MEMOIRMISS HANNAH ADAMSWRITTEN BY HERSELF.ADDITIONAL NOTICES,BY A FRIEND.BOSTON:PUBLISHED BY GRAY AND BOWEN.1832.t>vv^Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1832,By Gray & Bowen,in the Clerk's office of the District Court of Massachusetts.■'^94-PRINTED BY I. R. B U T T S B O S T O N .nr-INTRODUCTORY NOTE.The autobiography of Miss Adams is written withthe modesty and unobtrasiveness which distinguishedher character. It appears as if composed reluctantly,under the feeling that the community could hardlycare to know anything about the struggles, disappointments,hopes and purposes of an individual so humbleas herself She undertook the task at the requestof some of her friends, who thought that the circumstancesof her life, and the traits of her character,well deserved to be remembered. But herprincipal motive in executing it, was to leave it as alegacy, which she hoped might be of some smallbenefit to an aged and very infirm sister, to whosecomfort she had devoted her little savings for manyyears. It presents a lithographic drawing of herself,which will recall the features of her mind to thosewho knew her, and give some idea of them to thosewho did not.The continuation of her life is by a lady, one ofIVthose friends whose kindness she has acknowledgedwith warm gratitude towards the conclusion of herown narrative. It could not have been confided tobetter hands. The discrimination and delicacy withwhich the retiring virtues, and nicer shades of hercharacter are delineated and produced, will explainto those who did not know her, what was the charmthat drew genius and wealth, and youth and beauty,to minister with so much interest to the infirmities ofa poor old woman.Miss Adams was indeed deserving of such interest.Her life is, in many respects, full of instruction.Among those who have overcome great and peculiardifficulties in the pursuit of knowledge, she holds adistinguished place. She became a literary woman,when literature was a rare accomplishment in ourcountry. She has produced one work, her Historyof Religions, which is the best of its kind, eminentfor its great impartiality. But it was not merely forher powers of mind that she was remarkable, but forher warm affections, her glow of gratitude, and herchildlike simplicity. It is honorable to the communityin which she lived, that an individual, destituteas she was of all adventitious claims to distinction,should have been properly estimated and respected.This note is prefixed by the gentlemen to whomshe left the charge of publishing her manuscript.A. N.J. T.CHAPTER I.Being arrived at an age in which I cannotreasonably expect my life will be long continued,at the request of a highly esteemedfriend I am about to give a concise outlineof my past life ; notwithstanding I amsensible that a retrospect of past errors, faultsand misfortunes, will be exceedingly painful.I was born in Mediield, a country townabout eighteen miles from Boston. My fatherearly imbibed a love of literature, and preparedto enter the university. But as hisconstitution then appeared to be very infirm,and he was an only son, his parents werestrenuously opposed to his leaving them.Accordingly, to his inexpressible disappointment,he was obliged to settle upon their largefarm, without a suitable knowledge of, ortaste for, agricultural pursuits. This induceLIFE OFed him to open a shop, for the sale, principally,of English Goods and Books. His tastefor reading continued unabated till his death,which took place at the advanced age ofeighty eight years.From my infancy I had a feeble constitution; in particular, an extreme weaknessand irritability in my nervous system. HenceI can recollect uneasiness and pain previousto any pleasurable sensations. My motherwas an excellent woman, and deservedly esteemedand beloved ; but as her own healthwas delicate, and she possessed great tendernessand sensibility, I was educated in all thehabits of debilitating softness, which probablyadded to my constitutional want of bodilyand mental firmness.My father's circumstances then appearedaffluent, and it was not supposed I should bereduced to the necessity of supporting myselfby my own exertions. Partly from illhealth, and an early singularity of taste, 1took no pleasure in the amusements towhich children are generally much attached.My health did not even admit of attendingMISS HANNAH ADAMS. Dschool with the children in the neighborhoodwhere I resided. The country schools, atthat time, were kept but a few months inthe year, and all that was then taught inthem was reading, writing and arithmetic.In the summer, the children were instructedby females in reading, sewing, and otherkinds of work. The books chiefly made useof were the Bible, and Paler. Those whohave had the advantages of receiving the rudimentsof their education at the schools ofthe present day, can scarcely form an adequateidea of the contrast between them, andthose of an earlier age ; and of the great improvementswhich have been made even inthe common country schools. The disadvantagesof my early education I have experiencedduring life ; and, among various others,the acquiring a very faulty pronunciation ;a habit contracted so early, that I cannotwholly rectify it in later years.In my early years I was extremely timid,and averse from appearing in company. Indeed,I found but few with whom I couldhappily associate. My life, however, wasLIFE OFnot devoid of enjoyment. The first strongpropensity of my mind which I can recollect,was an ardent curiosity, and desire to acquireknowledge. I remember that my first ideaofthe happiness of Heaven was, of a placewhere we should find our thirst for knowledgefully gratified. From my predominant tasteI was induced to apply to reading, and as myfather had a considerable library, I was enabledto gratify my inclination. I read withavidity a variety of books, previously tomy mind's being sufficiently matured, andstrengthened, to make a proper selection. Iwas passionately fond of novels ; and, as Ilived in a state of seclusion, I acquired falseideas of life. The ideal world which myimagination formed was very different fromthe real. My passions were naturally strong,and this kind of reading heightened my sensibility,by calling it forth to realize scenesof imaginary distress. I was also an enthusiasticadmirer of poetry ; and as my memory,at an early period, was very tenacious, Icommitted much of the writings of my favoritepoets to memory, such as Milton, Thorn-missHANNAH ADAMS. Oson, Young, &:c. I did not, however, neglectthe study of history and biography, in eachof which kind of reading I found an inexhaustiblefund to feast my mind, and gratify my curiosity.Another source of my enjoyments in earlylife was an ardent admiration of the beautiesof nature. This enthusiasm was heightenedby the glowing descriptions of poeticwriters, and I entered into all their feelings.This taste has continued through life. At thepresent time, when age and experience havein some measure repressed the warmth of myfeelings, and while I am now writing, Ishould be more delighted with beautiful ruralprospects, and fine flowers, than when inearly life I used to be enraptured with contemplatingthe sublime and beautiful in theworks of creation.My early life was diversified with fewevents, and those of a painful nature. Theloss oF my excellent mother, which happenedwhen I had reached my tenth year, wasthe first severe trial I was called to suffer.When her death took place I was at an age1*b LIFE OFwhen maternal direction is of the greatestimportance, particularly in the education ofdaughters. Soon after, I was bereaved ofan aunt, who was attached to me with almostmaternal fondness. A few years after,my father failed in trade, in consequence ofwhich I was reduced to poverty, with a constitutionand early habits which appeared invincibleobstacles to my supporting myselfby my own exertions. Instead of that gayety,which is often attendant on youth, I wasearly accustomed to scenes of melancholyand distress ; and every misfortune was enhancedby a radical want of health, and firmnessof mind. My life passed in seclusion,with gloomy prospects before me, and surroundedwith various perplexities from whichI could not extricate myself. The solitudein which I lived was, however, to me, preferableto society in general ; and to that,and to my natural singularity, I must imputethat awkwardness of manners, of which Inever could divest myself at an advanced periodof life. A consciousness of this awkwardnessproduced a dislike to the company ofMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 7Strangers. Those who have been accustomedto general society when young, can scarcelyimagine the trembling timidity I felt, whenintroduced to my superiors in circumstancesand education. I, however, enjoyed societyupon a small scale. 1 had a few dear friends,(for novels had taught me to be very romantic,)who were chiefly in indigent circumstances,and like myself had imbibed a taste forreading, and were particularly fond of poetryand novels. Most of them wrote verses,which were read and admired by the wholelittle circle. Our mutual love of literature,want of fortune, and indifference to the societyof those whose minds were wholly uncultivated,served to cement a union betweenus, which was interrupted only by the removalof the parties to distant places, and dissolvedonly by their death. Yet I soonexperienced this melancholy change. Oneafter another became victims to the King ofTerrors, till our little society was greatlydiminished ; and I deeply felt these bereavementswhich were irreparable.Still, however, I was blessed with a sister of8 LIFE OFsimilar taste and sentiments, but very differentin her disposition. I was warm and irritablein my temper ; she, placid and even.I was fluctuating and undecided ; she, steadyand judicious. I was extremely timid ; sheblended softness with courage and fortitude.I was inclined to be melancholy, thoughsometimes in high spirits ; she was uniformlyserene and cheerful. I placed the strongestreliance upon her judgment, and as shewas older than myself, she seemed the maternalfriend, as well as the best of sisters.In short, ' she was my guide, my friend, myearthly allAs I was too feeble to engage in any laboriousemployments, I found considerableleisure for reading ; and as my happinesschiefly consisted in literary pursuits, I wasvery desirous of learning the rudiments of Latin,Greek, geography , and logic. Some gentlemenwho boarded at my father's offeredto instruct me in these branches of learninggratis, and I pursued these studies with indescribablepleasure and avidity. I still,however, sensibly felt the want of a more sys-missHANNAH ADAMS. \jemetic education, and those advantages whichfemales enjoy in the present day. Yet as Ialways read with great rapidity, perhapsfew of my sex have perused more booksat the age of twenty than I had. Yetmy reading was very desultory, and novelsengaged too much of my attention. Thoughmy seclusion from the world preserved mefrom many temptations which are incidentto young people, I was perhaps more exposedto errors of the understanding, than thosewho in early life have mixed more with theworld. Time and experience have led meto see the falsity of many of my early opinions,and ideas, and made me sensible thatthey were the source of a large share ofthe misfortunes of my following life.10 LIFE OFCHAPTER II.Until I had attained the twentieth yearof my age, my reading had chiefly consistedof works of imagination and feeling ; such asnovels and poetry. Even the religious worksI perused were chiefly devotional poetry, andsuch works as Mrs Rowe's Devout Exercises,and the lives of persons who w ere eminentlydistinguished for their piety. I was almosta stranger to controversial works, andhad never examined the points in dispute betweendifferent denominations of Christians.But at length an incident in my life gave adiflerentturn to my literary pursuit.While I was engaged in learning Latin andGreek, one of the gentlemen who taught mehad by him a small manuscript from Brough-ton'sDictionary, giving an account of Armenians,Calvinists, and several other denominationswhich were most common. This awakenedmy curiosity, and I assiduously engageHANNAH ADAMS. 11ed myself in perusing all the books which Icould obtain, which gave an account of thevarious sentiments described. I soon becamedisgusted with the want of candor in theauthors I consulted, in giving the most unfavorabledescriptions of the denominationsthey disliked, and applying to them the namesof heretics, fanatics, tenth usiasts, &c. I thereforeformed a plan for myself, made a blankbook, and wrote rules for transcribing, andadding to, my compilation. But as I wasstimulated to proceed only by curiosity, andnever had an idea of deriving any profit fromit, the compilation went on but slowly, thoughI was pressed by necessity to make every exertionsin my power for my immediate support.During the American revolutionary war, Ilearned to wave bobbin lace, which was thensaleable, and much more profitable to me thanspinning, sewing or knitting, which had previouslybeen my employment. At this periodI found but little time for literary pursuits.But at the termination of the Americanwar, this resource failed, and I was againleft in a destitute situation. My health didLIFE OFnot admit of my teaching a school, and Iwas glad to avail myself of every opportunityof taking any kind of v\^ork which Icould do, though the profit was very small,and inadequate to my support. One pleasingevent occurred in this gloomy period. Ihad the satisfaction teaching the rudimentsof Latin and Greek to three young gentlemen,who resided in the vicinity. This wassome advantage to me. Besides, it was apleasant amusement. One of these younggentlemen was the Rev. Mr Clark, of Norton,who pursued his studies with me till he enteredCambridge University, and has continuedhis friendship for me during life ; andhis uniform excellent character I have everhighly appreciated.The difficulty of taking in such kinds ofwork as I could do, for I was not, like mysister, ingenious in all kinds of needle work,induced me, as the last resort, to attend to mymanuscript, with tie faint hope that it mightbe printed, and afford me some little advantage.I was far from beg sanguine asto the result, even if I accomplished this ob-missHANNAH ADAMS. 13sect, I had been in the habit of employingmyself very diligently for trifling profits, andthose who are in easy circumstances cannotform an adequate idea of the lively satisfactionI felt, when I could procure any workby which I could earn a few shillings. Thiskind of enjoyment, which Providence hasgiven to the poor, appears intended to softenthe many difficulties in their situation.I was sensible, that, in printing my manuscript,I had various obstacles to encounter.It was difficult to procure proper materialsfor the work in my sequestered abode. I feltthat my ignorance of the world, and littleacquaintance with business, would put me inthe power of every printer to whom I mightapply. I, however, resumed my compilationon an enlarged scale, which included a fewof the reasons which the various denominationsgive in defence of their different religioussystems. Stimulated by an ardentcuriosity, I entered into the vast field ofreligious controversy, for which my earlyreading had ill prepared me. I perused allthe controversial works I could possibly obtain14 LIFE OFwith the utmost attention, in order to abridgewhat appeared to me the most plausible argumentsfor every denomination. As I readcontroversy with a mind naturally wantingin firmness and decision, and without thatpertinacity which blunts the force of argumentswhich are opposed to the tenets wehave once imbibed, I suffered extremely frommental indecision, while perusing the variousand contradictory arguments adduced by menof piety and learning in defence of their respectivereligious systems. Sometimes mymind was so strongly excited, that extremefeeling obliged me for a time to lay aside myemployment. Notwithstanding it requiredmuch reading to perform my task, the painfulfeelings I suffered while preparing mywork for the press far outweighed all theother labor. Reading much religious controversymust be extremely trying to a female,whose mind, instead of being strengthenedby those studies which exercise the judgment,and give stability to the character, isdebilitated by reading romances and novels,which are addressed to the fancy and imagesHANNAH ADAMS. 15nation, and are calculated to heighten thefeelings.After my View of Religions was preparedfor the press, the difficulty still remainedof finding any printer willing and able toprint it without money immediately paid.But at length, after various perplexities, thiscompilation was put to the press in 1784.The profit to myself was very small ; for, asit might well have been expected from myfather's inexperience in the business of bookmaking, he was completely duped by theprinter, in making the bargain. After beingat the trouble of procuring upwards of fourhundred subscribers, all the compensation 1was able to obtain, was only fifty books ; andI was obliged to find a sale for them, afterthe printer, (whose name, out of respect tohis descendants, I omit to mention,) had receivedall the subscription money. As mybooks sold very well, the printer must havemade something handsome by the publication.The effect of reading so much religiouscontroversy, which had been very16 LIFE OFtrying to my mind, was extremely prejudicialto my health, and introduced a train of themost painful nervous complaints. I was atlength brought so low, that the physician whoattended me supposed I was in a decline.But after a tedious interval of extreme suffering,I began gradually to recover ; and afterwardsfound my complaints were increased,by following the injudicious advice of thephysician who attended me. To the skilland attention of my friend Dr Mann, formerlyof Bentham, I owe, under Heaven, thepreservation of my life at this period.Soon after I began to recover, I received aletter from the printer of my View of Religions,informing me that he had sold thegreatest part of the edition, and was aboutto reprint it; and requesting me to inform himif I Ravished to make any additions to mywork. As I had the precaution to secure thecopy right, agreeably to the law passed inMassachusetts, 1783, I returned a laconic,answer, forbidding him to reprint it ; andhe finally relinquished the design.The information, that the first edition ofMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 17my View of Religions was sold, gave me theidea of reprinting it for my own benefit.But as I was entirely destitute of pecuniaryresources, ignorant of the world, incapable ofconducting business, and precluded from almostall intercourse with persons of literatureand information, and consequently destituteof friends who were able and willing to assistme, the execution of the plan was extremelydifficult. Even the few friends Ihad gained at that time supposed the disadvantagesin my situation too great to encourage,my undertaking. Instead of assistingme, they considered my plan as chimerical,and depressed my hopes and discouraged myexertions.While I was struggling with embarrassmentsand difficulties, I was involved in thedeepest affliction by the death of the belovedsister, whom I mentioned in the precedingChapter. I then experienced the keenestanguish the human heart can feel in losinga friend.Dearer than life, or aught below the skies,The bright ideas and romantic schemes2'^18 LIFE OFOf perfect love, and friendship, fancy paints,In her I realized.To describe the excess of mj grief on thisoccasion would be altogether impossible.Those, only, who have formed the highestideas of friendship, and have considered theirearthly happiness as dependent upon the lifeof one beloved object, on whose judgmentthey relied, and in whom they found comfortand support in every difficulty and affliction,can form an adequate idea of whati felt on this occasion ; which led me to exclaim.And is she dead ! My life, my all is gone.The world's a desert. Nothing now on earthCan yield me joy, or comfort.The death of my beloved sister made mefeel almost alone in the world. Our joysand sorrows, and all our interests were soclosely blended, that I nearly identified herexistence with my own. Everything appearedgloomy in my situation. My healthwas feeble ; I was entirely destitute of property; my father's circumstances were verylow ; and I had no other relation or friendMISS Banish ADAMS. 19from whom I might expect to derive assistance.But notwithstanding all the difficultiesin my situation, I determined to use everypossible exertion to help myself; consideringthat, if I was unsuccessful in attempting toextricate myself from poverty, my effortswould awaken the activity of my mind, andpreserve me from sinking under the weightof affliction I sustained in losing the best ofsisters. It was, perhaps, a happy circumstance,that necessity stimulated me to exertionin this most gloomy period of my existence.After I began to prepare the additions tomy View of Religions, I found it required agreat effort to detach my mind from the recollectionof past sufferings, and force myselfto that mental exertion which is naturallyso congenial to my mind. At length,however, I completed the task of preparingmy work for the press. I had previously,in 1790, sent a petition to Congress, whichwas presented by the late Fisher Ames,Esq. for a general law to be passed, tosecure to authors the copy-right of their pubesLIFE OFlocations. I now applied to a large numberof printers to know on what terms * theywould publish my work. But, though Iwrote nearly the same letter to all, consistingof a few direct questions, their answerswere generally various, prolix, and ambiguous.I at length concluded to accept the termsof one of the printers to whom I applied,who offered me one hundred dollars in books,for an edition of one thousand copies. WhenI went to Boston for this purpose, a friendof mine introduced me to the Rev. Mr Freeman,whom I had only once before seen :but I was well apprised of his benevolentcharacter, which I found more than realizedthe ideas which I had formed of it from report.I shall ever recollect the generous interesthe took in my affairs, with the mostlively gratitude. He removed my perplexity,by transacting the business with theprinter. By his advice, a subscription paperwas published ; and I soon found thebesof bis patronage, in procuring a largenumber of subscribers, and concluding anMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 21advantageous bargain for me with Mr Folsom,the printer. The second edition? waspublished in 1791; and the emolument I derivedfrom it not only placed me in a comfortablesituation, but enabled me to pay thedebts I had contracted during mine and mysister's illness, and to put out a small sumupon interest.22 LIFE OFCHAPTER III.Encouraged and animated by this success,I soon formed the design of engagingin another publication, and set myself tochoose a subject. It was poverty, not ambition,or vanity, that first induced me tobecome an author, or rather a compiler. ButI now formed the flattering idea, that I mightnot only help myself, but benefit the public.With this view, I engaged in writing a SummaryHistory of New England. I selectedthis subject, rather for public utility, than formy own gratification. My object was torender my compilation useful to those inearly life, who had not time or opportunityto peruse the large mass of materials, which,previously to my compilation, lay scatteredin many publications. I knew the workwould require much reading upon dry subjects,such as ancient news prints, state papers,&c. But I wrote for a bare subsistsHANNAH ADAMS. 23hence, and never wished to gain anythingfrom the public which I had not at leastearned bj laborious investigation. I alsoconsidered, that attention to such an unpoeticalsubject would have a tendency to keepmy mind in a more healthy state, than the perusalof works which are calculated to excitethe feelings. I therefore resolved to fix myattention by investigating simple facts, andby relinquishing to a great extent the readingworks of taste and imagination.When I compiled this work, there was notany history of New England extant, exceptRather's Magnolia, and Neal's History ;and these extended only to an early period inthe annals of our country. If there had beenonly one work, which reached to the acceptanceof the Federal constitution, my taskhad been far less laborious. There was noauthentic account of Rhode Island, exceptthat of Calendar's. This induced me tospend some time in Providence, in order toexamine the Records in the Secretary's office.The perusal of old manuscripts, which weredamaged by time, was painful to my eyes ;24 LIFE OFbut as they were naturally strong, I did notfor some time perceive the injury I sufferedfrom the task.After I returned from Providence, I attendedto my compilation with unremitting diligence,and hoped not only to obtain a temporarysupport, but to make a small provisionfor future subsistence. Stimulated bythese sanguine views, I wrote early and lateduring one winter, and expected to put mywork to the press the ensuing spring. Buthow vain were all these pleasing anticipations! A new misfortune arrested my progress,and made me feel my entire dependenceupon divine Providence. I found mysight suddenly fail to that degree, that I wasobliged to lay aside reading, writing, and everyemployment which required the use of myeyes. In this distressed situation, I consulteda number of physicians ; and their prescriptionsrather increased, than diminished mycomplaints. The gloomy apprehension ofbeing totally deprived of my sight was distressingbeyond description. I not onlyanticipated the misfortune of being obligedMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 25forever to relinquish those literary pursuitswhich had constituted so much of my enjoymentduring life, and was at this time myonly resource for a subsistence, but as I hadfrom my earliest years been an enthusiasticadmirer of the beauties of nature, I felt themost painful sensation in reflecting that thetime might arrive, whenWith the yearSeasons return, but not to me returnDay, or the sweet approach of eve or morn,Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer rose. 'At length, by the advice of a respectablefriend, I applied to Dr Jeffrey ; and by assiduouslyfollowing his prescriptions for abouttwo years, I partially recovered my sight.For the encouragement of those who aretroubled with similar complaints, I wouldmention, that when I first consulted the doctor,he had not any expectation my eyes wouldrecover so as to enable me to make the useof them I have since done. But by applyinglaudanum and sea water several times inthe course of the day, for two years, I recoveredso far as to resume my studies ; andS26 LIFE OFby employing an amanuensis to assist me intranscribing my manuscript, I was enabled toprint the work in 1799. Previously to puttingthe copy to the press, I consulted all theliving authors, and showed them the use Ihad made of their works in my compilation,and they did not make any objection. Asmy eyes were still weak, I could not bestowthe same attention in condensing the lastpart of my History, as the first ; and consequentlythe History of the American Revolutionwas much more prolix than I originallyintended. In giving an account of the war,my ignorance of military terms rendered itnecessary to transcribe more from Dr Ramsay'sHistory, than I had done in any otherpart of the w work. I therefore wrote an apologyto the doctor, and had the satisfaction ofreceiving in return a very interesting letterfrom Mrs Ramsay, expressing her approbationof my work, and inclosing a bill of tendollars. Before my eyes failed, I had sentout a subscription paper ; but afterward, theidea that I never should be able to completethe compilation, induced me to drop it ; andMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 27I was obliged to publish the work almostentirely at my own expense. The printerswere in low circumstances, and required paymentbefore I could dispose of the books.I was therefore obliged to borrow a sum ofmoney to defray the expenses of the work,which, as it was printed on very good paper,were large, and I derived but little profitfrom my labor.My next publication was the third editionof my View of Religions, to which I madethe addition of a hundred pages. TheRev. Mr Freeman, who continued his kindattentions, made the bargain for me with theprinter, by which I was entitled to receivefive hundred dollars in yearly payments, foran edition of two thousand copies. Thisrelieved me from the embarrassments inwhich I was involved by printing my Historyof New England at my own expense. Asmy eyes still continued too weak to engagein any new laborious work, I determined towait till a large part of my History of NewEngland was sold ; and then, if my life continued,to abridge it for the use of schools.28 LIFE OFIn the meantime, however, I set aboutwriting a concise Yiewof the Christian Religion,selected from the writings of eminentlaymen. I wrote with difficulty, as my eyeswere still very weak ; but I wished to exertmyself as much as possible to be useful, and togain a subsistence. Though attention to religiouscontroversy had led me to feel undecidedon some disputed points, of which perhapsChristians of equal piety form different opinions,my conviction of the truth of divine revelation,instead of being weakened by all myresearches, was strengthened and confirmed ;and I wished to make a public declaration ofmy sentiments on this important subject. Ifound it difficult to procure proper materialsfor the work, as I was utterly unable to purchasebooks. A considerable part of thiscompilation, as well as the additions to-thethird edition of my View of Religions, waswritten in booksellers' shops. I went tomake visits in Boston, in order to consultbooks in this way, which it was impossiblefor me to buy, or borrow. 1 desire, however,to recognise with gratitude the attention ofMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 29my kind father, who took pains that I shouldhave the benefit of all books which he couldprocure, and assisted me greatly in disposingof my works. When I had completed mycompilation, I found the printers and booksellersunwilling to purchase the copy, becausemuch had been written on the subject,and these publications were unsaleable. Atlength, in 1804, 1 agreed with a printer to executethe work, upon the small considerationof receiving only one hundred dollars inbooks.The tenor of my life at this time was verymonotonous. It was enlivened, however, bygleams of happiness, from the society of afew friends, and the pleasure I derived fromliterary pursuits ; and, by my convictions ofthe truth of that religion, to the examinationof which I had devoted so much of my time.My eyes still continued very weak, and Iwrote under the apprehension of being reducedto a state that would preclude all applicationto study. A considerable part of my Historyof New England being now disposed of,my only resource appeared to be to abridge3*30 LIFE OFthat work for the use of schools. The profitI hoped to derive from this compilationseemed to me to constitute all I had to dependupon in future, if my life should bespared. While I entertained these hopes, inwhich 1 was made sanguine by my knowledgeof the success with which books forschools had been printed, can it be a subjectof blame, or reproach, to a person in mysituation, that I felt extremely grieved, andhurt, when I found my design anticipated bya reverend gentleman, whose calling, and indefatigableindustry, are highly respectable ?The difference between us was left to referees,who sustained a high reputation forability, and sound judgment, extensive information,and moral excellence. I was satisfiedwith their decision. But I was reducedto the painful task of writing on the subject ;for, though I took this measure with extremereluctance, my opponent left me no otheralternative. I sincerely hope the painfulaffair may never be recalled to his prejudice.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 31CHAPTER IV.Notwithstanding the little profit, and variousdiscouragements I had experienced inwriting for the press, as I was entirely dependentupon my own exertions for a support,I was resolved to persevere. 1 hadnow acquired a number of valuable friends,to whose generous exertions in my favor Iwas deeply indebted. By several of them,I was enabled to put my abridgment of theHistory of New England to the press. I washowever unfortunate in this, as well as myother compilations. The printer failed whileit was in the press, which deprived me ofthe profit I expected to derive from it. Twoyears afterwards, I published a new edition.A similar misfortune befel me in this secondattempt to avail myself of my labors.But though my productions were far frombeing profitable, and I had frequent intereaLIFE OFeruptions in my studies from ill health, andbad eyes, I still had mj share of enjoyment.I hoped my works might be useful, and Iwas highly gratified by their candid receptionby the public.I next chose a subject in which I thoughtit probable that I should not meet with anyinterference. 1 formed the design of writingthe History of the Jews, though I wassensible that it would require much reading,and that I must wander through a drearywilderness, enlivened by one spot of verdure.My curiosity was strongly excited,and I determined to persevere in my attemptto investigate the fate of this wonderfulpeople. I began the introductionwith their state under the Persian monarchy,after their restoration from the babyloniancaptivity. The standard works forthis History were Josephus, and Passage,the latter of whom brings his narrative downonly to the 19th century. After this period,I was obliged to compile from desultorypublications and manuscripts. I had at thistime the privilege of corresponding with theMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 33celebrated Gregory, who had attainedgreat celebrity for the conspicuous part heacted during the French Revolution, and exertedall his energy in the first constitutionalassembly to procure the rights of citizensfor the Jews. He had the goodnessto send me some writings in their favor,which increased the interest I felt in thisoppressed people.Previously to concluding this gloomy detailof the difficulties 1 encountered, while writingfor the press, I would first notice, thatI was obliged to exert myself to the utmostto overcome my natural timidity, and accommodatemyself to my situation. Afterthe age and infirmities of my father preventedhim from assisting me, as he hadformerly done, in selling and exchangingthe copies of my work, I was necessitated toexert myself in doing business out of thefemale line, which exposed me to publicnotice. And as I could not but be sensiblethat my manners were remarkably awkward,this consciousness, joined with my ignoranceof the established rules of proprietyLIFE OFty, rendered me tremblingly apprehensiveof exposing myself to ridicule. These unpleasantfeelings, however, in time abated.In order to meet this trial, I considered,that what is right and necessary in the situationin which Providence has placed me,cannot be really improper ; and though myacting upon this principle may have exposedme to the censure, or ridicule of those, whoseideas upon the subject are derived from thevarying modes of fashion, and not from theunchanging laws of moral rectitude, it savedme from a feeling which would have beeninfinitely more painful, that of self-reproach.My objects were, to obtain the approbationof my own heart, and the esteem of a fewfriends whose opinion I most highly prized,and I was comparatively indifferent to thecensure or ridicule of the world in general.In the life of Mrs Charlotte Smith it ispertly remarked, that the ' penalties anddiscouragements attending authors in generalfall upon woman with double weight*To the curiosity of the idle, and the envyof the malicious, their sex affords a pecu-MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 35liar excitement. Arraigned not merely aswriters, but as women, their characters, theirconduct, and even their personal endowments,become the object of severe inquisition.From the common allowances claimedbj the species, literary women appear onlyto be exempted.'Though I have been too insignificant, andtreated with too much candor, fully to realizethe above remarks, yet I have been inasituation deeply to feel the trials which attendliterary pursuits. At length I saw oldage approaching, without any provision forit, when if my life was spared, I should beincapable of exerting myself ; and my mindwas at times depressed by this gloomy prospect.36 LIFE OFCHAPTER V.While I was compiling my History of theJews, I boarded in Bedlam. I was herehonored with the friendship, and receivedthe kind offices of Mr Dowse, his lady, andher sister,* and more pecuniary favors than Ihave ever experienced from any other individuals.Whenever I visited this happyfamily, I was received with the utmost cordiality; and I desire publicly to express mygrateful sense of their goodness.While writing my History, my eyes, which,since I had first injured them, have beenoccasionally troublesome, failed to that degree,that I was induced again to go to Bostonto consult Dr Effigies, in the hope, that, byattending to his directions, I might finish my*Mrs Shaw, who allowed Miss Adams one hundred dollarsa year, for tentative years, paid to her quarterly, byJosiah Quincy, Esq.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 37work. During this visit at Boston, I receivedthe unexpected intelligence, that a numberof benevolent gentlemen had settled anannuity upon me, to relieve me from theembarrassments I had hitherto suffered.The Hon. Josiah Quincy, Stephen Higgins,Esq. and William Shaw, Esq. were someof its first promoters. This providentialinterference excited my most lively gratitudeto my generous benefactors, and I hope Isensibly felt my deep obligation to the sourceof all good.My generous friends could hardly appreciatethe extent of the benefit they conferredupon me. I had not been able to make anyprovision for my declining years, and had notaplace on earth which I could call my home.My spirits were depressed by my destitutecircumstances, and I am persuaded that underProvidence, the generosity of my friendswas the means of prolonging my life.I had now attained a condition more eligiblethan my most sanguine wishes could everhave led me to anticipate. If in early lifeI could have enjoyed the literary advantagesLIFE OFI now possessed, I should have thought itthe height of earthly happiness. But I wasnow too far advanced in life to profit by theadvantages I had gained. However, 1 wasgrateful, and happy. My friend WilliamShaw, Esq. gave me the liberty of frequentingthe Atheneum. Amidst that large andvaluable collection of books, I found an inexhaustiblesource of information and entertainment; and among other advantages, Ifound a few literary friends, in whose conversationI enjoyed ' the feast of reason andthe flow of soul.' Among the many blessingsI was favored with, I shall ever highlyappreciate the acquaintance and friendship ofthe late Rev. Mr Buckminster, in whom Icontemplated with admiration the rare unionof intellectual, moral, and religious excellence;of a powerful mind with extensive information,and a feeling heart enlivened by devotion.He was admired for his distinguishedabilities and learning by all who knew him ;but the peculiar traits of benevolence, noblenessof mind, sincerity and sweetness oftemper, which adorned his character, couldMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 39only be duly appreciated by those who werehonored with his friendship.Mr Buckminster was so kind as to giveme the use of his large and valuable library,which was of great advantage to me in compilingmy History of the Jews. In my effortsto complete the work, I was encouragedand animated by his participating in theinterest I felt in this extraordinary people.Though entering into the details of the sufferingsof the persecuted Jewish Nation, yetthe enthusiasm Mr Buckminster inspired,and the pleasure of conversing with himupon a subject with which he was intimatelyacquainted, rendered the time I was writingmy History one of the happiest periods ofmy life. I completed my work in 1812, afew months before his death.In the year 1812 I sustained a severe affliction,by the sudden death of Mr Buck-minster.Amidst the large number wholamented his death, I believe there was none(except his near relations) who felt more distressedthan myself. I desire, however, to begrateful to divine Providence for the privilegeof his acquaintance and friendship.40 LIFE OFWhile my feelings were deeply susceptiblefrom the recent wound they had receivedby the death of Mr Buckminster, I went toMedfield to visit my aged father, with thehope that I might do something to administerto his comfort, and in this way soothe myown grief. But while I was with him, hewas seized with a complaint which put aperiod to his life. Though from his age,and infirmities, I had been often led to anticipatethis event, I found it very tryingwhen I actually realized it. He had been avery kind parent to me, and though he couldnot bestow any property upon me, he wasvery solicitous to aid me as far as he could.He was a great assistant to me both in procuringbooks, and in disposing of my works.During the last years of his life, he was assiduouslyengaged in studying the sacredScriptures, with the assistance of all thecommentaries he could procure. In the funeralsermon preached upon his death, the Rev.Dr Prentice observes, ' He was ever stronglyattached to the society of literary and seriouspeople, particularly of the clergy, witha number of whom he kept up a friendly in-MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 41recourse. There is reason to believe, thatby his exertions for many years he contributedin no small degree to the diffusion ofknowledge and piety, and to the advancementof the cause of Christ.' My father'slove of books continued till the last. Heread, and heard reading, on the day on whichhe expired. My residence in Boston enabledme to procure books for his perusal,and it afforded me great pleasure to be thuspermitted to gratify my honored parent.When, after the death of my father, Ireturned to Boston, my mind was depressedwith my recent losses. But I was sensiblethat I was still favored with many inestimableprivileges. Mr Buckminster had beenso kind as to introduce me to a number ofhis acquaintances, who treated me with thatgenuine kindness which is the essence oftrue politeness.Among the number of those excellentfriends, to whom Mr Buckminster was sokind as to introduce me, I would particularlyrecognise Mrs Dearborn, and Mrs Wind*LIFE OFthrow, who shone in the circles of polishedlife, and adorned their eminent stations bytheir engaging manners, and highly cultivatedminds ; and still more, by their christianvirtues. They were blessings to thosearound them ; and for a course of years favoredme with their attention, and kind offices.When they were removed by death to ahigher state of existence, I deeply mournedthe heavy and irreparable loss I sustained.While deeply indebted to the bounty ofmy dear and honored friends, I wished topursue my literary occupations with as muchdiligence as my health would permit. But inthe decline of life, I was so far debilitated byrepeated fevers, at small intervals from eachother, that I was unable to write for thepress. At length, I so far recovered, as toresume a work I had formerly begun, uponthe New Testament, which I designed to bemuch larger than it is; but my advanced ageinduced me only to publish a little book, entitled,' Letters on the Gospels,' which haspassed through two editions.I have already mentioned the perplexityMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 43and embarrassment of my mind, while writingmy View of Religions. After removingto Boston, and residing in that city whilethe disputes upon Unitarian sentimentswere warmly agitated, I read all that camein my way upon both sides of the question ;and carefully examined the New Testament,with, I think, a sincere and ardent desire toknow the truth. I deeply felt the difficultiesupon both sides of the question ; yetprevailingly give the preference to that classof Unitarians, who adopt the highest idea ofthe greatness and dignity of the Son of God.I never arrived to that degree of decisionthat some have attained on that subject.In this, and every other disputable subject,I would adopt the following lines ;If I am right, thy grace impartStill in the right to stay ;If I am wrong, O teach my heart,To find the better way.NOTICESIN CONTINUATIONBY A FRIEND.NOTICES.Those who have been favored with apersonal knowledge of the Author of theshort Memoir contained in this book, willread it with the deepest interest ; and perhapsto them it may seem almost superfluousto say more of her. But Miss Adams'sworks have circulated far beyond the spherein which she moved, and there are manywho are desirous of knowing her, as she wasappreciated by others, and not by her ownestimate. Such would be poorly satisfiedwith the short sketch she has given of herself,though her friends must ever value it asaparting legacy.The ^ timidity of early years ' followedMiss Adams through life ; and, even whensurround ^d by intimate friends, it never48 LIFE OFwholly forsook her. It was a sensitivenessthat sprung from deep feeling, and a diffidencethat was the result of genuine humility.This often operated unfavorablyupon her manners, and produced an awkwardness,of which she was painfully conscious.But there were times vv^hen the warmth ofher heart, and the cultivation of her mind,gave an enthusiasm and eloquence to herlanguage, that astonished those who listenedto her. At such times, her countenance lostits usual calm placidity, and glowed with ananimation that rendered it highly interesting.There was indeed a wonderful singularity inher appearance. In the circles of polishedlife to which she was often courted, therewas nothing like her. In the circles of humblelife, she was equally unassuming, andequally peculiar. No one could see her,without feeling that she was not of thisworld. It is possible that part of this timiditymight have arisen from the seclusion ofearly years. But it is certain, that no culture,or discipline, could have formed her mannersto the standard of easy and fashionableMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 49life. She sometimes observed, ' I know Iam very awkward ; I never could learn tomake a curtsey.' But it must not be supposedthat there was in her any want of gentleness,or propriety. Her disinterested andaffectionate disposition made her, in reality,all that the most calculating would desire toappear.The simplicity, and often the abstractednessof Miss Adams' manner, led many to supposethat her talents were confined to the subjectson which she wrote. Some consideredher as a walking dictionary of ' ReligiousOpinions.' Others viewed her merely as anAbridgment of the History of New England.'And many said, ' if you want toknow Miss Adams, you must talk to herabout the Jews.' And this last was, indeed,a subject that always called forth the energyof her mind. She had faithfully studiedtheir history, and she venerated the antiquityof their origin. Her inquiring mind wasdeeply interested by their ' wonderful destination,peculiar habits, and religious rites.'She felt for them as a suffering and persecutesLIFE OFed people ; and she felt yet more, when sheconsidered them as a standing monument ofthat religion, which she regarded as thefirst and best of God's gifts to men. It wasthe long contemplation of this chosen racethat induced her, amidst all the obstaclesthat were in her way, to write their history.It was an arduous labor. Yet her work isa proof, that, in this * barren wilderness shefound many a spot of verdure.' But thosewho viewed her merely in relation to herliterary works, knew her but imperfectly.With her extreme simplicity, there was anuncommon depth of observation, and an intuitiveknowledge of character. She wasoften in circles where her timidity kept heralmost wholly silent, and where she hardlyseemed to be even a spectator. But hersubsequent remarks would show how accuratelyshe had observed, and how nicely shehad discriminated. In speaking of a ladyof her acquaintance, she said, ' I value andadmire her, but I can never be easy with her.She is so kind, and so condescending, that Ican see she never forgets I am a poor awk-MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 61ward old woman.' At another time, whendeploring the loss of a young lady, whosefine talents had made her the delight of herfriends, ' and yet,' she said, ' she died at thebest time. Her powers were brilliant, andbeautiful, but they were exhausting to herself;and had she lived, she would havefaded before she reached her prime.' Hermind was habitually cheerful, and her cheerfulnesswas much increased by her sensibilityto the works of nature. She looked uponevery object with the eye of a poet, andforgot her infirmities, and even her diffidence,as she described her emotions. On visitingher sister, who resided in the country, afterhaving been confined to her chamber, in thecity through the winter, * it seemed to me,'said she, * as if the world was just created.'No one could exclaim with more feeling andtruth,T care not, fortune, what you me deny,You cannot rob me of free nature's grace,You cannot bar the windows of the sky.Through which Aurora shows her brightening face.*There is but little doubt, that, had she52 LIFE OFgiven way to the natural temperament of hermind, which was enthusiastic and romantic,she might have been a poet. But her duties,and her lot', led her into a different path oflife. In her youth, however, she occasionallylistened to the inspiration of the muses ;and though she never set any value on theseproductions, they discover much excellentthought, and a high tone of feeling.The want of early advantages, to whichMiss Adams so feelingly alludes in her memoirs,ought not to be forgotten, nor thedifficulties through which she struggled.Her attendance upon any school was extremelyuncertain, and often interrupted byher feeble health. Added to this, the schoolsof a country ' village are not often of thehighest class. Even the elementary partsof education are much neglected in them.I never,' said she, ' was taught how to holdmy pen.'There is nothing that more strikingly denotesthe progress of literature in this partof the country, than the attention which isat present paid to female education. ThereMISS HANNAH ADAMS, 53are few branches, if any, in which boys areinstructed, which are not now equally opento girls. Not many years ago, however, thetest of a good school rested principally uponthe exhibitions made of hand-writing, spelling,and arithmetic. Grammar, it is true,was professedly taught, but in a manner thatconveyed few ideas to the pupil. To getthe longest lessons, and to be at the head ofthe class, constituted the best scholar. Bydegrees, parsing, in its simplest forms, wasIntroduced, to aid the knowledge of grammar.Composition, geography and historyfollowed ; and the education of girls beganto assume a more respectable standing. Yeteven at this period, our village school-mastermuch resembled Goldsmith's, of whom,The village all declared how much he knew ;'Twas certain he could write and cipher too.'It was at such schools as these that MissAdams received her early education. Her ardentthirst for knowledge, however, and herindustry and perseverance enabled her, in maturerlife, to make uncommon acquirements.6*54 LIFE OFYet she always felt, and regretted, thewant of more thorough, and systematic instruction.Her father entered into tradeas a desperate resource from the wearinessof an agricultural life, for which he had notaste. He was plundered, and cheated by theman, whom he engaged to carry on his farm ;and as he had plunged into all the transactionsof a country trader, dealing in booksand drugs, English and West India goods,through all came vexation and disappointment,and a total failure ensued. A largeproportion of his books were left on hishands, and afforded to Miss Adams great facilitiesfor reading. Her father, too, happilyfor her, had encouraged in her a taste congenialto his own ; and her mind became cultivated,and embued with knowledge, almostwithout her own consciousness of theprogress she was making. However unpropitiousto her were the pecuniary disappointmentsof her father's life, they seem tohave exerted a favorable influence on hermind. Resort was had also, at this time, to thereceiving of several boarders into the family ;MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 55and from these she acquired the knowledgeof Greek and Latin. Of this knowledge, shetells us she availed herself, for fitting threeyoung men for College ; and for Mr P.Clark, one of her pupils, mentioned in hermemoirs, she retained through life the warmestregard. He married a friend of hers ;and ' this,' said she, ' was the only match Iever had any hand in making.' Of hermother, she always spoke with enthusiasticreverence ; and though only eleven years ofage when she died, she retained a perfect recollectionof her. Mrs Adams was marriedat fifteen, and died at the age of thirtythree, leaving three girls and two boys.Her short life seems to have been filled withusefulness ; and the following epitaph, writtenby an Episcopal clergyman, who was aparticular friend, and constant visitor of thefamily, may still be traced on her humblegrave stone, should any descendant of ' OldMortality' chance to wander to the spot.Beneath this monument of love and truth,Rear'd by fair gratitude's persuasive call,Rest the remains of innocence, and youth ;Esteem'd, lamented, and beloved by all.56 LIFE OFFond of retirement, and of rural ease,Her sober wishes never loved to stray.Heaven was her aim, her study, how to please,And carefully improve each fleeting day ;To worth, a friend ; a parent to the poor.Such was the woman ! could the saint be more ?'After the death of her mother, the care ofHannah, and of a younger sister, devolvedon Elizabeth, who was the oldest daughter.They now lived in great retirement ; andone of Miss Adams's early employments was,weaving lace with bobbins on a cushion. Inreferring to this, she afterwards pleasantlyobserved, that, ' it was much more profitablethan writing books.' This manner of life,with her desultory habits of reading, gave aromantic and enthusiastic turn to her mind,which was never essentially changed* eitherby time or circumstances.Miss Adams's heart was however peculiarlyalive to the ties of natural affection. Shedeeply felt the death of an aunt, who hadshown for her maternal tenderness. But aslong as her sister Elizabeth lived, she had, touse her own words, a friend, a counsellor, andMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 57guide. ' There was,' she said, *but one heartbetween us ; and I used sometimes to tellmy sister, in the overflowing of my affection,that I could bear to lose everything if shewas spared to me ; but, if she were takenaway, I should surely die ! ' Yet this calamitousevent took place ; and Miss Adams livedto prove, as many others have done, thatthere is, in the day of sorrow, a strengthimparted beyond human fortitude. Thehealth of this beloved sister was decliningfor nearly two years ; and it was, during thattime, one of her constant objects, to fortifyMiss Adams's mind for an event, that she feltwas near, and which she feared would be overwhelming.It however gradually approached,and brought no terrors to herself. Shewas calm, and resigned ; constantly expressingher ' entire submission to the Divine will,and laying all her burden at the foot of thecross.' There were no enthusiastic flights,nor was there any unnatural exaltation ofmind in her views of death. Though in thebloom of youth and with an ardent enjoymentof life, she met the event like a Chris68 LIFE OFlean. Hers was a philosophy which wasformed and nurtured by religion.'For years after my sister's death,' said MissAdams, ' it was a struggle to live.' Her healthwas extremely feeble, her heart she believedbroken, and poverty pressed heavily uponher. There were times, indeed, when shefelt as if she had not even a home. Herfather had made over his house and propertyto a son, with whom he and his other childrencontinued to live ; but as this son wasmarried, and his family was increasing, notwithstandinghis paternal kindness, MissAdams felt, and could not but feel, as if shewas a burden upon her brother. This wasthe most trying period of her life, and it wasalways recollected by her with strong emotion.The first effort of her pen, after her sister'sdeath, produced some lines on thatsubject. They seem to be the very breathingof her heart, and are thrown togetheralmost without form; yet a few extractsfrom them will best show the state of hermind.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 59The first attachment of my earliest years,Ere yet I knew to feel the attractive forceOf sacred friendship, was my love to her.Our minds expanding", each succeeding yearHeightened our mutual friendship. Not a joyEre touched my soul, but when she shared a part.When pierced with sorrow, her all cheering smileCould give me comfort. Well she knew to bearLife's adverse scenes with calm, undaunted mind,And placid resignation. Grace divineIllumed her soul, and stamp'd its features there.# # # # #The best of friends ! Oh, how my bleeding heartRecalls her tender love ! Of self unmindful,For me she seemed to live ; forever kind.Forever studious to promote my good.She was my guide, my friend, my earthly all ; "Heaven's choicest blessing. Not a single thoughtCould lurk in close disguise. I knew to trustThis much loved sister with my inmost soul.And must I lose her ! While unkind diseaseThreatened a life so dear, my trembling heartSunk in o'erwhelming wo. Could prayers, or tears.Could sleepless nights, or agonizing days.And all the care of fond officious loveAvert thy fate, — sister, thou still hadst lived.'Many expressions of her deep feeling onthis subject might be extracted from her papers; and to her immediate friends, they areprecious records of a sorrow stricken, andresigned spirit. But the friendship of these60 LIFE OFtwo sisters was such as ' strangers intermeddlenot with.' The death of this sisterseemed to be the dissolution of a tie, likethat which occasioned the exclamation ofDavid in his beautiful lamentation over Jonathan> ' Thy love to me was wonderful,passing the love of women.'That Miss Adams drew her support fromreligion under this calamity, her manuscriptsvery clearly show. She employed herself,when unable to compose, in making extractsfrom the Scriptures, which she applied to herparticular state of mind. These she arrangedin a little book, and preserved till herdeath.In her memoirs, she alludes to a smallcircle of females that had gradually beendraw n together from the neighboring towns,by a similarity of taste and situation ; andin this circle she found great enjoyment. Inafter years, her imagination probably exaggeratedtheir merit. Yet she retained manyproofs that they were notof an ordinary stamp.In speaking of this knot of friends, MissAdams, said, 'they were all poor, and mostMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 61of them good-looking,' and then added, withher usual simplicity, ' I had the fewest attractionsof any of them.'Nor was Miss Adams's pen at this timeidle. The powers of her mind were earlyappreciated by her young associates ; or,perhaps, it is more just to say, that they obtainedthat influence, which, however unclaimed,is stamped upon superior intellect.Mind is created to rule. Wealth, and all merelyoutward distinctions are thrown into obscurity,when brought in competition withmental power. This is strikingly exemplifiedin public and professional strife ; and,though more minutely, yet hardly less obviously,in the miniature circle of privatelife. Miss Adams, with all her humility,and her retiring modesty, was the casuist ofher youthful friends. A number of her papersthat remain, prove how often she wasresorted to by her companions in cases ofopinion ; and the publication of a few ofthese, it is believed, cannot be wholly uninterestingto those who knew her in later life.One of her young friends put to her this62 LIFE OFinterrogative. Ought mankind to be respectedfor their personal worth alone, abstractedfrom all accidental causes ?To this question Miss Adams replied.Mankind ought primarily to be respectedfor their personal worth ; yet if accidentalcauses make that worth appear more conspicuous,it may increase our esteem, whichstill is founded on personal worth in proportionas it appears. The more we see ofvirtue, the more it ought to attract our loveand admiration. Virtue becomes visible onlyby its effects. The diamond we value forits intrinsic worth. But when it is polishedand set, its essential beauty appears morerefulgent. So external accomplishments,and accidental causes, set forth the originalbeauty of virtue, and serve to heighten itscharms. There are particular circumstancesin which every virtue will shine with peculiarlustre. For instance, humility has intrinsicexcellence. But it appears mostattractive in those who are placed in affluentcircumstances, and are surrounded by pompand splendor. Fortitude, also, is an excel-missHANNAH ADAMS. 63lent quality of the mind. But suffering andadversity must bring it forth. Persons whohave performed eminent services for theircountry are worthy of greater honor, thanthose who have remained in private lifewith equal worth. I conclude, therefore,that mankind ought to be esteemed for theirpersonal worth, as it is rendered conspicuousby accidental causes.'Another question proposed was, whethervirtue ought not to be regarded as its ownreward, without any reference to a futurestate of happiness, or misery ?To this she replied, ' A regularity ofconduct is for the interest of all, even weretheir prospects terminated by the enjoymentsof this life. We cannot doubt that the virtuousSeneca enjoyed more happiness thanNero, his cruel and tyrannical master. Sofaras inward peace of conscience dependson virtue, it is its own reward. But we donot find that its ends are commensurate withits exertions. Honest industry does notalways bring even a moderate support. Ittherefore appears evident to me, that there64 LIFE OFwould not be sufficient reward for, nor consequentlysufficient excitement to, the sacrificeswhich virtue requires, without the hopeof a future life. God, bj the influences ofhis spirit, brings home the truths of theGospel upon the mind, and makes them thespring of new, and right principles. HenceDivine Revelation informs us, "by his ownwill begat he us by the word of truth." Ifwe look for nothing beyond the grave, toomany will say, " what advantage it me ? "Dr Doddridge observes, " there are some sufferingsof flesh and blood, to which goodmenfor conscience' sake have been .exposed,so extreme, that without some extraordinarysupport from God, it would be really impossiblethat the pleasures of a rational thoughtshould be enjoyed by them." Such supportmust arise from a view of a future state, andfrom a conviction that afflictions are but foramoment, and are " working out for them a farmore exceeding, even an eternal weight ofglory." Not that I mean to say, we are toexpect Heaven as a reward for our virtue,independent of the free grace of God, ButMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 65he has promised a glorious inheritance tothose who do well, and this ought to stimulatemen to the greatest industry in hisservice. Love to God is the great principleof christian virtue.'On another occasion she was applied to bya friend, who was placed in an embarrassingsituation, for her sentiments on the subjectof forming a connexion, without mutual attachment.The following observations are extractedfrom her reply.It has been readily allowed, that marriage,without great congeniality, must rendera person of sensibility extremely wretched.Novel writers have general urged theimpropriety of this connexion from this motive.But as this life is only a passport toa better, the principal objection ought toarise from a nobler source.Both religion and morality require thatthere should be a conformity between ourwords and actions ; and, that in both weshould always be entirely true. Nov when66 LIFE OFtwo people marry, they virtually and publiclydeclare, that they prefer each other to allthe world. If that preference be wanting,this declaration is a capital breach of sincerity.It is the declaration of an untruth beforeHeaven and earth.The least deviation from truth, in thisone capital point, imposes a kind of necessityto practise continual dissimulation.Having exhibited to the world the strongestproof of a peculiar, and individual affection,honor and reputation render it of consequenceto keep up the deception. By doingthis, however, the delicacy of moral feelingmust be" continually wearing away. Andwhat will be the happiness of married lifeunder circumstances like these ?The attention which a husband and wifehave a right to expect from each other, mustoriginate in a decided preference of each other; else the indifference of one; of the partiesmay effectually destroy that happiness,which they had bound themselves by themost sacred obligations to promote.But even this continual dissimulation,MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 67which is highly injurious to the moral character,and extremely painful to an ingenuousmind, will be wholly unavailing for itsend. True love is of so delicate a nature,that it can never be satisfied with anythingshort of love in return ; and it is of a powerso penetrating, that, by its own light, itsees into the heart of the person beloved.Its primary object is to possess the heart.Not the warmest expressions of affection,or the most fervent protestations, are able togive any satisfaction, where we are not persuadedthe affection is real, and the satisfactionmutual.All these possessed are nought, but as they areThe proofs, the substance of an inward passionAnd the rich plunder of a taken heart." 'The first edition of Miss Adams's View ofReligion was published before her sister'sdeath, and partly transcribed by this sister.The second was begun as soon after this afflictingevent took place, as she could collectresolution to engage in it. Those whoknew her might indeed wonder that any mossLIFE OFtime could at any time be powerful enough toinduce her to publish a book. Her humility,her diffidence, and her total ignoranceof business, seemed to present insurmountableobstacles. It was necessary,however, that she should earn a subsistencein some way. She had tried various methods.Making lace, during the war, had beenone of the most lucrative employments.But home-made lace could only be tolerated,when no other could be procured ; and assoon as importation become easy, it sunkinto total disuse. Spinning, weaving, andbraiding straw were by turns tried. But allafforded her only a scanty subsistence. Hereyes were weak, and often so much inflamedthat she could not use them. Her generalhealth also was extremely feeble, and hermind depressed by present evil, and harassedby distressing fears for the future. ' Itwas desperation, therefore, and not vanity,'said she, ' that induced me to publish.' Hermemoirs mention the disappointment sheexperienced in the profits of her first edition.When about publishing a second, itMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 69was necessary to pay a few shillings for thefurther security of the copy-right ; and thissum, though so small, she was obliged toborrow from a friend. On the subject ofpoverty, she always spoke with great feeling.She had early in life been brought upin indulgence ; and poverty had come uponher at an age, when the sensibility of theheart are most alive. There can hardly, indeed,be a suffering more acute to a feelingmind, that has experienced the pleasure ofbestowing, than to find its means of benevolencecut off, and all its powers necessarilyturned into a weary, wasting struggle forself-preservation. 'And yet,' she said, ' I hadthen enjoyments, of which the rich have noidea. When I had any work brought in thatwould enable me to earn a few shillings, bywhich I might buy paper, or any articles ofstationary, I engaged in writing with aninterest that beguiled the monotony of mylife.' After the second edition of her bookwas published, she kept a school for the summermonths for successive years ; and,though in this employment she experienced70 LIFE OFthe usual difficulties of school-keeping in thecountry, it was, upon the whole, a source ofhappiness. As the schools were in the neighboringtowns, she resided among the parentsof the children hy turns ; and her intelligentand acute mind often derived amusement,and profit, from these occasional residences.She treasured up many pleasantlittle anecdotes, that marked the habits andmanners of the families in which she thenlived, many of which retained much of theprimitive simplicity of their forefathers.One anecdote may not be unacceptable.She passed several months in the family of arespectable farmer, whose turn it was toreceive the school-mistress. His wife was apattern of frugal, industrious management ;yet not devoid of that desire of appearing^ decent,' which was manifested by the Vicarof Wakefield's wife before her. The usualdress of females in the country at thatperiod, when engaged in domestic employments,was the ' short russet kirtle,' confinedat the waist by a home-spun checkedapron. This was the costume of the mis*MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 71tress of the family. The year Miss Adamsresided there had been one of uncommonprosperity. The crops were abundant, andmany little luxuries had been added to thehousehold establishment With injunctionsof secrecy, the good woman informed herguest, that, if the next year also should proveto be as prosperous, she intended to wearlong calico gowns !Miss Adams remarked, that these earlyscenes often recurred to her mind, amidst thewealth and splendor she witnessed in laterlife ; and the impressions of both wereheightened by the contrast.That her sensibility was a source of pain,as well as of happiness, cannot be doubted.She censured herself severely for momentsof irritation, and felt the keenest self-reproachfor what might be truly called theinfirmity of her nature. That she perfectlyunderstood her weaknesses, and moralexposures, and guarded in her heart the avenuesto temptation, the following resolutions,found among her papers, are a sufficientproof.72 ' LIFE OFSERIOUS RESOLUTIONS.I resolve to read the Bible more attentively,and diligently, and to be constant and ferventin prayer for divine illumination anddirection.2d. To read less from curiosity, and adesire to acquire worldly knowledge, andmore for the regulation of my heart and life ;consequently, to have my reading less desultory,and to read more books of practical divinity.3d. In choosing my friends and companions,to have a greater regard to religiouscharacters than I have hitherto had.4th. To avoid such company as has atendency to unsettle my mind respectingreligious opinions.5th. To endeavor to preserve a firm relianceon Divine Providence, and to avoid allunreasonable worldly care and anxiety.6th. To pray and guard against lovingmy friends with that ardent attachment, andthat implicit reliance upon them, which isincompatible with supreme love to, and trustin, God alone.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 737th. To endeavor to attain a spirit offorgiveness towards my enemies, and tobanish from my mind all those feelings ofresentment, which are incompatible withthe spirit of the gospel.For a number of years, no incidents occurredin the life of Miss Adams which claimpeculiar notice. It is a long road, with onlyhere and there a milestone. She continuedto write, but on subjects not at all congenialwith her own taste. She was enthusiastic,and a great lover of poetry and fiction ; buton these subjects she distrusted herself, andmade it her constant study to accommodate hermind to common life. Her History of NewEngland is evidence of her perseverance inthis purpose, as that work was undertakensoon after the second edition of her ' Viewof Religious Opinions.'In her memoirs, she mentions her difficultyof procuring books that would aid her in herpurposes. The very uncommon facultyshe possessed of comprehending, and makingher own, the information a book contained,greatly assisted her labors. She was74 LIFE OFinvited to pass a week or two at the latePresident Adams's, at Quincy, with the offerof his library as an inducement to accept theinvitation. He was much struck with therapidity with which she went through foliosof the venerable Fathers ; and made somepleasant remarks in consequence, which inducedher to speak of their contents. Hethen found, that, while she had been turningover leaf after leaf, she had been cullingall that could be useful in her labors. Shepossessed the power of application to anuncommon degree, and was often so entirelyengrossed in her subject, as to be unconsciousof the lapse of time. This abstractiongave rise to many little anecdotes. Itwas said that she often spent days at theAtheneum ; and that the librarian, aftersome ineffectual attempts to disengage herfrom her book, would lock the door, go hometo his dinner, and return again, and find herin the same spot ; and unconscious either ofhis absence, or that the dinner hour was past.A friend repeated this account to her, andasked her if it was true. She said in reply.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 75It is very much exaggerated, I don't thinkit ever happened more than once or twice.'It was on a visit to Boston, that MissAdams first saw Mr Buckminster. He wasthen at college, and about sixteen years old.Those who knew him will not think herdescription of him an exaggerated one. ' Hehad then,' she said, 'the bloom of health onhis cheek, and the fire of genius in his eye.I did not know from which world he came,whether from heaven or earth.' Though soyoung, he entered fully into her character ;and before they parted, he gave her a short,but comprehensive sketch of the state ofliterature in France and Germany.' After hebecame the Pastor of Brattle street Church,he, with Mr Higgins, and Mr Shaw theactive founder of the Atheneum, proposedto Miss Adams, who, from an enfeebledconstitution, had begun to grow infirm, toremove to Boston ; at the same time procuringfor her, through the liberal subscriptionof a few gentlemen, an annuity for life.She had then commenced her History of theJews ; and nothing could have been more76 LIFE OFfavorable to its progress, or to her own easeof mind, than this benevolent arrangement.She could never speak of her benefactorswithout deep emotion.From the Rev. Mr Buckminster she receivedthe most judicious, and extensiveassistance. She was in the habit of visitinghim in his study, and had his permission tocome when she pleased, to sit and readthere as long as she pleased, or take anybook home and use it like her own. Perhapspeople are never perfectly easy with eachother, till they feel at liberty to be silent ineach other's society. It was stipulated betweenthem, that neither party should beobliged to talk. But her own language willbest describe her feelings. 'Mr Bucklingwould sometimes read for hours withoutspeaking. But, occasionally, flashes of geniuswould break forth in some short observation,or sudden remark, which electrified me.I never could have gone on with my history,without the use of his library. I was indebtedto him for a new interest in life.He introduced me to a valuable circle ofMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 77friends ; and it was through him that I becameacquainted with Mrs Dearborn, whosekindness and attention to me have beenunceasing. His character was the perfectionof humanity. His intellectual powers werehighly cultivated and ennobled. Yet eventhe astonishing vigor and brightness of hisintellect were outdone by the goodness ofhis heart.No thought within his generous mind had birth,But Avhat he might have own'd to heaven and earth.'Mr Buckminster assisted Miss Adams'sresearches, and procured information for her,relative to the Jews. He took a warm interestin this oppressed people, and oftenprayed for them during communion service,in the same language in which Jesus hadprayed for them. ' Father, forgive them ! forthey know not what they do.' For abouttwo years after the removal of Miss Adamsto Boston, she enjoyed this intercourse, visitinghis study with the utmost freedom.It is impossible not to look back with admirationupon the benevolence that promptedthese kind attentions ; and it is not7*78 LIFE OFa difficult effort of imagination to enterthe library, and to view these laborious,and dissimilar students together. Theone distinguished by the natural ease,grace and elegance of his manners ; theother, timid and helpless. The one,treading with the elastic step of youth, andthe other declining into the vale of years ;yet both drawn together by those sympathies,which spring from the fountain ofperfect and everlasting good. Who wouldnot be touched by the spectacle of ayoung man of distinguished talents, equallysought by the world of science, and of fashion,extending a helping hand, and devotinga portion of his valuable time, to a timidand helpless female, shrinking from the ills oflife ; but who indeed derived her happinessfrom the same sources that he did, literatureand religion ! When, from indisposition, sheomitted for any length of time her visits, hkind note, or a still kinder call alleviated theinfirmities of her health. But this happinesswas not to last. Miss Adams was onlyone among the many who beheld Mr Buck-missHANNAH ADAMS. 79minster disappear, at the early age oftwentjeight years, ' in all the brightness ofhis honors, and without any twilight comingover his fame.'Miss Adams corresponded with literarycharacters both abroad and at home, butshe never preserved any copies of her ownletters. She wrote with great simplicity,and singleness of heart, without any display,and set no value on her own composition.She had, indeed, a singular standard ofjudging. It was her firm persuasion, thatshe never wrote anything original. ' Itis other people's thoughts,' said she,that I put into my own language.' Wereall writers brought to the same test,there are few that could claim much originalityof thought ; though the rich and marriedmodes of expression, and the differentviews which different minds take of fundamentaltruths, often give them the graceand charm of novelty. In this opinionof herself, however, she seems to refuteher position ; as it must be acknowledgedthat this view of her own works is80 LIFE OFrather original among authors. Her defectwas, underrating, instead of overrating herpowers. Her mind was like a well cultivatedgarden, stored with fruits and flowers, andwatered by pure streams. But they werestreams that flowed on just as nature hadintended. There were no cascades, norfountains, nor serpentine walks, nor rare exotics.All was simple, and natural.Her timidity was excessive. It pervadedher whole character, and sometimes palsiedthe efforts of her mind. In her youth sheamused herself with writing tales of fiction.But,' she said, ' they all took their colorfrom her own life. She could do nothingbut kill and destroy ; and when her situationbecame happier, and her mid more cheerful,she could not endure the sight of them.'When very young, her health being in afeeble state, and not expecting to live long,she determined to write a number of lettersto her young friends, after the manner ofMrs Rowe's ; intending they should reachthem mysteriously, immediately on her death.But fortunately for the Jews, and for litera-missHANNAH ADAMS. 81ture, her anticipations were not realized.She was early in life much in the habit ofcommitting poetry to memory ; and this shenever forgot. ' I could repeat poetry,' saidshe, '• I believe for three months together ;and though I am now continually troubledby forgetting where I have laid a knife, apencil, or a pen, yet the long poems I learnedin my youth, I can repeat as accurately asever.' She went on to observe, that theserecollections did not give her so muchpleasure as might be supposed ; for, as thispoetry was selected when she was young,much of it was not of a kind which her maturertaste and judgment could approve.Though Miss Adams was born and bredinthe country, she felt the strongest enthusiasmfor rural scenes ; and they alwaysseemed to retain the power of novelty overher mind. A walk, a ride, or a visit to anynew place, awoke all the fervor of herfeelings. It was on one of these occasionsthat she composed the following lines.Such scenes the days of innocence renew,And bring the patriarchal age to view,82 LIFE OFThus favor'd Abraham, in the days of old,On flowery Maire kept his fleecy fold ;While friendly angels left their heavenly seat,To greet the patriarch in his calm retreat.'There are few who were more calculatedfor the enjoyment of friendshipand society than Miss Adams. Yet foralong period she seems to have been inagreat measure deprived of both. It isdifficult to say what effects might have beenproduced by the action of other minds uponher own. It might have roused it to moreinventive exertion ; or, on the other hand, inthe fulness of enjoyment, her mental powersmight have sunk into indolence. Butone thing is certain, that her happiness wouldhave been greatly increased by it. Thosewho knew her only late in life can fully realizehow much she must have felt the wantof a friend, after the death of her sister.Her strong sensibility to all that was excellent,and good, and fair in creation, peculiarlyfitted her for that intercourse of thoughtand feeling, which such emotions naturallycall forth. Her love of literature was noMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 83doubt a high source of enjoyment. But perhapseven this might have been increased,by those occasional restraints which theforms and habits of society impose. Theepicure is willing to delay his dinner for anappetite ; and, upon the same principle, thosewho read, write, or reflect with the greatestrelish, may return to these occupationswith tenfold enjoyment, after giving an houror two to a social circle, or even to the dullround of a modern tea party. But MissAdams had none of these incentives. Shewas at liberty to read, or write, withoutinterruption ; to turn over huge folios,or musty manuscripts, from morning tonight; and if she sometimes suspended herlabors, and walked abroad, it was for a solitarypleasure. Yet she allowed no sentimentof repining, or of discontent, to embitterher life ; for she fully realized that,It is th' allotment of the skies,The hand of the Supremely Wise,That guides and governs our affectionsAnd plans and orders our connexions ;Directs us in our distant road,And marks the bounds of our abode.'84 LIFE OFThis feeling of resignation to existingcircumstances prevented Miss Adams frommaking any strenuous exertions to improveher condition. Once, indeed, she projecteda plan of keeping a circulating library atSalem. She had a considerable number ofbooks to begin with, and probably encourageda hope that she might in this way becomeinstrumental to the promotion of religiousand moral instruction. But she neverthought superficially on any subject; andbefore engaging in active measures, shemade full inquiry into the probable successand consequences of her plan. It was thenthat her upright, and conscientious mind,relinquished the undertaking. The reflection,that the emoluments of a circulatinglibrary are drawn from novels, plays,and romances, and that, in keeping such alibrary, she must be accessary to much wasteof time, if not perversion of taste and evenof principle, by disseminating works whichoften are read because they are new, determinedher conduct. She felt, and lamentedthe injury, which the promiscuous readingMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 85of similar works had produced on her ownmind. While they had sharpened her sensibilityto the evils of life, they had also enervatedher resolution to endure them ; andshe ascribed much of her mental sufferingto this cause. She would not, therefore,pursue the plan of a circulating library,though encouraged to do it by some warmheartedfriends. Had the Waverley novelsmade their appearance in her youthful days,they would probably have rendered harmlessthe greater part of those which fell intoher hands. Their just historical painting,their strong delineation of character, andmasterly touches of passion and feeling,united with the exquisite description of whatis beautiful and sublime in the scenery ofnature, could not fail to have given her ajuster taste, and directed her enthusiasmto a higher mark. Her own good sense,led her, in time, to discriminate, and toseparate the gold from the dross ; and shenever ceased to derive great pleasure froma well written work of fiction. Her wholetestimony, however, was given against that86 LIFE OFpromiscuous reading of novels, which hasbeen in times past, more than of late years,permitted among young girls. The rapidprogress of education, by occupying thetime, and expanding the mind, has donemuch towards the correction of this evil. Manynow sip at the fountain-head of elegant literature,and feel the beauty of Virgil, and thesublimity of Dante, in their native languages;listen to the sweet melody of Tasso ; and findin the christian leader of the early ages, Godfrey,a hero far surpassing the heroes ofmodern romances.Happily the time has arrived, when thecultivation of female intellect needs no longerto be advocated, or recommended. Itis now placed on a just and rational ground.We hear no longer of the alarming andperhaps justly obnoxious din, of the ' rightsof women.' Whatever their capacity ofreceiving instruction may be, there can be nouse in extending it beyond the sphere oftheir duties. Yet how wide a circle doesthis include ! Who can doubt the sacred andimportant duties of a mother ? ' Nature hasMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 87not more evidently assigned them the taskof nourishing the body of the infant, thanshe has that of developing, and cultivatingthe mind, in its earlier stages.' It is heroffice to sow the first seeds of virtue ; toregulate the first excitements of temper ; tocultivate gentleness, forbearance, disinterestedness,and above all, obedience. Forthis, her own habits must be those of carefulobservation, of steady self-government,and of systematical arrangement ; otherwise,her plan will be made up of miscellaneousfeelings. and opinions, that will be constantlyfluctuating.It may be doubted whether any one canbe placed in so insulated a situation, as topossess a right of appropriating any considerableportion of his time to studies, whichmay not terminate in a practical result.'This rule, in an enlightened sense, ought tobe the standard of a woman's education.It ought to be the measure of her cultivation.But surely no faculty of her mind canbe spared from this work. ' She is designedby nature for elegance, and gentleness ;88 LIFE OFto endear domestic life to man, to makevirtue lovely to her children, to spread aroundher order and grace, and to give society itshighest polish. No attainment can be abovebeings whose end and aim is to accomplishthese important purposes. Every meansshould be used to invigorate by principle, andculture, their native excellence and grace'*These observations may be deemed irrelevant,but they are suggested by Miss Adams'sown remarks on this subject. Sheoften regretted the time she had spent inuseless, and desultory r^nrlinfr on^i ^Koomr^jrlthat when she first began to turn her attentionto the study of the dead languages, shefelt as if she was ' drawing upon herself theridicule of society.' She lived, however,to see these prejudices removed, and to receivea respect and deference from literarymen, which often excited her astonishment,as well as gratitude. There have been manyinstances recorded, of talent which hasbeen suffered to languish in obscurity andwant. Against these, the present instanceFenton.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 89ought not to pass unnoticed. The individualkindness that Miss Adams received wasinvariable. She had outlived almost all hercontemporaries. But new generations hadsprung up under the enlightened influences ofeducation, who respected her intellect andlearning, and who loved her for her goodness.After her removal to Boston, she wastherefore seldom long in solitude. Her littleapartment was usually decorated with theflowers that her young friends brought her.Many of them spent hours in reading to her,and cheered her by their bright aid animatedconversation. It should he justice,also, not to refer to che disinterested, andliberal assistance she received from thosefriends, who enabled ber to reserve a partof her laborious earnings for the benefit ofa suffering relative. The annuity, whichcontinued t^ her death, was said to havebeen first suggested by ladies ; but afterwards,the proposal was put into the handsof Mr Shaw, and the other gentlemen mentionedin her memoirs. A few years previousto her death, a number of ladies at.8*90 LIFE OFSalem sent her an annual sum as a testimonyof their respect.At one period of her life, her correspondentswere numerous. Amongst them mightbe mentioned names, that will long be cherishedby posterity. The venerable PresidentAdams, to whom the second edition ofher View of Religions was dedicated, tooka benevolent interest in her literary success.From one of his letters to her, the followingsentence is extracted.You and I are undoubtedly related bybirth ; and although we were both " born inhumble obscurity ,^' yet I presume neither ofus have any cause to regret that circumstance.If I could ever suppose that familypride was in any case excusable, I shouldthink a descent from a line of vi:itu()us independentNew England farmers, for onehundred and sixty years, was a better foundationfor it, than a descent through roya]or titled scoundrels ever since the flood,'With the learned Bishop Gregory, whosename is familiar in our country as well ashis own, her correspondence continued ma-missHANNAH ADAMS. 91ny years. The congeniality of their laborsin the cause of the Jews, as well as generalphilanthropy, had made them acquaintedwith each other. With Mr Cunningham,also, Vicar of Harrow, and author of ' TheWorld without Souls,' she exchanged letters.From Miss More she received several, all ofwhich she most highly prized. The lateMrs Catharine Cape was among her correspondents; nor can we omit to mentionher letters from the amiable, and distinguishedSwedenborgian, Mr Hill. There is onealso among her papers from the venerableBishop Carroll, in reply to a letter ofhers addressed to him. It is with no narrowfeeling we mention names like these.We ask not their sect or country. Theybelong to the great family of mankind, andwe claim affinity as a rightful inheritance.The strength of Miss Adams's natural affectionwas proportionate to her social ties.Of her only remaining sister, and to whomher memoir is bequeathed in the ' humblehope that it may be a pecuniary benefit toher,' she often spoke with deep and ireLIFE OFrepressible feeling. She sometimes projectedplans, by which she might have enjoyedmore of the society of her nieces ; but shesubmitted to the necessity which separatedher from her relatives without a murmur.One of her nieces was adopted, and educatedby a lady, who fell a victim to consumptionin the prime of life. Here recollectionlingers for a moment. Impelled by apowerful sense of duty,thi s lady quitted hernearest friend, and sought, in the milderclimate of Italy, that health and freedom ofrespiration which were denied her here.She was able to derive much enjoymentfrom her short residence in a land thatabounded with objects congenial to her taste ;but only lived to return, and yield her lastbreath in her native country.As Miss Adams has mentioned her worksin her memoir, in the order in which theywere written, it is unnecessary to say more ofthem. They have been reviewed, andweighed, by a candid public ; and met at thetime the wants of the different departmentsin which they were written. Her History ofMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 93New England was a pioneer to many similarworks that followed. There is, however,one work of hers, published in 1804, whichis less known. It is entitled, ' The Truthand Excellence of the Christian Religionexhibited.' This work contains interesting,and short sketches of the lives of eminentlaymen, v^ho have written in defenceof the Christian religion, with extracts fromtheir writings. The characters are selectedwith judgment and taste, and every circumstanceis omitted that does not aid herDurno^e. From the preface sto.' The Truthand Excellence ot the Christian lieiigiuii,written by the author, we select one passage.' In order to prevent any misrepresentationof the design of this compilation, itmay be proper to inform the reader, thatthese great names, and the testimonies theyhave given of their firm belief of the truthof Christianity, are not adduced to justify areliance upon human authority, or to establishthe divinity of the christian system ; butthe evidences of revealed religion are stillsubmitted to, and boldly challenge, the stricterLIFE OFest scrutiny, by the known and establishedrules of right reason.' In connexion withthis idea, she quotes the following lines fromCowper."Philosophy baptizedIn the pure fountain of eternal love,Has eyes indeed ; and, viewing all she sees,As meant to indicate a God to man.Gives him the praise, and forfeits not her oAvn." 'The order and systematic arrangement ofthis work is excellent. It was principallyintended for the use of young persons ; andthe characters selected are not wanting inthem attractive to the. young. The followinganecdote is there related of Grotius.This great man was twice sent on embassiesto England. On his return to Holland,he found the religious divisions whichhad for some time prevailed in that countryincreased. By his attachment to Barneveltand the remonstrant party, he incurred thedispleasure of Prince Maurice of Orange.In 1669, he was seized and sentenced to perpetualimprisonment, and his estate w^§MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 95confiscated. In pursuance of this sentence,he was imprisoned in the strong castle ofLouvestein ; and after having been treatedwith great rigor for more than a year and ahalf, he was rescued by a stratagem of hiswife. He had been permitted to borrowbooks of his friends ; and when he had perusedthem, they were carried back in a chestwith his linen, which was in this way sentto be washed. During the first year, theguards were exact in examining the chest ;but at length grew remiss, and did not takethe trouble to open it. His wife, who belongedto one of the first families in Zealand,and was worthy of such a husband asGrotius, observing their negligence, advisedhim to bore holes in the chest to prevent hisbeing stifled, and then to put himself intoit, and to make his escape. She requestedthe governor of the castle to permit her tosend away a chest. After her request wasgranted, Grotius was put into the chest, andconveyed to a friend's house in Gorkum,where, dressing himself like a mason, andtaking a rule and trowel, he passed through96 LIFE OFthe market place, and stepping into a boat,went to Brabant. There he discovered himselfto some of his friends, and hired a carriageat Antwerp. At first there was a designof prosecuting his wife, who remainedin the prison. However, she was releasedbj a plurality of voices, and universally applaudedfor a resolution and courage whichsaved her husband's life, while it endangeredher own.'It would be a pleasant office, in payingthis tribute to the memory of a friend, torecord the names of many whose kindnessand attention to her were unremitting.Some, like herself, have gone to their longhome ; but others still remain, to continuetheir 'noiseless deeds of worth.' Onelittle incident, which greatly interested herfrom the mystery attached to it, is a reasonfor mentioning the name of a lady who isnow no more, but who was distinguished forendowments of mind and person. Shemarried, and went to Europe during the revolutionarywar. After passing many yearsin England, Scotland and France, she re-MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 97turned to this country, with a mind fraughtwith practical knowledge, a heart full ofbenevolence, and blest with that happy talentof conversation, that draws forth fromthe recipient as much as it communicates.In this lady's society Miss Adams took thegreatest delight. During their long andpleasant intercourse of many years, an artistwaited on Miss Adams, and requested her tosit for a miniature picture of herself : sayingthat he was commissioned to solicit thefavor by a friend. She consented, but wasentirely at a loss to conjecture who thefriend could be. The picture was completed,and in the course of a few weekssent to her, with the following note.My dear Madam — I send you the miniaturefor which you had the goodness tosit. It has been generally recognised, andthought a good likeness. I hope it will beas much approved in your room, as it has beenin mine. Now, my dear Madam, you willdiscover the friend who was desirous thatyou should live in future, in person as well as98 LIFE OFin mind. I sincerely hope others may feelas I do on this subject ; and a more valuableportrait be secured of the lady, whose talentsand writings have diffused so much usefulknowledge, and whose conduct and life hasbeen so exemplary. After it has been withyou long enough for your friends to see it, Iwish it returned, and to have the honor ofits hanging in my house. If one better cal ,related for the purpose should not hereafterbe taken, I shall bequeath it to the Athenaeum.With great respect.Your friend and servant,Catharine Hay.Boston, Dec. 25, 1822.The hope of this lady was accomplished.A few years before Miss Adams's death,through the influence of a few friends, a finelikeness of her was taken by Mr Harding,and was afterwards presented by them to theAthenaeum.We hope it may not be deemed improperto mention one other friend, whose life wasMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 99a series of benevolent and disinterested exertions.Immediately previous to Miss Adams'sillness, she spoke of this friend withher accustomed interest ; and with an anticipationthat they should be fellow-travellersto the land of spirits. Mrs Conan'sdeath took place a few days after that ofMiss Adams. she has left to her friendsthose sweet and sacred remembrances, thatsoften and elevate the heart ; while theinfluence of her intelligent, and liberal mind,will long be felt in the society in which shelived.The most prominent trait in Miss Adams'scharacter was sensibility. It was impossibleto converse with her any length of time,without touching some of the numerouschords that vibrated through her system.An instrument thus organized did not requirethe skill of an artist to set it in motion.The feeblest hand could extract notes of joy,sorrow, or apprehension. Ii responded to everybreath that passed over it. This sensitivenesssometimes put her at the mercy of100 LIFE OFthe unfeeling and obtrusive. But, generallyspeaking, her sensibility was a source of greatenjoyment. Towards her friends it flowedforth in an affection fervent and enthusiastic.The sight of them,' to use her own expression,' was like the sun and air of Heaven.'All that was remotely connected with thembecame important to her. Those who haveheard her speak of Mr Teacher, the eloquentand feeling historian of her friend Mr Buck-minster,understood the nature of her emotions.She almost identified him with thebeing that he so beautifully and justly delineated.Brothers indeed they were in thesacred ties of love and harmony, and inthose qualities of mind that emanate fromthe source of perfect wisdom and goodness.There are many who may apply to both thattouching sentence the survivor applied to hisfriend ; ' Even now, when time has interposedto subdue all the more powerful emotionsof grief, there are those who delightto recall the hours we have passed withthem, and to dwell on those traits, which weMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 101loved while living, and which death cannotefface from our memories.'Mr Teacher, unlike his friend, was doomedto see death approach by slow and falteringsteps. If there is a trial on earth thatmocks the power of human fortitude, it is tofeel the usefulness of life cut off, and to becompelled to remain idle during the toils ofthe day, while cares and labors are throngingaround. How nobly he endured this affliction,how justly he reasoned that the partassigned him was to avait, must be well remembered.The teachings of Heaven areasvarious as our wants. This sublime exampleof patient endurance has found its wayto many a heart, and spoken more forciblythan the services even of an active ministrycould have done. His fervent prayer is nowaccomplished. He has gone to that worldwhere ' friendship is uninterrupted, and virtueeternal.'We bless God for the natural evidence ofa future life, which minds like these, bearingthe visible stamp of immortality, afford ; we9#102 LIFE OFbless him that such have existed y and webless him that such have preceded thosewhom we love, to cast brightness over thedark valley of death.We hope this involuntary digression willbe pardoned, and we return again to thesubject of our memoir. We have spoken ofher sensibility and elsewhere of her humility.This, however, must not be mistaken for thatslothful quiescent sense of inferiority, whichsometimes belongs to common minds. Itwas true christian humility ; it was the consciousnessof high moral capacities, fallingfar short of her exalted standard of excellence.The sensibility that led her so fullyto appreciate the kindness of her friends,made her alive to injury. At any attempt atimposition, her spirit rose proportionably, andshe expressed and felt a resentment for whichshe afterwards reproached herself.Her judgment and opinion of books wasderived from her own power of thought. Shedid not wait for the decision of others, but expressedher own fearlessly, when called for.MISS HANNAH ADAMS. 103But it was on the subject of character thather maid discovered most acuteness and originality.Even in those whom she loved, sheknew how to discriminate, and when sheallowed herself to speak on the subject,plainly discovered that she knew how toseparate the good from the evil, and thatshe had learned to love them with theirfaults.The last visit that Miss Adams made wasto South Boston, in the family of the Superintendentof Juvenile Offenders. Therewas much in her short residence there tointerest her mind. The success of this institution; the groups of rescued children,now cheerful and obedient ; the disinterestedkindness of the family ; nor ought it to beforgotten, the beautiful situation of the building,overlooking the bay of Boston with itsmany islands, the harbor and city rising inits pyramid of beauty, and crowned by thedome of the State-house ; all called forthher enthusiasm, and brightened the last daysof her earthly existence. When she returnsLIFE OFed to her lodgings in Boston, she lamentedthe want of sun and of prospect. By theinstrumentality of judicious friends, she wasremoved to Brookline ; and when there, shewrote the following note to a friend, which,as the last effort of her pen, is here inserted.Dear Madam — Will you excuse me ifI trouble you with a few lines. I am nowsettled for the winter, if I live. The greatestearthly happiness I can enjoy is seeingmy friends, among whom dear Mrs isin the first rank. I need not inform you,and I am unable to express, how much pleasureit would give me to see you in Brookline.The lady I am now boarding with isall goodness. My trembling hand willscarcely allow me to write. Adieu, dearMadam ; pray call upon me as soon as youcan conveniently.From your affectionate and grateful friend,H. Adams.Brookline, Nov. 12, 1831.The friend to whom the note was address-missHANNAH ADAMS. 105ed hastened to see her. She found herma large, and airy apartment. It wasa fine morning ; one of those days in whichAutumn seems to linger in the lap of Winter.'The sun poured its raps into herapartment to her heart's content. She wasbright, and cheerful, and said with a smileshe ' believed some people thought she hadlived long enough ; but she was willing toremain as long as it pleased God to continueher,' and then added, pointing to theprospect without, ' how can any body beimpatient to quit such a beautiful world !'But little remains to be added to thisshort sketch, and that little perhaps is expressedin the Obituary notice which wesubjoin.OBITUARY.Died at Brookline, near Boston, on the15th inst. Miss Hannah Adams, aged .Her literary labors have been longbefore the public, and have made her nameknown in Europe as well as in her native106 LIFE OFland. Her first work, the ' View of Religions,'was published at a time when thiscountry had few authors, and when a bookfrom a female hand was almost without precedent.She was not impelled by any desireof fame ; and though the hope of usefulnesswas undoubtedly a strong motive toher literary exertions, yet this would nothave availed, w without the prospect of contributingby her pen to her own support, and thecomfort of her nearest friends. It is gratifyingto know, that she has left behind asimple and interesting memoir of her earlylife, which precludes the necessity of sayingmore of her literary history. Indeed, literaryclaims are perhaps among the last that, ata moment like this, present themselves to theminds of her friends. The virtues and excellencesof her character, her blameless life,her sensibility, the warmth of her affections,her sincerity and candor, call forth a flow offeeling that cannot be restrained. To an almostchild-like simplicity, and singleness ofheart, she united a clear and just conceptionMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 107of character ; to a deep and affecting humility,a dignity and elevation of thought,that commanded the respect and venerationof those around her. Amidst many infirmitiesshe retained the freshness and enthusiasmof youth. Society never lost its charms.To the aged she listened with submission andgentleness ; to the classic and highly gifted,with a delight almost amounting to rapture.The young, and there were such who feltit a privilege to ' sit at her feet,' she viewedas ' ministering angels' dispensing joy andgladness. Her love of nature was exhaustless.The first beam of morning, the gloryof noon, the last rays of the setting sun, wereobjects which through a long life she nevercontemplated with indifference. Thosewho were in the habit of visiting her, willrecollect how constantly her apartment wasdecorated by flowers of the field, or the garden.It was her object to gather round herimages of natural and moral beauty. Inmany respects her mind seemed so truly constitutedfor enjoyment, that to those who108 LIFE OFknew her but slightly, she might have appearedto be exempted from that mentaldiscipline, which is gradually leading thepilgrim on to the land of promise. But herfriends knew otherwise ; they knew howkeen was her religious sensibility, howtremblingly alive her conscience, how highher standard of excellence, and how greather timidity and self-distrust, and they feltthat this was not her haven of rest.Though Miss Adams's faith was ferventand devout, it partook of the constitution ofher sensitive mind, rather than gave the toneto it. Yet amidst moments of doubt and despondency,a passage from scripture, or ajudicious observation, would disperse theclouds that had gathered round her, and thebrightest sunshine would diffuse itself overher mind and countenance. There are manywho will sorrow that they shall see herface no more ; ' but those who knew thepeculiar delicacy of her constitution, oughtrather to rejoice that she has escaped fromthe present inclement winter ; from theMISS HANNAH ADAMS. 109Stormy wind and tempest; that her eyes haveopened upon ' one eternal Spring,' a seasonthat always awoke the enthusiasm of hernature, and which she said seemed to herlike the first freshness of creation.'It was her happiness to have been conversantwith some of the most enlightened andgifted men of the age. From many she receivedessential benefit ; and the universalsympathy and respect, as well as the individualkindness which she excited, are testimonieshonorable to human nature. Manyin whom she delighted have passed away.To those she has gone, and to the Fatherand Saviour whom she loved.The last tribute of respect is, however,yet to be paid to the honored subject of thisnotice. Her remains are to be removed toMount Auburn, near Boston, the spot selectedfor a cemetery. Subscriptions for a monumentto her memory have been raised, andit will be erected in the spring. Thereseems to be almost a poetical unity in this110 LIFE OF MISS HANNAH ADAMS.arrangement ; that one who so devoutlyLooked through nature up to nature's God,'should be one of the first tenants of a spot,combining so much natural beauty ; andwhich possesses that magnificence of woodand water, which bespeaks it ' a templenot made with hands.'