ENGLISHPLEASURE CARRIAGES;THEIRORIGIN, HISTORY,VARIETIES, MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION, DEFECTS, Improvements,AND CAPABILITIES :WITH ANANALYSIS OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF COMMON ROADS AND RAILROADS,AND THE PUBLIC VEHICLES USED ON THEM ;TOGETHER WITHDESCRIPTIONS OF NEW INVENTIONS.ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS DESIGNS.FOR THE USE OF CARRIAGE PURCHASERS AND CONSTRUCTORS.BYWILLIAM BRIDGES ADAMS.He would fain keep a hold on the Actual, knit the New securely to it, andgive to them conjointly a past direction. * * * * He recognises motion as thetrue element of humanity, and principle of the universe."Characteristics of Goethe,LONDON :CHARLES KNIGHT & Co. Lydgate STREET.1837.jOZO.Don't Stnet. Fleet SinPREFACE.The object of this work is general utility, rather thantechnical instruction in minor details. The principles onwhich carriages ought to be constructed, rather than thearbitrary proportions of parts, are what the author hassought to make clear. The utmost care used in givingaccurate measurements, with considerable labour to thewriter, and more to the reader, woilld fail in enabling amere copyist to construct a good carriage, and a builderwith clear ideas would not need them. In architecture,there are certain rules laid down by which all proportionsmay be regulated ; but in carriages, so many considertons intervene, as to produce uncertainty, what actualstrength may be required. Seasons, localities, weight,speed, and many other circumstances, conspire to defy precisecalculation. The builder of a steam-engine knows toa 2iv PREFACE.a fraction the amount of strain his work will have to bear ;but the carriage builder canons take average proportionsto meet varieties of circumstances, unless his vehicle beintended for a railroad.The writer makes no pretension to set a completework before the reader ; circumstances rather than originalintention have caused the book to be produced, justas Mr. Babbage in the pursuit of a specific object acquireda mass of general knowledge, which he afterwardsgave to the world, for the benefit of those who mightnot have the opportunity of collecting it as he had done.The writer, when a boy, was *' brought up," in the usualphrase, to the *part and mystery of coach making'' andacquired the common amount of routine skill in imitatingcertain prescribed forms ; but as to the principles of theart, — ^as to the mode of originating the forms, he was leftin utter ignorance. In fact, those to whose instruction hewas confided were as ignorant as himself. Had the patternsof the factory been destroyed by accident, the businessmust have stopped, unless external talent had beenbrought in to renew them. Impatience of mere routineexcited in the writer the desire of becoming familiar withother branches of the art, and he acquired something ofskill in many varieties of work. Circumstances afterwardsbrought him into connexion with an eminent engineer,Preface. Vand a new world seemed to open upon him, gorgeouslydecked in all the wonders of machinery. The minds ofmost boys are essentially inclined to the material ; theyprefer the real to the imaginative, — utility in art, to taste orsplendour in art, — and feel far more interest in RobinsonCrusoe's canoe than in a Lord Mayor's barge. Thus,after becoming familiar with the properties even of simplemachines, the inferior mechanical construction of carriagesbecame an object of contempt to the writer ; andtaste for beauty of form not having been awakened in him,he ceased to feel any interest in them. His daily occupationbecame a drudgery to him, to which almost any otheremployment seemed preferable ; and the simple reasonwas, that he had no scope for improvement, no exercisefor advancing intelligence. The motive of the writer inrecording this is, that the same mischievous system stillprevails, though opportunities for self-improvement aremore numerous than before. Ere he had well attainedmature years, the writer was obliged by ill health toseek a more genial climate than his own, and he passedseveral years alternately sojourning and travelling invarious countries, where perceptions of the beautiful inNature and in Art gradually began to stir and awakenhis dormant faculties. Being thrown much on his ownresources in mechanical difficulties, his invention was freePREFACE.quietly tasked in various ways ; and the excitement ofovercoming obstacles served to stimulate his perseverance,and quicken his observation as to mechanical capabilities.When the writer returned to England with renewedhealth, he entered into partnership with his father, inthe firm of Hobson and Company, of Long Acre. For aconsiderable time he applied himself to the mercantiledepartment of the business ; after which, peculiar circumstancesgave him leisure to pursue systematically a seriesof mechanical improvements, as well as to study the principlesof the art of vehicular locomotion. He sought forbooks to aid him ; but the knowledge to be gleaned fromthem was so imperfect, and so extensively scattered — sodevoid of all system, and so very unsatisfactory, that hechose rather to seek the practical schools of the workmen,and the verification of experimental research, and thereonto build his own theories. Having accumulated the resultsfor his own satisfaction, it struck him that informationacquired with so much trouble must be valuable toa large class of readers, both the constructors and purchasersof carriages. Farther reflection convinced himthat a succinct detail of the progress of wheel carriagesin England from the earliest period down to the presenttime would be a desirable addition, and the result hasPreface. VUbeen the publication of the work now offered to thereader.Whatsoever may be the imperfections, the writer cannotdoubt that, in the absence of any existing availablework on the subject, the information herein collected willbe esteemed valuable by the large and increasing class ofthose who keep carriages, whether for their own use or forthe purpose of hiring out to the public. Whoever isabout to build a house endeavours to procure drawings andmodels beforehand, to make sure that his fancy may notlead him astray ; and carriages being articles of considerableexpense, it must surely be desirable to acquire suchknowledge as a book can give on the subject, previous tomaking a purchase. To constructors, this work must beuseful, even to those who might feel inclined to contestany of the positions the writer has laid down ; for it willgive them the opportunity to verify anything which theyfind not borne out in practice. It may perhaps inducesome one of greater skill than the writer to put forthanother work. He would be glad to hail such a work asmight be worthy of being entitled The Science of VehicularLocomotion. In the mean time, constructors residingat a distance from the metropolis, and those of foreignlands, will probably avail themselves of the opportunity ofknowing the existing state of the art of carriage construedPREFACE.tion in the English metropolis, where it is generally supposedto have attained its nearest approach to perfection.If there be any constructors so illiberal as to suppose thisinjurious to their interests, they will do well to reflect thatere foreigners can rival English constructors, they musttrain their workmen in every branch, direct and indirect,to posses greater skill than English workmen. The circulationof English models on the Continent would tendperhaps to improve the Continental manufacture ; but theywould to a greater extent tend to increase the already extensivetaste for English carriages.As this work may occasionally fall into the hands ofreaders who feel no direct interest in pleasure carriageseither as purchasers or constructors, some may perchancebe inclined to question its utility, except as it relates tothe mechanism of vehicular locomotion. They may perchancecondemn pleasure carriages altogether, as luxuriesunjustly engrossed by wealthy people. This would be asunjust as the sweeping condemnations so frequently passedon the public vehicles in the streets. Pleasure carriagesare instruments of elegant human enjoyment ; and to saythat none ought to enjoy them because all cannot enjoythem, would be to possess a spirit akin to that of the ^' dogin the manger." If those who possess pleasure carriageswere to enjoy them at the expense of those who do notPREFACE. IXpossess them, the evil would be a monstrous one: but suchis not the fact. Partial instances might be adduced ; butthey are only exceptions to the rule, — as, for example, thecase of a swindler. But, after all, those who do not usepleasure carriages — as the mass of the community — thoughthey do not benefit directly, still benefit indirectly bythem. They are objects of beauty constantly exposed topublic view, "as much so as architectural erections — perhapsmore so, being locomotive, — and far more so, though in ahumbler way, than paintings or statues. It is an undeniablefact, that the daily habit of beholding beautiful objectshas an imperceptible effect in refining the nationaltaste. Pleasing colours and pleasing forms tend to softenrugged natures ; and whatever may be the disputes as tothe evil or good resulting to a nation from the existence ofa permanent leisure class, it is quite certain that if no partof the community be at leisure to study the arts of elegance,the public will be far less refined, far more devoidof taste, than if they have a standard — ^a type, as it were, toimitate, when any individual may acquire the means toimitate, without understanding the principles of that whichhe imitates.In most branches of art, men of vulgar minds are to befound who deem that art is on the decline because worksof art are progressively diminishing in price ; forgettingX Preface.that an increasing demand more than compensates for adecreasing price. Amongst carriage constructors men ofthis class may be found, who prophesy the decline of carriagebuilding in England, because they cannot maintain alazy monopoly. They obstinately shut their eyes to thefact that the streets of London are now occasionally blockedup with pleasure carriages, as they frequently are withcarts. The simple fact is, that ordinary skill is now common,and carriage builders have become a more numerousbody. It is a more difficult thing than formerly to standout from the crowd, and it can only be accomplished bycombined talent and energy. The arts of elegance, orluxury, as they are sometimes called, will be pursued withmore earnestness than ever as people advance in wealth ;and if there be a fear, it is, lest the arts of wisdom be neglectedfor the pursuit of external enjoyments, as is so muchthe case in the wealthy cities of the United States.Dorchester Terrace, Bayswater,June, 1837.CONTENTSINTRODUCTION.Locomotion Animals .— Raft. — Canoe. — Sledge .— Palanquin.Litter. — Rollers. — Solid Wheels. — Cart. — Primitive Car. — PortugueseCar. — Chinese Car. — Framed Wheel. — Axle. — PampasCarts. — Turning Carriage. — Ancient Coach Springs. — StrappedSeats. — Swinging Braces. — Buenos Ayres Travelling Carriage. —Wooden Springs, used in Canada. — Johnson's Waggon. — SteelSprings PagetCHAPTER I.Early History of Wheel Carriages— Scriptural Chariots.— Caret,Carrack, Arcera^ Hectic, Carpenters Decemjugis. — Grecian Chariots.— Car from Persepolis. — Wine Waggon and Car from Pompeii.Saxon MS — Essedum. — King John's Litter. — Queen Katherine'sLitter. — Chariot of Lady Emergard. — Chariot of Melius. — FirstSuspended Carriage, Hungarian. — Whirlicote. — Robert Westende. —Coach. — Kotcze. — Emperor Frederic Illud's Close Carriage. —Elector of Cologne. — Margravine John Sigismund. — Henry theFourth of France. — Emperor Ferdinand the Second. — Coaches ofPerfumed Leather. — Glass Coaches. — Emperor Leopold's WeddingCarriage. — Brouette . 20Xll CONTENTS.CHAPTER II.English Carriages.-^— Walter Rippou. — First Coach. — Queen Mai-yEarl of Arundel. — William Boonenn. — Queen Elizabeth's Coach. —Cost of a Coach. — M. de Rosny, Treasurer of France. — ScotchPatent for Public Carriages. — Strictures on Coaches by Taylor theWater Poet. — Colloquy between Coach and Sedan. — Dialoguebetween a Frenchman and a Londoner. — Public Travelling. Page 42CHAPTER III.Definition of Wheel Carriages. Primary and Secondary. — Animaland Elemental Power. — Elasticity and Gravity. — Examples. —Mechanical Powers. — Lever. — Wheel and Axis. — Pulley. — InclinedPlane. — Wedge. — Screw. — Funicular Action. — Hydrostatical Action.—7 Automatical Action. — Ponderatical Action, — GeometricalForms in Carriages. 56CHAPTER IV.Materials of Wheel Carriages.— - Animal : — Hides. — Skins. —Hair. — wool. — Silk. — Glue. — Whalebone. — Ivory. — Pearl-shell. —Vegetable : — Timber.— Ash. — Beech. — Elm. — Oak. — Mahogany. —Cedar. — Deal. — Pine. — Fustic. — Lancewood. — Birch. — Chesnut. —Sycamore. — Plane Tree. — Cotton. — flax. — Hemp. — stow. — Straw.Caoutchouc — Copal. — Linseed Oil. — Turpentine. — Mineral : —Iron. — Steel. — Copper. — Brass. — White Brass, — Gun-metal. —Silver. — Gold. — Lead. — tin. — Glass. — Metallic Oxides. . . 68CONTENTS. XliCHAPTER V.Analysis of Carriage Construction. Dennet. — Stanhope. — tilbury.— Cabriolet. — Curricle. — Underspring Phaeton. — Coach. — Partsof Coach. — Carriage Body. — Equipage for Town and Country.Page 83CHAPTER VI.Wheels. Definition. —Solid Wheel.— Plank Wheel.— FramedWheel. — Barrow Wheel. — Nave. — Spokes. — Felloes.— CylindricalWheel. — Conical Wheel. — Pyramidal Wheel. — Nave Hoops. —Strake Tires. — Hoop Tires. — Mode of Construction. — Disadvantages.— Machine-made Wheels. — Solid Felloes.— Hancock's Wheels.Tubular-spoked Iron Wheels. — Losh's Wrought-iron Wheels.Jones's Pyramidal Iron Wheels. — Weight of Wheels. — Elasticity93CHAPTER VII.Axles. Wooden. — Conical. — Iron. — Cylindrical. — CommonBar. — Faggot. — Sizes. — Lubrication. — Soap. — Black-lead. —Grease. — Oil. — Common Axles with Inch-pins, — Screw Nuts.—Mail Axles. — Defects. — CoUinge's Patent Axle. — Process of Oiling.—Defects.— Mason's Improved Collinge Axle. — various Projects forAxles. — Essential Particulars necessary to the perfection of Axles. 106CHAPTER VIII.Springs.— Various Substances used for them. — Leather. — Whalebone.— Wood. — Metal. — Spring Steel. — Construction. — Defects.—Elasticity. — Varieties of Springs. — Simple and Combined Forms. —XIV CONTENTS.Straight Spring. — Elliptic Spring. — Regular Curved Spring. — SpiralSpring. — Examples. — Combinations of Springs. — Breakage of Springs.Essential Qualities of a perfect Spring. . . . Page 117CHAPTER IX.Iron-work. Cranes, — Perch Plates. — Loops. — Stays.— Plates.—Hoops. — Clips. — Bolts. — Steps. — Treads. — joints. — Shackles.Jacks. — Qualities of Iron. — Plated Work. — Beading.— Lamps.Dress Lamps. — Wax Candles. — Oil Lamps for travelling. —Argand Lamps. — Cochrane's Patent Lamps. — Principles of Combustion.132CHAPTER X.Construction of a Carriage. Length. — Height of Wheels. — Dishingof Wheels. — axle Arms. — Springs. — Lock of Front Wheels. —Splinters Bar. — Timber. — Constriction of a Body. — Painting. —Iron-work. — Trimming. — Carriage Frame-work and Iron-work. —Leathern Braces. — Hanging the Body. — Dress Carriage. —Seat andHammer-cloth. — Hind Standard. — Open and Close Carriages. 141CHAPTER XLInvention. —Derivation of Carriages mostly Foreign. — OriginalInventions and Improvements. — English Artists. — Patent Rights.—Continental Artists. — Processes of Improvement. — Theory andPractice. — Genius and Invention. — Wollaston. — Brindley. — Watt.Babbage. — Analysis of the Qualities developing Invention. —Difficulties of Inventors. — Expense of Patents. — jealousy of Rivals.Combination of Carriage Forms and Proportions. — taste in Design.—Drawing. — variety of Qualities necessary to conduct a CarriageManufactory. 156CONTENTS, XVCHAPTER XII.Carriage Artisans.— ^-Handicraft Work. — Steam Labour but littleused. — Skilled Workmen. — Modes of getting Work executed.— PieceMasters. — Carriage Builders' Tradesmen. — Materials. — VariousWorkmen: — Body Makers. — Carriage Maker. — Carvers. — SmithsTrimmers.— Painters, — Brace and Harness Makers. — Sawyers. — Labourers.— Designers. — Draughtsmen.— Herald Painters. —Axle-treeMakers. — Spring Makers. — wheelwright. — Lamp Makers. — BlindMakers. — joiners. — trunk Makers. — Turners. — Lace Makers. —Carriers. — japanned. — Ivory Workers. — Plates. —Chasers. — Embroiderers.—Trades' Unions. — Jealousy of Caste. . . Page 172CHAPTER XIII.Steam Locomotion. Canals. — Railroads. — Engines. — Boilers :High and Low Pressure. — Tubular Boilers. — durability of SteamEngines. — Difficulties of Steam Vehicles on Common Roads. — Mr.Hancock's Carriages. — Speculators in Steam Carriages. — Defectsof Steam as applied to Pleasure Carriages. — Steam compared withHorses. — Steam adapted to Rail-roads but not to Common Roads.Probable Increase of Pleasure Carriages by means of Railroads190CHAPTER XIV.Taste.— Definition of Taste. — true and False Taste. — Originalityand Imitation. — Form, Colour, and Proportion. — Defective Proportionsof Carriages. — Natural Forms. — Ornaments contrived to coverdefects Colours. — Heraldic Bearings. — Disposition of Ornaments.trimming 205XVI CONTENTS.CHAPTER XV.Varieties of Carriages. Distinguishing Characteristics. — Coachwith Under-springs — without Under-springs. — Landau. — DrivingCoach. — Town Chariot. — Post Chaise. — Landaulet. — BritzschkaChariot — Elliptic Spring Chariot. — Barouchet — Barouchet.— Britz-schka. — Elliptic Spring Britzschka. — Droitzschka. — Driving Phaeton.— Elliptic Spring Phaeton. — Pony Phaeton. — Britzschka Phaeton.— Ancient Phaeton. — Cabriolet Phaeton. — Elliptic Spring CabrioletPhaeton. — Curricle. — Cabriolet. — tilbury. — Stanhope. —Open framed Stanhope. — Dennet. — Gig. — One-horse Chaise, orWhiskey Page 220CHAPTER XVI.Purchasing and Jobbing Carriages. Carriages made to order, —Ready-made Carriages. — Judgment. — Preservation of Carriages. —Sun. — Frost. — Rain. — Dust. — Mud. — ^^ Atmospheric Air. — Moisture.— Dryness.— Metal-work. — Rust. — Leather. — Cloth. — Silk. —Lace. — Paint and Varnish. — Coach-houses. . . . 246CHAPTER XVII.New Inventions. Imperfections of English Carriages. — UnequalWheels. — Unequal Motion, unequal Wear, unequal Durability.Elastic and Rigid Wheels. — Modes of making Spring Wheels.Author's Invention of a Circular Spring Wheel. — Improved OilChamber. — Author's Invention of Equirotal Carriages. — EquirotalPhaeton. — Advantages of the Equal Wheels. — Equirotal CabrioletPhaeton.— Equirotal Pony Phaeton. — The same with a low body.Equirotal Droitzschka. — Equirotal Chariot ; Advantages. —CONTENTS. XVllEquirotal Carriages adapted for Posting with one Horses beingvery light. — Equirotal Omnibus; Advantages.— Author's Inventionof an Adjusting Bow Spring, adapted equally for light and heavyloads in Carriages, and universally applicable.Cabriolets and Omnibuses— Hansom's Cabriolet. — AssociationOmnibuses. — Patent Cabriolet, with door behind and Boulnois' EllipticSprings. — Defects of the Patent Cabriolet. — Imitations. — Go-carts.Four-wheeled Cabriolet. — Deep-ranked Axles. — Author's Inventionof a deep-ranked Axle. — author's Invention of a Cabrioletopen or close at pleasure, and driven from behind. — Author'sInvention of a Coal and general Burden Waggon, adapted tonarrow Streets and Wharves Page 255CHAPTER XVIII.Existing Mail Coaches. their Defects. — author's Invention ofan Improved Mail Coach. — The Advantages of it. . 282CHAPTER XIX.Railroad Transit. Clashing Opinions. — Engineers and CarriageBuilders. — Railroads still only experimental. — Manchester and LiverpoolRailroad. — Railroad Bubbles. — Steam versus Horses. — Iron-tiredWheels an argument for Iron Bearings on Roads. — Defects inthe Original Construction of the Manchester and Liverpool Railroadand Carriages. — Great Destructive Wear. — Causes. — Absence ofElasticity. — Springs. — Relative Speeds. — Diameter of Wheels. —Enormous Weight and Unscientific Construction of Railway PassengerCarriages. — Parallel Axles. — Flanges. — Coned Wheels. — advantages.— Sledge-like Motion. — Improvement in the Position ofRails. — author's Invention of a Railway Train to pass freely round aCurve. — Propositions for increased Speed on Railways premature. —bXvi CONTENTS.Stephenson's Six-wheeled Engine. — Earl of Dundonald's Two-wheeledEngine. — Methods of constructing Railroads. — analysis of CommonRoads.— Macadamised Roads.*- Imitations. — Combination ofWood and Iron for Railroads. — Durability of Wood. — ArtificialMeans of increasing Durability. — author's Inventions of a Railroadof Wood and Iron — Of a Mode of keeping the Wheels on the Railswithout Flanges— And of a Mode of keeping the Bearings of theAxles abundantly oiled without waste. — Summary of the Defects ofRailroads and Railroad Carriages and the Remedies which are desirable.—Conclusion. Page 289ILLUSTRATIONS.£quirinal DroitzschkaCar of Portugal■ Chile »Ox Cart of the PampasBuenos Ayres Carry-cocheCar irora the Ruins of Persepolis■ PompeiiBrouetteTown ChariotBaroucheBritzschkaModern PhaetonCabriolet •Tilbury . .StanhopeCircular Spring WheelEquirotal PhaetonCab Phaeton■ Town Chariot .OmnibusRegulating Bow-spring •Equirotal Mail CoachLateral Elevation of a portion of a very light Carriage trainfor a Railroad .Hind Elevation of a Railway Carriage . . -%Flexible Carriage-train drawn into a circle . , iMode of applying Horizontal Guide Wheels on Vertical Axes, todispense with the Flanges of the Running WheelsImproved Mode of oiling the bearing Brasses by an Oil-chamberand revolving Dippers attached to the AxisFrontispiece.PagesENGLISH PLEASURE CARRIAGES.INTRODUCTION.Locomotion. — Animals.— Eft. — Cause,— Sledge. — Palanquin. —Litter. — Rollers. — Solid Wheels — Cart. — Primitive Car. — PortugueseCar. — Chinese Car. — Framed Wheel. — Axle. — Pampa-carts.— Turning Carriage. — Ancient Coach Springs, — StrappedSeats. — Swinging Braces. — Buenos Ayres Travelling Carriages'Wooden Springs, used in Canada. — johnson's Waggon. — SteelSprings.The nature of man is progressive and constantlyprompts him to take advantage of all favourable circumstancesin order to lessen hin painful labour — sto mitigateas much as possible the " primeval curse '' by the exerciseof his great sustaining faculty reason. Next tospeech, and its kindred arts, reading and. writing, the powerof locomotion is the most important agent in human civilisation; and, as a consequence, facility of locomotion ishighly desirable. If locomotion be painful to a human beingsthe minimum of it will be performed ; if it be easy, themaximum will be performed, inasmuch as the power ofseeing new faces, places, scenery, and other objects, is desiredby almost all human beings ; and this desire is onlykept in abeyance by the consciousness or the fear thatthe pain caused by indulging it will be greater than thepleasure. arising from its gratification.The earliest and simplest means of locomotion were theBX INTRODUCTION.same in human beings as in the lower animals — the muscularaction of the limbs. So long, as the muscles continueelastic, the act of walking is a source of pleasure ; butwhen they become languid and relaxed, it is a source ofpain. The frequent necessity of continuing locomotionafter the muscles have become fatigued, must have sethuman invention at work at a very early period of theworld to devise a remedy. The simplest remedy whichpresented itself, — the easiest transition from actual pain tocomparative comfort,— was that of substituting for humanmuscles, the muscles of the lower animals ; in short, theact of subjugating such of the lower animals as were sufficientlypowerful, to human control, and obliging them tocarry a human burden. Thus commenced the art of riding.Horses, asses, mules, camels, dromedaries, elephants, andeven cows,* have been used to ride on in various countriesand localities, according as they were found or adapted.Bone of these, as the four former, may be trained to suchease and grace of movement as to give pleasure to therider ; consequently they are still used even where no positivenecessity exists. The three latter, on the contrary,are painful to ride on, and ungraceful in their gait ; consequentlythey are only used in the absence of any bettermeans of locomotion. The wild Arab only chooses thebone-shaking dromedary in preference to the horse, whenthe desert is too broad for the horses powers of endurance.But though the act of riding on the back of a dromedarybe only a lesser evil than walking, and though the act of• The chief of the Gallas galloped off on his copy5 Brttce's Abyssinia.INTRODUCTION. 3riding on the back of a horse be a positive pleasure, still itis not a pleasure at all times, nor to all persons. Themuscles of a horse become non-elastic on a long journey,and the act of riding a tired horse, if not more painful, isonly one degree less painful than walking with tired legs.Besides this, horses vary, both in their tempers and physicalqualifications, and it is as great a pain to ride some, asit is a pleasure to ride others. In short, as a means of sin*pie locomotion, for the purpose of a long journey, a horsesback is, to the majority of human beings, a very imperfectmode of conveyance. It is only in the vigour of youthswhen the animal spirits are predominant, or by the possessorsof hardy frames and enduring constitutions like theTartars, and some few individuals of other nations, thatriding horses are preferred to other and easier modes oflocomotion, when a choice can be attained. The old theinfirm, the feeble, the idle, the luxurious, the careful, thecalm, the industrious, the sedate, and the economists of timeand strength, though they may all in turn ride on horsebackfor the purposes of pleasure or exercise, will invariablyprefer, as a means of simple locomotion, whatever methodmay offal the maximum of speed, with the minimum ofbody exertion, and consequently diminished wear of theanimal economy.The first attempt at vehicular locomotion must necessarilyhave been imperfect. Human beings residing on thebanks of large rivers would naturally observe the facilitywherewith trees and other vegetable productions floated onthe surface, moving with the downward current. AftCTthis, the construction of a rude raft would be an easyB 24 INTRODUCTION.transition. At the present day, there exist people whogo out fishing on rafts constructed of bundles of dryrushes.* A long period probably elapsed ere the inventionof the oar or paddle, for the purpose of moving up theStream, induced the river travellers to construct, first araft, and then a canoe, which might be worth preservingAS a property of constant utility. But this was a mode oflocomotion confined to a limited space. Vehicular convey-ronce by land was the most important desideratum.The first and most simple form of it would naturallybe a land*rafb or sledge, which, if not heavily loaded,would move in favourable localities with considerable facility,as over dried grass, or green turf, or ice, or on the4Bur&ce of hardened snow. In the northern countriesboth of Europe and America, the sledge is constantly usedupon the snow at the present day ; for which purpose itis better adapted than wheel vehicles, the great length ofthe two bearers preventing them from sinking in the snowAS wheels would do. In the island of Madeira, the heavypipes of wine are drawn on sledges from the mountain vineyardsto the sea-ports ; and part of the drivers business is,to walk by the side of them with a kind of mop, to keepthe surface of the bare rock on which they run constantlywetted to diminish the friction. Another instance is thesledge used by the London brewers, and drawn by a singlehorse, to convey barrels of light weight. But it is evidentthat, except inter peculiar circumstances, the frictionof sledges is so great as to cause a great loss of animal-power; .and, therefore, better vehicles must have been objectsof desire at a very early period. In mountainousLake fishermen in parts of South America.INTRODUCTION* Ocountries, sledges could scarcely be used except down hills ;and accordingly, in mountainous countries, the next stageof improvement must have been first adopted.This mode was to take the sledge altogether from theground, on which it had been drawn by horses or oxen,and to suspend it from the backs of two or four of themesby means of pack-saddles and lashings. In Spain andPortugal, this rude vehicle is still to be found, under theform of the litera or litter ; which is, in fact, a sedan chairborne by two mules, one before and one behind, the polesbeing slung to their packsaddles. In England this sedan'chair is, or rather was, borne by men. In the East, theform changes &om a chair to the more luxurious one of acouch and under the name of a palanquin it constitutedthe principal vehicular conveyance of the rich, being borneby olive-complexioned men more capable of endurancethan quadrupeds in an enervating climate.But the litter and the palanquin were alike imperfectinasmuch as they consumed a large amount of animalpower for very little effect ; because the whole weight ofthe passenger and the vehicle also, had to be borne aswell as moved along. Those who navigated large rivers incanoes, were obliged occasionally to lift them out of thewater, and carry them over land wherever falls or shallowsinterrupted the channel. In such a case, the bearerswould become sensible of the disproportion of labourexisting between the act of paddling a canoe and that ofcarrying it, * and invention would be set to work to proofthe navigable rivers in Canada, there are numerous spotsmarked in the maps ^* Portages,^* These are Carrying-places for theIndian canoes, the progress of which is impeded by falls or shallows.6 INTRODUCTION.duce a similar result with a land vehicle— to find a modeof sustaining it, as the water sustained the canoe. Inventorsare not creators,-^they are merely finders-out : they donot make new forms, — they merely take the tjrpes whichexist in nature. He who cut down trees on the hill-sideto build his house in the valley would naturally remarkthe facility wherewith the round trunks rolled to the bottomof the hill, and also the ease with which they couldbe moved over the level, when compared with flat logs orhigh blocks of stone. This was doubtless the origin ofrollers or round logs of wood, which are placed underheavy trees or beams in order to move them over the surfaceof the earth* To set in motion trees thus placed,it is necessary to apply a lever. This would not be a tediousprocess of discovery, after the example of the paddle,which acts as a lever in the water. But turf or soft groundwould prove a very inefficient fulcrum to rest the lever on,and the next process would naturally be that of cutting ahole through the roller in which to insert the lever. Theconvenience of several holes in the circumference of the rollerwould then become apparent, and thus would be formedan embryo wheel nave. It could not fiiil to be remarkedalso, that the larger the roller, the greater the risibilityfor turning it, and consequently the greater the load thatcould be borne upon it. But there are few trees whosestems are found of large size and of a cylindrical form ;without which latter condition, they would not roll in astraight line, but in the circumference of a circle of greateror lesser size : and besides, the weight of very large solidrollers would be a great disadvantage. Under these circum-introduction.7stances, it would soon be remarked, that it is not essentialfor rollers to bear on the earth throughout their wholelength ; — that it is sufficient if they bear at the extremity,with just so much surface as is necessary to prevent themsom sinking into the ground. Most trees are found topossess the largest diameter just above the spread of theirmain roots* It would soon occur to those who wished forlarge rollers, that if a short length were cut from one ofthe largest trees at this spot, it might be joined to asimilar one at the needful distance by means of a crossbeam inserted in a hole in each. This, supposing thecross beam to be fixed in square holes, would be the rudeoutline of a pair of wheels and an axle, of precisely thesame principle as those used on the Manchester and otherrailroads at the present day, and also by the rustic cultivatorsand town carmen of Portugal.Possessing this wheel and axle, it would be a very sin*"pie process to round the axle cross beam, and place aframe on it capable of carrying burdens, the axle beingconfined to perform its revolutions at or near the centre ofgravity* of the frame, by thole pins or guides similar tothe rowlocks of a boat. The form of the frae would beacentral pole or beam, sufficiently long to bear the bulkor bolton of the load, and also to project forward betweenthe two draft horses or oxen. Parallel with the centralbeam would be ranged two side bearers, and these wouldThe motive for choosing this precise position on the axle, is tobalance, or nearly balance, the frame, in order that the weight maynot unduly press on the horses' backs, or hare a tendency to lift themfrom the ground.Introduction.be connected together by cross framing or diagonal braces.This then would be a car or cart, the simplest possibleform of a wheel carriage.But it-would soon be discovered that a cart thus constructedruns best in a straight line, and that to turn it isa circle, unless it be a circle of very large size, causes animmense quantity of friction. The reason of this io, thatin the act of turning, one wheel has a tendency to revolve-faster than another, the outer track being longer than theinner one. To obviate this difficulty, the cart-maker ordriver would soon contrive that each wheel should revolveon its own centre. Instead of fixing the cross beam or axlein a square hole, they would contrive it to play easily in around one of a conical form, that being the easiest formfor adjustment. The principle of this cart would be preciselythat of the antique cars' used by the Greeks andRomans for the purposes of war and festivity, the battle,the triumph, and the Olympic games, as well as for agriculturalpurposes ; the only distinction being in the absenceor presence of ornamental work, and the generalsuperiority or inferiority of the construction, or ratherworkmanship. The rude carts used by the poor peasantryIntroduction.of Chile for their agricultural purposes in remote districtssre constructed in the manner above described.It is evident that a machine made in the rude mannerdescribed could not be well adapted for very rapid motion,without a great expenditure of animal power, especiallyif it were much loaded. The axle being of wood, mustnecessarily be of considerable size ; and working in woodalso, a rapid motion would cause so much Action, thatit would soon be cut through, even though the hardestwoods might be sought and lubricating substances applied.The wheels, procured at an expense of much labour,would quickly become useless ; large-sized trees wouldbecome scarcer; and reducing the size of the wheels wouldincrease the friction, already too great. To provide a remedyfor this would be the next task of invention. Thetoiler, with the lever-holes cut through and around it,formerly referred to as the original of the wheel, wouldbe again examined, and a number of levers of equal sizebeing placed in it, would present at their extremities, theoutline of a circle of great diameter. How to connectthese would be the next consideration ; and when the plan10 INTRODUCTION.of fixing felloes on was first devised, the first experimentprobably gave a sample of rude and crazy workmanshipat which the makers of solid wheels would laugh in scorn,and exult when they broke down, as though to fulfil theirpredictions that " they could never answer." But noreally useful invention can be finally put down, and somemore skilful workmen, fired by ambition, would beginanew, and remedy the defects, consisting, not in principle,but in execution ; and thereat all cart-drivers wouldcry, '^ Lo ! a wonder !" and thenceforth solid wheels wouldonly be regarded as matters of antiquity, and a theme forsurprise, that people could have been found simple enoughto make, and other people simple enough to use them.But the new wheels, with naves, spokes, and felloes,would be liable to the same disadvantages as the solidones— a too rapid wear. The first remedy for this wouldbe to make the axle of softer wood than the nave of thewheel, inasmuch as a new axle could be supplied with lesslabour than a new wheel. As this would not be sufficient,means would be devised to cover the axle with some wearingsubstance which could be renewed from time to time.Nothing could be so simple or so appropriate for this asacovering of untanned neat's hide sewed on wet, and leftto dry and shrink. Supplied with grease or soap, thefriction of an axle thus covered would be comparativelysmall, and both axle and nave would remain serviceablefor a considerable period. The great point of wear wouldbe the felloes, which would be renewed as they wore. Thefrequent renewal of these felloes would loosen and wearthe spokes, and therefore means would soon be devised toIntroduction. 11cover the Tearing surfaces of the tells vHh some materialcapable of being renewed. In the absence of m^slfitted for the purpose, wood would of course be resortedto : and the mode of applying it, would be to use a secondset of felloes around the oaten circumference of thefirst, covering each joint, and fastening them b^ means oftree nails and wooden wedges. Precisely such wheels asthese are used in the ox-carte, which form the trading caravansof the great Steppes of Spanish America.* Theirheight is about seven feet, in order to lessen the draughtas much as possible, and also to enable them to cross thedeep stretuns and gullies. The frame of the carts is suchas before described; but on the frame a wattling of sticksis erected, six feet in height, and arched at top, the sidesbeing thatched with rushes, and the roof covered with unmannedhides. Not a particle of metal is used in theirwhole composition.The SK quaint; leaned by the natives " barcot tie Ikrru," i. e.landsbips,'* inasmuch as the; ply for freight, and can provision*aod water with them over the deserts.12 INTRODUCTION.We have now seen the most primitive specimens ofopen and covered two-wheeled carriages ; and in the improvementof their workmanship, art would. for a long-periodfind sufficient occupation. Form and ornamentwould be the principal objects aimed at, and some of thebeautiful results have been handed down to us in the specimensof the antique cars for the purposes of war andpleasure used by the Greeks and Romans ; with the generalconstruction of which, most persons are familiarwho have been accustomed to inspect antique coins,medals, or bas-reliefs.Beautiful as these vehicles appear in their design andharmonious curves, they were by no means adapted to ensureease of motion unless at a very slow pace : in fact, ata rapid pace the passenger was usually obliged to standupright, and relieve his body from the jarring shake aswell as he could, by the elasticity of his feet* Wholesomethe cars doubtless were in the way of exercise, andexceedingly graceful when grouped with the fine horsesby which they were drawn ; but neither the old nor theinfirm would use them from choice.After or before that two-wheeled carriages could arriveat this degree of perfection, it is probable that vehicleswith four wheels would be constructed for the transport ofarticles too bulky or too heavy for the two-wheeled vehicles; such, for example, as timber. These would be simplya frame of the ordinary kind, but of extra length ; andthe wheels would be of equal height, like our modem railroadcarriages. It would soon be found that such carriagesare not calculated to turn except in a very large space ;INTRODUCTION. 13hind some contrivance would be resorted to, to enable thefore wheels to lock round.* This process would be, to constructa double frame, one a long one with the hinderwheels affixed to it, and the other a short one with thefore wheels affixed to it, and moving or turning under thelong frame, by means of the lever beam or pole, on a centralpin or pivot, now called a perch-bolt. As considerablestrength would be required in the under frame, and as itwould be necessary to retain the upper frame at a horizontallevel, it would of course be necessary to reduce theheight of the fore wheels, and thus cause a mechanical imperfection,which has been perpetuated in carriages up tothe present day. This imperfection consists in the iur<a*ease of friction in the fore wheels, in consequence oftheir diminished size obliging them to perform a greaternumber of revolutions in the same space than the hinderones do. Vehicles thus constructed, though they wouldbe enabled to turn in a reasonable space, would still beAwkward in a narrow street or lane, because the fore wheelswould be limited in their locking or turning by the sidof the upper frame which carries the load. Many of theEnglish waggons are still constructed thus, and may beseen with an angular piece cut out of their sides, to admitA larger space for the wheel to lock in. Some of the stagecoaches also are thus imperfect in their locking, and axeoccasionally overset on account of it when the horses becomerestive and start on one side. In order to avoid this,The expression '< to lock' 03 applied to the turning motion of acarriage, is not a good phrase ; but custom having made it familiar,the author has thought it well to retain it.14 INTRODUCTION.it is necessary either to mise the upper frame, or to reducethe size of the fore wheels, so that they may turnbeneath it. Either of these remedies produces a certainportion of evil ; — the former, by raising the centre of gravityto a greater height, and increasing the chance of oversetting; the latter, by increasing the friction and consuminga larger amount of moving power.Most of the ancient coaches or covered carriages wereconstructed upon one plan. Two longitudinal timbers orbeams, secured to two cross bars at each end by scarfjoints and bolts, constituted the upper frame. As the streetsof most of the ancient European cities were very narrow,the difficulty of turning or locking experienced with suchcarriages, led to an obvious improvement — the inventionof the crane neck. The two longitudinal beams beingremoved, their places were supplied by two long heavybars of iron, arched upwards in front, in the form of aswan or cranes neck, to a considerable height, so thatthe fore wheels when locking might pass beneath them.By this contrivance, a high fore wheel was retained, and aperfect lock accomplished ; but very considerable weightelis at the same time added to the vehicle. But as coacheswere only kept by the rich, who could afford abundanceof animal power, this was not to them a very importantdefect.Ere mechanical art reached this degree of perfection inthe wheels and framework, it is probable that attemptswould be made towards the development of some means forpreventing the concussion arising from the rapid motion ofthe wheels over rough roads from reaching the bodies of theINTRODUCTION!. 15passengers. As a concussion or shock is transmitted muchmore forcibly through a solid or firm medium than throughan infirm one, the simplest contrivance would be, to suspenda seat by means of straps or lashings : — specimens ofthis may be seen in the light carts used by butchers andothers in the large towns of England. The next improvementwould be, by separating the sitting part altogethersom the wheels and axles and interposing a movingmedium between them : — the sitting part would be madean independent frame, supported on long ropes or strapsstretched beneath it, and affixed by the ends to anotherframe firmly secured upon the axles. The antique four-wheeledcarriages of Europe used for state purposes aremostly constructed on this plan, and their great weightand slow movement prevent any violent concussion.Many of the public stage-coaches of France are suspendedon the same principle, as well as those of the UnitedStates and Canada : for in the latter countries, thoughthere is not any lack of enterprise or want of energy toimprove the public vehicles, it is found by experiencethat the imperfect condition of the roads precludes thepossibility of using steel springs with a due regard toeconomy.The natives of Buenos Ayres use for the purpose of travellinga covered two-wheeled vehicle with shafts, called acarrircochi^ or cart-coach. Horseflesh, owing to its abundance,is profusely wasted on the Pampas of La Plata.When used for draught, the horses are not harnessed : astrap or cord of raw hide is fastened to the ordinary saddlegirth ; and as many as are the horses fastened to a vehicleINTRODUCTION.SO is the number of the postilions. The possibility ofone man guiding more than one horse i^hen attached to atravelling vehicle has not entered into the imaginationsof Spanish American economists. As for the collar, it iiunknown* The wild Gaucho, in fact, draws a carriage justas he would draw a wild bull — with his lao or huntingnoose attached to the right or off side of his saddle girth.The carri'Cochi consists of a close framed body, paintedand lined, with sliding glasses, and a door to open behindthe whole suspended on long braces or twisted cordsof untanned hide. When used in towns it is intendedto be drawn by one or two horses with a postilion, and tocarry six persons, three on a side like an omnibus.BUENOS AYRES Carry-COCHE.The objections to this carriage pare, that the body beingfixed on two nearly straight braces, and having little weightto steady it, when on a rough road the quick vibratingmotion is almost as unpleasant as actual concussion. Inevery carriage thus suspended, great weight or inertia i^absolutely necessary to procure ease to the passenger.INTRODUCTION. 17Those who have travelled in the heavy and heavy-loadedFrench diligences at a slow rate, will not have found theirmotion unpleasant ; but whoever has experienced themovement of the rude leather-covered carts formerlyused for the conveyance of the French mail will neverwish to repeat the experiment.To get much ease in the mode of suspending the bodyor sitting piaxt of a wheel carriage by braces stretched orattached to solid supporters, it is necessary to have greatlength. This of course must increase the weight, and beanadditional motive for resorting to some more perfectmethod of avoiding concussion. This would naturally beby the interposition of positive elastic substances. Elasticwood, from its facility of workmanship, and also from generalfamiliarity with its qualities, acquired by the long lise ofthe bow as a projector of missiles, would be the first resortedto. Amongst the settlers of Upper Canada, andthe inland portion of the United States, aire to be foundthe rudest four-wheeled vehicles used by civilised people.They are called waggons, and consist of an oblong packing-caseof rough planks, beneath which the wheels are attached,the fore wheals being contrived to turn or lock veryslightly. They are used with one or two horses, whetherfor farm or other purposes. When used as a personal conveyance,a simple contrivance is resorted to, to lessen concussion.A kind of framed chair, affixed to two bearers ofelastic wood, is placed inside for the principal sitters ; andif there be others, they rough it out as they best canesrude springs are also used in the construction ofgigs, or two-wheeled vehicles drawn by one horse .c18 Introduction.In England also, wooden springs are occasionally usedfor two-wheeled vehicles ; when they are placed at rightangles across the axle, the body resting upon them. Alight four-wheeled vehicle was invented some few yearsback, by a Mr. Johnson. It consisted of two very longlight poles, connecting the hinder axle and wheels withthe fore cross bar, beneath which the under frame and forewheels were made to turn : the seat, for a single sitterwas placed in the centre of the poles, which by their flexibilityserved as springs. This vehicle was very light, andnot very uneasy ; but, owing to its great length, it was illadapted to turn in ordinary streets.The long braces which supported the huge bodies of thelumbering vehicles formerly called coaches, were usuallyattached to a strong wooden pillar, or frame at each end,which was either upright, or slightly sloping outwards.After a time, an attempt would be made to give someflexibility to these pillars : but such an attempt would bevery imperfect, as wood in short lengths cannot be madeto carry heavy weights, and exhibit the quality of elasticityat the same time. The long-bow of wood is of considerateable length ; the cross-bow of steel is comparatively short,yet possesses more power and elasticity. These differentqualities would soon be compared as applicable to carriages,and after some few preliminary experiments, uprightpillars of elastic steel would form the supports for attachingthe braces. They would at first be constructed of i^single piece of steel in a taper form, and thence by gradations,regulated by the modes of their failure, they wouldassise the form of laminae, playing one against another.INTRODUCTION. 19This accomplished, a carriage would possess all the essentialprinciples required ; viz. — facility of moving forwardand facility of turning round by the application of theneedful external power, and freedom from concussion tothe passengers. The carriages existing at the present dayin the greatest state of perfection as yet accomplished, aremerely these same principles better regulated by moreperfect combinations and more perfect execution.c %soCHAPTER I.Early History of Wheel Carriages. — Scriptural Chariots.— Caret,Camica, Arcera, Hectic, Carpenters Decemjugis. — Grecian Clanriots. — Car from Persepolis. — Wine Waggon and Car fromPompeii. — Saxon MS. — Essedum. — King John's Litter. — QueenKatherine's Litter. — Chariot of Lady Emergard. — Chariot of Melius— First Suspended Carriage Hungarian. — Whirlicote. — RobertWestende. — Coach. — Kotcze. — Emperor Frederic Illud's CloseCarriage. — Elector of Cologne. — Margravine John Sigismund.Henry the Fourth of France. — Emperor Ferdinand the Second.coaches of Perfumed Leather. — Glass Coaches. — EmperorLeopold's Wedding Carriage. — Brouette.Some of the earliest records of wheel carriages are tobe found in the Old Testament ; though, as it confines itsmention of them to the simple fact of such things beingin use, no light is thrown upon what was their construction.The " chariot '' and the " waggon '' are both namedin Genesis : Joseph rode in the second chariot of Pharaohas a mark of peculiar dignity. « Waggons " were despatchedfrom the court of Egypt, to convey thither thewives and little ones of the family of Jacob : from this, *as well as the fact of the brethren of Joseph bearing theircom away on asses, we may infer that wheel carriages, evenof the lowest description, were not in general use amongstthe common people at that time. Later in the Israelitishhistory, we hear of the trouble caused in the host of Pharaoh,in his pursuit of the Israelites towards the Red Sea,EARLY HISTORY OF WHEEL CARRIAGES. 21by the wheels being detached from his chariot, so that*' they drave heavily ;" an impediment almost as trying toin ancient army, as the abstraction of wheels from artillerycarriages would be to one of later date.* Chariots at thaiperiod, and subsequently, were used principally for warpurposes ; all public games, all public sports, tended to theencouragement of this, one of their master passions; andthe sound of chariots and the sound of. horsemen wereseldom heard, but as heralds to the sound of battle. Eventhe chariots themselves were made to assist in the work ofdestruction; being armed with hooks and scythes, bywhich they made considerable devastation, mowing downmen wherever they came in contact with them. Thoughthe better sort of carriages were used for so mischievous apurpose, others of an inferior kind, and at a loiter period,,were introduced among the Jews for agricultural purposes.They were principally used for thrashing out the comand were called carts or drags ; (a method still practised inArabia.) The word cart is most probably derived fromthe Latin caret, a diminutive of carus ; and the ancientearruca had most probably a kindred derivation. Beckman,in his " History of Inventions'' tells us 'that theearliest Roman vehicle on record was the arcera^ of whichmention was made in the Twelve Tables. It was a coveredcarriage, used by sick and infirm persons. It appears tohave been employed earlier than the more luxurious leorica (litter), and by it to have been brought into disuse''Detaching the wheels would seem to indicate that the wheelswere fast on the axle, which turned beneath the body: the axle beingsthrown out of the thole pins, the chariot would become a sledge. ,2£ EAELY History OFIdaiali, when prophesying the future glory of Jerusalemdescribes the faithful as coining ^^ upon horses and in chariots,and in litters and upon mules." *' A later invention''continues Beckman, ^^was the carpenter; the form ofwhich may be seen on antique coins, where it is representedas a two-wheeled car, with an arched covering, whichwas sometimes hung with costly cloth. Still later wereintroduced the carrack, first mentioned by Pliny; butio little is known of them, that antiquaries are uncertainwhether their had one wheel like our wheelbarrows, or(«s is more probable) four wheels. This much however i»known, that they were richly decorated, often with solidcover curiously engraved and carved, and that senators andpeople of condition were carried in them. The TheodosianCode allowed them to civil and military offices as amark of dignity ; and it was considered an honour to ridein those which were remarkably high.There is a distinguishing difference between the constructionof ancient and modem carriages in one respect :—the greater proportion of the former must have been madeprincipally for the display of muscular strength and agilityin their management, rather than for the purpose of bodilyease and relaxation. Hence might have arisen the long-retainedprejudice against carriages of all kinds, as tendingtoo much to luxury arid effeminacy. Carriages reallydeserving the name, carrying the person who placed himselfwithin them, without requiring his constant and dexterousmanagement of the muscles, were seldom used exceptat public festivals. In " Bennett's Roman Antiquities''are engravings of several cars, as they appeared whenWHEEL CARRIAGES. 23in procession to grace one of the triumphs, allowed only todictators, consuls, or praetors. The first car contained thespoils and treasure ; the second, a group of Roman nobles ;and the third, the hero of the day.The Romans had their chariot races like the Greeks ;though th fer-famed Olympic games carried away theprize of pre-eminence, so that the heroes of Rome Where fainto ent^ the lists. Suetonius chronicles the EmperorNero as engaging in the Olympic games, and riding in adecemjugisy or chariot drawn by ten horses abreast. Therenown attached to a winning chariot was as great as thatnow gained by a winning horse. In modem times, however,something more is contested than the reward of barefame, and a wreath of parsley. It was remarked of Alcibiadesas a thing of extraordinary extravagance, that hefirst sent three chariots at one time to the Olympic games.The skill in the use of these chariots must have beendisplayed in turning them without breaking the wheelsor axles, of which there must have been some danger,as their racecourse was longitudinal instead of circular.The earliest representations of the chariots of Greecewill be foimd on the bas-relies amongst those beautifulexiles from. their native land— the Elgin marbles. Theywere the product of the time when Pericles held sway overAthens — nearly five hundred years before Christ ; and therecords left on the stone tablets adorning the walls of thetemples erected by him, are among the oldest handed downio us.The vehicle here inserted is taken from an engraving ofsome specimens of the remaining ruins . of Persepolis, EARLY History OFdestroyed hy Alexander the Great, three hundred and thirtyyears before Christ. It is from one of a number of representationsof different deities typical of the seasons. Thissmall wheel carriage served as a sort of moving platformfor one of these idols, who was seated upon it in Orientalstyle. The mode of attaching the axle to the carriagediffers from that of the Greek and Roman cars of a contemporaneousperiod, — or indeed som any other we haveseen in antique sculpture, or elsewhere.There is another, a curiosity in its way, and although ofRoman origin, it differs from the usual form of cats at thattime. It is from an antique gem in cornelian, which formsthe subject of one of the many erudite papers in the Arclwe-ologia. It is like a Greek car reversed, and is a kind ofprimitive model of the whole tribe of one-hoise vehiclesnow in use. It is drawn by horses, driven by a Cupid ;but the detail of traces, harness, &c. is omitted, as isusually to be observed in representations of antique charioteers.The gem is inscribed " Marte — Mario," andhas reference, in all probability, (as the historian supposes,)to some passage in the life of Caius Marius, whose for-wheelCARRIAGES. S5tunes were influenced very materially by Martha, a renownedSyrian prophetess, Marius was bon one hundredand fifty years before Christ.By four the nearest approach to the ingenuity of contrivanceof modem times, is to be found in a drawing madeby Sir William Gell from one of the time-desiring frescosof Pompeii. It is of a wine cart, or rather waggon ; andthough it aided the services of the inferior orders amongstthe people, it displays a neatness and ingenuity in its constructionfar exceeding that of the cars and ornamentalvehicles of the time — supposing they had equally faithfulartistical chroniclers. The four wheels are of equal size, —a desideratum long sought after for locomotive vehicles, —and the contrivance which allows them to turn with safety,an open arched space in the centre of the cart, — sis simpleand practicable. The group from which it is copied is classicaland elegant : the figures of the peasants employed inemptying the skins in which the wine was contained aregraceful both in form and costume, the latter being thesimple tunica. Sir William Gell complains of the slovenlystyle in which the whole is painted : his copy suggestsan exquisitely neat and finished original. Notwithstandingthis little discrepancy, the details as to the principle of itsconstruction may be trusted.In the same work are two other designs. One representsone of the several chariots drawn by different animals,which decorate the tablinum of the peristyle of the Dioscuri.It appears to be slovenly in its execution, and thedetails of its constriction incomplete. There is an absenceof elegance in its design — the angle supplying the place26 EARLY HISTORY OFof the graceful curve which characterised the Greek chariotsof earlier date. — The other is from a design executed instucco on a stone in the temple of Venus. The groupentire represents Love in the act of driving two mules ;though Love must have been somewhat deficient in tasteto have selected such cattle for such a carriage.CAR FROM POMPEII.The simplest of all forms that have made pretension tothe name of chariot, is the essedum of the ancient Briton,referred to in Caesar's Commentaries, lib. iv. c. 29, Hethere, in describing the manner in which our rude forefatherswere wont to conduct themselves in battle, distinctlyproves an obvious difference between the war chariotof the Briton and that of the Roman. The Britons,it appears, were accustomed to leave their chariot, and runalong a pole which was attached to it, from whence, orfrom the yoke, they engaged the enemy, again to retireinto their chariot when they saw fit. Its constructionmust have been low in the fore part to have allowed this ;differing essentially from those of the other nations, whichare thus represented : " Front of the body breast-high,WHEEL CARRIAGES. 27bounded like a shield, so as to answer to the driver for adefence ; and was for that reason called a(riri8i(rxi}, or theshield part*" Struts, in his ^^ Manners and Customs ofEngland's mentions a kind of chariot in use amongst theAnglo-saxons : he says, it is supposed to have been derivedfrom the Britons, and to be the old British essedumreferred to by Caesar. Without meaning to insult the of our warlike ancestors, it has nevertheless a strikingresemblance to the donkey carts in use in many of ourcountry villages : but it is somewhat wanting to the religionof history thus to profane what most probably wasthe moving platform from whence Boadicea with her wrongeddaughters harangued the brave though undisciplinedIceni.An evident improvement in invention was made by theSaxons. In the Cotton Library there is a valuable Saxonilluminated manuscript ; by some supposed to be that ofCiedna, by others the work of Clericus abbot of Salisbury.The subject is a comment on the books of Genesisand Exodus, with illustrative delineations. In one of thesemay be found the first approach to a slung carriage ; and itmay be interesting to the lovers of historical coincidence,that it is given in an illustration of the meeting of Josephwith Jacob, of that part of the Old Testament which firstmakes mention of vehicular conveyance. The cjixc or chariotin which Joseph is seated is a kind of hammock, (mostprobably made of leather, which was much used by theAnglo-saxons,) suspended by iron hooks from a frameworkof wood. It moves upon four wheels, the constructionof which is somewhat ambiguous, owing to decorative28 EAELY HlSTOEr OFlicence having been taken with them by the artist, Therfather of Joseph is placed in a cart, which we doubt not,from its primitive simplicity, is a faithful representative ofthose of the time. This proves the illuminator to havebeets true both to his subject and the custom of the periodin which he lived, as the cjirt was monopolised by the principals,while the people rode in carts.With the Normans came the horse litter, a xiative^originally of Bithynia, and from thence introduced into;Rome, where it is still used by the Pope on state occa-»sons, and also among the mountain passes of Sicily-^-alsoin Spain and Portugal. Salisbury records that the deadbody of Rufiis was placed upon a " rhea caballaria^^'^ akind of horse litters-or, as Fabian translates it, a " horselitter'' King John, in his last illness, was conveyed fromthe Abbey of Instead in " hectic equestre." These werefor several succeeding reigns, the only carriages in use forpersons of distinction. Froissart writes of Isabel, thesecond wife of Richard II, as ^* La June Boyne d' Angleterreen une litter moult riche qui etoit ordon^e pourelle." These litters were seldom used except on stateoccasions. When Margaret, daughter of Henry Viiwent into Scotland, she, is described as journeying on a^ faire palfrey :" but after her was conveyed by two foot-^men, " one vary riche litera, borne by two faire coursersvary nobly drest ; in the wich litera the sayd queene waaborne in the intryng of the good towns, or otherwise toher good plaster." Some idea may be formed of thestate and richness of these conveyances from Holinshed'sdescription of that of Queen Katherine at her coronation :WHEEL CARRIAGES. 99itThen came the queen in a litera of white clothe of golde,not covered nor bailed, which was led by two palfreys cladin white damask done to the ground, head and all, led byher footmen. Over her was borne a canopies of cloth ofgold, with four gilt staves and four silver bells. For thebeapng of which canopies were appointed sixteen knights,four to bear it one space on foot, and other four anotherspace'' Long after the introduction of coaches, the littercontinued in use. In the frontispiece of Thomas Scott's^^ Vox Populi," (1620) there is a representation of a littercarried by mules ; and the mother of Henrietta, queen ofCharles I, entered London in a litter, having previouslytravelled from Warwick in a coach.The feudal times were obviously unfavourable to theuse of carriages : the only seat considered befitting aknight was his saddle,— and the only place for a vassal, atthe stirrup of his liege lord. The knights bestrode theircoursers, and fair dames gracefully reined up their richly-caparisonedpalfreys. In 1239, on the entrance of FredericII. into Padua, ladies highly bon and sumptuouslyattired came forth to meet him on horses ornamented withtrappings. But this state of things was to have its changerthe more commodious though less picturesque wheel carriagecame to make, its innocent and bloodless revolution.Italy, France, Spain, and Germany take the lead of us intheir records, and contend with each other for the honour ofthe first introduction of carriages. The earliest record wehave found is. upon Beckman's authority : he states, thatwhen Charles of Anjou entered Naples, (towards the end ofthe thirteenth century,) his queen rode in a caretta^ the80 EARLY History OFoutside and inside of which Was covered with sky-blue velvet,interspersed with golden lilies. That the example ofthe fair queen was speedily followed in France, though mostprobably at a humble distance, may be inferred from theact of an ordinance of Philip the Fair being issued is1294, (and which is still, according to Beckman, in! preservation,)for suppressing luxury, and forbidding the citizens'wives the use of " cars." That these carettas werethe same with the " carse*' " charles," and latterly the'^ chart," in form, though differing in adornment, there islittle doubt ; and although " caret," and " sky-blue velvet,"and ^^ golden lilies," seem &r more fitting to describethe car of Cinderella, or of some radiant genius m a fairypageant, there is little difficulty in believing that all theabove-named vehicles had one universal emily likenessboth in name and construction, to our onion broad-wheeledcart ! In the " Anciennes Chroniques de Flan-does,"date 1847, a manuscript in beautiful presentationswork of art it may be called, from the brilliancy and delicacyof its finishes an illustration of the flight of Emerygard, wife of Salary, Lord of Roussillon. The carriage iuwhich she is seated, is not only richly coloured, but thedetails of its construction are accurately supplied. Theouter edges of the wheels are coloured grey, to represent atire of iron, and the horses are attached to the carriage bya similar method to one jiow in use. The body of thecart or ^^ charlotte" is of carved wood, and the hangings ofpurple and crimson, turned up in the centre. The LadyEmergard is seated inside, with an attendant behind, andWHEEL CARRIAGES. 81her Fool in front. The machine is drawn by two horses,the charioteer sitting upon the left horse.That England was not &r behind in the possession ofthe "chare'' we have testimony, and that of an interestingkind, as it has thrown some light upon a part of theLady Emergard's vehicle of stately clumsiness of whichwe had not till then discerned the use. In "The Squyr ofLow Degree'' supposed to be before the time of Chaucer,(vide Ellis's Specimens of Early English Poetry,) the fatherof the Princess of Hungary thus makes promise : —To-morrow ye shall on hunting fare,And ride my daughter in a chare.It shall be covered with velvet red,And cloths of fine gold all about your head ;With damask white, and azure blue,Well diapered with lilies new :Your pomelles shall be ended with gold,Your chains enamelled many a fold''These pomelles* were doubtless the handles to the rodsafield towards the roof of the *charlotte ;" and were for• .the purpose of holding by, when deep ruts or obstaclesin the road caused an unusual jerk in the vehicle :— iu theillumination they are gilded. This coincidence with theother of the "lilies" in the "caret," seems to identify thecarriages as far as general construction is concerned.That the use of wheel carriages became common inMoselle— probably a diminution of pcmme, little apple — referringto the small round knob by which the hand held on. Modemcarriages still retain a similar appliance in the shape of inside lace-holders,even now that the improvements in springs and roads haverendered them useless except as ornaments.32 EARLY HISTORY OFEngland as they did in Fiance, may be gained, amongstothers, from Froissart, who, in speaking of the return ofthe English from Scotland in the reign of Edward III,tells of 'leurs charettes,''^ which were most likely of asimilar form to those above mentioned; though, as theywere used for purposes of war, they were without any ofthe elegant appurtenances that were thought seemly forladies of high degree.The progress of improvement in vehicular locomotionappears to have been very slow. A double reason maybefound for this : an internally struggling country has littletime or means to foster inventive power ; and the badstate of the roads, which continued for centuries, make itno marvel that a machine nearly akin to a broad-wheeledwaggon, was the only carriage employed by people of conditionin our early history. In France progress wasalmost equally slow. In '' Le Roman du Roy Meliadus,''a manuscript which is supposed to bear date towards themiddle of the fourteenth century, a representation is givenof the carriage which had the honour of conveying his majesty,which, with all the added charm a poetical imaginationhas given to it in a wheel of architectural design, hasyet in the body of the carriage a most unfortunate plebeianlikeness to one of our common vans. Another reasonmay be found for this backwardness in improvement, inthe strong prejudice which existed against the use of anykind of carriage ministering to personal indolence. It wasthought derogatory to the dignity of men to be seen inthem : princes and electors who have avoided attendanceon the meetings of the States, have excused themselves onWHEEL CARRIAGES. 33the plea of the unfitness of their health to bear the fatigueof a long journey on horseback. In the '' Memoiressur Ancienne Chevalerie ^ of M. of Sainte Palace, hementions the entrance into Bruxelles of Louis the Dauphinin 1456 on horseback, and that he was met at theporte by the Duchess Isabella and other ladies of thecourt on foot !One of the most curious documents relative to thistime, is to be found in Roubo''s " L'Art de Menuisier."It has reference to the introduction of what would seemto us to be the first suspended carriage, althoughhistory ascribes this to a much later date. In speakingof a carriage brought from the King of Hungary as apresent to the Queen of Bohemia, and which seemed toexcite the wonder and admiration of the good Parisians,he describes it as " brabant et moult riche'' What couldbrabant (quivering or trembling) mean, but that it swayedto and fire, from being suspended ? From this timecovered carriages began to be used in France, thoughsomewhat sparingly. They were forbidden for common use,even to women, as tending too much to the promotion ofluxury ; and only those of the highest rank were permittedto use them. At all public ceremonies there is no mentionmade of state coaches, but of state horses and statemules. Even his holiness the Pope rode upon a greyhoise; though, to indemnify him for the exertion, hishorse was led and his stimip held by kings and emperors.As time went on, people became more philosophical ;and one evidence of this was, in preferring the ease thatdoes no injury, to the self-denial that does no good; — orD34 EARLY HISTORY OFrather, the ease that does good, to the self-denial that doesinjury. Covered carriages began to obtain more commonly,though at first their uses were confined to long journeysor times of public ceremony. Hungary appears to havebeen the country out of which the coach was bon; thoughmany nations contend for the honour of atheling the unwieldychild, which has in its turn been father to a numeroustribe of now rapidly-improving offspring. Deninacontends for Spain ; Father Semedi, for Italy ; the " EncyclopedicFranchise," for France; while we would putin a claim founded on the " whirlicote,'*'' which conveyedthe mother of Richard II. from the terrors of Father'smob. What these whirlicotes were, we have notbeen able to discover; most probably the first rude attemptat the close carriage of a later period.* That thecommon people of this country had at this time their conveyances,may be inferred from the record of the bearing ofKing Richard's corpse, — ^* upon a charlotte or sort of litteron wheels, such as is used by citizen's wives who werenot able or not allowed to keep ordinary litters." Anne,the wife of this king, granted an annual stipend during thelife of Robert Westende, " purvoiour de nos chariettes.'**There are various and ingenious derivations ascribed tothe word " coach ;'* some of them of an amusing character,such as, for instance, that of Menage, who says it is to betakenfrom the Latin vehiculum ! — a somewhat more probableone of Junius, sea, to carry ; Watchmen, from theGerman kitten, to cover ; Lye, from the Belgic koetseuy tolie along,— or, as it properly signifies, a couch or chair.• Query — whirling cot, or moving house.WHEEL Carriages. 35Others have endeavoured to prove its derivation from theHungarian, — that it had its rise in a village in the provinceof Wiesellung, formerly called Kotsee. In '^ Beckman'sHistory of Inventions'' (a book that has furnishedus with many details and much valuable general information,)an extract is made from Stephens Broderithus, whosays, speaking of the year 1526, " When the archbishopreceived certain intelligence that the Turks had enteredHungary, not contented with informing the king by letter,he speedily got into one of those light carriages of theplace, they call kotcze and hastened to his majesty." Thisevidence, backed by the presentation carriage before mentionedto the Queen of Bohemia, is certainly in favour ofthe Hungarian coach makers ; but we must leave to wiserheads to determine the exact truth : for what with theearache of France, the earoee of Italy, the carri-eoehi ofSpain, and even our own coach, the head is somewhat betteredand is fain to take refuge in the simple carrack ofold Rome, from which these appellations most probably hadtheir rise. After all, it must be a divided honour. The earetta^ chare ear, eharat^ &c. being the earlier construction,they had the earlier derivation ; later came the Hungariankoteze^ the German kutsehe^ &c. &c., and adding both formand name to what had gone before, produced a mixedvehicle with a mixed appellation. We will glance overthe state and increase of carriages on the Continent duringthe fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth centuries, andQuery. — are coach and couch synonymes ? The earliest coaches orlitters were for reclining, The cars in the procession of Maximilianaie literally coaches or sofas on wheels.D 286 EARLY HISTORY OFdevote the concluding chapter exclusively to those ofEngland during the same period and up to the presenttime.In 1474 the Emperor Frederic III. came to Frankfortin a close carriage ; and as he remained in it on account ofthe wetness of the weather, the inhabitants had no occasionto support the canopy over his head, except on going andreturning from the council house — (vide Beckman). Thepoor citizens must have invoked as ardent a benedictionon the head of him who invented coaches, as did SanchoPanza oh him who " invented sleep*"At the beginning of the sixteenth century, the richnessand number of carriages increased — though the accessionwas chiefly confined to Germany. At tournaments theywere made objects for display ; they are spoken of as beinggilded all over, and the hangings of crimson satin. Elect-dressesand duchesses were seldom seen without them ; andthere was as much rivaby in their days of public exhibition,as there is now amongst the aspirants of fashion intheir well-appointed equipages at a queen's drawing-room'.While in 1562 the Elector of Bologna had twelve carriagesin his suite, and somewhat later the MagazineJohn Sigismund, thirty-six coaches, with six horses each,at Paris in 1550, during the reign of Francis I, there werebut three, — one belonging to the queen, another to theking's queen, and the third to a corpulent old lord, whoseinability to take exercise in any other way, rendered thisluxury a necessity. If, as historians say, in spite of the^* brabant '' before mentioned in Roubo's comment on thecarriage of the Queen of Bohemia, the carriages of thisWheel CARRIAGES. 37time were not suspended, his lordship's exercise must havetended somewhat to his reduction.Even so late as Henri Quatre little advance had beenmade in emulation of the more luxurious Germans. It appearssom a letter said to be still in preservation, thatHenry the Great had but one carriage for himself and hisqueen : he says, "I cannot come to you to-day, because mywife is using my coach'' This coach was probably the onein which he was afterwards assassinated. It is said, thatimmediately upon the murder, his friends about him letfall the curtains of the coach and drove to the palace.Carriages at this time used in France were made with acanopy supported by ornamental pillars, and the wholesurrounded by curtains of stuff or leather, which mightbe drawn up or let down at pleasure.The example of the German nobles was soon followedby their vassals. In 1688, an edict was issued by DukeJulius of Brunswick, in which his vassals were forbiddento ride in carriages : amongst other things, he says, " thatthe useful discipline and skill in riding have been almostlost ; and that the principal cause of this is, that our vassals,servants, and kinsmen without distinction, youngand old, have dared to give themselves up to indolence,and to riding in coaches ^"^"^ &c.The seventeenth century in Germany began with equalstate in its princes, and the same imitation at a humbledistance by its vassals. Count Kevenhiiller, in speakingof the marriage of the Emperor Ferdinand II. with a princessof Bavaria, says, ^^ the bride rode with her sisters in asplendid carriage studded with gold ; her maids of honour.38 EAELY HISTORY OFin carriages hung with black satin ; and the rest o£ theladies, in neat leather carriages At the same time anattempt was again made to suppress the use of carriagesamongst the people. In 1 668, Philip Duke of PomeraniaStephen reminded his vassals that they ought not tomake so much use of carriages as of horses ; and there isa less gentle admonition in the Churmark Archives, wherean edict is still^reserved that went to forbid the use ofcoaches under pain of incurring the punishment of felony.All these prohibitions were of little avail, especially as theexample of the nobles tended to the increase rather thanthe diminution of state in their wheel carriages. Coaches of^* perfumed leather ^ (probably what we now call Russialeather) and glass carriages now are mentioned.In 1631, Mary, Infanta of Spain, rode in Carinthiain a glass carriage in which no more than two personscould sit. The wedding carriage of the first wife of theEmperor Leopold, (1658,) who was also a Spanish princess,cost, together with the harness, 38,000 florins : thecarriages of the Emperor himself are thus described byKink: ^'In the imperial coaches no great magnificencewas to be seen ; they were covered over with red clothand black nails. The harness was black, and in the wholework there was no gold. The panels were of glass, andon this account they were called the imperial glass coaches.On festivals the harness was ornamented with silk fringe.The imperial coaches were distinguished by their havingleathern traces ; but the ladies of the imperial suite wereobliged to be contented with carriages the traces of whichwere made of ropes''WHEEL CARRIAGES. 39From the circumstances of the two Spanish princessesbeing so richly appointed in their equipages, itwould seem that Spain was now taking the lead whichhad so long been engrossed by Germany. Poor Francestill continued at a distance, as may be inferred fromthe act, that as late as the reign of Louis XIII,(16S0,) a woman was accustomed to go to court maskedand hooded, jogging behind a man on horseback !The first attempt at a common usage of covered wheelcarriages amongst the Parisian citizens occurred at thistime, in the introduction of a vehicle called brouetteor roulette. The body of this was like a sedan chair,placed upon two wheels, and was dragged by men. Theproprietors of sedans interfered to have them prohibited ;just as our short-sighted labourers would proscribe machinery,not seeing how much in the end their own toilmay be mitigated. For a while they were forbidden; butwere permitted in 1669, and in 1671 they were in generalusage amongst the people. Lupin, the inventor of theserosettes found means to contrive them so that their motionwas tolerably easy ; and his ingenuity concealed hisart so well,— or rather, the Parisian mechanics of that timehad so little of enterprise or curiosity, — that he was theonly one who made them. The author has obtained fromRoubo''s '/L'Art de Menuisier," in the Bibliotheca Royaleat Paris, the mode of the suspension of these carriages,which, as they were the only ones of the time, and are theearliest of the kind on record, are a mechanical curiosity.The description is here inserted in its original quaintFrench, with the accompanying illustrations.40 Early HISTORY OF'ales brouettes sont des petites voiture assez semblables auxchaises h porters pour ce qui est de la forme et la construction dela caisse ; mais elles different de ces desires, en ce quelle sontport par des roues, ou, pour mieux dire, par un ressort [possiblyof elastic rope] attach au corps de la voiture et ^ I'essieu des roueset trained par un homme au moyen de deux batons attaches k lavoiture, entre lesquels il est place comme un cheval de limon ; ce qui,malgré Usage, ne fait pas beaucoup honneur h Urbanity franchise.Toute la difference qu'il y a entre 1e corps d'une chaise h porterset celui d'une brouette, c'est qu*^ ce dernier il faut placer deux roon-wants sur le terrible dans la partie de Tappui, ou, pour mieux dire, unseul montant evuid^ au milieu pour passer I'essieu des roues et lescontents, qu'ils le soient de roani^re que les roues ne d^bordent pasle corps de la voiture peu devant, et que leurs ouvertures, ainsi quele siege, soient assez levees pour que I'essieu puisse monter sans ytoucher. Les roues des rosettes ne sauroient avoir plus de 3 pieds8 pouces de diamMre ; parce que si elles en avoient davantage, elleshausseroient trop le siege, qui est d^j^ fort ^lev^, puisque a pres de16 pouces du dessous, ainsi qu'on pent le voir fig. 3, laquelle representedla coupe de la brouette, dont les elevations de face et de cotsont repr^ent^es fig. 1 et 2.'< Quant k la manil^re dont les rosettes sont suspended, elle est fortingenious. Elle consiste en un lien de resort attache en dessous dubranched, que Ton prolonged d'environ un pied plus que le devant dela voiture : le petit bout de ce ressort entre dans une boucle form kune tringle de fer attach avec I'essieu de sorte que tout le poids dela voiture porte sur le ressort, et par consequence sur les roues par lemoyen de la tringle mpntante, qui alors fait Office de souvent. Jene donner pas autres details touchant la manure de suspendre lesrosettes, parce que cela n'est pas du ressort de cet ouvrage, et quec'est Affaire du serrurier de voiture ; ro'^tant content devoir representdans les fig. 4, 5, 6, Elevation d'un mount de brouette avecsa garniture de fer, let le montant de fer dans lequel passe BessieA; le bout inf(grieur de ce m^me montant, avec la boucle ou chape,qui refit le bout du ressort, et le plan des contents des cots de labrouette, avec les garnitures de fer, dans lesquelles est pratique lacoulisse par o\i passe le montant de fer, dont le collet est undique pardes lignes punctures descendants de elevation fig. 4, au plan fig. 6.Les rosettes sont peu susceptibleS de decoration, tant la plupartdes voiture publiques ; il sufiit quelle soient constructed solidement.Cependant, comme il y a quelques particuliers qui en font usage, onWHEEL Cabbages. 41pourni faire ces deniers un peu plus riches que les autres, comme jeI'ai observe bu fig. 1 et 2, od j'ai mis des glaces de custode et deiiDODtants de cmtsesi ce qu'on oe rit pas aui rosettes piques, lesquelles,ainsi que lea chaises & pleura de cette espece, n'ont pas labee aiu« que par les cbt6s, que des overtures d'euviroD B ou 9pouch de haul ouvtaates & coulisse horizontal pat les cdtts seulementLes rosettes, ainsi que les chaises ik porters publiques, doiventkatie uu peu plus petites que celle dont je viens de foiie la description,d'euTirou 3 ou 4 pouces sur la hauteur, alio de les reudieun peu plus l^rea."In the following reign, that of Louis XIV, carriagessuspended by leathern straps were supposed to be first introduced.There is a drawing in the Bibliotb^que Royaleof the king's entry into Paris, in which this method isadopted. But already are exceeded the limits devoted toonr Continental neighbours, and it is time to return toEngland, beginning with the commencement of a newchapter:4SCHAPTER ILEnglish Carriages. — walter Ripon. — First Coach. — Queen May. —Earl of Arundel. — William Boonenn. — Queen Elizabeth's Coach. —Cost of a Coach. — M. de Rosny, Treasurer of France. — ScotchPatent for Public Carriages. — Strictures on Coaches by Taylor theWater Poet— Colloquy between Coach and Sedan. — Dialoguebetween a Frenchman and a Londoner. — Public Travelling.The introduction of coaches into England appears tohave been at a somewhat later period than either in Franceor Spain. In Stowe's " Summaries of the English Chronicles''he says, coaches were not used till the year 1555,when Walter Ripon made a coach for the Earl of Rutland,which was the first ever made in England ; and inthe year 1664, the same Walter made the first '* hollowturning coach," with pillars and arches, for her majesty,(Queen Mary), being then her servant ; and in the year1684, he made "a chariot throne with four pillars behind,to beare a crowne imperial on the tope, and before twolower pillars, whereon stood a lion and a dragon, the supportersof the aims of England** Another ascribes theirintroduction to Fitzallen Earl of Arundel, who broughtone from Germany in 1580. In the postscript to the Lifeof Thomas Parr, written by Taylor the Water Poet, (anda mortal enemy to land carriages,) we find the followingENGLISH CARRIAGES. 48note : " He (Parr) was 81 years old before there wasany coach in England ; (Parr was bon in Edward I Wth'sreign, 1483 ;) for the first ever seen here was brought outof the Netherlands by one William Boonenn, a Dutchman,who gave a coach to Queen Elizabeth, for she had beenseven years a queen before she had any coach ; since whenthey have increased with a mischief and ruined all the besthousekeeping, to the undoing of the watermen, by the multitudesof hackney-coaches. But they never swarmed somuch to pester the streets as they do now, till the year1605 ; and then was the gunpowder treason hatched, and atthat time did the coaches breed and multiply .^^ Taylor is tobe thanked, not only for his information, but for his capitalthough unconscious burlesque upon those fancied philosopherswho talk of cause and effect, where events, becausethey happen in sequence, are made to depend one on theother, when the fact of their being two things apartmakes them independent existences. Another absurditymaybe noticed : the attempt then, as too often now, to sacrificenewly-increasing comfort to old custom— the multitudeof coaches to the lesser number of watermen. Whatwould the murmurer have said now to the moving mass ofomnibuses and other conveyances that stretch som oneend of Babylon the Greater to the other ? What wouldhe say an hundred years hence, when owing to the superiorcompactness and cheapness of their constructionand manufacture, their number will perhaps be trebled ?The moving temple before described as made for QueenElizabeth was doubtless suggested by the importation ofthe Dutchman, and in process of time gave rise to the44 ENGLISH CARRIAGES.more easy but less magnificent coach of modem use. Tohave attached a "box"' to a *' moving temple," would havebeen a most derogatory anomaly ; so *' the coachman joineda horse found to match a saddle-horse to the coach-tree,then he sitter upon the saddle, and when there was fourhorses, he drave those which went before him, guidingthem with a reign'' That the carriages used by QueenElizabeth could be opened and closed at pleasure, may beinferred, from her causing at Warwick, during one of hetprogresses, "every part and side of her coach to be opened,that all her subjects present might behold her, which mostgladly they desired."We now find conveyances of numerous kinds becominggeneral amongst the wealthier people. Spenser, inhis *' Faery Queen," uses the words '^ wagon," " coche,"and " chart." Long waggons for passengers and goods,afterwards called caravans, were introduced, though ofsomewhat clumsy construction to accommodate them tothe badness of the roads and the number of personsthey carried. Private families had their private carriages :in the year 1673, there is in the household book ofthe Kytson family, (vide the Archselogia, vol. xx.) a memorandumof the cost of a coach then in use; it runsthus : — " 1678. For my m"*' coche, with all the furniturethereto belonging except horses — xxiiiijli. xiii*. Forthe painting of niiy m' and my in*^*' armes upon the cocheij s. vj d.For y* coche horses bought by M"^ Paxton — xj li,••• •••• J,,xiii. Ilia.At the close of the following century is another minuteENGLISH CARRIAGES. 45of a similar kind, entered in Sir William Dugdale^sdiary.1681. Paid to M' Meres, a coachman in St.Martins Lane, for a little chariot w*^** I then sent into thecountry, ^23. Ribs. Od; and for a cover of canvas, c£^01Oi. Good. : also for harness for two horses £04i. 00s. OOd.*"Vehicles of all descriptions now became general, and anoutcry was speedily raised against them. In 1 584, WilliamLilly, in one of his plays, complains of those whowere accustomed to go to a battle-field '^ on hard-trottinghorses, now riding in easie coaches up and down to courtladies'' So high did the clamour run, that a parliamentarybill was in agitation to prevent the increase of coaches ; itsalleged necessity being, that government would be at aloss to mount the army, owing to the increased use ofhorses amongst the common people.Meantime England was lending in turn to other countrieswhat she herself had borrowed. Towards the endof the sixteenth century, John of Finland, on his returnfrom England, among other articles of luxury tookwith him to Sweden the first coach that was seen in thatcountry. Before that time, the nobles of Sweden whenthey travelled carried their wives behind them on horseback.The princesses travelled in like manner, and when itrained, enveloped themselves in a mantle of waxed cloth.In 1598 it was accounted a great marvel that the Englishambassador to Scotland had a coach with him, as it wasthe custom for all public functionaries to add to theirother toils of office that of making long journeys onhorseback. James I« made his first progress from Edin-46 ENGLISH CARRIAGES.burgh to London after this fashion. Stowe records hisleaving Edinburgh on the 6th of April, and not reachingLondon till the 7th of May. We must cease to wonderat slow national progression, if all public business was conductedat a similar rate. Great part of the way where thecountry was favourable, the king hunted ; and on the dayof his arrival, to avoid the extremity of dust, he rode fromTheobald, through the meadows. At Stamford Hillhe was met by the lord mayor, knights, and aldermen ofLondon, in scarlet robes, all on horseback, and ^^ multitudesof people swarming in highways, in fields, on housesand trees, to behold the king, and with whom the name ofking was very strange, being full fifty years since therewas a king in England'sThere is a record by the same chronicler of the commonuse of carriages at this period. ^' On the 8th of Junefollowing arrived at London, Monsieur de Rosny, greattreasurer of France, accompanied with noblemen and gentlemenin great number. The same night they, in thirtycoaches, rode to the French ambassadors leaguer, thenlodged at the Barbican by Recross Street'' Andersonplaces the period of the general employment of coachesin 1706, and, in his ^' History of Commerce'' gives thefollowing state of the number and increase of hackney-coachesin London and Westminster :In 1637 . . .601662 . . 2001694, limited to . 7001716 . . 800.This does not quite agree with Old Parr's chronicler, whoENGLISH CARRIAGES. 47surely could not account fifty coaches in London a swainsufficient to ruin the watermen or cause the gunpowderplot ! What would he say now to the nine hundredomnibuses of modem growth, exclusive of the ancient-lookinghackney coaches, and the endless varieties of thegreat mushroom family of cabs.It is a singular fact that in the earlier use of coaches inScotland, that country was indebted to a native of Stralsund,in Pomerania, who, in the year 1610, offered tocontract for a certain number of coaches and waggons, withhorses to draw and servants to attend them. Accordingly,a royal patent was granted him, conferring an exclusiveprivilege, for fifteen years, of running between Edinburghand Leith. In England, coaches were daily becomingmore necessary to the good citizens ; although, in manyquarters, the prejudice ran high against their use. Themost vehement outcries, as might be expected, were to befound amongst the watermen, whose " rights were mostinfringed upon. These, with their own poet Taylor attheir head, now and then assisted by a stray pamphleteeror squib-writer, raised so formidable a complaint, that thematter was taken into parliamentary consideration, andthere was some serious discussion as to the eligibility ofchecking the too frequent use of hired coaches ! Thesupposed necessity of such an injunction is almost to bewondered at when we consider what these vehicles werewithout springs, and altogether clumsy and unsightly intheir construction— vehicles in which people were, in thewords of Taylor, " tost, tumbled, rumbled, and jumbledwithout mercy /^ Take his more elaborate description :48 ENGLISH CARRIAGES.The coach is a close hypocrite ; for it hath a cover forknavery, and curtains to vale and shadow any wickedness.Besides, like a perpetual cheater, it wears two bootes andno spurs, sometime having two pair of legs to one boot,and oftentimes (against nature) it makes faire ladies wearethe boots ; and if you note, they are carried back to back,like people surprized by pyrats, to be tyed in that miserablemanner and thrown overboard into the sea. Moreover,it makes people imitate sea-crabs, in being drawnsideway as they are when they sit in the boot of the coach ;and it is a dangerous kind of carriage for the commonwealth,if it be considered*" He even ventures so far inhis abuse as to call them " hell-carts' — a nickname whichthey retained for many years after. In 1635, a patentwas granted to Sir Saunders Buncombe for the introductionof sedans ; their purpose being " to interfere with thetoo frequent use of coaches, to the hindrance of the cartsand carriages employed in the necessary provision of thecity and suburbs." A rivalry now sprang up betweencoach and sedan ; and it gave rise to a humorous tract, inwhich they are impersonated, and represented as holding acolloquy. From the different descriptions, as well as theplates given of them, we may form some idea of their constructionat that time. The title runs thus — (we quotefrom the Archselogia) — *' Coach and Sedan ; a pleasantdispute for precedence, the brewer's cart being moderator f'1686. They are thus described : " The one (sedan) wasin a suite of green, after a strange manner, windowed behindand before with isinglass (talc), having two handsomefellows in green coats attending him ; the one everENGLISH CARRIAGES. 49went before, the other came behind. Their coats werelaced downe the back with a green lace suitable ; so weretheir half-sleeves ; which persuaded me at first they weresome cast suites of their masters. Their backs were harnessedwith leather angles cut out of a hide as broad asDutch collops of bacon*' — ** The other (Coach) was athick, burly, square-sett fellow, in a doublet of blackleather, brasse-buttoned downe the breast, back, sleevesand wings, with monstrous wide bootes fringed at the topwith a net fringe, and a round breech guided, and on theback an achievement of sundry coats in their proper colours,&c. &c. Hee had only one man before him, wraptin a red cloak, with wide sleeves turned up at the hands,and cudgelled thick on the back and shoulders with broadshining lace (not much unlike that which mummers makeof straw hats) ; and of each side of him went a lacquey,the one a French boy, the other Irish, both suitable alike*'During the argument " Coach'' has somewhat the worst ofit. Sedan speaks : '* And, Coach, twice or thrice a year,.you must needs take a voyage to London with your ladie,under a color, to be new colored, guided, or painted,covered, seated, shod, or the like ; when her errand indeedis, as one saith well, speaking to such ladies who love tovisit the city,** To see what fashion most is in request, —How is this countess, that court ladie drest.Hence it happens. Coach, that by your often ambling toLondon, Sir Thomas or Sir John sinks, as in a quicksand,by degrees so deep into the merchant, mercer, or lawyer'sbooke, that hee is up to the ears, ere hee be aware ;.E50 ENGLISH CARRIAGES.neither can he be well drawn out without a tame ofusurers, and a craftie scrivener to be the fore-horse, or thepresent sale of some land ; so that wise men suppose thisto be one maine and principal reason why within a coachjourney of a day or two from the citie, so many faire inheritancesas have been purchased by lord mayors, aldermen,merchants, and other rich citizens, have not continued in aname to the third — yea, scarce the second generation ;when, go far north or westward, you shall find many familiesand names of nobilitie and centre to have continuedtheir estates two and three hundred years, and these in adirect succession' The moderator " Beer-cart" seemsan apt disciple of the lawyer who made the celebratedoyster decision, for he thus finishes the dispute : ** Coachand Sedan, you both shall reverence and ever give way toBeer-cart wherever you shall meet him, either in citie orcountries, as your auncient and elder brother''In the first day's entertainment at Rutland House,(vide Sir William D'Avenant's Works,) this despotism ofBeer-cart is appealed against in a disputation between aParisian and a Londoner, who contend for the superiorityof their national cities. We give the extract; and itseems to imply the superiority at that time of the coachesof Paris to those of London, as the Frenchman remainsunanswered. " The song being ended, a consort of instrumentalmusic after the French composition beingheard awhile, the curtains are suddenly opened, and in thenostra appear sitting a Parisian and a Londoner in thelivery robes of both cities, who declare concerning thepre-eminence of Paris and London." The opening ad-englishCARRIAGES. 51dress of the fonder deserves quotation. ** You of thisnoble citie are yet to become more noble by your candorto the plea between me, a bourgeois of Paris, and my opponentof London ; being concerned in honour to lendyour attention as favourably to a stranger as to your nativeorator ; since His the greatest signe of a narrow educationto permit the borders of rivers or strands of seas toseparate the general consanguinity of mankind ; thoughthe unquiet nature of man (still hoping to shake off distantpower and the incapacity of any one to sway universalempire) hath made them bounds to divide government.But already I think it necessary to cease persuading you,who will ever deserve to be my judges, and therefore meanto apply myself in admonishing him who is pleased to beawhile my adversary's He docs admonish him, and verywisely too, on his national concert, on his imperfect systemof education, and other subjects of different import to theone directly before the reader. After some remarks onthe overhanging build of the city, contrived, he supposes,*ein the days of wheelbarrows, before those greater engines,carts, were invented*' or as " an umbrella of tilesto intercept the sun'' or that " the shambles were soempty that fresh air was to be avoided least it shouldsharpen the appetite," he continues — " I have now leftyour houses, and am passing through your streets ; butnot in a coach, for they are uneasily hung, and so narrowthat I took them for sedans upon wheels. Nor is it safefor a stranger to use them till the quarrel be decided,whether six of your nobles sitting together shall stop andgive place to so many barrels of beer. Your city is theE 252 ENGLISH CARRIAGES.only metropolis in Europe where there is a wonderful dignitybelonging to carts. Master Londoner, be not too hotagainst coaches ; take advice from one that eats much sorrelwith his broths**The fever against the use of coaches — nay, against coachesthemselves, (vide Bishop Hall, who calls them " sin-guilty")continued to rage, the watermen turning firemenon their jury, and others, with less interested motives, butwith equal absence of reason, crying out for their suppression.*' Coaches and sedans, (quoth the waterman,) theydeserve both to be thrown into the Thames ; and, but forstopping the channel, I would they were ; for I am sure,[now comes the gist of this and many a modem objection,]where I was wont to have eight or ten fares in amorning, I now scarce get two the whole day !"At. this period, it may be presumed, public vehicles wereuniversally used, not only for short distances, but for longjourneys. For proof we are again indebted to the archaeological,which gives the following letter, date 1673, with anauthenticated pedigree : — " Honored Father, my dutiespremised, &c. I got to London on Saturday last. Myjourney was noe ways pleasant, being forced to ride in theboots all the way. Y* company y* came up with mee werepersons of great quality, as knights and ladies. My journey'sexpense was SOs. This travel hath soe indisposedmee, y* I am resolved never to ride up again in y* coatch,'^&c. Directed — *' To his honoured Father, Perkins,Esq. Browsholme House. To be left with the postmaster,Preston, Lancashire''It may be inferred from the foregoing extract thatENGLISH Carriages. 58the journey from Lancashire required some days for itsperformance ; but even this rate of travelling had itsimpeders amongst the objectives. The writer of a tractin the Harleigh Miscellany (1673) deprecates '^ the multitudeof stage-coaches and carriages now travelling onthe roads,^^ and advises parliament to interfere to suppressthem ; — ^' especially those within fifty or sixtymiles of London He recommends the others beingobliged to travel with one set of horses, and to be limitedto thirty miles in summer, and twenty-five in winter,,per diem I Although the legislature was too wise toadopt the recommendation of this " slow coach'' locomotiveconveyance made for some time only a tortoise-likeprogression. So formidable an affair was the undertakinga journey reckoned, that even from Birmingham to Londona departure was the signal for making a will, followedby a solemn farewell of wife, children, and household !Slow travelling, and a correspondent tardiness of otherarrangements, continued to a much later period than mightbe imagined, when we look, not at the rapid rate at whichjourneys are made from place to place, but even as wewrite, we are conscious that those who come after us willbe tempted to smile at our " rapid rate'' as we have oftensmiled at the rapid rate of our grandfathers, in their advertisementof " that remarkable* swift travelling coach theFly, which leaves Birmingham on Mondays and reachesLondon on the Thursday following." When we considerthat the days of railroads are in their infancy, and yetwhat extraordinary progress is made through their agency,we can scarcely calculate on what their capability, com-54 ENGLISH CARRIAGES.bind with that of steam, or other yet undiscovered meansof employing the powers of nature, may effect.Toward the end of the seventeenth century, improvementsbegan to take place. In Wood's Diary, mention ismade of a machine called the " Flying Coach," which completedthe journey between Oxford and London in thirteenhours ! The outcry lessened, and the imperfect vehiclesand bad roads were left to passengers unmolested. Whatthe latter were, may be imagined from the fact, that whenCharles III. of Spain visited England, and Prince Georgeof Denmark went out to meet him, both princes were soimpeded by the badness of the roads, that their carnageswere obliged to be borne on the shoulders of the peasantry,and they were six hours in performing the last nine milesof their journey !Abroad, little progress seems to have been made. In acurious collection at St. Petersburg, now in the possessionof the Emperor Nicholas, and originally belonging toPeter the Great (recognised as Emperor in 1726), somespecimens of antique carriages are still preserved. Oneis close, made of deal, stained black, mounted on fourwheels, the windows of mica instead of glass, and theframes of common tin : the other is open, with a smallmachine behind of the shipwright emperor's invention-itspurpose to determine the number of miles traversedon a journey. In the same collection is the litter ofCharles XII. used at the battle of Pultowa.During the eighteenth century, improvements were verygradually made in carriages, and but little progress in therate of travelling. So late as 1760, t^ journey from Edin-ENGLISH CARRIAGES. 55burgh to London occupied the time of eighteen days,part of the roads being only accessible by pack-horses.Within our own time may be remembered the uncouthturns-out," as a coachman would emphatically call them,both in private and public conveyances : — heavy coaches,laden with ill-packed luggage ; miserable horses, boundin worse harness ; all at the mercy of a red-faced, half-drunkenapoplectic coachman, with a wisp of straw for ahatband, and buried under a weight of dirty drab capesand cotton neckcloths, looking as if he united the doublecapacity of driver and passenger, sufficient weight for thecoach, being the passenger thereon.CHAPTER III.Definition of Wheel Canister. — Primary and Secondary. — animaland Elemental Power. — Elasticity and Gravity. — Examples. — MechanicalPowers. — Lever. — Wheel and Axis. — Pulley. — InclinedPlane. — wedge. — Screw. — Funicular Action. — Hydrostatical Ao^lion. — Automatical Action. — Ponderatical Action. — GeometricalForms in Carriages.A WHEEL CARRIAGE moved bj internal action, aswhen steam power is combined with it, may be defined —a primary machine for the purpose of locomotion.A wheel carriage moved by external action may be defined— a secondary machine for the purpose of locomotion.A machine, properly so called, is a material combinationof two or more of the means designated by mechaniciansas "mechanical powers'' whereby the forces known asanimal and elemental* power may be transmitted to otherbodies with various modifications, for the purpose of producingmotion in them.Animal and elemental power may be divided into twoclasses : that which acts by the force of elasticity, and thatwhich acts by the force of gravity.The author has retained this old term on account of its familiarityto the general reader, though savouring of the quaintness of the antiquechemistry, now exploded.DEFINITION OF WHEEL CARRIAGES. 67When a horse is used for the purposes of draught, partof his power consists in the elastic action of his muscles,which serve to throw his body forward, as when he firstbends and then straightens his limbs ; and part of it ingravity, as when he hangs his body forward against thetraces after the expansive muscular action is expended.For this reason a heavy horse can do more work than alight one, with less fatigue, even though the muscular actionsof both be of equal power.When a man works the wheel of a tread-mill by climbingfrom step to step, it is the force of gravity alone whichacts directly. The elasticity of his muscles only serves toenable him to maintain a position in which his gravity canbe available to produce motion.When a man lifts a weight from the ground in a verticalposition, it is the force of elasticity alone which acts ;viz. the expansion and contraction of his muscles : theweight of his body does not enter into the account as aproducer of motion. A man whose muscles possess greatpower of expansion and contraction will exert more forcethan a much heavier man whose muscles do not possess thesame power.But when a man pulls a rope above his head without hisfeet being fastened to the surface on which he stands, theelasticity of his muscles only serves to secure his gripe onthe rope : all the motion he can give it is the effect of thegravity of his body, — so that a heavy man will exert moreforce than a light one.Amongst elemental powers, steam may be considered as58 DEFINITION OF WHEEL CARRIAGESan example of pure elasticity. This power is used in numberlessmodes as a first mover.Atmospheric air, on the contrary, possesses the powersboth of elasticity and gravity. The former is shown in itsaction in the form of wind upon mills, and also in its compressibility; the latter, by its downward action in the pistonof an atmospheric steam-engine, when the steam whichserved by its elastic force to raise the piston has been againcondensed and restored to the state of water.The water of running streams, which is applied to turnmill-wheels, is an example of the force of pure gravity.The tidal power of the ocean is precisely the same, whenapplied to mill-wheels.As the elastic force of gases has not yet been efficientlyapplied to produce motion, they may be omitted. Theclassification, then, of the available " powers' will be asfollows :Animal Power.Wind Power.Water Power.Steam Power.The two kinds of force by which the powers are madeavailable to perform human drudgery, viz. elasticity andgravity, may be considered as primary and secondary ; forin no case can gravity produce motion until it has beenacted on or disturbed by elasticity. Thus, the horsesweight or gravity in draught is not brought into actionuntil the elasticity of the muscles has thrown the centreover the base. The gravity of the man on the tread-wheeldoes not iEict till the elasticity of his muscles has raised himAND MECHANICAL POWEES. 59the necessary height. The man sho pulls the rope cannotbring his gravity to act, till the elasticity of his muscles hasraised him from the ground, and served to suspend himfrom the rope. The weight of the atmospheric air cannotdrive down the piston of the steam engine till the elasticaction of the vapour has first raised it. The water of therunning stream cannot bring its gravity to bear on themill wheel, till it has been first raised from the surface ofthe ocean to the summit level of the fountain head, in theform of elastic vapour.Therefore, the material source of all physical power maybeconsidered to reside in the principle of elasticity ; andthe secondary means of distributing this power consistin certain natural forms of matter which man has imitated,and which mechanicians have agreed to designate as mechanicalpowers, but which, it is evident, are not powersin themselves, but merely vehicles or instruments for thetransmission of power, just as a steam engine is a vehiclefor the employment of steam power or the force of steam.The mechanical powers, as set forth by mechanicians,are six in number :The Lever,The Wheel and Axis,The Pulley,The Inclined Plane,The Wedge,The Screw.These may be divided into two simple powers, of whichthe other four are combinations or modifications. Thelever and the inclined plane are the simplest ones.6Q DEFINITION OF WHEEL CARRIAGESThe common poker wherewith a fire is stirred is a familiarexample of the lever. The poker is suspended on thebar of the grate as a fulcrum ; the power or force withwhich it acts depends on the proportion in which the radiusor circle described by the hand in moving it, exceedsthe radius or circle described by the coals which are moved :in simpler language, in proportion as the length of pokeroutside the bar exceeds the length of poker inside the bar.The handle of a common pump is another familiar instance.The type of the lever may be found in nature, in the tree,which, spreading farther into the air than it does into theearth, is acted on by violent wind, and in falling, tears upthe solid ground with its roots. In this case the elasticforce of the air is the mover. Another type is found inthe ocean cliff, which becoming gradually undermined bythe influx of the wave, at length projects far over thestrand, till it acquires a leverage overpowering the cohesionof its material, and then comes gravity to weigh it downand leave a mass of ruins on the margin of the sea, whichby the friction of attrition gradually reduces it into sand.An inclined plane is a straight surface, one side of whichis lower than another— or, in other words, which dips downwardfrom a horizontal level and forms an angle with it.It is the especial instrument with which gravity works.Where a rolling body is placed on a sufficiently inclinedplane, the centre of gravity or weight overhangs the baseor bearing point, and motion ensues, which only ceaseswhen the horizontal level causes the centre of gravity tofall within the base. A wheel carriage rolling down hill isa familiar example of the use of an inclined plaise. But itAND MECHANICAL POWEES. 61is clear that an inclined plane must be useless for the purposesof motion without the intervention of the lever*When we say that the centre of gravity overhangs thebase, we merely mean that the contact point or fulcrum ofthe body is not in a vertical line with the centre of gravity.A line drawn from the axis to that part of theperiphery which impinges on the ground does in realityconstitute a lever which the force of gravity impels downwardsor towards the centre of the earth. In naturethe inclined plane is found in numerous positions of highutility. Tie hills and the valleys are inclined planes,which drain off the surplus moisture and prevent the earthfrom becoming a quagmire: the beds of the rivers areinclined planes for the efficient motion of the minglingmountain streams : the ocean beach is an inclined plane,down which the dashing surf rolls back to join its parentwater ; and the sides of the hoary rocks of the lofty mountainridges are inclined planes, down which the fragmentsshattered from the peaks by the winter's frost, roll to thehigher valleys formed by the snowy rills, there graduallyto be decomposed and play a new part in creation.* In allthese cases gravity is the moving force.The wheel and axis consist merely of a series of leversplanted round a common centre. In the common framedwheel every spoke is a lever. When the wheel is fixed ona horizontal axis, two of the spokes are vertical ; and as thehorse draws forward, each pair of spokes in succession be-geologistssay that these very mountains have been originallyraised up by the elastic force of heat. If so elasticity is in the veryoutset the awakener or employer of gravity.62 DEFINITION OF WHEEL CARRIAGEScome vertical. When a spoke is vertical, it constitutes alever reaching from the line of draught, which is the axle,to the ground : therefore, the longer the spoke— or, in otherwords, the higher the wheel, — the more powerful is thelever.The wedge is an inclined plane, the action of which isreversed or modified by being made movable. It ismostly used by the force of concussion, as the blows of ahammer or sledge ; which is ^ modification of the power ofgravity, the centre round which the weight moves beingthe ball and socket joint of a man^s shoulder. But thewedge may also be acted on by a lever, or lever and screw,and may be used either for the purpose of raising or loweringa body. A large ship, when on the stocks, is securedupon a series of wedges ; these wedges being loosened, sheslides down the inclined plane into the water.The pulley is simply a small wheel and axis, aroundwhich a rope runs in a groove. The convenience of the pulleyis, that it may be multiplied many times for the sakeof increasing the power at the expense of the time : i, e. aseries of levers are brought into action at once by means ofa longer rope.The screw is a movable inclined plane, not straight,but in a spiral form. It is a modification of the wedge,and not intended to be moved by concussion, but by alever, without which it is useless. The path of this movablespiral wedge is in a circle. It is used by mechanicseither to cause bodies to approach to, or to recede fromeach other. An example of the former case is the commonsmites vice, wherein the action of the screw is usedAND MECHANICAL POWEES. 63to impel the chops or gripping parts forcibly towardseach other, to hold firm the work. An example of the lattercase is the screw jack, used by builders to lift heavyweights, such as the walls of buildings which have sink.An authority of high repute, Mr. John Fare, author ofthe well-known work on the Steam Engine, has added tothe ancient catalogue of the " Mechanical Powers" twoothers, viz. :The Funicular Action,The Hydrostatical Action.The first is the force exerted by a cord or rope forciblystretched between two supports to draw those supportsnearer together. The archers bow is the familiar illustrationof it. The bow string is in this case merely the vehicle fortransmitting the muscular or elastic force of a man^s arm.The force which is given to the bow, and which serves topropel the arrow, is the force of elasticity, which is communicatedby the man's arm temporarily, and more rapidlyexpended than communicated. The force employed indrawing the bow is the amount of force communicated tothe arrow, minus friction.The hydrostatic action in one form is the facility affordedby water as an agent in the transmission of force.The well-known Dramas press is an illustration of it. Itconsists of a large and solid cylinder, in which works anaccurately-fitted piston or plunger; a forcing pump ofvery small bore communicates with the cylinder, and bythe action of the pump handle or lever, exceeding smallquantities of water are forced in succession beneath thepiston in the large cylinder, thus gradually raising it up,64 DEFINITION OF WHEEL Carriagesand compressing bodies whose bulk or volume it is intendedto reduce. It is evident that this press is merely acircuitous contrivance for accumulating together the separateefforts transmitted from the man^s arm in each successiveaction of the lever or pump handle. Without thelever, the pump could not be worked.To these two last mechanical powers may very fairly beadded two others of a more complicated kind, which havelong been in constant use. They may be designatedThe Automatical Action,The Ponderatical Action.The first is the action of a coiled spring of steel, such ascontains the moving power of a watch, a common bottle-shapedroasting jack, and many other contrivances. Thespring itself is not a power ; — sit is merely the vehicle forholding the power communicated in a short space of time,by the elastic action of the human hand through the levercalled a key, and which power it distributes by means ofmultiplied wheel work through a long space of time. Thispower is the representation of the force of elasticity alone.A simple form of this action is shown in the delicatespring coiled within the balance wheel of a watch, whichkeeps up a continuous resistant action. The spiral springused to lift the screw of a large stamping press is anotherinstance.The ponderatical action is the action of a suspendedweight which contains the moving power of a commonclock, a common roasting jack, and other machines. Theweight is not the power, but merely the vehicle for holdingthe power communicated in a short space of time byAND MECHANICAL POWEES. 65the elastic action of the human hand through the levercalled a cranked handle, and which power it distributesby means of multiplied wheelwork through a long spaceof time. The immediate cause of the weight's action isthe force of gravity, of which it may be held the representative: but, again, that gravity only represents the elasticityof the hand first communicated to it. A simpler formof this action is shown in the safety valve of a steam engine,where the gravity of the weight constantly regulatesthe elasticity of the steam. The pendulum of a clock isanother instance. Another is the governor or revolvingpendulum of the steam engine, which regulates the issueof the steam. The common fly wheel for regulating speedis another instance.Of the four powers known as " first movers'' three onlyhave been applied, or can be conveniently applied, to communicatemotion to wheel carriages.* They are.Animal Power,Wind Power,Steam Power.All three may be used as external powers by which carriagesof the secondary class can be moved ; but they cannotall be used as internal powers to propel machines ofthe primary class. Only steam and animal power can beused at all as internal movers!* and only the former withA steamboat moving by paddle wheels may be called a waterwheel carriage ; but the water does not move it, — it merely supports it,f Wind carriages, made of light cane work and impelled by sails,are said to have been used by the Chinese at very early periods.Carriages impelled by large paper kites, and also by sails, have frequentlybeen experimented on in England, but with little success TheF66 DEFINITION OF WHEEL CARRIAGESmuch advantage. Men might impel carriages internally bytheir muscular elastic force, but it would be an exhaustingprocess ; and horses could not very conveniently impelthem by means of their gravity, while their elastic powerwould be unaided by impetus.In a locomotive wheel carriage moved by the internalpower of steam, the principle of action would be a combinationof several of the " mechanical powers*' Into theaction of a wheel carriage of the secondary class, only twoof the mechanical powers enter, viz. :The Lever,The Wheel and Axis.The pole or shafts of a four-wheeled carriage are "applicationsof the lever for the purpose of locking or turning.The shafts or pole of a two-wheeled carriage areapplications of the lever both horizontally and vertically ;the former for the purpose of locking, the latter for thepurpose of supporting the weight at the proper level.The wheel and axis is applied both to two and four-wheeledcarriages, as the medium of progression on whichthe whole machine is supported. In four-wheeled carriagesthe perch-bolt is an application of the axis, as acentre around which the fore wheels and under frame turnthrough the medium of the pole's leverage.principal reason of their want of success is, that they are confined tonarrow roads, and have not an open surface, as sailing vessels have onthe ocean. But they could at best only serve as vehicles of amusement.In an age of certain power like steam, no business people will,if they can help it, trust to the uncertain power of wind. On someshort lines of railroad near the sea, the wind is commonly madeavailable to drive cars by means of sails attached to them, — t. e. whenthe wind happens to be favourable.AND MECHANICAL POWEES. 67The geometrical figures which enter into the compositionof a carriage are,The Plane,The Circle,The Ellipse,The Square,The Oblong,The Rhomboid,The Triangle,The Prism,The Cylinder,The Pyramid,The Cone,The Parallelogram.F 2CHAPTER IV.Materials of Wheel Carriages. Animal : — Hides. — Skins. — Hair.Wool.— Silk. — Glue. — Whalebone.— Ivory. — Pearl-shell. — Vegetable: — Timber.— Ash. — Beech. — Elm. — Oak. — Mahogany. —Cedar. — Deal. — Pine. — Fustic. — Lancewood. — Birch. — Chesnut.Sycamore. — Plane tree. — Cotton. — Flax. — Hemp. — Tow. —Straw. — Caoutchouc. — Copal. — Linseed Oil. — Turpentine. —Mineral : — Iron. — Steel. — Copper. — Brass. — White Brass. — Gun-metal.— Silver. — Gold. — lead. — tin. — Glass. — Metallic Oxides.The materials of which wheel carriages are composed,embrace the three great divisions of nature, called theanimal, the vegetable, and the mineral.The animal substances used in carriage building are,hides, skins, hair, wool, silk, glue, whalebone, ivory,pearl-shell.The vegetable substances used in carriage building are,timber of various kinds, — ash, beech, elm, oak, mahogany,cedar, deal, pine, fustic, lancewood, birch, cotton, flax,hemp, tow, straw, caoutchouc, copal, linseed oil, turpentine.The mineral substances used in carriage building are,iron, steel, copper, brass, white brass, gun-metal, silver,gold, lead, tin, glass, and various metallic oxides.Hides are used both for purposes of suspension andalso for coverings. The hides are those of horses andneat cattle, converted into leather by the action of oak andMATERIALS OF Wheel Carriages. 69other bark. They are afterwards smoothed and levelledby the currier; — being occasionally split into two equalthicknesses by means of an engine ; after which they arerendered pliable by the application of oil and tallow, andfinished to a clear black or brown colour, as they may berequired : this is called dressed leather. For some purposesthe hides are merely levelled, put on wet to the objectthey are intended to cover, and left to shrink anddry. Others, again, are covered with a coat of elastic japan,which gives them a surface like polished glass, impermeableto water : in this state they are called patent leather.In a more perfectly elastic mode of japanning which willpermit folding without cracking the surface, they are calledenamelled leather. They are usually black; but anycolour which is required can be given them. All thisjapanned leather has the japan annealed, something inthe same mode as glass. The hides are laid betweenblankets, and subjected to the heat of an oven at a particulartemperature during several hours.* Sole leatherhides are also used for some purposes.The skins are those of the sheep and goat. The formerare converted into leather by the action of oak bark. Inone form of dressing them they are known as basil leather,which is of a light brown colour and very soft. SometimesThe original inventor and patentee of this leather was a Frenchman.He lost his patent right, because in his specification he inadvertentlystated the heat of the oven according to the thermometricalscale of Reaumur without naming it. It was held that as Fahrenheitwas the English standard of the imo metrical heat, the ** degrees ^named must be taken by^at standard, in which case the specificationwas untrue.70 MATERIALS OFthey are blacked, and occasionally japanned, in the samemode AS horse and neafs leather. In all these forms^heep^d^ins are only used for inferior purposes, as merecoverings, where no strength is required. The probableorigin of the term basil is, that it was first manufacturedat the town of Basle in Switzerland, and thence importedinto England, ere it became a native manufacture.Goat-skins are the skins used for preparing the beautifulleather known by the names Spanish and Morocco.They are not tanned in oak bark like other leather, butvery slightly in an infusion of the bark of the sumachtree. They pass through many processes previous to thatof dyeing ; for which purpose they are sewn up with thegrain outwards, and blown with wind like a bladder. Thisis to prevent the dye from getting access to the flesh side.This beautiful leather was originally manufactured by theMoors, who afterwards introduced the process into Spain ;by which means it came to be known under the two names.The English manufacture ha been so much improved on,that few others can now vie with it. These skins are usedin carriages for inside linings.Hair is used as an article of stuffing. To give it thepeculiar curl which renders it elastic, it is forcibly twistedup in small locks, and in that state baked in an oven tofix it. The hair of horse's tails is the best, as being thestrongest and longest ; but various other kinds are used.Sometimes it is adulterated by mixing it with fibres of'whalebone. Doe hair is also much used as an article ofstuffing ; but as it is very short, it cannot be curled, andthere is very little elasticity in it.WHEEL Carriages. 71Wool in its natural state is not used for carriage purposes.In the form of *' flocks*" which are the short combingsand fibres produced in the process of manufacturingit, it is very largely used as stuffing. In a manufacturedstate great quantities are used for various articles : cloth,lace, fringe, carpeting, baize, serge, shalloon, binding,tufts, tassels, twist, occasionally plush.Silk is used in various fabrics, such as cabaret, velvet,cape, lutestring, damask, and various others, for insidelinings. It is also used for lace, fringe, embroidery, tassels,tufts, cord, twist, and lastly, for sewing.Glue is prepared by boiling down refuse gelatinous substances.Whalebone is used principally to fix to the under sidesof lancewood shafts, to reinforce them on account of theirextreme brittleness, just as archers' bows are formed of twopieces of wood, the more elastic and brittle being in the inneror concave side, and the toughest on the outer or convexside. These, however, are fastened by cement ; whereas thewhalebone is fastened to the shafts by means of bolts orscrews. Whalebone has also been applied to the purposeof making wheels ; but being an article of limited supply,the price rose so rapidly that the manufacture wasdiscontinued.Ivory is used for rollers, studs, and buttons ; and sometimesfor carving armorial bearings, crests, &c.Pearl-shell is used for similar purposes.The timber principally used in the construction of carriagesis that of the ash tree grown in England. Thereare two kinds of it, known as '* hedge-row '' and "coppice*"72 Materials OFThe former, as the name imports, grows in hedge-rowsand other open spots, and being exposed to the air andlight, is of slower growth, but much firmer, stronger, andtougher than that of the coppice, which spires up veryrapidly without the access of air and light, and is proportionablysoft, and not durable, though straighter grained.Ash timber brought from America is principally of thislatter quality, being grown in thick forests, which areremarkable for a moist atmosphere.* But the quality ofthe timber also depends much on the soil in which itgrows. Strong wheat lands are the best adapted to it. Forthe heavy framework much exposed to concussion, the timberis required in its greatest state of perfection, arrived atmaturity, but not at the extreme size it is capable of at-theforests of America of ancient growth, where they have beenuntouched by the axe of the settler, present a remarkable appearance.There is no growth of underwood, for the absence of free air and lightwill not permit it to spring up. No sound is heard on the ground,and all is hushed and still. The breeze penetrates not to the personof the traveller, and he can but hear its distant murmur as it rufflesthe lofty branches of the forest giants whose round naked stems boundhis vision on every side, like an endless columnar temple from which,at rare intervals, can be perceived a glimpse of the blue arching vault,as though from the mouth of a well. At first entering the forest fromthe sunshine the eyes are blinded for a while, for the only light is adim twilight. The earth is covered to a considerable depth with theundisturbed dust of decayed vegetation, and the footsteps are else unimpededsave by an occasional fallen trunk of an ancient tree, whichmostly crumbles to fragments at the touch. It is over this stratum offine vegetable dust that the Red Indian goes upon the trail '' of hisfoe, and hunts him to the death as surely by the sight as a bloodhounddoes by the scent. In such scenes, wearied with the gloom, the travelleralmost wishes that fire would consume it and give the heavensto his view; and when a stream intersects his line of march, he blesseshis happy chance that he can once more look on daylight.WHEEL CARRIAGES. 73training, for then it becomes of weaker texture, and is morefitted for such framework as, being removed from concussionby the intervention of springs, requires less strength.Ash is not, properly speaking, an elastic, but rather atough fibrous wood, very capable of altering its form bythe application of pressure, and therefore, when not inlargemasses, it requires iron plates to secure it. By boilingit becomes very plastic, and will take any requiredform, provided the thickness be not too great ; but thesoundness and durability of the wood is much lessenedunless care be taken not to overboil it. Wood consists offibres united by gluten. If boiled long enough, the glutenwould all dissolve and the fibres separate. Hot steam doesless mischief than hot water, because, as it does not makeBn infusion, it is less liable to carry off any of the gluten,which is the bond of union. — Some ash timber is white atthe heart, and some red : the white is usually the strongestand best. Some trees which have been grown on hill-sides,much exposed to constant winds, present a remarkablywrinkled appearance through their whole length, and it isscarcely possible to plane their timber smooth : this is thetoughest of all ash timber. Parts of ash trees are sometimesfound of a yellowish brown colour, accompanied by a fetidacid odour. This is occasionally attributed to the effectsof lightning; but the most probable solution of the matteris, a putrid fermentation of the sap takes place in consequenceof an imperfect process in drying. All other carrsubstances being equal, that timber is best which is cutdown when the circulation of the sap is slowest, as thepores are least open. In the process of drying, the meantMaterials OFseulement of the trees diminishes considerably. One of thequalities which render ash peculiarly valuable for carriagesis the absence of elasticity, and consequent indisposition toalt its form by its own internal efforts — that is say, it isnot liable to warp or twist. Though excellent for framing,ash is not well adapted for boards or planks in which muchwidth is required, as in drying it is apt to rend and open.It is also more expensive than other woods which are adapted for boards. The diameter of ash trees used bycarriage builders is som one foot to three feet six inches ;Int the latter is an unusual size. Altogether there areforty species of ash.Beech is a wood which ought never to be Used for carriages,or for any work which may be exposed alternatelyto air and moisture. It is, however, occasionally used bycarriage builders, and also by wheelwrights, on account ofits superior cheapness. It is extremely liable both to warpand to rot, and cannot be depended on ; but when coveredby water and kept constantly wet, it is durable.Elm is a wood largely used in carriages for plankingwhere strength is required. There are two kinds, — hedgesand wych or wick. The latter is an old Saxon namemeaning stream or streamlets-one of the tributary streamswhich run into main rivers, as Hampton Wick, Greenwich.The banks of such streamlets axe generally composedof soft alluvial land, and the timber growing on them ismostly large, soft, and straight-grained. Such is the characterof wych elm ; but though every timber-dealer professesto sell such, it is very rarely met with. Hedge-rowhelm composes almost the whole supply The diameter ofWHEEL Carriages. 75the trees is from one foot six inches to three feet six inches.The grain is curly and wavy, difficult to work, brittle,and apt to split, without care. It is not a good surface topaint on, as the grain shows through several coats of colour.The wych elm is more apt to split, but it forms agood surface for paint. Elm is used also for the naves ofwheels. It is not so expensive a wood as ash. There arefifteen species of elm.Oak is used in carriages for the spokes of wheels. Thebest kind are made of the timber of saplings, which are notsawn but rent in the direction of the grain, in halves or inquarters according to their size. Inferior spokes are alsomade som the limbs of large trees. Oak is also used inplank under the name of wainscot, for boxes. The numberof species is one hundred and forty.Mahogany is very largely used for the pannels of carriagesin such parts as are intended to show an even surfaceof paint. There are two kinds of mahogany, knownas '* Spanish " and " Honduras'' The former grows onmountains and on the sides of ravines, and its favouritesoil is where a profusion of limestone is found. In mostjos il, the pores will be found filled with a white powder,which destroys a cutting edge so rapidly, that cabinet-makersuse what is termed a tooth plane to work it ; i, e.the edge of the plane iron is composed of a number of sharppoints like the teeth of a saw. This kind of mahoganyis never used by carriage builders ; as the beautiful curledgrain which gives the effect of light and shade, so muchprized by cabinet-makers, renders it unfit for carriage pairnews, which in many quae require to be bent not merely in76 Materials OFa cylindrical, but also in a partially spherical form. Forthese purposes the Honduras wood is admirably adapted ; asit can be procured, if required, upwards of four feet in widthand perfectly straight-grained, and free from knots and blemishes.This timber is not all brought from the bay ofHonduras, although originally it came from thence. Manyparts of the Spanish Main abound with it. It is mostlyfound in low alluvial soil in the neighbourhood of riversand marshes where air and light are not very abundant :therefore it is that the colour presents a blanched appearancewhen compared with the Spanish kind. There areseveral qualities of mahogany sold under the name of Honduras: some of it is very solid though straight-grained, andsome very porous and curly, while other classes of thetimber are very open-grained and straight throughout.There are three species altogether ; one being found in theWest India Islands and America, and which in commercebecomes ^' Spanish " or " Honduras " according to its soiland locality. The other two species are natives of theEastern Indies.A coarse-grained species of cedar, of considerable width,which is brought from the same districts as the Hondurasmahogany, is sometimes used for carriage pannels which.are to be covered over with leather or other substance.Its extreme porosity renders it unfit to serve for a paintedsurface.Deal is very largely used for the flooring of carriages,and also for covered pannels, occasionally glued by theedges to get a sufficient breadth. The word " deal '"^ refersWHEEL CARRIAGES. 77merely to the form of the timber, and not to its quality.Deal means portion.The wide American pine is chiefly used in very thinboards to form the covered pannels and roofing of carriages.The hard yellow wood called fustic is occasionally usedto form the naves of wheels which are intended for hot climates,as they are not so subject to shrink as the woods ofEnglish growth. This wood is a native of the Isthmus ofPanama, of Brazil, and of the West India Islands. Itis a species of mulberry.Lancewood is a straight-grained elastic but highly brittlewood, brought from the West India Islands in the formof taper poles about twenty feet long, and from six to eightinches diameter at the largest end. This wood was formerlymuch used for shafts, but it is more disused of lateon account of the curved forms which have become fashionable.Lancewood can be bent into form by boiling ;but it is altogether a very unsafe material to trust to forso important an article as shafts, the breaking of which frequentlyoccasions the loss of life. The grain is yellow, andclose as box.American birch is a most valuable wood for flat boarding,inasmuch as it can be procured of great widths ; fromone foot to two feet six inches, and occasionally three feet.It is of a perfectly homogeneous substance, free from rents,and with scarcely a perceptible pore. It works easily withthe plane, and yields a beautifully smooth surface, whichdoes not show the smallest particle of grain beneath the78 MATERIALS OFmost delicate paint-work. It is even as stretched canvass.It is not very straight-grained ; but this is not important.The greatest defect is its brittleness, which will not admitof its being used for any but plane surfaces ; and thenmuch care is required in bolting, screwing, or nailing it.The price is not much higher than American pine. It isof the bade of this tree that the Indians of North Americamake their beautiful light canoes, which are merely sewntogether : some of them will carry twenty men, yet are solight that they may with facility be carried by two. Thetrees grow in alluvial soil with little air and light, and areprincipally cut down for the purpose of clearing land ; sothat it is to be feared, the time will come when they willbe much scarcer,— at least the larger trees. It would be avaluable kind of wood to introduce in England as a plantationtree.Of late, the great increase in the construction of carriagesfor railroads and other public uses has caused a scarcitytao be felt in the ordinary timber, and chesnut, sycamore,plane, trees, and other woods are now occasionally used.Cotton is used in the manufacture of carnage lace, as anunder body on which to weave the surface. But it is generallyconsidered an inferior material. It is also used forwaterproof material with India rubber.Flax and hemp are largely used in the form of sewing-thread,twine, cord, and rope ; and also for floor-cloth, linenand canvass, and the purposes of lace-making. Tow isgenerally used as stuffing where a more solid substancethan hair is required.Straw is used in small quantities for stuffing coachmen'sWHEEL CARRIAGES. 79seats exposed to the atmosphere ; also for stuffing the letthere parts of poles.Caoutchouc, or India rubber, is a most valuable article incarriage building where pliability and impermeability towater are required in conjunction. It is a gum preparedfrom the sap of trees, the growth of some parts of SouthernAmerica. It is also found in Ceylon. The AmericanIndians early discovered its valuable proprieties as a vehiclefor containing water. Their usual water-vessels weremade of gourds or calabashes, but which were liable tobreak with a fall ; a defect causing much inconvenience ona journey. When the caoutchouc gum was first used intheir stead, the Indians took for models the calabashes, togive form to their new inventions. The process was, tomould a lump of clay to the desired shape, and woundingthe tree, to suffer the sap to flow over it till the desiredthickness was attained. The sun's action rapidly hardenedit, and then the inner mould was washed out with water ;the result being an elastic bottle well adapted for carriage,and not capable of being broken. These bottles were firstbrought to Europe as articles of curiosity, and eventuallyas articles of commerce, when their utility as a rubber orcleanser was discovered. For a long period they were appliedto no other purpose, as chemistry had not furnishedthe means of dissolving and re-hardening them. Even whenthis difficulty was vanquished, the material still continuedfor a long period to be brought over in the form of bottles.Ultimately it was brought over in large squares, whichwere cut by a machine into thin slices, used for various purposes.The process was then discovered of dissolving the80 MATERIALS OFmaterial so that it would again harden to its former consistence.For making water-proof cloth, two thicknesses arerequired, either of woollen, linen, cotton, or silk. Thecaoutchouc is spread on one in its liquid state, and theother is pressed upon it by means of heat. The union isso perfect, that it requires very considerable force to separatethem afterwards ; and though the film of gum is exceedinglythin, it is both air and water tight. The nativesof Columbia had adapted this material to the preparationof water-proof cloaks long before it was so used in Europe ;and their cloaks are the most perfect, inasmuch as theyprepare them with the fresh gum from the tree, and notfrom an artificial solution. The gum after artificial solutionand re-hardening is never so tough as at first. In usingit as rubber, it is not so efficient, and wears away veryrapidly. Waterproof material prepared with caoutchouc,will not bear the contact of oil or grease without beingdestroyed. The cloaks used by travellers on horseback,are spoiled by coming in contact with the sweat of thehorse.Copal is a transparent resin of a faint yellow colour,brought from Southern America. All carriage varnish isprepared with it, as it is very tough and not easily crackedor worn.Linseed oil is used in the preparation of paint. It isextracted from the seed of the flax by expression.Turpentine is ia product of the fir tree, and is used withpaint in the form of a thin liquid in order to give it dryingproperties.The metal which is most abundantly used in carriageWHEEL CARRIAGES. 81building is iron. The consumption of it is enormous. Itis used in the cast form for the boxes of wheels ; and in thewrought form it is used in almost every possible shape,from the wheel tire, the axle, the crane, the bar, the stay,the hinge, the plate, the bolt, up to the most minute screwand nail. The quality most known and preferred is thatcalled, after its mark, " King and Queene'' *Steel is likewise a metal of great consumption for themanufacture of springs. It is not of a very fine quality;?• e. less carbon enters into its composition than into thatof the finer steels used for cutting implements, and clockand watch springs, cross-bows, &c. The spring-makersassert that steel of a finer quality would not answer sowell, as it would be more liable to break by concussion :but this is mere assertion, and not borne out by facts.Copper is much used for the preparation of beadingwhich covers joints, and is intended to be painted. It hasalso been occasionally used for panels.Brass, an alloy of copper, is used in innumerable ways ;as, beading, wheel hoops, plates, locks, rings, buckles, andfor other purposes, both useful and ornamental.White brass, another alloy of copper, is a materialwhich has lately come into use, known under variousThis iron is called " scrap iron* being prepared from the fragmentsof worn wrought iron collected in London and its neighbourhood.This is placed in furnaces, and welded in masses under a veryheavy tilt hammer, after which it is passed between rollers and convertedinto bars. This is a similar process to that by which old horse-nailsare converted into gun barrels. The intelligent proprietors ofthe King and Queen Iron Works at Rotherhithe would much benefitthe public by adapting their machinery to forge axletrees and similarironwork, at present imperfectly executed by hand labour, with a destructivewear of human life.G82 MATERIALS OF WHEEL CARRIAGES.names, as, albata, German silver, &c. It is now used incarriages to some extent, for ornamental purposes. Butneither white nor common brass can be used for purposesrequiring much strength. In such cases iron is used, andthe brass is plated on them in a thin sheet by means ofsolder.Gun-metal is another alloy of copper, which is used tomake axletree nuts, in preference to brass, as it is tougher,and not so liable to corrode with oil.Lead and tin are both used in the preparation of solder ;of which there is a large consumption, especially for fillingup the hollow parts of beading and chased work.Silver is largely used for ornamental plated work, andoccasionally as pure metal. Lamp reflectors are platedwith silver.Almost the only form in which gold enters into a carriageis that of leaf gold for the purposes of the heraldpainter.Glass is an item of considerable importance. Wherethe window frames are not divided by cross bars, it isnecessary to use plate glass for strength ; and its superiorbeauty, independent of other considerations, always securesit a preference, notwithstanding the extra expense. Forlamp glasses however it is not required, clear commonglass being sufficient. Cut glass has not hitherto beenused in carriages for ornamental work ; but it might so beused to great advantage.Almost all the metallic oxides capable of being used inpaint as colouring matters, are applied to carriages. Vegetablecolouring matter is rarely used, as it is liable tochange with the action of the atmospheric air and light.CHAPTER V.Analysis of Carriage Construction. Dennet. — Stanhope. — tilbury,Cabriolet. — Curricle. — Underspring Phaeton. — Coach. — Partsof Coach. — Carriage Body. — Equipage for Town and Country.The component parts of the simplest kind of two-wheeledspring carriage for one horse are,The wheels, the axle, the springs, the carriages whichconsists of the shafts connected together by cross bars, —the steps, and the body or sitting part, to which are attachedthe lamps.The body is composed of the framework, the jointedhood or head covered with leather, the lining, the cushions,the driving box, the dashing frame of iron coveredwith leather, to keep off the mud and dirt thrown up bythe heels of the horse, and the apron or knee boot.The Dennet and Stanhope are the existing specimensof this kind of vehicle.In the next class of two-wheeled spring vehicle for onehorse, pliable leathern braces are introduced between thesprings and the body of the vehicle. In this case, suspensionbrackets must be introduced. The Tilbury and theCabriolet are the existing specimens. In the former, aniron bracket like a double gibbet is allied on the hinderpart of the carriage, and two shorter ones are affixed forG 284 analysis ofward beneath the shafts. In the cabriolet, two iron bracketscalled loops are affixed to the hinder part of the body, tosuspend it by braces from the upright circular springs :forward, two small brackets are affixed beneath the shafts,to take two straight springs which are bolted to the body.In the two-wheeled vehicle for two horses called a Curricle,there are no shafts. The body is suspended in a similarmode to the cabriolet, on a frame consisting of twoside pieces and two cross bars at each end. A pole is insertedinto this frame, which passes between the horses andis suspended from a metal bar resting on their backs. Theprinciple of yoking therefore is precisely that of the classicchariot. When this vehicle stands without the horses, itis necessary to support the fore end with a rest, which isa light frame resembling ^ short ladder hinged on to thefore end.The simplest kind of four-wheeled spring vehicle forone horse is called an Underspring Phaeton. It consists of^ long deep-sided box, usually painted black, the fore endof which is fitted to a body resembling that of a bennet orstanhope, while the hinder one carries an open seat. Betweenthe hinder end of this box and the axle are secureda pair of double elliptic springs to give ease of motion.Beneath the fore end is secured a circular plate of ironand some strengthening framework. Beneath this is aframe called the under carriage, turning upon the perchbolt ; to this frame the fore springs and fore wheels areattached, and also the splinter bar and pole, in lieu of theshafts, when it is intended to draw with two horses insteadof one. A great variety of carriages are built on this sameCARRIAGE CONSTRUCTION. 85principle, the difference being in fond, and not in mechanicalconstruction.The next class of four-wheeled spring vehicle is that inwhich the body is connected with the under framework bypliable braces of leather attached to the springs. In thiscase, the framework which supports the fore and hindsprings is connected together by a long central piece oftimber plated with iron, called the perch. The fore framingis provided with a wheel plate, beneath which theunder carriage and fore wheels work or lock round theperch bolt, as before described. The springs are of a circularform, and placed in a vertical position. An ironperch called a crane neck is sometimes used instead of awooden one.The next class is an improvement on the last, by usingdouble sets of springs ; viz. horizontal springs placed immediatelyon the axles, to intercept the concussion of thewheels, and sustain the whole weight of both body andcarriage ; and also circular upright springs, to sustain thebody. For the purpose of procuring mere ease of motionto the passenger without regard to other considerations, noimprovement upon this mode of construction has yet beenbrought into use. The close carriages built upon this constructionare called Coaches and Chariots. Those madeto open occasionally are called Landaus and Landless.Those permanently open with a leathern hood or head arecalled Barouches and Barouche. A variety of this last arecalled Britzschkas.For an analysis of parts, the Coach may be selected inits most finished state, as the chief of every class, and from86 ANALYSIS OFwhich the constructors of pleasure carriages take their usualdesignation of " coach-makers'An Underspring Coach is usually so constructed that itmay serve as a town or travelling vehicle, by changingcertain equipments called technically ^' town and countryfiimiture/^ The component parts are theWheels,Axles,Under Springs and Dumb Irons ;Beds, or cross framing timbers, which are technicallycalled the fore axle bed, hind axle bed, forespring bed or transom, hind spring bed and hornbar;Perch, or central longitudinal timber ;Wings, which are spreading sides hooped to theperch and framed to the hind beds ;Hunters, or small framing pieces, which help to bindthe hind beds together ;Hooping Piece, — a piece of timber scarfed andhooped to the fore end of the perch to secureit to theWheel Plate, which is a circular iron cased withwood, bolted beneath the fore beds, and beneathwhich the under or fore carriage turns. The forecarriage consists of the fore axle beds, into whichare framed theFutchells, which are longitudinal timbers supportingtheSplinter-bar and thePole.CARRIAGE CONSTRUCTION. 87The hinder end of the futchells support theSway-bar, — a circular piece of timber working beneaththe wheel plate. A circular piece of timber ofsmaller size supported on the fore part of the fut-shellsfor a similar purpose is called theFelloe Piece,On the splinter-bar are fixed theRoller Bolts, for fastening the traces.On the pole is affixed thePole Hook, to secure the harness.The perch and beds are strengthened with ironplates where necessary ; and the other iron workconsists ofSplinter Bar Stays, to resist the action of thedraught. Formerly these were affixed to the endsof the axles, and called "wheel irons''Tread Steps, for the coachman to mount by;Footman Step ;Spring Stays.On the beds are placedBlocks to support theC Springs ; to which are attachedJacks, or small windlass, andLeathern Suspension Braces, which bind around theconvex surfaces of the springs.All the wood work is lightened in its appearance asmuch as possible by the introduction of carving and beading; and these parts constitute what is technically calledthe carriage ; i, e. the framing which supports the bodyor sitting part.88 ANALYSIS OFThe body is a species of box fitted with door and windows,and lined and wadded for the purpose of comfort.As the bottom is the part by which it is suspended, itis of course there that the greatest strength is necessary.The two side bottom timbers are bonded together by twocross timbers called bottom bars, which are firmly framedinto them. To give depth to the floor without destroyingthe symmetry of the side, deep pieces of elm plank arefixed to the inside of the side bottom pieces, and to thesethe flooring boards are nailed, being additionally securedby strap plates of hoop iron nailed beneath them. In thecentral portion of the bottom sides are framed the doorposts,called '' standing pillars'' At the angles of thebottom framework are scarfed the comer pillars. Thecross framing pieces which connect the pillars are calledrails. Two of these rails stretching across the body inside,between the door posts, are called seat rails, and serve tosupport the seats. To form the roof, arching timbers arelaid across from side to side. The doors are framed doubleto contain a hollow space for the glasses and blinds, andthey fasten with a wedge lock forced into a groove by a leverhandle. There ife one window in each door, and one infront : behind, there is a small light with a fixed glass.The doors of the best carriages are always hinged withsecret hinges, not showing on the exterior, — for which purposethey are made with a ranked lever working eccentricity.The panels are of mahogany, fitted into groovesand strengthened by batons. The roof is of thin pinecovered with japanned leather; and the bouge or swordcase, which projects behind, is formed in the same manner.CARRIAGE CONSTRUCTION. 89Bouge IS a Saxon word signifying, to bulge out, as an excrescence; which it in fact resembles, being originally anawkward contrivance to enable gentlemen riders to Stowaway their swords on a journey. The body when completeconsists ofThe Frame or Case,The Doors ;The Glasses, which are fixed in thin frames of wainscotcovered with cloth or black velvet ;The Blinds, which are sometimes panels and sometimesVenetian, so adjusted with springs that thebars may stand open at any required angle ;The Curtains, of silk, which slide up and down onspring rollers ;The Lining and Cushions, of cloth, morocco, silk,hair, lace, &c. The cushions are occasionallymade elastic by the addition of springs of coiledwire.The Loops, which are stays or brackets of iron boltedto the bottom, one at each comer, for the purposeof suspension to the springs ;The Check Brace Rings, to which are attached leathernbraces from the spring heads, to prevent thebody from swinging too far fore and aft ;The Collar Brace Rings, to which are attached leathernbraces from the perch to prevent the bodyfrom swinging too much upwards or sideways.The Steps, which are made to fold up and fill recessesin the doors when they are closed ;The Lamps, which are affixed to the upper part90 ANALYSIS OFof the fore end of the body, by means of ironstays.When the coach is intended for town use, there isaffixed on the fore beds aSalisbury-boot, which carries the coachman seat,hammer cloth, and foot board. This is consideredthe most perfect equipment ; but sometimes inlieu of it is used aCoach-box, which consists of a light open framefixed to the beds, carrying the seat and hammercloth, instead of the much heavier Salisbury-boot.But the coach-box does not harmonise so wellwith the general appearance of the carriage as theSalisbury-boot does.On the hinder beds are fixed two carved woodenblocks, which support the hind footboard. On thehind footboard is placed a frame covered with leatherand stuffed, for the convenience of standingfirm. This frame is adorned with carved woodenuprights and ornamental iron work, and the namegiven to it is Hind Standard. Its principal use isto fill up the hinder part of the carriage, whichwould otherwise look naked. At the back part ofthe body are attached theHolders, which serve for the servant to steady himselfby. They are merely strings of lace or webbingsecured by staples.When the coach is wanted for the purpose of travelling,the boot or coach-box with the coachman'^s seat is removed,and its place supplied by a box called a Platform-boot,Cabbage CONSTRUCTION. 91which carries luggage inside. On the top of the platforma trunk is fixed.The hind standard, footboard, and blocks, are also removedfrom the hind beds, and a Rumble, or boot with aseat for two servants, takes its place. Under the seat ofthis boot there is a luggage box. At the back part of thebody is fixed a large trunk called a Cap-case. Under theseats inside are two wainscot boxes ; and on the roof areone or two very large flat shallow trunks called Imperials.In addition to these. Wells or deep boxes are sometimesplaced beneath the bottom of the body, one on each side ofthe perch. A drag-staff, chain, and shoe, and tool budget,are also necessary appendages on a journey.The different items thus enumerated as forming parts ofa first-rate undertaking coach, with various alterations as toshape and form, enter into the composition of most four-wheeledcarriages. Some are occasionally omitted, and somefew others are occasionally added. The pole is of course appliedwhen the carriage is in use. It is fixed between thefutchells and secured with an iron pin. At the front end ofthe pole is affixed a double staple, to which the leathernstraps called pole pieces are attached, to hold the horses inaproper position, and prevent the carriage from overrunningthem when descending a hill.The foregoing notice of the different parts of a coachis merely the enumeration of their names. Many of themrequire an accurate analysis in order to make the readerunderstand their advantages and defects. Those partsare, the92 ANALYSIS OF CARRIAGE CONSTRUCTION.Wheels,Axles,Springs,Iron Work,Lamps.The simplest mode of treating them will be to takeeach subject separately, and analyse all that relates to it.CHAPTER VI.Wheels. Definition. — Solid Wheel. — Plank Wheel. — FramedWheel .r-Barrow Wheel. — Nave. — Spokes. — Felloes. — CylindricalWheel. — Conical Wheel. — Pyramidal Wheel. — Nave Hoops. —Strake Tyres. — Hoop Tyres. — Mode of Construction. — disadvantages.— Machine-made Wheels. — Solid Felloes. — Hancock'sWheels. — Tubular Spoked Iron Wheels. — Losh's Wrought IronWheels. — Jones's Pyramidal Iron Wheels. — weight of Wheels.— »Elasticity.A WHEEL for a locomotive vehicle is a circular roller,either cylindrical or conical, the width or thickness ofwhich is considerably less than its diameter. It may heeither solid, or constructed of various pieces ; in which lattercase it is called a framed wheel. It may also be madeof wood or metal, or of a combination of both.A solid wheel, such as is used still in countries wherethe arts have made little progress, is formed of a shortlength cut from the boll of a round tree. Solid wheels arealso made of cast metal.The simplest form of framed wheel is that made ofplanks set together side by side and crossed by otherplanks, the whole united by nails or prevails.The next form of framed wheels is when an exteriorcircle is formed of wooden segments on which planks arenailed.The next form is that in which two spokes at right94 CONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS.angles are made to pass through an axis, and segments ofa circle are framed on to their extremities. The commonbarrow wheel is a specimen of this class.The next form is when the wheel is composed of threedistinct parts, viz. the Nave, the Spokes, and the Felloes.The Nave in its simplest form is a short cylindricalblock of wood forming the centre of the wheel, and piercedlongitudinally with a conical hole to admit an axis.The Spokes are arms or radiating levers framed into thenave at equal distances to form a circle.The Felloes are circular segments framed on the extremitiesof the spokes, forming the tie or arc to them, andsecuring the whole together.The simplest form of this wheel is when the frameworkis made to form a plane surface, i. e. perfectly cylindrical.The next form is when the wheel is not a plane surface,but is dished or conical ; ie. the centre is made to fallback from the level of the felloes, so that the spokes forman angle with the central line of the nave.The next form is that in which the nave is made sufficientlylong that the spokes may stand at an angle with eachother, alternating both ways so as to render both surfacesof the wheel conical. A wheel in this form is the strongestthat can be made, as the centre or nave is the base ofa pyramid of which the felloes form the apex. But thoughthis wheel will support a very heavy load, it cannot bearmuch concussion, owing to its want of elasticity.Wheels which were made before the introduction of ironwere of course very clumsy in their construction, in orderto give strength. Specimens of them may still be seen inConstruction OF WHEELS. 95the broad wheels of waggons, technically termed rollers.The naves of these wheels are of enormous size. Butwhen the naves of wheels were reduced for the purposes ofelegance, a thin hoop of iron was applied both to the frontand back, to prevent them from bursting by the strain ofthe spokes. When the felloes also were reduced in size,straps of iron called strakes or streaks were applied to theirconvex surfaces, covering the joints. But the last improvementwas the most important of all, viz. the applicationof what is called a "hoop tire '^ instead of a ** straketire :" i, c. the tire forms a solid hoop which is put on thewheel warm, and as it shrinks in cooling, forces the wholeof the framing together into a firm body.It will be as well now to describe the process of constructingthe best wheels in use ; such, for example, as areused to the coach before treated of.The form of wheel which is now generally preferred inpractice is of the dished or conical kind. When in use, theaxle arm is slanted so far downwards from the horizontal line,that the lower spokes may be always in a vertical position.By this means the friction is undoubtedly increased, inasmuchas a wheel on a horizontal axle runs the easiest andlightest. When the axle arm is slanted downwards towardsthe point, the wheel has a tendency to bind harder againstthe shoulder, and the rubbing surfaces are thus increased inextent. But there are several advantages to set against thisdisadvantage. The collar or shoulder of the axle is firm andsolid. The nuts or lynch pins, which prevent the wheelsfrom coming off, are much inferior in solidity. Consequentlythere is an advantage in throwing a greater stnlin on the96 CONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS.shoulder collar than on the nut, because it is better ableto bear it ; and moreover, in case of the nuts or lynch pinsgiving way, there is not so much risk of the wheel comingoff, as its tendency when on a level road is to run upwardstowards the shoulder. Besides this, as the lower spokesare in a vertical position, the upper ones spread considerablyoutwards, and thus afford a greater space for the bodybetween the wheels, without the track on the ground beingincreased. The last advantage is, that the mud collectedby the conical wheels is thrown off from the carriage.The hind wheels of a coach such as before describedvary in height from four feet three inches to four feet eightinches ; the fore wheels are from three feet four to three feetdight. The number of felloes in the circumference variesaccording to the number of the spokes, two spokes beinginserted in each felloe. Fourteen spokes are the usualnumber to a hind wheel of ordinary size ; twelve to a forewheel. When the nave of elm wood has been turned toits size in the lathe, it is marked for the spoke vortices,and firmly fixed at a convenient height at such an anglewith the horizon as corresponds to the intended dish of thewheel. Two holes are then bored in each mortise in succession,after which they are squared out with proper chisels.Truth of eye and skill of hand are the workmen'sonly guide in this operation ; though it is evident that itis the most important operation of the whole, as upon itdepend the accuracy and solidity of the wheel when finished.The tenons of the spokes, — which are portions of dryrent oaken saplings, — are then cut to fit the mortices, parallelin their thickness and slightly wedging in theirwidth. The other parts of the spokes are only partiallyCONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS. 97prepared. Every alternate spoke is then driven by blowsof a maul, the workman guiding it as well as he can inaproper direction till it abuts upon the shoulder. Butit is evident that the position which each spoke will takeis by no means certain. The spokes are driven verytight, and wood, not being of a homogeneous texture,will yield more in one part than another: and themortise, cut as it is by sleight of hand, must be uncertain.Every alternate spoke being driven, the remainder arethen driven in between them in the same manner. Afterthis, the spokes are finished to their proper form ; and thelengths being measured from the nave, the outer tenons arecut to a cylindrical form, leaving the back shoulder square,to abut on the felloe with more firmness. The back ofthe spoke is rounded to a semicircular form in nearlyits whole length behind ; in front it is worked to aknife-edge, for the sake of a light appearance. Thefelloes are then fitted on the spokes, and jointed together.Holes are then bored in the ends of the felloes, and asmall piece of wood, called a dowel, is inserted, whichserves as a tenon to connect them together. The felloesbeing then driven home, wedges are inserted in the ends,of the spokes to keep all firm. After this, the tire, weldedinto a solid hoop, is heated and put on. As it shrinksin cooling, the wheel cracks and compresses beneath theforce. Iron pins are then driven through tire and felloe,one on each side of every joint, the points being rivetedinside the felloe upon a small round plate of iron called aburr.The result of this mode of making a wheel is, thatH98 CONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS.it is very imperfect when finished. Scarcely any twowheels are alike. Scarcely any spokes in a wheel radiatealike ; some are apart an inch more than others ; andas the shrinking of the tire varies, some wheels, as a consequence,get more dish than others, the spokes eithercompressing in the nave vortices, or yielding elasticallyin their length. To get them at all accurate, it is necessaryto employ very skilful workmen ; and as veryskilful workmen are not very numerous, the cost of wheelsis very much increased, beyond similar work in otherbranches. Another disadvantage attends them : a workmanmay put his work badly together, and there is nomeans of detecting it except in practice, A badly-framedwheel may show as well to the eye as a goodone, and until it breaks down, no one, neither the masterwheeler nor his customer, can detect the inaccuracy.Unless th master watches every wheel while the spokesare driving, he can only depend on the good faith of hisworkman.There is no remedy for this evil except substitutingmachines for men's hands. The machine, if it cuts trueonce, will cut true always. Every piece of wood in awheel ought to be shaped by machinery. The felloesshould be sawn to their exact size, curve, and length,by machine saws ; they should be bored by machineaugers, and rounded by machine shavers. The spokesshould be tended by machine saws, and shaped by machinelathes. The naves should be turned by a machinelathe, and the vortices cut by a machine chisel : andthe spokes should not be driven by the irregular strokesCONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS. 99of a maul, but be forced into their places by the regularpressure of a machine. And when the tire isput on, the wheel should be fixed in a frame, in orderto preserve an exact size and shape. And when allthese things are done, we may hope to procure woodenwheels alike in form and quality, and, moreover, accuratelycircular, — which wheels at present are far frombeing. All the machines should be worked by a steam-engine.That wheels continue to be made by hand inEngland, is a somewhat remarkable thing, after the blockmachinery has existed so many years at Portsmouth. Thereis scarcely any article of manufacture for which there isso large a demand, and there is no variation in theirmode of construction. It may, perhaps, be alleged thatit would be cruel to turn wheelwrights out of employmentby machinery ; but such would not be the fact. Theunusual cheapness of wheels would cause more to be used ;and the probability is, that people would cease to repairold wheels ; and thus the total number of workmen wouldrather be increased than diminished.It seems, at first sight, a paradox to assert that a conicalor dished wheel is stronger than an upright or planeone. To say that any body will stand firmer in a slantingposition than in a vertical one, is a manifest untruth.The fact is, the advantage arises from the solid hooptire : with a strake tire, the upright wheel would be thestrongest. When running, the great lateral strain on thewheel is from the outside. Consequently, if the wheelbe dished in an opposite direction, the thrust will be inthe direction of the greatest resistance. The spokes can2100 CONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS.not yield, because in yielding they increase the area oftheir circle ; and this the hoop tire will not permit. Uponthe same principle in carpentry which constitutes greaterstrength in the cumbered or crooked beam than in thestraight one, the dished wheel is stronger than the uprightone.When the tire is shrunk on the felloes, the spokes areforced somewhat into an arching form, and consequentlyhave a tendency to regain their natural position. As thewheel revolves in use, the tire by the process of constantconcussion is elongated as by hammering on ans anvil ;or the wood beneath it is compressed, which producesthe same result. As the circle increases the spokes becomemore upright, and loosen in their vortices withthe jarring. It is then necessary to take off the tire,and shorten it by the process called technically, " cuttingand shutting ;**' when the spokes are forced backio their original position at the expense of leaving gapingorifices between the tenons and vortices at the backof the nave. Water gets in there ; and thus the wheelbecomes rickety, and must at last be replaced by a newone.These known defects in wheels have given rise to manyattempts at improvement. Amongst others, wheels weremade with the felloes in an entire piece. Straight grainedash was selected of the requisite length and thickness,which by the process of boiling was softened and bentinto a circle. It was imagined that this gave greaterstrength than the separate felloes ; but such was not thefact. Wood is a substance consisting of fibres laid sideCONSTRUCTION QF WHEELS. 101by side, and adhering together by means of a naturalglue. If the wood were boiled long enough, the gluewould all boil out, and the fibres would separate. It isevident, therefore, that the strength of wood must occasionallybe materially injured by injudicious boiling. Inaddition to this, it was a difficult thing to get the felloeinto its place in a single piece ; and to repair a wheelthus made, was wholly impracticable, unless by cuttingaway as much of the felloe as might be equivalent to theextent of the damage.Attempts were subsequently made to form the felloesin two segments of boiled timber; but there was noadvantage in it, and the plan was at length altogetherabandoned.During the process of experiments in the art of constructingsteam carriages for common roads, the defects ofordinary wheels have been found to be a chief impediment.To obviate this, Mr. Hancock, one of the competitors inthis branch of art, constructed a wheel of a novel but veryefficient form. He abandoned the nave altogether ; andinstead of cutting the ends of the spokes into the form oftenons, he formed them into a series of wedges fitting eachother, and forming a barrel arch, the ends abutting on theaxle-tree box. Two circular flange plates were then appliedlaterally, and a screw bolt passed from one to anotherthrough the end of each spoke Thus is constructeda very simple and exceedingly strong wheel ; althoughthe centre, from its large size, looks somewhat unsightly.But it might be reduced, and the wheel advantageouslyadapted to ordinary vehicles where very rapid102 CONSTEUCTION OF WHEELS.motion is not required, on account of the facilities it affordsfor the use of improved axle boxes, containing an abundantsupply of oil.When railroads were first brought into use as a modeof rapid locomotion, it was soon found that wooden wheelswere not capable of bearing the work required of them athigh velocities. Iron wheels, cast in a single piece each,were then tried, but were found to break down. Wroughtiron tires were then applied to them ; but though an improvementin the mode of construction, still the expenseby breaking down was very great. A method was thendevised of making the arms or spokes of drawn iron tubes,flattened to an oval form, which were laid in the moulds,and the centres and peripheries cast upon them. A wroughtiron tire being then applied, the wheels were found tostand the work required of them tolerably well ; and nobetter railway wheels have yet been produced, except thoseof Mr. Losh, of Benton House, who bends wrought ironbars into a triangular form, and then placing a sufficientnumber in a circle with their ends meeting in the centre,casts a solid axle box on them to unite them altogether.The outer sides, which form segments of a circle, abuttingagainst each other, are then clipped with a grooved tire,which is shrunk on hot ; and thus is formed a rigidwheel of perhaps the strongest form which art can accomplish.The wheels of railway carriages are always upright,and the great velocity used is the cause of their requiringso much extra strength. Every irregularity, everyslight blow is multiplied in its effects with a compoundCONSTEUCTION OF WHEELS. lOSforce. Small pieces of gravel are felt as though it werea pavement of rough stones ; an inequality of less thanone quarter of an inch in the level of a rail joint is feltlike a plunge into a deep hole, or an ascent over a formidableobstacle.Impressed with the disadvantages attendant upon theuse of wooden wheels, Mr. Theodore Jones projected awheel made entirely of iron, and constructed with considerableingenuity. The cast iron nave is of considerablelength, and the round iron rods which serve as spokesare inserted at either end alternately; thus forming apyramidal wheel, the apex of which is at the circumference,and the base at the nave. The spokes are fixed intothe nave with a screw-nut, and the extremities are rivetedthrough the iron rim or circumference : for thisreason the proprietor called it a suspension wheel. Theoriginal wheels were made with plain rings of cast iron,which were found to fail, and consequently the proprietorreplaced them by rims of rolled iron with a rib in thecentre.Ingenious as these wheels are in their mode of construction,they have not been found to answer all the expectationsof the proprietor. For heavy carriages with a slowmotion they are well adapted ; but when they are requiredto be light, and are used with a rapid movement,the spokes are found to become very loose, and apt occasionallyto break short off at the nave. Attempts havebeen latterly made to save them from concussion by attachingthe axle to double elliptic springs, for lightcarts; but the expense must be considerably increased104 Construction OF WHEELS.by it. It is clear that elasticity is a necessary ingredientto ensure durability in wheels ; and this is a naturaladvantage in wooden wheels over iron ones.Wheels were at one time constructed for the street cabrioletson Mr. Jones's principle, retaining the cast ironcentre, and substituting wooden spokes and wooden felloesinstead of iron ones. A much lighter though clumsy-lookingwheel was thus produced, and in reality a strongerone, inasmuch as the vibration resulting from the elasticityof wood is better adapted to resist shocks. But,notwithstanding, they have gone out of use.Weight in wheels is a matter of less importance thanin other parts of a vehicle, inasmuch as the amount ofaxle friction is scarcely at all increased by it. Wheelsmay be too light as well as too heavy. If there be a greatweight resting on the axles, the wheels should have aproportional weight, or the carriage would have more tendencyto overset. But of course, though the amount ofaxle friction would differ little with heavy wheels or lightones, very heavy wheels would require more draught power,inasmuch as they would add to the total weight of thevehicle, increasing thereby the amount of inertia. Ingoing up hill this disadvantage would always remain ;but on level ground, when a sufficient amount of velocitywere attained, the weight in the wheels wouldhave something the same effect as the fly wheel of anengine. But in practice the extra weight would mostlybe found to act on the disadvantageous side, at leastin vehicles moved by animal power.Elasticity is important in wheels, both to increaseCONSTRUCTION OF WHEELS. 105their general durability and to promote the ease of thetraveller. Some years ago, a Mr. Hancock inventeda wheel the spokes of which were made of whalebone.The aptness to split in this material was a considerabledifficulty ; but a still greater was the limited supplyof the material, which rose so rapidly in price, that itbecame necessary to abandon the project. To invent,plan, and bring to bear anything new, as an articleof manufacture, requires much consideration. It is necessary,first of all, that it be not too costly ; next, that itbe generally useful ; and lastly, that it be not constructedof a rapidly-exhausting material.Most persons familiar with the wear of wheels musthave remarked that the difference of durability in differentsets of apparently the same construction is verygreat, — nay, that some sets of light wheels will last longerunder the same weights and speeds than those which axeapparently stronger. The reason of it is simply to befound in the relative degrees of elasticity. A well-madewheel properly tired will be found on examination, to havethe backs of the spokes rounding, and the wheel, insteadof being conical, will be dome-shaped. It willbe an elastic dome; and the more the spokes are thusrounded, — provided the elasticity of the timber be notinjured, — the greater will be the durability of the wheel,as it will contain within itself a power to evade the mischievouseffects of concussion.CHAPTER VII.Axles. Wooden . — CoDicsd. — Iron.— Cylindrical.— Common Bar.Fs^a^ted. — Sizes.— Lubrication. — Soap. — Black-lead. — Grease.Oil. — Common Axles with Inch-pins, — Screw Nuts. — MailAxles. — Defects.— CoUinge's Patent Axle. — Process of Oiling. —Defects. — Mason's Improved CoUinge Axle. — various projects forAxles. — Essential particulars necessary to the perfection of Axles.An axle, or axle-tree, for a locomotive wheel vehicle, isthat portion of wood or metal, or both combined, whichserves as an axis or centre for the wheels to turn round on.The name axle-<r€c at once indicates the substance originallyemployed for it — viz. wood. Axle-trees are oftwo kinds ; those which are fixed firmly in the wheels andrevolve in gudgeons beneath the vehicle, and those on whicheach wheel revolves separately. The former, as being therudest, were probably the earliest used. The earliest fixedaxle-trees were simply pieces of hard timber with the endsrounded down into a conical form, that form being theeasiest to fit to the wheel. Subsequently they were platedwith iron to resist wear.In the earliest iron axles, the conical form was still preserved,for the obvious reason of easy adjustment to thewheel. These iron axles were not made in a single piece,but were merely short ends bedded in, and bolted to aAXLES. 107wooden centre Examples of these axles may still be seenin heavy carts and waggons.The next improvement was to make axles of a single barof iron ; and this practice has now become common. Anaxle is technically divided into three parts ; — the two armsand the bed, or that portion which connects the arms together.The commonest axles, which are manufactured forthe sake of superior cheapness, are formed of a square bar,simply rolled to its shape between mill rollers. This ironis uncertain in its quality, as it is liable to have sand cracks,blisters, and other imperfections, which cause axle-treesmade from it to break down with concussion. To guardagainst this, the best axle-trees are formed of several flatbars of iron welded together in a mass, which process istechnically called ^' faggoting'' The size is regulated bythe weight they are intended to carry. For a very heavycoach, from two inches to two inches and a quarter indiameter, and ten to eleven inches long in the arm, is anappropriate size. For light carriages, both four and two-wheeled,an inch and a half in diameter, and eight incheslength in the arm, is a common size ; and occasionally someare made as small as an inch and a quarter in diameter.It must be borne in mind, that a much less size would bearthe weight, were the axles stationary, as in mill work ; butfor locomotive vehicles it is necessary to provide againstthe greatest concussion they can meet with in ordinaryapplication.When iron axles were first used, it was customary todrive an iron ring or hoop two or three inches broad intoeither end of the nave, to prevent the too rapid wear. This108 AXLES.plan is still occasionally used in heavy cart$ ; but otherwiseaxles are always fitted with iron boxes adjusted to thearms with more or less accuracy, according to the price, andthe material used for lubrication. For the prevention offriction in wooden axles, soap or black-lead are the bestmaterials ; for common coarse axles, a thick unctuousgrease is the best adapted ; but for axles which axe accuratelymade and fitted to the boxes, there is no lubricatingmaterial equal to oil of the purest kind which can be prepared,t. c. the freest from mucilage or gelatine, accordingas it may be of vegetable or animal production.The commonest axles now used are of a conical form,with a box of plate iron fitted to them. This box is madeby welding the two edges of the iron together in a broadprojecting seam, which helps to secure it in the nave. Theinside of the box is sunk into hollows, for the purpose ofholding the lubricating grease. At the upper end of thearm the axle is left square, and against this a broad ironwasher is usually shrunk on hot. Against this washer thebox works. To secure the wheel against coming off, asmall iron collar is placed on the reduced outer end ofthe arm, and a inch-pin is driven through, the arm beyondit.An improvement on this kind of axle is when the collarat the upper end or shoulder is made solid by welding, anda screw-nut with a inch-pin through it is substituted forthe collar and inch-pin. These nuts are commonly madesix-sided, with a mortise or slot for the inch-pin througheach side, in order to afford a greater facility for adjustment.In all other particulars this axle is the same as the last.AXLES. 109except that occasionally it is case-hardened to prevent wearand friction.In travelling, these axles require to be fresh greasedevery two or three days ; and the trouble thus caused isvery considerable, besides the risk of omission, in whichcase the axle is likely to be entirely spoiled.The other axles in common use are lubricated withoil.The commonest kind of oil axle is called the " mailsbecause the peculiar mode of fastening was first used in themail coaches. The arm is not conical, but cylindrical, inthe improved kind. At the shoulder of this axle a soliddisk collar is welded on for the box to work against. Behindthis shoulder collar revolves a circular flange plate ofwrought iron, pierced with three holes corresponding withholes in the nave of the wheel from front to back, throughwhich long screw-bolts are driven, and their nuts screwedsufficiently tight against the circular flange plate, to alloweasy motion. The wheel, when in motion, thus worksround the shoulder collar, while the flange plate secures itagainst coming off. This is not neat or accurate, but it issimple and secure, and no nut or inch-pin is required tothe axle in front, while the front of the nave can be entirelycovered in. When screwed up for work, a washer of thickleather is placed between the shoulder collar and the box,and another between the shoulder collar and the circulardisk which extends over the whole surface of the back ofthe nave. The. box of this axle is of cast iron. Thefront is closed by a plate of metal, between which and theend of the axle arm an inch of space is left, as a reservoir for110 AXLES.oil, which is poured in through a tube passing throughthe nave of the wheel, and closed by a screw-pin. At theback of the box there is a circular reservoir for oil, three-fourthsof an inch in depth and half an inch in width.When the wheel is in motion, the revolving of the boxwashes up the oil and gradually pumps it away from thefront to the back reservoir, and all which is above the levelof the leakage point — the bottom of the arm at the shoulder— gradually drips away. The oil in the back reservoir,being below the level of the leakage point, does not di*appear so rapidly while the axle is in good order ; but afterno great length of time, by rain or the process of washing,the large leathern washer gets saturated with water, whichby compression finds its way into the reservoir, and thenof course the oil floats off by reason .of its specific lightness.In short, the mail axle is very imperfect, and cannotbe trusted without frequent examination when it hasmuch work to do: but as it is neat in appearance,tolerably secure against accidents, and not very expensive,it is much used. Both arm and box are case-hardened.The other kind of oil axle is that known to carriagebuilders as " Collinge's Patent." The original intentionof the inventor was to make it a cylindrical arm, withthe box running round it against a coned shoulder, andsecured by a coned nut in front : but as it is found inpractice that a leathern washer is necessary at the shoulderto prevent jarring, this part of the plan was abandoned.The axle as at present constructed consists of a cylindricalarm, with a broad shoulder collar. The box is of castAXLES. Illiron, and the back of it is like the mail before described.The front of it has a rebate cut in the box to receive asmall conical collar and the screw of an oil cap. The armof the axle is turned down in the lathe to two-thirds ofthe total thickness, from the point where the rebate of thebox begins; A flat side is filed on this reduced portion,and along it is made to slide a small collar of gun-metal,with a conical face in the interior to fit against the conedinterior of the rebate in the box. Against this collar,technically called the " collet,'*'' a nut of gun-metal isscrewed ; and against that again, a second nut of smallersize, with a reversed thread, is tightly fixed. These twonuts thus screwed in different directions become as firm onthe arm as though they were soldered there, and no actionof the wheel can loosen them, because the collet, which doesnot turn, removes all friction from them. But, as a furthersecurity, the end of the axle arm projects beyond thefurthest nut, and is drilled to receive a spring inch-pin.Over all, a hollow cap of gun-metal containing a supply ofoil, is screwed into the end of the box.When the wheel is in motion, the oil is pumped upwardsfrom the cap and passes along the arm to the back reservoir,constantly revolving round the cap with the wheel. If thecap be filled too full of oil, — that is, if the summit of thecolumn of oil in the cap be at a horizontal level above theleakage point at the shoulder, — it will pump away rapidlyand be wasted till it comes to the level of the leak, wherethe remainder will be economically used. It is essentialto the perfection of an oil action that the oil should not be112 AXLES.permanently above the level of the leak, but that smallportions of it should be continually washing up into thatposition by the action of the wheel in turning.In order to ensure their greater durability and greaterfreedom from friction, these axles and their boxes arealways case-hardened ; u e. their rubbing surfaces are convertedinto steel to a trifling depth by the process of cementationwith animal charcoal, for the space of an houror two, when they are plunged into water. The boxesare ground on to the arms with oil and emery ; either endbeing applied alternately, a nearly true cylindrical fit isaccomplished.The mode in which oil acts as a lessened of friction isby its being composed of an infinite number of moveableglobules, over which the fixed surfaces of the arm and boxroll without the abrasion or adhesion which would ensue ifthey came into actual contact. But this saving of the abrasionof the arm can of course only be accomplished bythe destruction of the oil. This gives us one rule for guidance; viz. the greater the mass of the oil, the better andlonger will the axle run. The bearing surface of the axlealso should be sufficiently distant from the surface of thebox to permit a film of oil between them ; and it should besufficiently extended so that the superincumbent weightmay not press out the oil from beneath it and thus causean actual contact of rubbing surfaces. This considerationwill sufficiently determine the size of axles. In a well-madeCoUinge axle, a wheel of three feet six inches in diameter,running on an arm of sufficient size, will travel five thousandmiles without getting dry. A highly-polished surfaceAxles. 113is important in an axle and box, inasmuch as the bearingis thereby flatter and truer. A rough surface is a surfaceof salient angles, which would pierce through the filmof oil and produce contact.But, perfect as these axles are, they are not securedagainst dangers arising from carelessness. The fit of theaxle being so close, if by any chance the two surfaces arerubbed together without oil for a short time, heat is elicited,and the axle sticks fast in the box, the two surfacesuniting partially together. To guard against this as muchas possible, the arm of the axle is reduced in thickness atthe centre, for about an inch in length, to allow a lodgementfor the oil. But in the process of work, as the wheelbox revolves round the arm, it constitutes a circular pumpwhich gradually draws up the oil from the front cap. Ifthe thicker of a pump be allowed to get dry it fails to drawup the water ; and just such is the case with the wheel. If,from carelessness, the wheel be put on with the box andarm dry, the capillary attraction of the oil from the capwill not take place, and when the wheel is in motion themetal will heat, and the wheel stick fast.Another danger arising from carelessness is the introductionof grit into the box. The two surfaces being veryhard of course it requires some substance still harder tocut into them. In practice this commonly consists of particlesof silex, which, cutting into the opposing surfaceskeys them firmly together, so that it is frequently necessaryto break the box in pieces to get it off the arm.To remedy these defects, a patent was taken out by aMr. Mason for a plan of casting three longitudinal trials114 AXLES.gulax grooves in each box. The advantages thus gainedare, that if grit gets in, it finds its way to the bottom ofthe grooves, and does not interfere with the action of thewheel ; and moreover, the grooves keep a constant surface ofoil in actual contact with the arm, instead of trusting tothe mere capillary attraction. Nor is the bearing surfacealtered by it, for the circular sinking round the arm inCollinge'^s plan is of about the same superficies as that ofthe grooves on Mason^s plan.The number of plans which have been devised, and patentstaken out for improvements in axles, is almost innumerable; yet none have hitherto come into verjr generaluse save those enumerated. Mr. Hancock'^s plan for hiswedge wheel is a deep circular chamber, open all round tothe arm and cast in one piece with the box : it will containa large supply of oil. The plan of Mr. Jones, in hisiron wheels, is to cast a semicircular hollow round his boxopen to the arm all round, and fed with oil by a thumbscrewfrom the exterior. Friction rollers have been tried,set in the box all round the arm, with oil contained in thehollows between them. The box has been sunk into flutedhollows, presenting only minute convex surfaces to thefriction, and the interstices containing oil. Loose barrelshave also been applied between the box and the arm, andthe arm has been made a hollow cylinder.— But none ofthese contrivances are comparable to the CoUinge axlewith the grooved boxes. Some of them fail from want ofsufficient bearing surface, and others from difficulty ofmanufacturing, or extraordinary expense.AXLES. 115To the perfection of an axle several considerations arenecessary : —That there be sufficient bearing surface for the arm torest on ;That the box be of a convenient shape for insertion inthe wheel ;That as large a body of oil as possible be kept in actualcontact with the arm hy washing up as the wheelrevolves ;That the column of oil may in no case be above the horizontallevel of the leakage point while the wheel is atrest.The possibility of accomplishing more than has yetbeen done as regards these objects will be treated of in aseparate chapter on improvements ; but all carriage keepers,nay all cart keepers who understand the principles of economy— not the false economy of mere low price at the outset,but that true economy which takes into the calculationall that bears on the subject — will, as a matter of course,prefer purchasing the best made axles on Collinge's principle,— with grooved boxes, — to any other at present in use.The mere saving in oil or grease is almost motive sufficient,saying nothing of the labour and risk of takingwheels on and off frequently. And more than all this isthe risk attending neglect of that which should be performedat very frequent intervals in mail and commonaxles, viz. the oiling or greasing. If the wheel runs dry,the axle gets damaged, and perhaps breaks suddenly ; andthis is a matter ordinarily left to the care of servants.It is sometimes objected to CoUinge's axles, that if any1%116 AXLES.accident happens to them — such as a wheel sticking fast inthe country, or on the Continent, their complication rendersit a difficult matter to put them to rights. But this objectionis not of much force ; for, if necessary, common boxesfor grease may be applied to them as easily as to anyothers.CHAPTER VIII.Springs.— Various Substances used for them. — Leather. — Whalebone.— Wood . — Metal. — Spring Steel. — Construction. — Defects. —Elasticity. — Varieties of Springs. — Simple and Combined Forms.Straight Spring. — Elliptic Spring. — Regular Curved SpringsSpiral Spring. — Examples. — Combinations of Springs. — Breakageof Springs. — Essential Qualities of a perfect Spring.Sings, in locomotive vehicles, are the elastic substancesinterposed between the wheels and the passengersor load, in order to intercept the concussion caused bythe wheels revolving on an uneven surface.Many substances may be used for this purpose ; as,thongs and straps of green hide, leather, catgut, hempencord, caoutchouc, horn, whalebone, elastic wood, and metal.These may be used either separately, or in combinationone with another. Elastic atmospheric air, orgases, might also be employed for a similar purpose.In English carriages, the only materials actually employedfor elastic purposes are leather, whalebone, wood,and metal. — Leather is used for suspension in the form ofslings and braces. Whalebone is used to strengthen theunder sides of lancewood shafts. Wood is used insteadof metal, in the form of springs, in light one-horse vehicles,in order to avoid the tax to which spring vehiclesare subject. But what is technically understood in carriagesby the term " springs*' is a plate or plates of temptsSprings.pere steel properly shaped to play in any requiredmode.*The earliest springs were probably formed of a singlepiece of steel ; a mode of construction exceedingly defective,and liable to accident where there is no provisionto limit its action. And in the mode in which thebodies of carriages are usually suspended, there is no provisionfor the rebound — as is the case with a bow, whosestring restrains it by the ends — sand a violent concussionwould break a single plated spring. Experience in thisThe word Steel is probably more variously suggestive to thetints and imaginations both of the learned and unlearned than anyword in the English language. It is associated with the poet's lore,the artist's inspiration, and the artisan's toil. It calls up hosts ofideas, as valuable to the imaginative writer as is the metal itself forthe innumerable uses to which it is applied in the actual existingworld. It brings the Iliad and Odyssey before us, and paintsthe gleaming axe-like weapons that flashed at Marathon and Thermopylae,and the nodding plumes and stem features of the warriorswho wielded them, piling up hecatombs of their invading foes.And old Rome, too, comes before us, with her cohorts, and the manynations through which they hewed their way ; and our wild Celtic ancestorsarise, with their chariots, and the '' sharp scythes fastened totheir axle-trees ;" and Ragnar Lodbrog, and the Vikings haunt ourcoasts once more, ringing their weapons, and deifying their fabricatorsin their Runic rhymes and wild war-songs. And the hall of Odin isdimly seen, and the gnomes of the mountains of the North are flittingbefore us with their enchanted blades, whose edges no earthly materialmight resist. The steel rings of the ancient ^' hauberk's twisted mail"are clinking, and the plated war-suits are clanging to the tramp ofbarbed steeds'' and the dints of the quarries from the cross-bowsare heard: and William Tell starts up once more, and Highlandclaymores flash amidst "dirks and steel-wrought pistols," and** busy armourers closing rivets up ;" and old Andrea of FerraraTurtles it again in his bravery, with oue of his exquisite blades twistedround his bonnet to sustain a plume, and another girdled round hisSPRINGS. 119matter probably first led to the construction of springs ofmore than one plate, leaving their ends free to play againsteach other, and describe arcs, each upon its own centre,when in motion.Springs for carriages are formed of a peculiar steel, ofcoarse quality, and into which little carbon enters : it isprepared expressly for this purpose. It is pretended bythe spring-makers, that better steel would not answer thepurpose ; but this is not the fact. The secret is, that theexpense of material being greater, they fear the profit ofthe workmanship would be reduced ; and moreover, thewaist to upbear the hilted weapon by his side. And the surnamedblades of Don Quixote's heroes, and "swords of Spain, the ice-brook'stemper," and " Spanish blades," and " real Toledo," and the blood-dyedkhanjar of " Anastatius'* turned Moslem, and Mahratta tuhl-wars, and Malay creases, and the fearful two-edged weapons of thetrue Indian Wootz, and Damascus scymetars, and Sblingen blades,and the " Spanish Armoury," and London curiosity shops, and WalterScott's library and armoury and novels, and Rose's Antiquities, andmultitudes of old traditions and portions of history, crowd before usin an ever-moving picture, which, were the hands as nimble as thebrain, might furnish many galleries of paintings. And then there havebeen secret springs to drawers, and desks, and carved oaken chests,and sliding panels, wherein steel has wrought the works of mystery.Nor has it less aided to give form to human imaginations of beauty.It served for the chisels of Phidias and Praxiteles ; and while we littleheed the clear ring of the modem trowel on coarse bricks, we may notforget that the same metal fashioned the marble columns and thefreezes of the Parthenon, and cut the dies which have been the meansof handing down to us coins and medals, in many cases the truestrecords of the periods in which they were wrought. Nor, while thesteel anvil rings with the blows of the sturdy strikers who fashion ourmodem anchors, can we restrain our imaginations from wandering overthe vast deep with the gallant ship to which the ponderous hook is tobe the emblem and means of safety. And this again, calls to thewriter's memory a beautiful poem which appeared in Blackwood's120 Springs.workmen would be obliged to train themselves anew towork a different material from what their had previouslybeen accustomed to. But it is not certain that a higherpriced steel would increase the cost price of the springs ;for a better quality of metal would be found probably moreefficient and in that case a smaller quantity would suffice,thus making up for the increase of price. It must seemto every reasoner a paradox to assert that inferior metal ismore efficient than the best, when, for cross bows, whichhave to sustain a severer trial than any to which coachsprings are opposed, the best shear steel is used.The steel used by coach-smiths is prepared by rolling-millsto any thickness and width required. The narrowestis about an inch and a half in width ; the broadest,about three inches. The thinnest is about one-eighthof an inch; the thickest, about three-eighths to halfan inch.A spring may be of two kinds, — double or single : i. e.tapering in one direction from end to end, or tapering in twoMagazine on the subject of forging an anchor,— one of the most vividpieces of written painting he remembers ever to have seen. In theolder ages, when brute force obtained the mastery over mind, steel wasalike the instrument and emblem of j90ti;er, and the two-edged pointedsword, still borne by our statues of Justice, is a remnant of the oldenfeeling. A blind figure wounding on all sides, might be consonantto the old practice of making laws merely instruments of vengeance,but does not well represent the modern feeling, fast gaining ground,that laws should simply aim at restraint and correction. The preciousmetals, and the paper which represents them, are the modernemblems of power ; but the real power resides, as of old, in steel.Steel digs the gold and the silver from the debris and from the hardheart of the mountain ; and steel cuts the metal from which the paperis engraved. It were well, Were it never applied to worse uses.SPRINGS. 121opposite directions from a common centre, as in a commoncrossbow. A spring composed of several plates, is hoopedtogether with an iron hoop shrunk on hot, and rivetedthrough at the point of fulcrum, whether it be double orsingle. The plate which forms the back of the springis generally made thicker than the others, for two reasons :first, that the bolt-eyes are generally formed in it, forthe purpose of suspension ; and next, that it is thelongest plate. In carpentry it is found that the longerthe beam, the greater must be the thickness, and a givenproportion between length and thickness is maintainedthroughout. The spring-makers recognise this principle intheir longest plate, but they do not keep it up throughout; for though the longest plate is thicker than the rest,all the others are mostly alike in thickness, though theirlength gradually diminishes.The process of making a straight double spring of fouror more plates to cross an axle at right angles is asfollows : —The back plate being cut to the proper length, theends are slightly tapered in the direction of their thickness,by the hammer, and curled round a mandrilof the size of the suspension bolt. The side which fitsagainst the other plates is then technically " middle :^^t. c. it is hollowed by hammering so that the centre maybesunk below the edges. The next plate is then cutas long nearly as the first, and the ends are tapereddown ; after which it is " middle' on both sides. A slitis then cut at each end, about an inch in length andone quarter of an inch wide, in which a rivet head is122 Sabines.to slide and connect it with the first plate ; so that whicheverway the force or weight may act, these two platessustain each other. At a little distance from this rivet,a stud is formed upon the under surface by a punch,which forces out a protuberance, sliding in a slit in thenext plate ; by which contrivance all the plates are retainedparallel while they work. The next plate is preparedin precisely the same manner, with the exceptionthat it is from three to four inches shorter at either end ;and so on with as many plates as the spring may happento consist of. The last one, like the first, is only"middle" on one side.The plates being all prepared to shape, they are heatedto the requisite degree by drawing them through a hollowfire ; when they are plunged into water. This is calledtechnically " hardening"" They are then drawn throughthe fire again, the workman occasionally rubbing a piece ofstick over their surface till every part is of equal heat andwill kindle the stick to a blaze. This is technically called*' tempering". After this, the warps which the plates mayhave received in hardening are set straight by blows of ahammer; the workman taking care to have the platesslightly warm while doing it, to avoid the risk of breaking.This is technically called " setting." The platesare then filed in all parts exposed to view ; a. c. the edgesand points of the middle plates, the top and edges of theback plate, and the top and edges of the shortest plate.They are then put together, a square hoop is shrunk onhot, and a rivet being passed through it connecting all theplates with it, the spring is complete. After this modeSPRINGS. 1^3all carriage springs are made, whether they be straight orcircular, double or single, the only difference being thatthe circular spring requires more setting.It is evident that the whole process of spring-making isdefective. In the first place, the plates should be taperedfrom the hoop to the points ; which they are not, but merelyat the points. In the next place, the plates should bear flaton each other throughout their width ; which they do not,and being thinner in the middle than at the edges, theyare more likely to break. In the next place, not beingtempered in a large fire with a measured and accurate degreeof heat, but depending entirely on the eye and skillof the workman, it is evident that they must be liable toinaccuracy. *' Setting ^^ also is partial breakage ; t. e. thefibres are unduly strained.Small articles, such as gunlock springs, are heated afterhardening till they will blaze tallow or oil ; and they arekept at this heat upwards of an hour, to ensure accuracy.Saw blades are tempered as accurately as watch or clocksprings ; and coach springs will not be perfect till similarmodes shall be resorted to. The spring plates ought to befirst forged, truly tapered, then "sets and ground to levelsurfaces, then tempered as sword blades are done.The mode in which springs are at present constructedensures their quick destruction. It is evident that the** middling' process produces a large hollow space betweenevery two plates. Into these recesses the rain or thewashing water finds its way, and forms a magazine of rust,eating away the hardened surface, in which most of the elasticityof the plates resides. The elasticity of a spring plateUtiSPRINGS.somewhat resembles the elasticity of a common cane, whichresides in the silex or hard covering. This silex beingremoved, the cane becomes non-elastic, and capable of permanentlyaltering its form. A similar process it is whichcauses old springs to become soft and devoid of elasticity.*The appearance of rust oozing out at the edges, which isthe case with all springs, is very unsightly. To preventthis, some builders require their spring-makers to paint theinner sides of the plates before putting together ; but thisis of little avail : it serves to impede the, free action ofthe springs while it lasts, and soon getting partially rubbedoff, rust is at fill liberty to work the work of decomposition.A far better plan would be, to cleanse the surfaceof the plates by means of acid, and then tin them all over :the process would not be very expensive. It has frequentlybeen remarked that carriage springs in action yieldmore in wet weather than in dry. This may be very easilyaccounted for. The plates act by rubbing against eachother's surfaces. In dry weather there is much friction byreason of the rust ; but when the rain gets in between theplates, it serves to lubricate them.The names given to carriage springs are numerous ; butthe simple forms are few, the greater part of the varietiesbeing combinations of the simple ones. The simple formsare, — the straight spring, either single or double, — the ellipticformed spring, either single or double, — the regularcurved spring, either single or double, — the reverse curvedspring, either single or double, and the spiral spring.The mere polishing the blue colour off a watch spring is sufficientto destroy its perfect action.SPRINGS. 125Examples of the straight spring may be found in themodem Phaeton, the Tilbury, and in the Curricle pole,where it is suspended from the steel bar over the horses'backs. The technical name is " Single Elbow Springs*'Examples of the double straight spring may be found inmosttwo-wheeled carriages, where it is fixed across theaxle at right angles. It is also used in the Omnibus, theStage-coach, the Cabriolet, Dennet, Stanhope, Tilbury, andmany other vehicles. The technical name is " Double ElbowSprings*' A similar spring of one plate is also usedas a splinter for horses to draw from.The elliptic spring is used single, in what are called un-desiringcarriages, where the spring rests on the axle,and is connected with the frame-work by means of a dumbor imitation spring so as to form a double or completeellipse. This is technically called an '' Under Spring."When four of these springs are hinged together in pairsso as to form perfect ellipses, they form four springs allworking together. They are used principally for four-wheeledcarriages without perches. Eight springs or fourellipses constitute a set. The technical name is " NutcrackerSpring""The regular curved single spring is in form generally,two-thirds of a circle lengthened out into a tangent, whichserves as a base to fix it by, in an upright position. Aleathern brace is suspended from it to carry the body orweight. Its general figure has caused it to acquire thetechnical name of " C Spring''The regular double curved spring is now rarely used. Itsform is three-fourths of a circle, fixed with the open space126 SPRINGS.upwards, a leathern brace being suspended from the twopoints to carry the body or weight between them. Thisspring is of double weight without any corresponding advantage,and i<> get sufficient length for play, requires anusually long carriage. The technical name is " DoubleC Spring."Examples of the single reverse-curved spring may befound in the old-fashioned Phaeton fore springs, in the foresprings of the Tilbury, and also of the Cabriolet. Theywere also used formerly as " body springs to fix to thebody in lieu of suspension brackets or loops. Ere CSprings were used, they were applied as upright springs toCoaehei^ and Chariots, under the technical name of ^^SSprings ;" in which case, leathern braces were attached tothem, and they were supported by a brac^i.or buttress ofiron called the « Spring Stays*' The <* Whip Spring,"which succeeded theol, and has yet only been partiallysuperseded by the C Spring, was used in the same way.The hind springs of Mr. Russeirs steam carriage are theonly example of the double reversed curve, fixed by thecentre, and acting in opposite directions.The examples of the spiral spring in old-fashioned carriagesare found interposed between the leathern braces,serving as a sort of elastic bracket to keep them apart, sothat they lengthen and shorten in the working. The otherexample is in the spring cushions of modem carriages.Both these springs are alike defective, on two accounts.In the first place, the brace spiral, instead of being cylindricalin form, was a double cone, largest at the centre; andnext, being screwed firmly at the ends by screws, it couldnot play without straining the metal. The cushion springSPRINGS. 1^also is a double cone, with the smallest part in the middle.These are also fastened between two frames covered withstrained canvass, to which the ends are firmly sewed, andconsequently they cannot act without straining the metal.These springs are not made of steel wire, which is foundto break, but of iron wire, which, owing to its toughness,will bear the strain of its metal for a long time withoutbreaking. But the ultimate consequence is, that after aperiod they require to be renewed.To understand the principle on which a spiral springacts, we must imagine it stretched out into a straight line.If it were then suspended by the centre, the two ends wouldplay freely beneath weights placed on them adapted totheir strength. But if the spring were suspended firmlyby the two ends at fixed points, and the same weight wereplaced in the centre, it would not play at all. If sufficientweight were added, and concussion employed, it wouldbreak down. When the straight rod is turned into a spiral,its mode of action is not altered ; it continues to act inthe direction of its length, though that length is laid in acoil. It is therefore of as much importance that the ezkdBof a spiral should be left &ee^ as the ends of a mightspring; and if they be fixed and sufficient spine, supplied,they mast break. And it is not sufficient ^tSat^ the endsbe free to ensure a perfect action : the spiral should beregular and of a cylindrical form, or the strain would notbe on all parts alike. The child's spiral spring-gun is afiuniliar illustration of the mode in which this spring canbest act.The combinations of springs used in carriages to whichtechnical names have been given are eight in number :128 SPRINGS.The Nutcracker,Telegraph,Old Phaeton,Tilbury,Modem Phaeton or Mail,Dennet,Cabriolet,Underspring with dumb iron.Nutcracker Springs, as before described, are a combinationof ellipses.Telegraph Springs are a combination of straight springs,eight in number when used for four-wheeled carriages, fourat each end. Two springs are fixed longitudinally on theframework, and two transverse ones are suspended fromthem by shackles : on the latter the weight rests. Fromthe small space they occupy, they are constantly used instage-coaches. They are not easy without a great weighton them ; but they have the advantage that the body isthus placed two removes from the concussion. The two-wheeledcarriage called a Stanhope is suspended on four ofthese springs.The old Phaeton was an example of the combination ofthe upright C, or S, or whip springs, with leathern bracesbehind, and two pairs of single elbow or reverse-curvedsprings before. In this carriage there are six springsaltogether.The Tilbury Springs are a combination of two singleelbow springs attached to the body, suspended by leathernbraces to a straight transverse spring behind. In front,two single elbow springs attached to the body serve toSPRINGS. 129suspend it from tl^e shafts by a short leathern brace. Inaddition to these springs, double elbow springs are sometimesinterposed between the axle and the shafts. In thiscase, seven springs are used. This mode of hanging isunscientific, inconvenient, and unsightly, besides possessingconsiderable extra weight.The modem Phaeton Springs are a combination of theTilbury and Telegraph springs, the hinder part being suspendedlike the hind part of a Tilbury, and the fore partlike a stage-coach. Seven springs are used in it.The Dennet Springs are a combination of three straightsprings, two of them being placed across an axle at rightangles, and the third suspended from them by shacklesbehind. The shafts are attached to the fore part of thesprings, as in the street Cabs.The Cabriolet Springs are a combination of C springsbehind, with leathern braces, and two reverse-curvedsprings suspended from the shafts before. Two doubleelbow springs are also interposed between the shafts andthe axle. This is altogether very heavy, owing to thesize of the springs.The Under-spring Carriage Springs are a combinationof C springs and leathern braces above the framing, andsingle elliptic springs and dumb irons upon the axlesbeneath it.The last combination is the most effective which hasyet been discovered for producing the minimum of concussionor motion to the passengers ; but the weight is soconsiderable, that of late many persons prefer to have carriagessuspended on the double elliptic springs alone.K130 SPRINGS.When carriages were first used, roads and pavementswere so rough, that long leathern braces attached to uprightsprings were the only available means of avoiding concussion; but Macadamisation in modem times has contrivedto make streets and roads as level as bowling greens, sothat the elliptic springs are now nearly as easy as springsand braces formerly were. The modem circular spring,with its long brace, yields a universal motion before, behind,upwards, downwards, and sideways ; and therefore,weight apart, it is the best. Elliptic springs only delianup and down motion. Telegraph springs, by means ofthe swinging shackles which connect them together, haveto a small extent a universal motion ; but elbow springs,like the double elliptic, are confined to a vertical action.The C spring and long brace is the best for the rider,but not so well for the horse ; for although an elastic carriageof equal weight with a non-elastic one is fer the easiestto draw, still that is when the elasticity does not causemuch momentum, as is the case when a heavy body swingsloosely on leather braces.It has been remarked that accidents fix)m breakagerarely occur in C springs, but frequently in elliptic anddouble elbow springs. And moreover, these accidents, contraryto apparent probability, happen more commonly withlight carriages than with heavy ones. The reason, however,is an obvious one. The elliptic and elbow springsare firmly bolted both to the axle and the framework.Their strength lies in the direction of the downward pressure,and a heavy framework always keeps them to theirwork in that direction. But light carriages, after a violentSPRINGS. 131concussion downwards, experience as violent a reboundupwards, when all the weight is thrown on one or at mosttwo plates, instead of the whole, and of course the liabilityto break is increased. To diminish this chance as muchas possible, these springs are in the best carriages notbolted through their substance, but fixed with clips,which avoid the necessity for drilling holes in them. Theclips are however very unsightly, and a better mode is, todrill them and screw the nuts down on a strong short plateequivalent to the casual strain. Sometimes these springsbreak because the end hinge bolt holes are not truly bored.But carriages will not be perfect till springs shall be devised,which without causing niomQntum, shall yield auniversal motion, acting at the same time by suspensionand also by pressure; resisting an upward pr lateral reboundas well as a downward concussion, and capable ofadjustment to light and heavy weights. When a wheelrevolves, the obstacles it encounters communicate a shockin the direction of the length of the carriage, as well asupwards and diagonally.The combinations of springs most commonly used havebeen described ; but out of the simple forms a great numberof changes of combinations may be devised.K 21S2CHAPTER IX.Iron-work. Cranes. — Perch Plates. — Loops. — Stays.— Plates. —Hoops. — Clips. — Bolts. — Steps. — Treads. — joints. — Shackles. —Jacks. — Qualities of Iron. — Plated Work. — Beading. — Lamps. —Dress Lamps. — Wax Candles. — Oil Lamps for travelling. — garlandLamps. — Cochrane's Patent Lamps. — Principles of Combustion.In addition to the axles and springs, a large quantityof expensive iron-work is used in carriages ; the principalcause of which expense is not the material, but the highlyskilled labour which is necessary in preparing it.The most expensive articles are iron Perches or cranes ;the use of which is to allow the fore wheels to turn beneaththem, to gain space in narrow streets. But such weightyand unsightly encumbrances are no longer necessary, asroads and streets are now made wide enough for convenience,unlike the mere lanes and bridle-paths of formerdays.The articles next in expense are the long broadplates riveted to perches on either side, to prevent themfrom breaking by the strain of an unequal surface ofground, as the curved form of the perch cuts the grainof the timber across and disposes it to break with facility.These plates being exposed to view, as forming a conspicuousline in the carriage, are necessarily very nicelyIRON-WORK. 18Sinwrought. Another plate, of rougher construction, is boltedto the bottom of the perch.The article next in expense is the Wheel Plate, or circulariron on which the fore carriage turns. This alsorequires very accurate workmanship.The Loops, which serve to suspend the body, requireexceeding good workmanship, for they are curved in manyopposite directions, are tapered, and irregularly formedevery way, yet requiring to have bearing bolts accuratelyadjusted, and sundry contrivances for affixing iron-work tothem, and all this without a single straight side for themaker to work from. They are samples of great mechanicalskill and dexterity of hand.Other carriage iron-work generally is divided into Stays,Plates, Hoops, Clips, Bolts, Steps, Treads, Joints,Shackles, Jacks.Stays, are iron brackets of various forms, bolted bytheir extremities to such parts as they are intended tosustain, without bearing throughout their whole length.Plates, are irons which bear throughout their lengthand breadth on the part they are intended to strengthen,and to which they are fastened by bolts, screws, or rivets.Hoops, are flat straps of iron riveted or welded togetherfor the purpose of securing timbers together sideby side.Clips, are a kind of open hoops, the ends of which areformed into screw bolts to take nuts. The object they areused for is to screw springs and axles in their places withoutthe necessity of drilling holes through their substance.Bolts, are cylindrical pieces of iron of various sizes,134 IRON-WORK.one end of which is flattened out to form a head, andthe other is formed into a screw to receive a nut. Theuse to which they are applied, is to secure the iron-workand heavy framework.Steps may be single, double, or treble. In the twolatter cases, they are called folding steps, and maybemade to shut inside the body or outside. Outside,they are frequently very unsightly ; and if they be wellmanaged, they do not incommode the sitters inside.Treads, are small single steps a few inches square, fixedfor the most part on a single iron stem.Joints, are jointed iron stays made in the form of theletter S, and serve to keep the leathern heads or hoodsof open carriages stretched firmly out, when shade orshelter is required.Shackles, are iron staples which serve to receive thefeather suspension braces on the springs, and also tocouple springs together.Jacks, are small windlass which serve to receive theends of the leathern suspension braces after passing aroundthe backs of the springs. By means of a wrench or winchhandle, the jack may be wound up or let down so asto shorten or lengthen the brace.The variety of small articles of iron work used in carriageswould occupy a catalogue merely to enumerate,and they are not of material importance enough to dwellupon, more especially as many of them are used in otherbranches of art as well as carriage building. The greatestimprovement in minor articles for carriages which hastaken place of late years is in the door hinges, which,IRON-WORK. 135instead of projecting from the panel, and giving admissionto water, and being exposed to rust and rot, as formerly,are now entirely concealed beneath the surfaceby being made to turn upon excentric centres. Yet,strange to say, these hinges were invented many years beforethey were brought into use ; and this was owing partlyto the inaccuracy of their construction, and partly to thesldll it was necessary for the workmen to acquire, in orderto ensure their accurate insertion. They, however, requirevery large timber framing to insert them in.For the security of carriage iron-work, two qualities arerequired in the metal, — toughness and rigidity. If itbe not tough and fibrous, it will snap short ; and if it benot rigid, great additional thickness, and consequentlyweight, will be required to prevent it from bending. Forthis reason it would be advantageous to use spring-steelin lieu of iron, for many portions of the work, and especiallythe plates, as its superior rigidity would enable thework to be executed with greater lightness, and the lesseramount of weight would partly compensate for the differencein value of the material.Two modes are resorted to in order to secure the ironand steel work of carriages from rusting ; viz. coveringtheir surfaces with paint, or with metal not subject torust. Steel springs are always painted ; though therewould be no difficulty in plating them — and it wouldbe a far better mode of securing them a-gainst rust, forthose to. whom expense were not an objection. Carriageiron-work is always plated when it is wished to makeit ornamental ; — in which case it is first covered with a136 IRON-WORK.coat of tin laid on by means of a soldering iron withrosin and a small portion of sal-ammoniac, which promotesunion between the two metals. The tin being smoothed,a portion of silver or brass rolled exceedingly thin is laidon, and by means of the soldering iron it is made toadhere to the tin ; more of the silver is then added tojoin the first by the edges, till the whole surface is covered.It is then burnished and polished by means of proper tools.All articles of iron requiring to be covered with silverare treated in the same way ; small articles of ornamentin brass, which do not require strength, are cutin solid metal, as it is cheaper by the saving in labour ;but for heavy articles, the weight of metal would muchenhance the price, supposing strength not to be required.Wheel-nave hoops, axle-tree caps, loops, brace buckles,check rings, and door handles, are covered with brass orsilver in highly-ornamented carriages ; in ordinary ones,the loops and wheel-nave hoops are painted.The beading which is used to cover seams and joints,is of three kinds : brass, copper, and plated copper. Itis formed of stripes of rolled metal drawn into a semicircularor angular form by means of a die, the hollow spacebeing filled with solder, into which small pins of pointedwire are fixed to attach it by. The brass beading ispolished; the copper is painted, for which purpose thesurface is roughened. As the quantity of beading usedis very considerable, the labour of silvering by means ofa soldering iron would be too great, and therefore theplated or silvered beading is prepared from metal silveredin the sheet. The process is very simple : — A bar ofLAMPS. 137copper being made flat, a bar of silver of the requisitesize is united to it by heat. They are then passedthrough the rolls together, and occasionally annealed inthe fire till the requisite thickness is attained, the twometals spreading equally. This kind of metal is muchused in the manufacture of carriage lamps.Several kinds of Lamps are used in carriages, both asregards principle of construction, as well as form and ornament.In the simplest kind, the light is furnished by thecombustion of wax candles, which are contained in tintubes, through a hole in the upper part of which the wickpasses, the candle being pressed upwards as fast as it consumes,by a spiral spring. In what are called dress carriages,when the lamps are very ornamental, the sidesbeing composed principally of glass, wax candles are alwaysused on account of their superior cleanliness, thoughtheir light is inferior to oil.Lamps used for the purpose of travelling are mostly usedwith oil. Indeed, the proper meaning of the word lamp is,& vehicle in which oil may be burnt by means of a wick.But amongst carriage constructors, what is commonly understoodby a lamp is, the frame and glass which shelters thelight from the weather, without regard to the light itself:this is, properly speaking, the lanthorn or guard. Dresslamps are of a circular form; but travelling lamps aresquare, and so contrived with slides or shutters, that theymay be blind by day for the greater security of the glass,and only show their interior by night. The lamp itself iscommonly a round wick of the most ordinary kind, thoughsometimes flat for the sake of spreading the flame. Re-138 LAMPS.electors of many kinds are used in every variety of carriagelamps, formed of silvered metal highly burnished.Attempts have been made to use the Argand lamp witha current of air through the wick, but hitherto withoutsufficient success to bring them into general use, as it isfound that they are liable to be suddenly extinguished byviolent draughts of wind. There is, however, little doubtthat this will ultimately be accomplished, when the philosophicalprinciples of combustion and the regulation ofthe draught shall be better understood. There are, however,some difficulties to be overcome.By a common lamp, is understood one that feeds thewick with oil by capillary attraction, the column of oilbeing below the level of the flame. An Argand lamp, onthe contrary, has a column of oil considerably above thelevel of the flame, and constantly pressing upwards to itlike a fountain. The motion of a carriage has a tendencyo make the oil at times flow too rapidly, and extinguishthe flame, and sometimes also to cause too sudden a gushof air up the central tube, which blows away the flamefrom the wick. And when these difficulties are overcomeby ingenuity, the lamps become too complicated for theskill of the generality of servants into whose charge theyare committed. This is the greatest difficulty of all ; but,fortunately, it is one which will be overcome with the progressof time. The light yielded by the Argand lamp is soinfinitely superior to that of candles, or any other lightsave gas, that it is now universally used in houses by allwho can afford it, and of course the skill to trim it mustexist within the walls of dwellings. To transfer thisLAMPS. 189skill to the stable and coach-house cannot be a matter ofinsurmountable difficulty.The principle of constructing an Argand lamp so thatit may regulate its own air-draught, is set forth by LordCochrane in one of his patents. It is to divide the lampinto three chambers ;— one in the centre which containsthe reflectors and light, surrounded by the chimney glass,and having a communication with the other two. A chamberabove this receives the top of the chimney glass,and is pierced with holes at the sides to permit the egressof the heated air and the ingress of the atmosphericair. From this chamber a tube or tubes communicatewith the lower chamber, into which the air-tube of theburner descends, and thus furnishes a regulated supply ofair. It is evident that by this process the air rushing inmust be regulated by the air rushing out, and vice versa.The flame of a lamp is not produced by oil or tallowalone ; it requires the oxygen of the atmosphere to minglewith it. Without a supply of oxygen it would be extinguished; and herein consists the advantage of the Argandlamp in furnishing atmospheric air in the centre of a flame.The flame arising from a thick wick, either round or flat,is hollow ; i. e. it is a film of light like a bladder, and notcontinuous, the inner portion of the bladder being filledwith gas.It is well known that if the flames of two candles bebrought in contact, they will produce a greater intensityof light than if they be burned separately. Upon thisprinciple what are technically termed '' cobblers' candles **'are made. For the same reason, lamps arc sometimes made140 LAMPS.to burn two or three wicks, placed just so far apart thatthe flames may come in contact. This is an approximationto the Argand principle, by admitting air between them.But there is one difficulty attending them, viz. the recurhating the wicks all to an equal height, which would beconsiderable, unless the lamp were so contrived that allcould be regulated by one movement. If this difficultyshould be overcome, a very excellent lamp might be madeby placing four wicks in a square.It is too early yet to look forward to the time whenportable gas will be burnt in carriage lamps, at least foranything but town use. But the time will come whengas will be kept at inns as an article of consumption fortravellers, as commonly as axle oil or grease.CHAPTER X.Construction of a Carriage. Length. — Height of Wheels. — Dishingof Wheels. — Axle Arms. — Springs. — Lock of Front Wheels. —Splinters Bar. — timber. — Construction of a Body. — Paintings— trimming. — Carriage Frame work and Iron-work. —Leathern Braces. — Hanging the Body. — Dress Carriage. — Seat andHammer-cloth.— Hind Standard. — Open and Close Carriages.In commencing the construction of a carriage there areseveral points to consider : — first, the purpose to which itlis to be applied ; and next, the amount of power which is tobe applied to draw it ; — in other words, the size and strengthof the horses. It is a generally-received opinion, that theshorter the carriage, the lighter it will run. In surmountingthe angle of a ridge, this is undoubtedly the case ; buton a straight hill side or on level ground, a long carriageand a short one must be alike in friction, provided thetotal amount of weight and all other circumstances beequally balanced.The next consideration is the height of the wheels. Onlevel ground, a horse will draw a vehicle with the greatestfacility when the centre of the wheel is a trifle lower thanthe point of draught, viz. the point where the traces areaffixed to the collar ; but this in practice would be foundinconvenient, inasmuch as a rider would be unable to enterthe vehicle save from behind, and moreover the height of142 CONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE.the axle would necessitate a corresponding and inconvenientheight in the riders seat. For this reason, the total heightof the wheels of two wheeled vehicles is usually made tovary from three feet to four feet six inches. It must beborne in mind, that a low wheel on a very level road, — arail-road, for example, — may be more efficient than a higherwheel on a rough and uneven road. But on the same roadand with an equal load, the high wheel is that which requiresthe smallest amount of power to turn it.It would be a desirable thing that the wheels of four-wheeledcarriages should all be of equal height, in orderthat the friction and power might be equal ; but this isprevented by the existing mode of construction, which hasprescribed one only mode of making the lock or turn. Itis evident, therefore, that the height of the fore wheels mustbe regulated by the height at which the body hangs, so thatthe wheel may pass beneath it without striking when thesprings play. In practice, this height varies from two feetto three feet eight inches, according to the kind of carriagethe wheels are intended for. The hind wheels vary fromthree feet to four feet eight inches.The next point is the dishing of the wheel, which is necessaryfor the four purposes of — strength— to take the strainoff the nuts, — also to throw off the mud, and prevent itfrom clogging either the wheel or body, — and also to givegreater space between the wheels upwards, while the track isnot increased. Whatever be the amount of the dishing orconing, which varies from an inch and a half up to two inchesand a half, one rule should always be adhered to ; viz. tomake the lower spokes vertical with the horizontal plane,CONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE. 143both in the fore and hind wheels. The axles being thenmade both of a length, the hind wheels —-if coned at thesame angle — will follow in the track of the fore ones.Long practice has verified the theory that a cylindricalarm will carry a wheel with less friction than a conical one ;yet there are persons who from the dished form of thewheel extract the semblance of an argument in favour of aconical arm. A horizontal axle, it is clear, runs with lessfriction than one which dips ; but with a dished wheel it isnecessary to have a pitched or dipping arm. If thereforethe arm were made conical so that the bottom of it mightbecome horizontal, it is clear that a dished wheel wouldnot be liable to run hard against the shoulder collar. Theargument seems plausible, but it is fallacious, inasmuch asthe curving of the arm would reduce the front bearing surfaceso much, that the oil would be squeezed out, and itwould run dry. The action would thus be unequal andthe total amount of friction would be increased.The next point to settle is the form, combination, andproportions of the springs. Springs which are laid uponthe axle at right angles have to carry all the weight of thecarriage save only the wheels and axles. Where othersprings are used in addition, it is not necessary that the axlesprings should have much play : it is sufficient if they vibrateslightly so as to intercept the concussion from theroad. The strength of the springs ought to be adjustedto the weight they are intended to carry ; for it is evidentthat if they be made sufficiently elastic for the weight ofsix persons, and only three enter the carriage, the springswill be found too hard. Yet this disadvantage carriages144 CONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE.labour under: that the load is sometimes made to vary-from two persons to six or seven, and a large quantity ofluggage. In this case, the only remedy is to make thesprings sufficiently strong to carry the greatest weightwhich is likely to be put upon them, and then, if theirhardness be complained of with a light load, to add ballastin the shape of leaden weights till they be brought downto their work. It is probable that in time carriage springswill be used, capable of adjustment according as their load belight or heavy ; but meanwhile there is no better remedythan ballast, for carriages intended to carry unequal weights.Light carriages are never so easy to ride in as heavy ones,even when the springs are proportionately adjusted ; for theconcussion of a rough road takes more effect on a lightcarriage in causing Rebound, than it does on a heavy one.The next consideration in a four-wheeled carriage is thelock of the front wheels, which must of course depend onthe length of the axles, or width the wheels are apart.This in a full-sized carriage is from four feet six inches tofive feet. The fore wheels will therefore strike the perchat the distance of two feet three or six inches from theperch bolt. The body therefore must be so hanged thatit may not approach within eight or ten inches of this spot,in order to prevent it from striking the front wheel whenon the lock.The height of the splinters bar from the ground shouldfall on a straight line drawn from the horse's shoulder tothe centre of the hind wheel. This, however, is not alwaysconvenient in practice, as the fore wheels regulate theheight of the framing of the under carriage, to which theCONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE. 145.splinters bar is affixed. The distance of the splinters barfrom the central pin or perch bolt is regulated by the sizeof the wheels, and the projection of the driving-seat footboard.The ash timber of which carriages are built is allowedto lie some time after falling. It is then cut by hand intoplants of different thicknesses, from six inches to an inchand a half, which are piled one on another, with flat sticksbetween, and left to dry a sufficient time. As the formsof carriage timbers are for the most part irregular, machineryhas not yet been introduced for the purpose of sawingthem.When the plank is dry, the softer portions are set apartfor body work, and the tougher for carriage work. Thedifferent portions being marked out on the planks by patterns,they are cut out at the saw-pit or saw-bench, carebeing taken to adapt the circular shapes to the naturalcurves of the wood. In this state the timber mostly undergoesanother drying process. The chariot body makerhaving sorted out the right number of pieces, planes a flatside to each of them, from which all the other sides, whetherstraight or circular, are worked. They are thenframed and scarfed together ; after which the grooves areformed for the panels and rebates for the floor, and thenthe carver beads and carves the various parts. Previous tobeing fitted in, some of the panels have canvass glued firmlyon their backs ; and when in their places, blocks are gluedall round their inside edges, to fix them firmly to the framing.Before the upper panels are put in, the roof isnailed on, and all the joints stuck over with glued blocks146 CONSTEUCTION OF A CARRIAGE.inside. The roof is then painted, and a hide of undressedleather is strained on wet, nailed, and left to shrink. Theupper panels are then put on, united together at thecomers, and blocked. Such panels as require much bendingare wetted on one side, and held over a flame or heatedsurface on the other. In this mode the thin board whichcovers the sword case is bent to its shape. Formerly it wasthe custom to cover the roof, upper panels, and sword-case,all with a single piece of leather ; but now it is only-considerednecessary to cover the roof, a piece of fine linenbeing glued over the surface of the sword-case board, whichalso has canvass glued inside. The doors are then madeand hinged, and the hollow spaces intended to hold theglasses and blinds are covered in with thin boards ; and thewhole being complete, the body is given in charge to the painter,Who colours it over with a paint composed of white leadand litharge outside, and also paints the whole of the gluedcanvass inside with coarse colour, to prevent damp fromacting on it. Coats after coats of white lead and yellowochre, to the number of six or seven, are then applied asfast as they can be laid on ; and then they are left for twoor three weeks, if there be time, to harden. When hard,the whole is rubbed down with pumice stone and water toa smooth surface, the grain of the wood being entirelycovered and hidden. One or two coats of white or lead'colour are then applied, which are afterwards smoothed withsand paper, and then one or two boats of green, brown j oryellow, or whatever colour is intended are laid on, till thewhole appears one homogeneous surface. The framing are'then blacked ; and when dry, the clearest copal body var-constructionOF A CARRIAGE. 147nisi is applied, to the timber of six (Boats, over the colouredparts ; and several coats of black japan are applied to theroof, upper panels, and sword case, ending with a coat ortwo of varnish. The whole is then suffered to harden.The process of polishing the varnish is put off as long aspossible. The loops and other iron work are then fitted,filed, and japanned black, if they be not intended to beplated with silver or brass.The body their goes to the triii^mer or liner, and theinside seats are either caned or trailed over with strainedgirth web. Canvass is then nailed over some of the unevenportions, and wadded with tow. Certain parts, such as thedoors, pillars, and roof, are coveted with cloth; and valancesof fitted cloth are made to hang from the seat edge to theflooring. Lace, composed of silk, worsted, or of both combined,is applied in various ways as a binding. It is dividedinto three qualities :— abroad, which is about twoinches in width ; pasting lace, which is half an inch broil,and serves to cover rows of tack heads ; and seaming lace,which is applied to cover coarsely-sewn edges. It wasformerly a custom to use cloth only as a lining; but now,the seat cushions, and those for the back and sides, arecovered with silk or morocco. The back and side cushionsare stuffed with horsehair only, as the pressure is notgreat upon them; and the back of them is only canvass, asthey are fixed in their places. But the seat cushions beingmoveable, they are covered with cloth on one side, and silkor morocco on the other. Being subject to much pressure,they are made firm round the edges with tow and flocks,horsehair being applied at the top. To make the cushl2148 CONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE.ions more firm, they have strings tied at various partsthrough their thickness, the strings being hidden by tuftsof silk or worsted. The folding steps are then trimmedwith carpet and morocco, and a carpet is fitted to the bottomor floor, when the body is ready to place on the carriage,after the plater has put on the beads, door handles,and check brace rings, and any other ornamental workwhich may be required.The process with the carriage part is simpler. Theworkman first planes a flat side to the perch, and thentapers it narrower behind than before. He then works upthe top and bottom curves, or some portions of them, andframes on the front and hind spring beds. A pair ofspreading wings are then fitted to flie sides of the perch,and their hinder ends are framed through the hind springbed. The hind axle-tree bed is then scarfed upon the topof the perch and wings, and is connected with the hindspring bed by two small framing pieces called hunters. Atthe fore end of the perch, a cross bed, called a horn bar, isscarfed on the perch, at the same distance from the forespring bed as the hind axle bed is from the hind springbed, viz. the length of the spring bearing — about fifteeninches. The horn bar is connected with the fore springbed by the two spring blocks, which are either framed intothem or scarfed down on them, and also by the hoopingpiece, which is scarfed on the top of the perch. The perchand wings are then planed together to the proper curve,and the perch is taken to the smith, who fits and rivets onthe side plates, which have ears at the ends to bolt themto the beds. The carver then does his work, by beadingCONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE. 149the perch, wings, and beds, and rounding all the ends intoIonic scrolls and volutes. A bottom plate with a draghook riveted in it having been fitted to the perch, thehind framing is now put together, screw bolts securing thetenons and vortices, and light iron hoops fixing the wingsto the perch, which are rebated to receive the perch plates.The hooping piece is then hooped in a similar way to thefore end of the perch, and the transom firmly bolted. Thecarriage is then turned bottom upwards, and the smith fitsto it the wheel plate or turning iron across which runs abroad plate the width and length of the fore spring bed. Asimilar broad plate runs across the hind spring bed. Thehind axle is then fitted to the wings and perch, and let intoits bed at the ends, where screw clips secure it, bolts passingthrough the perch and wings, sometimes through the perchalone. The carriage is again turned upwards, the wheelplate is cased on the top with carved wood, and a plate isriveted to the side of the horn bar ; when the springs arefitted to their blocks and bolted firmly down. Iron staysare bolted to the springs beneath the beds to renderthem still firmer. The footman's step, the tread steps forthe coachman to mount by, and other iron-work, are thenfixed, and the upper carriage is complete.The under carriage is framed to. the fore axle-tree bed,which is a very heavy piece of timber. Through this areframed the two futchells which receive the pole. Theupper part of the axle-tree bed is covered with a strongplate to match the wheel plate. A circular piece of timber,called a sway bar, is bolted behind the axle-tree bed,and this also is plated beneath for security. In front is a150 CONSTRUCTION OF A Carriage.smaller piece of the same kind, and they both serve for thecircumference of the wheel plate to rest on. The splintersbar is bolted to the fore end of the futchells, and securedby two branching stays, one at either end, connecting it withthe axle-tree bed. As an additional security, iron stays arefitted to the bottoms of the futchells passing over the axle,which, in addition to bolts, is secured by screw clips at theends, the sable as the hind one.The carriage here described is one without inter-springs.Where uiider-springs are used, the mode of construction isthe same, all but a few minutiae, and a reduction of size inthe material on account of the concussion being removed.?he axles cure in this case clipped to the under^springs,nrhich hinge to the dumb-irons, cased with wood to makethem resemble springs. This dumb-iron is bolted to theframing.Those who are familiar with the subject will at onceremark, that numerous minutiae are omitted in this description; but to go through them would weary the readeras much as the writer, and serve no useful purpose, asit would scarcely serve to instruct one not previously with the subject, how to construct a carriage. Ageneral outline of the form and structure is all that thewriter pretends to give.The carriage being thus completed, the painter commenceswith it. Two coats of white-lead and lithargebeing applied, white or lead colour are again laid on tomake a ground work, which is smoothed with sand paper.The colour it is intended to show is then laid on in two orthre coats. After this, it is lined or picked out, togetherCONSTRUCTION OF A Carriage. 151witt the wheels, which have undergone the same preparation.Three coats of copal varnish, of a tougher kind thanthat applied to the bodies, completes the operation.The next point to attend to is the hanging braces, forwhich purpose the best and strongest leather is required.But few persons are capable of judging of the quality ofleather without very long practice. The strongest materialfor the purpose of suspension, is untanned hide softenedby friction and well saturated with oil or tallow. Butthis is elastic and very pervious to water. In this state itis very liable to stretch and lengthen. The motive fortanning leather, therefore, is to render it less pervious towater, less elastic and more solid. But the lime and thebark used in the process render the fibres of the hide brittle; and thus the weight which a strap of leather will sustainis many times less than that which a strap of the hideit has been prepared from would have sustained. But altogetherthe advantages are considered to be in favour ofleather, though probably its appearance is a chief consideration.The best hide leather is that which is prepared inthe West of England. Sometimes leather is entertained ;«'. e. the interior of the hide remains in a gelatinous state,uncombined with the tanning principle. In that case, it istough, but liable to stretch. Sometimes also, though notoften, the hides lie too long in the pits, and being overturned,lose much of their tenacity, while they gain in solidity.The best portion of the hide is what is called thebutt, after the belly and neck parts have been rounded off.Jn preparing the braces, the butt is cut into straps slightlywider than the spring, viz. two inches and three-eighths, or152 CONSTEUCTION OF A CARRIAGE.thereabouts. As many of these straps as are necessary fortie weight they have to bear, are then put together, taperingfrom the hinder end to* the other, which is turnedover into a loop to receive the suspension bolt, the endsbeing tapered down one after the other with a spoke-shavetill the whole amalgamate neatly, forming at thedouble, a thickness from one inch upwards. They arethen double sewed together with waxed hemp pointed withblunted needles instead of bristles, as the holes are allstraight and pierced with an awl called a stabbing awl,made in the form of a spear head. In what are called thebest braces, four rows of stitches are introduced, and thestitches are crowded together as many as possible in thespace of an inch ; which is a disadvantage, as the braceis thus nearly severed longitudinally. When the bracesare finished, the hinder end of each is fastened to a smallwindlass called the jack, fixed to the bed of the spring,and capable of being wound up by a lever. The upperend of the brace is kept firm on the back of the spring bya shackle near the top, which clips it round. In ordinarycarriages, these suspension braces, known as " Polignacbraces' are admitted in the loops'* heads by taking out thesuspension bolts ; but in ornamented carriages they aremade shorter, and between them and the loops are introducedother braces, with large buckles, for the sake ofeffect.From the spring heads to the centre of the body, smallsewn straps called check braces hang in a low curve. Theyare to prevent the body from swinging too far fore and aft.From the perch to the bottom of the body, there is aCONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE. 153strong brace on each side, called the collar brace, the objectof which is to resist any tendency of the body toturn over, and break the springs by a reverse action incaseof violent concussion.A very important point in the comfort and appearanceof the carriage is the mode in which the body hangs. Itshould be so disposed between the four springs that thedoor pillars stand perpendicular. To accomplish this, thelength of the loops and braces must be accurately adjusted,so that the centre of suspension may fall in the right place.Those who understand the operation can calculate it allfrom the drawing ; those who do not, hang the body downby temporary loops, and get at the result by fourfold labourand expense. Of course it require a correct eye toknow when the body hangs in the right place.When the carriage is intended for dress or town use, aSalisbury boot is fixed on carved blocks on the front beds.This is a kind of egg-shaped trunk, with one end open, andthe other flattened diagonally to form a base. It is a heavyframe of most expensive make, partly close and partlyopen railed, and covered all over with black japanned lea-»ther. On the fore part of it a coachman'^s foot-board isfixed, painted and varnished the colour of the carriage.On two horns which project upwards from the boot arefixed two branching stays to take the coachman's seat, — akind of wooden frame covered with canvass and baize, andstuffed with straw, higher at the ends than in the middle, togive the coachman a firmer seat. This coarse-looking frameis covered by the hammer-cloth, the colour of which some-^times harmonises with and sometimes forms an agreeable164 CONSTRUCTION OF A Cabbage.contrast to that of the paint. It is made of very strong clothstiffened with tarpaulin, canvass, and paste, and contrived tohang in graceful massy folds. The upper edge has a singlerow of broad lace round it; the lower edge is made somewhatto resemble an architectural basement, by threerows of broad lace, or two rows of lace and one of deepheavy fringe. The central compartment of the end folds,usually receives a crest done in silver, brass, ivory, orembroidery.The hind standards and footmarks holders being affixed,is well as the lamps, and the wheels being oiled and regulated,the carriage is ready for use.With little difference such is the process through whichall carriages pass, from their first entrance into the coach-makersfactory in the shape of material, till they leave itin their most perfect condition. The varieties of carriagesare every day increasing as fer as regards form, though thegeneral principles of construction remain the same. Infour-wheeled carriages there is one great distinction to bemade— those constructed with braces, and those without ;e. e. those bolted to the springs firmly, and those hangingloosely from them. The carriages without braces are theroughest, but also the lightest and least costly. There isanother distinction to be made : carriages which are open,or made to open occasionally, and which are provided withdoors, must necessarily be heavier than close carriages, asthe bottom must be made strong enough to sustain itsweight and that of the passengers without any other framing.A Landau, for example, is much heavier than aCoach, because it is necessary to sustain the bottom withCONSTRUCTION OF A CARRIAGE. 155heavy iron plates, in order that it may not alter its formwhen the head is open, and thus prevent the doors fromopening and shutting. A Phaeton also may be mademuch lighter than a Barouche or Britzschka; becausethe two latter must have bottom plates, and the formerrequires none.CHAPTER XI.Invention. Derivation of Carriages mostly Foreign. — Original Inventionsand Improvements. — English Artists. — Patent Rights.—Continental Artists. — Processes of Improvement. — Theory andPractice. — Genius and Invention. — Wollaston. — Brindley. — Watt.Babbage. — Analysis of the Qualities developing InventionsDifficulties of Inventors. — Expense of Patents. — Jealousy ofRivals. — Combination of Carriage Forms and Proportions. — tastein Design. — Drawing. — Variety of Qualities necessary to conducta Carriage Manufactory.English carriage constructors are certainly not an inventiverace, if we allow that the names^by which carriagesare known are indicative of their origin. Coach is derivedfrom the Hungarian Kotsee ; Chariot is French ;Landau is German ; Barouche and Britzschka are thesame ; Vis-clovis is French ; Cabriolet is French ; Chaiseis French ; Droitzschka is German. Even the EnglishCurricle has a Latinized name ; and the Phaeton takes itsdesignation from the heathen mythology. Whiskey,Gig, Stanhope, Tilbury, Dennet, Buggy, and JauntingCar, are our only native names ; and the first six are onlyvariations of the same thing.But mere invention, mere original conception, does notconstitute excellence ; and if foreigners may fairly layclaim to the greatest originality, English artists have themerit, perhaps still more important, of gradually improvingINVENTION. 157the original designs, and so contriving all the details, that,in their state of comparative excellence, the carriages canscarcely be recognised as constructions of the same principleas their models. In order to verify this assertion, letany man compare one of the German Britzschkas broughtover to England when peace was last proclaimed, with oneof the best constructed English Britzschkas of the presentday.That English artists are not remarkable for the inventionof new carriages, is no proof of their want of the talentof invention. They have invention in abundance, if therewere sufficient motives to call it forth ; but the feet is,that invention is a matter but poorly paid for, unless itcan be effectually secured by patent right ; and to make apatent profitable, several things are requisite: — first, toproduce an article for which there is a considerable demand;secondly, that it be an article of such a nature that it cannotbe pirated under the form of what are called " irmovements ;*" and thirdly, that the material of which it iscomposed be in sufficient abundance to prevent its beingmonopolised. That considerable improvements may yetbe made in wheel carriages, no sensible person will behardy enough to deny; but very rare indeed are thosefor which a patent right could be maintained. Englishartists are mostly little more than merchants in their modeof doing business ; they cannot afford to lose time, andtheir principal object is to make as large an annual returnas possible, and as large a profit as possible on that return.Continental artists are very commonly enthusiastic loversof their art ; they try to improve it from liking for it, an168 INVENTION.when they fell, it is mostly from want of efficient workmento Another their designs. The demand with them is notsufficient to make every branch of their art a manufactureIn England, on the contrary, the manufacture of carnagesis a work of many trades, and thus greater skill is producedin manipulation. But few carriage builders care tointroduce anything new. If chance brings in; a new fashion,competition is aroused, and does not subside till excellenceor something approaching thereunto be attained. ^ A foreignartist has mostly abundance of leisure time for iiiinvention to work ; but if an English artist attempts toinvent, his trade stops, and he will probably be designatedfor his pains by the contemptuous epithet of '^ schemer,*^even though his genius be that of a Watt. The ordinarymeasure of talent is held to be success, i, e. the acquisitionof property ; though it is quite clear, the qualities whichensure success are not always those which tend to produceexcellence or improvement in carriages more than in otherarts. The inventor may produce, but it is for the mostpart the mere merchant or tradesman who profits by theinventions. Carriages are made to sell, as plays are writtento fill theatres ; and the English carriage builder takes aFrench or German marriage to improve upon, because itsaves his time and trouble, just as the English play writertranslates a French play to save the labour of his brains.Improvements are rarely the voluntary production of Englishcarriage builders ; they are forced on them by the purchasers,first individuals, and then the mass, who desire, somemere novelty, others greater ease, and others a more rapidrate of motion. Almost all the changes and improvementsINVENTION. 169in carriages may be traced in their origin to the carriageusers, and not to the carriage builders. The carriage buildersdo not lead, but they have always the means of pressingtalent enough into their service, whenever a sufficientdemand offers them a remunerating return. Coaches werefirst invented on the Continent ; but it was in Englandthat they were improved into public stages, capable ofbeing run ten miles and upwards per hour for days andweeks together.This was not done at once, or by any one man : it wasthe combined result of numberless small improvements,forced on by the necessity of overcoming practical difficulties.Carriage builders have not been remarkable as ascientific body. They have been, strictly speaking,practical men T' and as the knowledge they have gainedby experience has not been carefully hoarded in books, carriageconstruction has remained a sort of occult matter,without any specific theory attached to it. Each one, asheis fresh initiated, gains his knowledge as he best canfrom verbal instruction or from a new series of experimentsand thus a considerable portion of his time must elapse erehe can have verified his judgment. Enough of this knowledgeexists in various brains, which might suffice for theconstruction of a sound theory ; but it would be a dijBScultoperation to gather it together, for many petty feelingswould be at work. In the mean time, all mention of theorysave in derision is decried. By most experimentalists, theword theory is understood as synonymous with falsehood orabsurdity, — as the very opposite of practice. It is clearthat practice must be the ultimate verification of theory;160 Invention.but every true practice must have a true theory belongingto it. The theory of a subject is the science or philosophyof that subject : practice is the positive knowledge orproof of the soundness of the theory. But as theories aremore plentiful than practices, and as many of them are notverified, there are, of course, many false ones. On thisground, unscientific experimentalists have acquired thehabit of regarding all theory as false ; which is about asreasonable as it would be to assert that because falsehoodexists in the world, all truth must therefore be extinct.This peculiarity is not confined to carriage building : engineeringand architecture abound with it, and law andmedicine are not wanting in it. The truth is, that humanknowledge is only got together by small portions at a time,in the school of experiment ; and when that knowledge isconsiderable in any one branch, a true and verified theorymay be constructed from it. But when a great number ofsubjects have thus been analysed and theorised, it is comparativelyeasy to construct theories by analogy, on newsubjects, by sound principles. Newton's theory of theuniverse was just as true when he first developed it inthought, as after he had verified it by calculation.It is a common notion that a mechanical inventor mustnecessarily be a man of genius ; but if the matter beanalysed, it will be found that though inventors areoccasionally men of genius, they are but rarely so. inventionin its ordinary sense, as the word implies, is theart ot finding out. By genius is meant a species of creativepower, like that of the poet, for example, in hishighest state of excellence. Invention is of two kinds ;— .INVENTION. 161one resulting from a quick habit of observation, whichdetects the applicability of various forms of matter tosimilar objects. Of this an example may be given inthe case of Dr. Wollaston, who, in a hurried experiment,needing some lime, which was not at hand, suddenly casthis eye on his ivory paper-cutter, and with some scrapingsfrom its surface accomplished his object. This quickhabit of observation, when it goes to the production ofbeautiful forms, is akin to fancy. The other, and higherkind of invention, is that which results from bringing atheory into practice, — from first imagining a desirableresult, and then bringing it to bear by the exercise of thejudgment, and constant persevering efforts steadily directedthrough a long period of time. The names of Brindleyand Watt, and in our own time, Babbage, are examplesof this quality. When Brindley set to work upon canals,he did not create, — she merely formed the plan of levellingthe surfaces of natural streams, by drawing off the waterinto new channels of sufficient depth, and then preventingthe water from being wasted. The process of formingthe locks was a continued series of mechanical contrivances,with purpose aforethought. When Mr. Wattfirst imagined the steam-engine, he did not invent thepower of steam ; that was known long before, and hadexisted from the time that fire and water existed. Buthe formed to himself the plan by which he hoped to realisethe result of making steam an efficient human servant,through the agency of a perfect machine. The generalidea of this machine existed in his mind long beforehe brought it into practice, and the slow process by whichM162 INVENTION.this was accomplished is evidenced by the fact, that aprolongation of the tenn of his patent right was grantedhim by Act of Parliament, on the ground that he hadnot sufficient time to reap benefit from it. An anecdotetold of Mr. Watt serves not only to prove this,-but also his highlander philosophy, which was far beyondthe miserable vanity of ordinary inventors, whoaim at astonishing their fellows rather than instructingor benefiting them. After success had elevated Mr. Wattto the public eminence he so well deserved, a noblemanwho dined in his company expressed himself in terms ofwonder on what Mr. Watt had accomplished. Mr. Wattcoolly remarked, *' The Public only look on my success,and not on the intermediate failures and uncouth constructionswhich have served as steps to dumb to tictop of the ladders' Mr. Babbage also, in the remarkablevolume published by him on the subject of Machinery,says distinctly in his prefigure,** The present volume may be considered as one ofthe consequences that have resulted som the calculatesengine, the construction of which I have been so l<mgsuperintending. Having been induced during the lastten years to ^risit a considerable number of workshops andfactories, both in England and on the Continent, for thepurpose of making myself acquainted with the variousresources of mechanical art, I was insensibly led to plyto them those principles of generalization to which myother pursuits had naturally given rise''It is clear in this case, that the accuracy obtained inmathematical science led Mr. Babbage to conceive aINVENTION. 163nutdiine whereby the changes of figures might be multipliedad infinitum. After this, in order to bring itto bear, he ransacked the stores of accumulated knowledgeactually existing under the form of machinery.The power of mechanical conception is very widely extended;it is a modification of the same power whichcomposes romances : the magic horse in the airy talewhich turned and was guided by means of a pin in theneck, was a mechanical conception. If the same personwho conceived that, had worked it out into practice, itwould have been an evidence of genius; viz. imaginationdiscovering truth by some analogical inference.Invention, then, of the highest kind, must be composedof four qualities : — imagination to conceive a new andcomplicated machine, knowledge to gather mammals,judgment to select and combine, them, and perse ^france, without wearying, till the result be obtained.There are few samples of mechanical invention like untothis. Those things which commonly go by the namesof new inventions, are very frequently merely modificationsof what has been done before : " Improvements''is the technical term.The task a man has to go through, in conceiving,designing, acting, and painting a complicated mechanicalinvention, is by no means inviting. Evan whenhe possesses the hand to execute that which his head hascontrived, only a portion of his difficulties are overcome.A first idea is fascinating, and apparently easy of execution.It is thought over again and again ; all difficultiesare apparently surmounted, and all obstacles ram2164 INVENTION.moved : it is, in the imagination of the inventor, perfect.He may perchance know how to draw ; but if not, hemust employ some one to make his drawings for him.In this case, to avoid the risk of piracy, he must previouslytake out his patent ; i, e. he must incur an expenseof from one hundred to one hundred and fiftypounds for a purpose whose success is uncertain, as ithas not been experimentally verified. He may perhapsintend to take out his patent for England alone ; in whichcase he is allowed only two months to specify or describehis invention, and make the necessary drawingsfor depositing in the public archives. If he can makeuphis mind to take out his patent for England andScotland, he may have four months ; if for Ireland also,he may have six months ; but his expenses will be doubledor trebled, unless he can stretch his conscience, on thepayment of the first fees, to swear that he intends a triplepatent, for the sake of gaining the time, and afterwardschanges his mind and takes a single patent. This speciesof conscience-stretching is very commonly practised.Having secured his patent, our inventor sets his draughtsmanto work, and with considerable difficulty— owing perhapsto want of clearness on the one side, and want ofcomprehension on the other — the drawings are made. Thenfollows the model ; and ere that is completed, it is discoveredthat there occur unexpected difficulties in the material construction,which did not present themselves on paper. Newcontrivances must be resorted to, and the model is madeand re-made many times over, at a considerable expense.It is at last completed — perhaps within a very few days ofINVENTION. 165the time allowed for depositing the specification, and freshexpenses are incurred by the necessity of paying highly,those whose business it is to work against time. Whenall is ready, the specification is deposited, and the inventorperhaps discovers that the title he has first taken will notcover his invention, on account of its being different fromhis first contemplation. The title therefore must be altered,and the fees paid over again ; the first being anentire loss. He now sets to work to construct a ftdl-sizedsample of his invention, and all his patience is needed. Hemust take either first-rate or ordinary workmen. If he takesfirst-rate men, he must pay them very highly, because theymust necessarily work more slowly at a process which theyhave to learn, than at one with which they are familiar ;and in order to earn the same amount, they must be higherpaid. If he takes ordinary workmen, his patience is stillmore severely tasked : he has to teach them how to work,without knowing how himself; he can only get at a resultby numberless repetitions and by a great waste of time.At length his invention is in a state for practical trial.Up to this point all seems well ; but practice soon discoversa defect, not perhaps in principle, but in detail. A secondexperiment is made without success, and many more followere the invention be completed, alike in principle and execution.Then begins the task of getting it before thepublic. Perhaps the inventor has been sanguine, and hasattempted to introduce it to the public in an imperfectstate, and the consequent failures have excited a prejudiceunfavourable to his object. This prejudice has to be overcomeby repeated and unceasing exertions ; and at length.166 INVENTION.perhaps, when half the period of the patent right has expired,the inventor begins to reap the fruits of his skill andindustry. Public rumour is ever fond of exaggeration, andhe is soon supposed to be realising a large fortune, thoughmost likely he is only banning to pay his expenses.Competition is then at work, and rivals, who have been atno expense or trouble, imitate his invention, or make justso much alteration in it, as they think necessary to evadehis patent right. He goes to law with the pirates andthen perhaps makes the discovery that his title or specificationis imperfect, and that he has been labouring foryears to bring to perfection an invention from which hecan reap no more pecuniary advantage than if he had confinedhimself to an ordinary trade, in which imitation aloneis necessary.* If he be successful in a law-court againsthis piratical competitors, he may then chance to be amplyrepaid : but this is not a frequent case ; and even when aman possesses imagination to conceive, the head to contrive,and the hand to execute, it is not an uncommon thing forthe term of the patent-right to run out, ere an inventionbe reduced to general practice.It is evident, therefore, that a man who possesses a goodtrade as a coach-maker has little inducement to embark inthe perilous field of invention. His time is mostly takenBy a late alteration in the law of patents this hardship has beenin part amended, the inventor being permitted to disclaim any portionof his specification which makes against him, — paying fees, of course.The want of a really efficient and simple patent law, protecting meritand punishing piracy, is a grievous hardship on one of the most deserving,and certainly not the least important classes of the community,^-not the less important though usually needy, others reaping thefruits of their exertions.INVENTION. 161up with his ordinary business, and, unless under very peculiarcircumstances, he has no leisure to study improvements.Those who have too little business to fill up their time areinterested in producing new things, in order to attract publicattention ; but as their leisure is only at intervals, theyrarely devote themselves to it. First ideas frequently originatewith working men, who have not the means of puttingthem in practice unless in comparatively trifling improvements.It is mostly the interest of the established tradesmanto discourage such things, as they interfere with theirplans, and give them more trouble without extra profit.Thus, when under-springs were first adapted to carriages,,it was prophesied that they would be the ruin of coach-making,by making the carriages too durable. When the streetswere Macadamised, the wheelwrights and coach-makeralike complained that it was destruction to their trade. It.is the same in other things. The Manchester cotton spinnerwho has a mill and machinery already erected, does notfeel very benevolently disposed towards an inventor whocontrives new machinery of a better class, by which h earn five pounds per week ;but as they seldom have full work the year through, theydo not average more than four. Ordinary workmen donot earn more than three pounds per week, and on theaverage less than that.Carriage makers are more akin to millwrights in thework they perform, though much less skill is required ingeometrical knowledge. Their work is heavy, and requiresgreat truth in all the framing ; but the lines areon a larger scale than those of the body-maker, and thereforeslight inaccuracies are not so perceptible. They havealso few double convex or double concave lines, and moreplane surfaces. The materials they use are ash and elm,much of them in combination with iron work supplied bythe smith. Neatness, but not extreme delicacy of work, isrequired in the carriage maker : he requires fewer toolsthan the body-maker, and his earnings, while employed,are, by piece-work, from three pounds to two pounds perweek, according as he may happen to be a good or indifferentworkman.Carvers, are the workmen who 'execute the ornamentalwood-work of carriages. Some of them are artists, furnishingdesigns as well as executing them, and of courseare in such cases highly paid. Others are merely theexecutors of the designs of others. There are two classesof carving used in carriages: the simplest consists of theN178 Carriage Artisans.beads and mouldings on the framework of the body, andalso on the carriage timbers ; the other consists of leaf-workand tracery, according to fancy, and is used to ornamentblocks of various kinds, as well as the hind standards,and also on the timber ends. The designs for thesepurposes are similar to the scrolls and volutes used in architecture.The earnings of carvers are from thirty shillingsup to four and five pounds per week, according totheir skill ; but, like many other workmen, they are unemployedseveral months in the year.Coach-smiths are the most skilful of all iron-workers.They have to work large and heavy bars of iron intoforms containing several unequal curves, the thickness ofthe metal also being unequal. It is a work guided by theeye more than by measurement, and there are fewstraight lines to work from. The coach-smith must beable to draw, or at least to criticise forms accurately, or hewill not prove a skilful workman. He must possess considerablepersonal strength, and capacity to bear the heatto which he is exposed ; he must be a good judge of themetal he uses, and so contrive his work that it may appearlight, while capable of efficiently resisting the strain uponit ; and it must moreover be truly wrought, being all intendedto fix to wood-work previously prepared. Menpossessing so many different qualities are not numerous,and therefore are highly paid. Coach-smiths are dividedinto three classes, — fire-men, hammer-men, and vice-men.The fire-men are the class just described. Thehammer-men aid them in their work, with the sledgehammer,when heavy blows are required to reduce theCARRIAGE ARTISANS. 179metal in size or form ; they also Low the bellows andmake up the fire, — sin short, perform the office of labourers.And hence arises much injustice. If the hammer-manhappens to be a skilful man, he frequently applieshimself to work in the fire-manes absence. The latter,as soon as he discovers it, grows jealous, quarrels with,and discharges his hammer-man. Thus, the hammer-menIve in a position from which they are forbidden to emerge,even if they possess the necessary skill. —The businessof the vice-man is to file and smooth the work fromthe rough marks of the hammer, to fit joints, and finishscrew-bolts and nuts. Neatness and skill are required inhia work, but not the precision of eye required in thefire-man. — Fire-men mostly work by the piece, and earnfrom two to three and four pounds per week, according tothe class of work : the hammer-men earn from twenty-fiveto thirty shillings ; the vice-men, from thirty shillingsto two pounds.Smiths have usually been esteemed a very drunken race;but this estimate of them must be taken with a reservation.They were formerly much more so than at present,like other mechanics ; but, like them, they are estimproving. Men who work hard in a heated atmospherehave a tendency to drink more than those who do not ;and with the imperfect arrangements which are sa commonin smiths shops, it is not surprising that some of themshould become confirmed drunkards. Contrivances willin time be resorted to, to enable the workman to avoidthe heat while working ; and probably tilt-hammers willbe so contrived that there will be no necessity to breedn2180 CARRIAGE ARTISANS.up hammer-men to a trade in which they can make noprogress.Trimmers, are to carriages what upholsterers are tohouses, in what regards the interior lining. They usesimilar materials ; as, cloth, silk, morocco, canvass, webbing,curled hair, wool, flocks, &c. But, in addition tothis, they have to use the more stubborn material, ofleather, in various ways, as for the coverings of foldingcarriage heads, in what is called " open work." Hereinmuch judgment is required,— The work of some trimmersis entirely confined to leather work, and their technicaldesignation is "budget trimmers." They sew onthe leathers to the iron frames called dashing or splashingirons and wings,— cover poles and shafts with leatherin the wearing parts, — cover the small cases called toolbudgets, drag chains, safety chains, and ropes, and othersimilar work. In these employments, the men who .cutout, require much judgment, and also some teste, in ordernot to waste valuable materials, and also to make theirwork firm, and at the same time neat and agreeable tothe eye. The earnings of trimmers who are skilful cuttersare from three to four guineas per week ; those whoare merely workmen earn from thirty shillings to fifty.Painters are an importent branch of the carriage trade, foron them the general good appearance of the carriage depends.The director or foreman must be an accurate judge of. cq-tlours, as to their durability, and also as to the effect whichfamish will have on them. He sometimes has to match a^single panel which has been damaged; and it i3 a verypice operation to match a new colour to an old one, moroCARRIAGE ARTISANS. 181especially when the colours are conspicuous. The mechanicalskill required in painting is not very great : that portionwhich consists in what is technically called " picking outsor painting fine lines of a distinct colour, on a ground-work,as black on yellow, — requires the greatest skill. Thewages of a foreman are from two to four guineas per week.The ordinary workmen earn from twenty-five to thirty-fiveshillings, according to their skill ; and they are byno, means too highly paid, considering the unhealthy natureof their employment, in heated apartments impregnatedwith mineral and other odours. Generally speaking,painters are more healthy of late years than they formerly were ; and this must be attributed to their increasinghabits of greater personal cleanliness.• Brace Makers and Harness Makers are generally rankedtogether, on account of the similarity of their work. Thebraces of a carriage serve to support the body on the springs,and also to confine its oscillations within certain limits.The braces are combinations of two or more straps of leather,increasing in number according to the strain they maybeexposed to, and sewn together to form one substance.The cutthroat requires considerable judgment as to thequality of his leather, and also how to use economicallythe different parts of the hide which are fitted for differentpurposes, as they are not of a homogeneous texture orsubstance : he must also be able to calculate the requisitestrength of material. The workmen who sew the materialstogether require little more skill than shuttle throwers:piercing the stitches with the awl is a mere matter of habitwhich almost any person can acquire. The wages of a182 CARRIAGE AKTISA14S.good cutter are from two to three guineas per week. Thesewers earn from twenty-five to thirty shillings, accordingto their neatness of work. Their employment is unhealthy,as their work is always performed in a stoopingposture, and working on black leather has a tendency 4oinjure their eye-sight.Sawyers do not require any great skill. Inferior carpentersand others commonly become sawyers. The workis rather laborious. Their earnings are thirty shillings perweek. Very few carriage builders now use pit sawyers,as a single man at a bench with a small frame-saw is found&r more efficient.Labourers are a class of people employed by coach*makers under one designation, but varying much in theirskill and ability. The commonest class are those who washcarriages and move them from place to place. The nextclass are those who are capable of polishing the metal-workand leather, and keeping the paint in order. Thenext and most efficient class are those who possess a generalknowledge of the mechanical construction of carriages,and are capable of hanging and hanging them, separatingtheir various parts, replacing damaged bolts or iron-work,nailing on the wearing leathers, painting the iron-work,greasing, oiling, and adjusting the wheels. They mustalso be able to judge of the general condition of carriages,so as readily to detect defects which might render them unsafein travelling. The weekly earnings of labourers arefrom twenty to thirty shillings, according to their skill.Axle-tree Makers are divided into forgers or fire-men,turners, and vice-men. The work of the forgers requiresCARRIAGE AETISAigs. 183considerable skill and strength, to unite large masses ofiron at a welding heat, and to reduce them to accurateforms : their work is akin to that of anchor-smiths.Axletree turners must be very skilful, accurate workmen,to fit the patent oil axles truly: for the common axlesused with grease, inferior workmen will suffice. The vice-menalso require much skill and practice in filing, to enablethem to work true, which is absolutely necessary inaxles. Were these men taught to work in wood first, asis the case with millwrights, skill would be more frequentamongst them than is the case at present. The forgersearn from three to four pounds per week ; the turners,from two to three pounds ; the vice-men, from thirty shillingsto two pounds, — but the latter sum is not common.Spring Makers require considerable skill, especially forthe construction of circular or C springs with many plates.They work by the aid of a hammer-man, like other smiths,and have a vice-man to finish their work. The modes ofworking being exceedingly imperfect, their work is empirical; and thus some few by long practice acquire skill intempering the steel, which others do not attain, simplyfrom want of instruction. Spring-makers earn from twoto four, and occasionally six pounds per week ; the vice-menand hammer-men, the same as in other cases.Wheelwrights must be skilful workmen ; for their workis so severely tested, that if not true and soit, it mustfail; and moreover, the accuracy of it depends moreon truth of eye and skill of hand, than on any marks,guides, or rules. First-rate wheelwrights earn from twoto three pounds per week ; but their work is very laborious184 CARRIAGE ARTISANS.Tire-smiths are a branch of the wheeling trade : an unskilfultire-smith does much damage in a short space of time,and skilful ones are not abundant : their earnings are fromthree to five pounds per week, and occasionally more thanthat.Lamp Makers have no hard work to perform. Theirwork consists in cutting out thin metal and soldering ittogether. It requires neatness, but no considerable amountof skill or exactness. The effluvia of a lamp-makers shopis unpleasant, but not positively unwholesome ; yet thesitting posture in which they perform their work is notfavourable to health. Their earnings are from twenty-fiveto thirty shillings a week.Blind Makers, Trunk Makers, and Joiners are reciprocaltrades. The amount of skill required by the workmen isnot very considerable. Their earnings are about thirtyshillings a week, and their work is very light. The joinersmake wainscot cases, seat boxes, &c.Turners are employed by carriage builders to turnsplinters bars, splinters, drag staves, raisers, and similarthings. Their earnings are thirty shillings a week.Lace Making formerly constituted an important branchof carriage building, as skilled workmen were few, and theycommanded very high prices for their labour. But the artof lace-making is no longer a sealed book ; the workmenhave increased in number, and although a first-rate workmancan earn three pounds per week, still, as he does noton the average work more than three or four months in theyear, the total amount is very trifling. Formerly lace-makingwas confined to London ; but since the increase ofCARRIAGE ARTISANS. 185carriages it has become more of a manufacture, and ismade wholesale at Manchester and other manufacturingtowns. The London carriage lace-makers are, like mostweavers, a miserably poor and squalid race ; as is the casewith all trades which are wearing out, or where the modeof operation is changing.Carriers are the workmen who dress the leather whichhas been converted from the raw state by the tanner. Considerableskill is required in the operation of levelling thehides by a peculiar process called shaving, and the work islaborious. When in work, the men can earn from two tothree pounds per week at piece-work ; but their numberskeep many of them constantly out of employment. Curryinghas generally been considered a profitable businessfor the masters ; and the reason has been, that considerablecapital is required in it, combined with judgment in buyingmaterial. Tanners do not give credit, and the currier hasto lay in his stock of hides at particular seasons. Withoutgreat skill to judge of the quality of a very deceptive material,he may easily be ruined. It is a healthy trade forthe workmen.Japanners, in the leather trade, are those who preparethe glazed and enamelled waterproof leather used for carriages.Those who carry on this business are generallyemployed by the currier who finds the leather. Considerableknowledge of materials is required, as it is essentiallya chemical art, and the material on which the japan isspread is very liable to injury. The workmen earn thesame as other painters, and the employment is far fromhealthy, on account of the great heat necessary.186 Carriage Artisans.Ivory Workers are divided into turners and carvers.The former earn from thirty to forty shillings per week—the latter considerably more, as they require more skill.The turners prepare rollers and buttons for glasses andblinds ; the carvers cut out ornamental crests for seat-cloths.Plates prepare the ornamental metal-work, such asdoor-handles, and the beading which covers joints, as wellas buckles and all the metal-work used in harness. Theearnings of the workmen are about thirty shillings perweek.Chasers emboss the crests, arms, &c, on the door-handles,heads, and axle-tree caps, as well as other ornamentalwork. The ordinary workmen earn two guineas per week :but designers are paid much higher in proportion to theirskill.Embroiderers prepare crests and coats of anne to ornamentthe seat-cloths. Their work being principally fancy,no fixed price is attached to it.Notwithstanding the apparently high wages earned bythe greater part of the workmen employed by carriagebuilders, but few of them, and those only amongst themost skilful, enjoy constant work. High wages have producedthe common effect of increasing the numbers of theworkmen beyond what are necessary for the demand. Theconsequence has been, that inferior workmen have beenfound willing, occasionally, to work at a lower rate ofwages, for small masters, who work on speculation, andget carriages up cheaply with inferior materials, for theCarriage Artisans. 167chance of a . ready-money sale. In order as much suspossible to counteract this, and prevent the low rate ofwages from becoming general, many of the workmen havejoined together in a Traders Union, binding themselvesnot to work, for low prices. The consequence is, thatthere axe two. classes of men, — those who belong to theUnion, and those who do not : but this makes no actualalteration in their, relative condition as to their earnings.The most skilful. men belong to the Union rather sortiesake of quietude and remaining unmolested, thanfrom any value they attach to it, because they know thatwith or without the Union their skill can always commandconstant employment at the highest rate of wages. Theother Unionists share amongst them just as much employmentas there may happen to exist ; and they would dojust as much without the Union, inasmuch as it neitherincreases nor diminishes the total amount. If they begood workmen, they get employment; and if they bebad ones, the Unions cannot procure it for them. Andthose who do not belong to the Union are in the sameprecise condition: .those who employ them select themost skilful, and leave the others without work, unlessunder the pressure of necessity. The only advantage theUnions can appear .to hold out, is the prevention of interlopersfrom working at the trade, without serving a regularapprenticeship to it : but as these interlopers can workin other shops, not belonging to the Unions, they are notin reality kept out, but do the Unionists greater mischiefby working at a lower rate of wages. It has been supposedby many, that great mischief may result to the188 CARRIAGE Artisanspublic from the general customs of Trade Unions ; but thesupposition is unfounded. On the contrary, experienceand discussion will most probably convince the Unioniststhat combination cannot raise their rate of wages ; and theelements of dissolution are moreover constantly at workamongst them. They are not an equal body, but one composedof classes taking rank one after another. In the carriagemanufacture it is peculiarly so. The body-makers arethe first on the list ; then follow the carriage makers ; thenthe trimmers ; then the smiths ; then the spring-makers ;then the wheel-wrights, painters, plates, brace-makers,and so on. The body-makers are the wealthiest of alland compose amongst themselves a species of aristocracy,to which the other workmen look up with feelings, half ofrespect, and half of jealousy. They feel their importance,and treat the others with various consideration, accordingto their station Carriage makers are entitled to a speciesof condescending familiarity ; trimmers are considered,too good to be despised; a foreman of painters theymay treat with respect, but working painters can atmost be favoured with a nod. A smith is consideredquite unendurable, — a regular drunken, beer-drinking*^ Ironsides ;'' and a plater is contemptuously denominatedbead-sticker." A wheelwright is held to be a kind ofrough wood-chopper; and a brace-makers a mere vulgar^^ snob." The other classes partake of the same feelingsof caste in their various proportions. A body-maker isconsidered a " good catch" as a husband for the daughterof an ordinary mechanic ; and the carriage maker exciteS:much anxious feeling on the part of mothers, who con-carriageARTISANS. 189side marrying to a carriage maker as important a matteras vulgar-minded mothers in the classes just abovethem consider « marrying to a carriage."All these things of course create much jealousyand bickering. The progress of democracy is not likelyto be advanced by the agency of Trades' Unions formedof such ingredients.CHAPTER XIII.Steam Locomotion, — Canals . — Railroads,— Engines.— Boilers —High and Low Pressure. — tubular Boilers. — durability of SteamEngines. — Difficulties of Steam Vehicles on Common Roads. — Mr.Hancock's Carriages. — Speculators in Steam Carriages. — Defectsof Steam as applied to Pleasure Carriages. — Steam compared withHorses. — Steam adapted to Railroads but not to Common Roads.probable Increase of Pleasure Carriages by means of Railroads.From the time that Mr. Watt first brought to perfectioncontinuous circular motion by the agency of steam,^&om the time that the first steam fly-wheel was seento revolve, — sit became an easy thing to imagine, that ifa steam-engine were provided with four fly-wheels, supportingit on a horizontal surface, it might be made locomotive.The idea doubtless occurred to many ; but necessityalone could reduce the idea to general practice.The increase of human wants gave the first employmentto steam as a mill-grinder, machine-mover, water-pumper,and coal-lifter ; and its first rude attempts at locomotionwere as a coal-porter, to drag, in waggons, the coals ithad raised from the pits, to the place where they were tobe embarked in ships or barges. At the Northern collieries,the first locomotive engines were used on railroads.But this was only for short distances. As populationthickened, and commerce and manufactures increased,rapidity of inland transport became an important object.STEAM LOCOMOTION. 191Canals were found available to facilitate the transport ofheavy goods too inconvenient for land carriage ; but theywere impracticable as a means of rapid transport, and liableto interruption in winter. Land carriage on ordinaryroads by means of horses was too expensive, and railroadshad only been applied for short distances for particular,and not general purposes. At length a railroad wasplanned between Manchester and Liverpool, and all difficultiesbeing vanquished, locomotion by means of steamwas found profitably available, at double the speed whichcould be obtained by draught horses. But the originalexpense of constructing the road was so great, that manyspeculators, with added energy, applied themselves to thetask of making steam locomotion available on commonroads.*Wheel carriages drawn by animal power are moved bythe external leverage of the animals limbs put in actionby expansive muscular force combined with gravity.Steam carriages, on the contrary, are moved by an internalleverage acting on the wheels by the elastic force ofsteam, either by a crank on the axle, as a man turns agrindstone, or by some other contrivance producing thesame effect. Therefore, when the wheels turn on theiraxes, it is necessary that the peripheries should hold firmlyto the ground, and not slide on it ; or the forward move-theChat Moss was a most formidable and expensive enemyto the Manchester Railroad. The history of the struggles betweenthe skilly intelligence and perseverance of die elder Mr. Stevenson,and his capricious illusory antagonist, the Moss, is very remarkable.As this road now exists, it is in reality a floating causeway, as carefullyballasted as a ship, to secure he equilibrium.192 STEAM LOCOMOTION.ment will not be obtained, but, instead of It, the wheelswill grind a hole, and gradually sink down. Therefore, inorder to obtain the forward motion, a certain weight mustbe placed on the wheels, to increase the friction and keepthem from slipping. But this weight will be unavailing,unless the road on which the wheels rest be sufficientlyhard, firm, and unyielding in all parts, to prevent thewheels from sinking below its surface. If it be soft, i^will not afford a sufficient fulcrum for the wheels toact on.That part of an engine which generates the elastic forceof steam is called the boiler. The larger the boiler, i, e.the greater the surface of water exposed to the boilingaction of heat, the greater will be the quantity of steamgenerated. And in proportion as the intensity of heatis increased, so is the power of the steam ; but in thatcase the boiler must be made proportionately stronger.Boilers which are calculated to bear a pressure of steamequal to fifteen pounds to the square inch are called "low-pressureC those which are intended to bear a greater pressureto the inch are called " high-pressures It is thereforeevident that the high-pressure boilers with their chargeof water may be much lighter, and occupy much less spacethan the low-pressure ones. In stationary engines, whereneither space nor weight are of consequence, low-pressureboilers are most commonly used; but in a locomotivemachine, it is important to diminish as much as possibleboth the weight and bulk, and therefore high-pressureboilers are preferred. But boilers may chance occasionallyto explode from unforeseen causes, as guns go off andSTEAM LOCOMOTION. 19Shouses are occasionally burned down, by accident. In caseof an accident, which is more likely to happen with a high-pressurethan with a low-pressure boiler, the danger ismuch greater with the high-pressure than with the low-pressure,because the elastic force of the steam is greater.In a steam-coach it would almost infallibly be fatal to thelife of the engineer, if not of the passengers. To obviatethis difficulty a new kind of boiler has been adopted.Instead of holding the water in one dense body, it ismade to circulate through a number of small tubes, roundwhich the heat of the fuel plays. These tubes are allconnected together, and contained within an iron casing.Some one of these tubes may have a flaw which causes itto burst ; but the explosion is so trifling, that no dangercan be apprehended. A very small portion of the totalforce is expended in the explosion, and the water immediatelyleaking out, the fire is extinguished.But though the danger is removed, these boilers arefound to give little steam power in proportion to theirweight ; and the vehicles which are constructed with themfor the most part are inefficient, except on very hard firmroads : a loose surface stops them, and a hill is with difficultysurmounted. But this is not all. The durability ofa steam-engine depends very much on its being kept at onerate of speed, and that the elastic force put in operationbe constantly the same. On roads which vary in theirtexture and in their level this is impossible; up hill thepower of the engine must be exerted to the utmost, — consequentlythe engine must be sufficiently strong for thehardest work, and the extra weight and strength will194 STEAM LOCOMOTION.prove an incumbrance on level ground. Rail-roads are ofeven surface, but Macadimised roads are uneven,— consequently,delicate machinery on the latter must suffer muchdestructive wear. It is only by making the road very firmand even, or by the substitution of very efficient springs,that this destructive wear can be alleviated. Very heavycarriages, such as steam carriages must necessarily be, willbeat themselves to pieces over rough roads unless theirrate of movement be very slow. The size of the obstacle,or the depth of the inequality, is multiplied in compoundproportion by the increased rate of motion. And whereefficient springs are used between the moving wheels andthe machinery, it is evident that there will be a greatertendency in the wheels to slip round without moving thevehicle. Now, in locomotion, one chief advantage whichsteam has over animals is not merely its power of workingunceasingly without tiring, but also the capability of exertingany needful increase of power to increase the rapidityof movement. As regards a steam-coach carrying passengerson its own wheels, the inequality of a road is a sufficientdifficulty; and for a steam-drag drawing passengers inseparate vehicles, a common infirm road with an undulatingsurface would considerably increase the difficulty in thepresent condition of locomotive machinery. The naturalpowers of an animals limbs are adapted to surmount naturalsurmises, though rough or difficult ; but the artificial limbsof steam are only adapted to artificial causeways of anequal degree of excellence.But though steam vehicles in their present conditionlus regards the toads they travel on, are not adapted to ge-steamLocomotion, 195neal use, it is no argument that skill and dexterity cannoteventually bring them to bear. They have improved muchsince the first attempts were made; and the numerousspeculators at times engaged on them, are continuallyadding to the knowledge of what will not do by theirfigures, — and something also to the knowledge of what willdo, by their partial success. Gradually, thb stock of knowledgecontributed in small portions by different personsfill be combined to produce a more efficient result.Wheels will be better constructed to prevent them fromsinking into the road, and springs will be contrived toproduce the necessary ease to the machinery without impedingthe movement. One of the most patient, skilful,and persevering, amongst steam carriage speculators, is Mr.Walter Hancock of Stratford, and the compound progressionwith which he has produced several carriages is aremarkable proof of what has just been advanced. In theyear 18^6 he took out a patent for a boiler, not constructedof tubes, but in flat partitions forming compartmentsIt was not imtil the beginning of 1831 that the first carriage,called the Infant, constructed with this boiler, wasenabled to run. In 18S^ a second carriage, called theEnterprise was commenced, and in April 1838 it wasrunning for hire. The third carriage, the Autopsy, wascommenced in 1833 ; and by October of the same year itwas on the road. The fourth carriage, the Era was commencedin 1834 ; and by August of the same year it "wascompleted. In the same year also a steam-drag was completedand shipped for Vienna. In all these carriagesthere has been a gradual improvement of construction, aso2196 STEAM LOCOMOTION.well as rapidity of execution, which will not cease to makeprogress till perfection be attained, or till perfection shallhave ceased to be an object of desire, by the attention ofthe inventors being turned to objects of greater profit andutility.It is not generally known that the idea of a steam-coachoccurred to Mr. Watt, and is even proposed in one of hispatents,' but was never acted on. The commencement ofactual construction for common roads was about the year1825. It may seem strange that a considerable numberof persons should have been separately engaged for tenyears on the same object without producing a perfect result; but Mr. Watt himself was engaged twenty yearswith his inventions ere he brought them to perfection.Many years also elapsed between the first attempts atsteam-boat locomotion, and its regular establishment as amatter of business. The difficulties to overcome in rowingvessels by means of circular paddle-wheels are assuredlyless than those of propelling coaches over rough roads ;but steam-rowing had its difficulties to contend withnevertheless. There was a sufficient number of peoplewho knew how to build ships, and also a sufficient numberwho knew how to build steam-engines ; but those who hadto combine them must necessarily serve an apprenticeshipto a new art, ere they could harmonise differing materials,and ascertain the proportions and true forms of the variousparts. And this is the case with steam-coaches. A combinationof the practical knowledge of the carriage builderand the engineer was necessary, to enable an inventor toput his plans in execution ; but mechanical men in regularSTEAM LOCOMOTION. 197business rarely embark in speculations. The speculators,for the most part, were neither carriage builders nor engineers: they possessed general knowledge, but very littleknowledge of details ; they knew nothing of proportion,and as they went on, — mostly in pecuniary difficulties, — rthey were obliged to acquire their knowledge in the schoolof costly experiment. And even engineers could not availthemselves of their previously gathered knowledge, butwere constrained to learn afresh. The proportions of parts,adapted to stationary engines, are not fitted to encounterthe uncertain concussion and momentum of rough roads;Strength must be provided to resist the greatest amount ofconcussion, and it is at the same time necessary that allpossible lightness should be preserved. To accomplishthese two opposite objects, the greatest nicety of calculationis required, — and that calculation can only be verifiedby repeated experiment. All this must be at the cost ofthe needy speculator ; the public at large does not interestitself, till doubts have vanished, and certainty has takentheir place, — unless the speculator be a good advocate, andcan persuade them to believe in a certainty he himself believes,but has not verified. In such cases the knavish speculatorwho aims at people's pockets, and not at mechanicalsuccess, has a better chance than the honest one.But even in the present condition of steam-coaches,enough has been done to excite the prejudices of many carriagebuilders, who fear lest their trade should be encroachedon. They fear it may be possible for steam to supersede-horsesin pleasure carriages. To analyse this, we must firstdefine what is meant by pleasure carriages. All carriages which198 Steam LOCOMOTION.carry human beings may be called pleasure carriages, inasmuchas they are constructed to avoid the pain of walking ;but the best definition of a pleasure carriage is, one notused for the purposes of business, or mere conveyance betweennear or distant places, — but for the purpose of pleasantexercise in the open air, or to facilitate the intercourseof social life, not as a matter of necessity, but of enjoyment.For pleasure carriages as thus defined, it is notlikely that steam will be considered available. The reasonsare sundry. In the first place, steam is a mere labourer —a drudge who performs his work without speech or sign,with dogged perseverance but without emotion. By dintof the garb in which he is clad, the machine which serveshim for a body, he sometimes puts on the appearance of alive thing, shaking his polished metal clothing like an armouredknight : but this is only when he is stationary.His travelling garb is rough and rude, his breath is sulphureous,his voice is hissing, his joints creak, the anointingof his limbs gives forth an unpleasing gaseous odour, hecarries with him a kitchen and a fuel chamber, and hiswhole appearance is black and unsightly He may be personifiedwhen speaking of him ; but no one pats his neck orspeaks to him in a voice of encouragement. It is not sowith a hone or horses. They are beautiful and intelligentanimal, powerful yet docile ; creatures that respond tokindness, tod shrink som cruelty and injustice. Thedriver and owner can love them or feel proud of them ;they step with' grace, and can vary their form and movementsin a thousand ways. They are creatures of individualimpulses ; and although injudicious treatment occa-STEAM LOCOMOTION. 199signally reduces them to blindness by artificial means,—though injudicious custom chooses to govern them by thesense of feeling rather than by the inflection of the voicemodulated to their ear, still there is felt towards them aspecies of companionship. The man who rides a horse,feels a pleasure when the creature responds willingly tohis purposes ; and when he responds unwillingly, he feelsa pride in the exercise of his power to compel him to obedience.Even when a horse is vicious, there is a pleasurableexcitement in riding him. The riders nerves arestrung, his senses are quickened ; eye, hand, and ear arealike on the alert ; the blood rushes through the veins, andevery faculty is aroused. There is a feeling of proud Consciousnessthat his individual skill and dexterity can renderhis life as secure in peril as other menes are under ordinarycircumstances. Many men there are who prefer ahorse to a certain extent dangerous.*' Oh ! the blood more stirsTo rouse a lion than to start a hare''Most men like a horse with vivacity, and few chooseone which is merely adapted to work, — at least for riding.And thus it is with driving to a certain extent, — that is tosay, for pleasure purposes. The carriage is built to harmonisewith the horses, and the horses are selected to setoff the carriage well. The carriage and horses form a combination; and if they possess not harmonising points, theyare unsightly. A cart-horse in an elegant carriage is asmuch an anomaly as a blood-horse in a heavy cart.But there are persons who merely need a carriage forthe purpose of moving in the open air without personal200 STEAM LOCOMOTION.trouble, and to whom a machine would be preferable if itafforded them the same facilities, together with a diminutionof the inconveniences. In its present state, steam isnot capable of supplying this purpose. The boiler andappurtenances are necessarily of great weight; and thesmaller they are made, the more proportionately heavy dothey become as regards the work they are capable of performing.Fire, even of coke or charcoal — steam — the empyreumaticodour arising from heated oil, together withhissing noises, are nuisances of great amount. A steamgig or chariot would undoubtedly be a great acquisitionfor night work, saving horses and servants alike from illnessand annoyance. It is a painful sensation to be at theopera and be conscious that the horses and servants aresuffering pain, and perhaps imbibing the seeds of disease,exposed to rain, snow, or frost ; but as these are only casualties,they will be endured, rather than the certain annoyancesfrom steam in its present state will be submitted to.For short trips by sea, steam is endured, because it is certainin its time, and against its inconveniences are to besetthe fearful inflictions of protracted periods of sea sicknessin sailing vessels ; but if it were a question of a permanentdwelling on the sea, most persons would prefer asailing vessel to a steamer.And our present state of knowledge affords little hopethat the inconveniences of steam can be efficiently removed.The old name for " steam-engine '"^ was "fire-engines'*The truest definition would probably be to designate it aheat-engineer The heat is the real mover ; the water isbut the vehicle in which to apply the heat, just as theSTEAM LOCOMOTION. gOlwater in a Branch's press-pump is but the vehicle toconcentrate the force of the human arm applied throughthe lever. Water absorbs heat as spongy wood absorbswater ; and its bulk being increased by it, it acts like awedge against whatever restrains it. Attempts have beenmade to use heat through other agencies,— ^as the variousgases, and atmospheric air ; but they have not yet beenfound practicable. Could the gases be used, the weightof the charged machine would be lessened by the substitutionof a light medium for a heavy one ; but the weight ofthe machine itself would remain the same, as the samepower of resistance would be necessary. It is possiblethat in time the ill-odoured gases evolved from heated oilmay be neutralised by mixing them with other gases, andthe chief mover, fire, made exact and unerring in its applicationswithout smoke or vapour : but this is to calculatenot on what is, but on what may be.It seems not likely that steam can be applied to pleasurecarriages ; but improvements will most probably go onin the construction of steam carriages, till they be perfectlyavailable for common roads as vehicles of locomotion, — -^as a means of travelling more economically than withhorses from one place to another. But to realise a profitfrom them, they must carry many passengers : they will dofor public, but not for private vehicles. One advantagethey will possess which common vehicles have not : incold weather they may be warmed by the steam-pipes withthe same facility as a house, and in hot weather they maybeventilated by fanners worked by the machinery.But, when all this has been done, it will not be worth202 steam LOCOMOTION.while to work steam-coaches on common roads, for a sin*pie reason. Wherever there may exist traffic enough towarrant the use of steam-coaches, it will be worth while tolay down rail-ways. Those who are strong advocates forsteam-coaches on common roads usually assume that railroadsare enormously expensive in their construction, andthat common roads cost nothing, or but little. But thisis an unwarranted assumption. The expenses of rail-roadsare heavy in the outset, by reason of the necessary embankments,deep cuts and tunnelling, together with thepurchase of land, and the erection of bridges or tunnels tokeep up the communication on intersecting lines of road.But is not this also the case with common roads on newlines? The true question at issue is, whether, aftthe level has been produced, it be more expensive to laya rail-road or a Macadamised road capable of bearing aspecific weight. In some districts the expense of Macadamisingwith granite is enormous, on account of carriage ;and for steam-coaches, the roads are required to be of thevery best kind, or they will not bear the weight. Allowingthat the rail-roads be most costly at first laying down,there can be no comparison as a question of repairs. Allthat can want renewal are the iron rails and fastenings ; andthe steamers on the hail-road can carry their own materialswhich the steamers on common roads cannot so convenientlydo, the bulk being so enormous. And the amount of loadwhich the same amount of power will draw on the rail-road,owing to the lessening of friction and concussion, is veryconsiderably increased. And lastly, the difference of speedis an unanswerable reason for giving a preference to the railroad.Fifteen miles per hour is probably the outside per-STEAM LOCOMOTION. SOSfinance which common road steamers can attain withoutshaking themselves to pieces ; while on rail-roads twenty-fivemiles can without difficulty be attained* Where verygreat speed is not required as for short distances and sentientstoppages, such as the common omnibuses are usedfor, — sit may eventually be worth while to employ steamerson common roads when they are sufficiently improved.The momentum acquired by great speedy which is foundso advantageous on rail-roads, would prove a serious difficultyin the case of frequent stoppages.The constructors of pleasure carriages have not only nothingto fear from the encroachments of steam, but, on thecontrary, they may regard it in the light of an ally. Sincethe invention of steam-boats, the facility of exporting carriagesto Ireland and the Continent, without the necessityof expensive packing, and without the uncertainty ofarrival, has led to a greatly increased demand, la spiteof the unwise exclusion contemplated by the custom-houselaws of France, English carriages are now commonly seenin Paris and other parts, and they are universally preferred.On an infinitely greater scale will carriage-keeping bepromoted by the introduction of railroads. Time was,that travelling coaches were something like baggage waggons,and travelled as slowly. People wanted to travelfaster, and their baggage was sent by the waggon, as heavily-ladenvehicles would not bear rapid motion. But the vehicleswere improved, the baggage was lightened, andgoods and passengers again travelled together. But thevehicles were wanted for other purposes than there travelling; they were needed as pleasure carriages in towns. Inventionwas set to work, and the same vehicle was made204 STEAM LOCOMOTION.to show like a town coach one day, and like a travellingcoach the next. But such vehicles are necessarily imperfect.The springs which are adapted to carry a light weighteasily are not adapted to carry a heavy weight, and viceversa: and a carriage must necessarily lose much of itsbeauty when used for travelling. These disadvantageshave prevented many persons from keeping carriages, andhave obliged some few to keep two carriages. But anothermotive has perhaps been still more forcible. In travellingwith a carriage rapidly, it is necessary to go with post-horses; or to travel by very easy stages, with a single pair.Few persons like to travel slowly, and fewer still, to leavetheir horses behind them and be deprived of their use ; andas the habits of those who keep carriages are mostly migratoryat particular periods of the year, they would rathercease to keep horses and carriages than be confined to onespot. The desirable thing is to have one pleasure carriageperfect in all its parts, and to be able to convey it,servants, horses, baggage and all, at a rapid pace, fromone point to another, without injury to carriage or horses ;to have the perfect use of it at any required spot, withas much facility as though the owner had not left hishome.Stadia locomotion on rail-roads will accomplish all this.The driver or the owner may drive the vehicle, with thefamily, servants, baggage and all appurtenances, on to aplatform securely railed round, and steam will do its officein conveying them to their destination, without concussion,and without damage to the vehicle. When this shallcome to pass, pleasure carriages will increase in numbermanifold.^05CHAPTER XIV.Taste. Definition of Taste. — true and False Taste. — Originalityand Imitation. — Form, Colour, and Proportion. — Defective Proportionsof Carriages. — Natural Forms. — Ornaments contrived tocover defects — Colours. — Heraldic Bearings. — Disposition of Ornaments.— trimming.There is a notion prevalent amongst uninstructedpeople that the quality called Taste is a peculiar " gifts*'which an individual is endowed with at birth, and whichcannot be acquired by any amount of application. Someportion of this belief is founded on reason, inasmuch asthe physical faculties of some individuals at their birthare more perfect than those of others. Some are bornwith weak, and others with strong eyes : and the samdifference may exist in the perceptive faculties generally,on which faculties the quality of Taste must depend.But even as weak eyes may be strengthened by judicioustreatment, and strong eyes may be weakened by irisjudicious treatment, so inferior perceptive faculties maybeimproved by cultivation, and those which might havebeen first-rate may disappear by neglect. Nearly all peoplehave the germs of Taste ; but in some nations thosegerms are developed more than in others. Even in thosenations where the germs of Taste are developed in butfew individuals, — where the mass of the community cannot206 TASTE.discover beauty for themselves, they are yet susceptibleof its influence when it is placed before them by others.If it were not so, the expression " a person of good Tastewould not be used, as it so commonly is, as a mark of approbation.The phrases " a person of Taste," and " a personof Genius," in common language mean two differentthings ; but they are in reality merely modifications of thesame thing. Perceptive faculties of a high kind, withoutmuch cultivation, give a critical power to examine theproductions of Art generally ; but when highly cultivated,they give the power of creating works of Art of the highestkinds — and this fiu;idty is by common consent calledGenius.Taste may be considered as another word for Truth orProportion, both morally and physically. Thus, the utteranceof a falsehood is bad moral Taste ; it is a violenceoffered to Nature. In works of imagination, such asnovels, those which offend a correct taste will be foundto violate truth, probability, or proportion ; and evenwhen they are copied from Nature, it will be found a vitiatedand distorted nature, forcibly perverted from thetrue type. Much false taste exists in the community, andalways haa existed; but the total amount is continuallylessening. The reason of the false taste is, the imitativenature of man, which in an uncultivated state pillowswithout examining. But even as it is the nature of waterto attain a state of rest after violent oscillations, so it isthe tendency of truth and proportion to grow out of thechaos either of thought or matter. When an individualby the force of his Genius or cultivated Taste setsTASTE. ^7a true type in any work of art, the public soon begin toappreciate it, to take pattern by it, to imitate it,— andthough many imitate badly, still there is a marked generalimprovement. Excellence cannot be attained by imitation; the principles of an art are the most important partof it, and when they are once thoroughly mastered bylong^ontinued application, the details will be filled inwith comparative ease. It is a far more tedious operationto imitate than to originate ; and imitations, thoughthey may be excellent as imitations, can never have thevalue of originals : they lack the intellect, the spiritwhich Genius alone can bestow. Imitations of works ofart are like the mimicries of the manners of living beings :they are caricatures rather than likenesses ; being based onno rules, they bring the important parts into stronger reliefthan the main portions ; they lay stress on the omanments, and forget the lines of proportion ; they overloadthe capital, and entirely neglect the base.Carriages, as constructed for the purposes of pleasure,are works of art, in which Taste may be widely developedin Form, Colour, and Proportion ; but the former is ofcourse subservient to the mechanical construction. Thehitherto defective mechanism of carriages, in which ^^ a largewheel is made to follow a small one,^^ has to a great extentdestroyed proportion, and given a general licence i6 allkids of heterogeneous devices and barbarous ornaments,as if to overlay defects which there were no apparent meansof obviating. Custom has reconciled the public to thisdiscrepancy, which, were it now to appear foi' the first timewould excite universal distaste and ridicule. The lines208 TASTE.of a carnage are generally arranged with the purpose ofcomposing an elegant side view. To use an Iritis, theside of a carriage is its front. Viewed as a piece of architecture,it presents a central elevation, with a large wingand a small one,— or rather, with two unequal pediments.If viewed as a locomotive machine, the exaggerated mechanicaldefect of the fore wheel being the smallest, isat once perceived. The birds which cleave the air or floaton the waves, and the fishes which swim beneath thewaves, are all constructed by nature with the breast broad,and the tail tapering off. The swift-footed quadrupedshave a greater length of limb before than behind ; andships and boats intended for speed have their extremebreadth very fair forward. But an ordinary four-wheeledcarriage is constructed in direct opposition to the principlesZ locomotion exemplified in an'Ls and saps.In an ordinary coach, tee side form of the body is composedof elliptic lines, from which the supporting ironbrackets or loops are continued into reversed curves. Thiscontrivance keeps the centre of gravity low. The fourC springs, from which the body is suspended by leathernbraces, are each— or ought to be — two-thirds of a circle,with a tangent to it to form a base or support. The percybeneath the body, which connects together the frameworksupporting the springs, is curved into a serpentineline, corresponding to the bottom of the body and theloops ; and thus a generally agreeable form is preserved.But the double framework in front, and the unequalwheels, entirely discompose the effect ; and as a whole, itis extremely disproportioned, and consequently unsightly;TASTE. 209The framework and wheels look a huge mass of timberand iron work, much too heavy for the light loadwhich is suspended on it. The wheels appear to projectfar apart from it, for no apparent reason. To restoresomething like a proportion of form, the hinder part isfilled in with what is called the hind standard, — a compositionof carved curvilinear wood and iron work, supportedon a pediment or cushion, resting on carved blocks,1^— and the fore part is filled in with a black mass, withelliptic outlines, called the Salisbury boat. This is supportedon a pediment of carved wooden blocks, and issurmounted by a mass of coloured drapery and fringe,called a hammer-cloth. Altogether it is a barbaric mass,which is only redeemed from positive ugliness by the harmonyof the various curves as a whole ; and to producethis harmony there are yet no ascertained rules. Thereforeit is that the builder who possesses taste producescombinations pleasing to the eye ; and he who is withouttaste produces unsightly works, which he is necessarilyobliged to sell at a low rate of profit, as mere articlesof convenience, and not of refinement. And even as aristidesof convenience, they are imperfect, inasmuch as theharmony of form arises from the due proportion of partsto each other ; and that very proportion produces a greateramount of convenience. The size and weight of a carriageought to be proportioned to that of the horse orhorses intended to draw it, as well as that of the personor persons intended to ride in it, and also the locality andseason it is intended for; and the proportion of partshaving been once accurately settled, the same rule of prop210 TASTE.portion must be observed, "whether on an increasing ordiminishing scale.After settling the preliminary of Form, the next considerationis that of Colour. Taste in the latter can domuch towards amending the defects in the former, or atlast can divert the attention of ordinary observers fromdwelling on them. Certain colours produce their effectby contrast ; as green and red, purple and yellow, orangeand blue : others again produce their effect by harmony ;as green and drab, or brown and amber : others again bygradation ; as the differing shades of greens and browns, inalmost endless variety. Colours are generally divided intotwo classes, — the warm, and the cold. Red and Yellow,and their various gradations, are warm colours; Greenand Blue, and their various gradations, are cold colours.The intermingling of the opposite colours forms neutrals.In choosing the colour of a carriage, various considerationsintervene : — whether it is to be used in summer or in winter,or in both seasons ; — whether it is intended to look richin the outset, without regard to wear ; ox whether the chiefconsideration be durability, and the next, appearance.The warm colours are of course the. most appropriate forwinter, and the cold ones for summer ; but those whichlook the richest are not generally those which wear thebest. As an exception to this, however, the yellows, whichare both rich and showy, are amongst the most durablecolours. For bright sunny days the straw or sulphuryellow is very brilliant and beautiful; but for the autumnalhaze, the rich deep orange hue conveys the mosttaste:. 5^11agreeable sensations. The greens used are of innumeiyaide tints, commencing with the yellowish oUyb^ and graydually darkening till they are barely distinguishable fromblack. Neither apple green, grass green, sea green, norany green of a bluish tint, can be used in carriage paintering with good effect as a ground colour; but in somespecies of light carriages a pleasing effect may be poorduce for smiler by the imitation o£ the variegatedgrasses. The dark greens look the richest, but do not wearso* well, the slightest specks being magnified by the darksunrise. They look best in the winter time. But theolive greens are preferable for the siimmei^, bb they showthe dust less and are amongst the most generally durablecolours. The browns are scarcely less, numerous than thegreens, and even more durable ; but the lighter shades ofbrown have rather an unpleasing effect, far too. homelyfor varnish. Some of the darker browns become exceedinglyrich with the admixture of a reddish tint, from thefirst point tinge, up to. the deep beautiful chocolate colour,tiiie intermediate shade between which and a decided lakeafford perhaps thereby richest ground coklura used in carriagepainting. Blues w&cq formerly principally used asaground colour for bodies, to contract with axed carriageand framework. Of ^ late very dark blues have been usedas a general ground colour, and when new they are veryrich, being a glazed or partially transparent colour ; butthey very soon become worn and &ded, the least speck ordust disfiguring them. Blue is also a cold colour, and while;it is unfitted for summer by reason of its easy soiling, it isp 221^ TASTE.unpleasant in winter, owing to its want of warmth. Drabsare very rarely used for painting colours, though for somepeculiar purposes they might be advantageously applied.In addition to the ground colour, other colours are usedto relieve it, the framework of the body being generallypainted black ; and in the case of a very dark colour beingused for the ground, it becomes necessary to nm a veryfine line of a lighter shade, in order definitely to mark theinner edges of the framework. The same process is pursuedwith regard to the carriage and under framework, forthe purpose of making it look lighter to the eye. Werethe perch, beds, and wheels painted of one colour, theywould look exceedingly heavy and clumsy : but the skilfulmanagement of the fine lines, or " picking out'' ^ it istechnically called, produces a pleasing optical illusion.The same effect is sought also in the carved work, whichwould look very bare were it not heightened and broughtinto relief by the judicious application of black andcoloured lines. The heraldic bearings, such as arms andsupporters, crests and ciphers, which serve as ornamentsto fill up the broad spaces of the panels, w^ formerlypainted in their proper heraldic colours. With some brightgrounds, such as yellow, the effect is occasionally good ;but with others it destroys the general harmony of the carriage.On this account it has been customary of lateyears, when dark colours are used, such as greens andbrowns, to paint the heraldic devices in relief of the samecolours.Proportion in carriages applies both to Form and Colour.As regards form, it regulates the sizes of the various partsTASTE. 213SO that the whole may harmonise, and dictates the adoptionof contrivances for lessening the apparent size of those partswhich would otherwise be unseemly. Thus the total heightwhich is necessary in the body for the comfort of the passengersis too great for the length which is convenient to assignit. Therefore the total height is reduced, and to give sufficientleg room a false bottom is affixed by means of convexrockers like a child's cradle, and which, being thrownback and painted black, cease to form a portion of the elevation: they are like a foundation out of sight, and thusthe proportion of the front view is preserved. In paintingthe body of a coach or chariot, it is customary to confinethe ground colour to the lower panels, and to paint theupper ones black, all except some stripes on the upper partof the doors. Now, inasmuch as colour in this case constitutesform by means of outline, and as that outline givesan irregular figure, it is a decidedly defective arrangement,making the upper part of the structure look heavier thanthe base. But the act is, this defect has not been causedby intentional bad taste ; it is a mere result of imitation,of following up old practices when the motive for them hasceased* — It was formerly the custom to cover the roofsand upper panels of all close carriages with greasy leather,in order to make them water tight, the edges of the leatherbeing fastened down with rows of brass nails. Thisleather was black, arid thus the eye became gradually reconciledto an unsightly object from a consideration of utility.After it was discovered that undressed leather couldbe strained on and painted, it was still considered necessaryto paint it black, as the surface was not smooth214 TASTE.enough to show well with bright coIoutb ; and now thatwooden panels are used to the upper as well slower part,long custom has made the black colour of the upper partappear indispensable.As by the present mode of constructing bodies, variousjoints are left exposed to View, where leather unites withwood, and where two varieties of woodmnrte in the samesurface, it becomes necessary to Resort toosdtne mode ofcovering them. This is done by means of building, orstripes of needed metal nirith fastenings si[d<^aced to theinner side. In some cases this beading is blushed anUscarcely shows ; but in others it is of polished. biass^or plated,and thus marks portions of the outlines of the framework.This ' has an exceedingly bad effect, and gives v^«side lines a broken and unfinished appearance. Either tkebeads should not show at all, or the whole of the outlineshould be distinctly marked, as is the case. in some' fewof the best finished carriages. The elegance of a carriagedepends on the perfection of the outlines, and everythingwhich tends to. disturb those outlines should be>avt)ided4Ornamental work conspicuously placed in iiyadicioustipbfiii^tons ceases to be an ^masient. Thtis^ iheile^fbeadsare proper positions to place an'orhamentalf boss, beea^eethey ate the points 'where sardis end and^«dler lin^xom*^hence ; but the j ritigs which 'sustain the checb^brmces .odthe body should be kept obt of eight, iixasniiEdi^ as seybreak thief lines t)f the body in the 'straightest' portions jwhere there is no scroll to relieve them-fortis reas^crests or head plates are objectionable, and seem mere excrescencesquite out of place : theyveric^ibiber a'q>lsin ^sin*-TASTE. 215face without compartments, and that in a mode which looksas though they had been rolled away towards one edgenear the roof, in order to get them as far out of the wayas possible. The practice is now est disappearing. Itoriginated in the desire to cover in some way the unsightlyprojecting hoop-sticks used to sustain the flexible headof landaus, barouches, and other open carriages. In suchcases the head plates had somewhat the same effect as theornaments used by architects at the eaves of CSteeian rooto cover the ends of the projections which run in parallellines down the joints. But on a plain surface, such as ispresented by the upper panels of a coach or chariot, suchornaments are out of place;The handles of the doors are always made conspicuous,being of brass or plated metal. Necessity dictates this, asthe constant action of the hand in opening and shuttingthe doors prohibits the use of paint, on account of itsrapid wear. The side of the carriage would look betterwithout this prominent projection, if it could be avoided :but as that is impracticable, it is generally placed at the intersectionof the central vertical and the central horizontalKnew, where it interferes less with the outlines than itwould in any other position. In some classes of carriages,such as dress coaches and chariots for town use these handlesare made highly omameniial-vrith a profusion ofchased work ; but in others they are left quite plain. Thedisadvantage attending chased work in carriages is the difficultyof keeping it clean. Its effect is dependant otLthe arrangement of bright and; d^d portions, and the kt^ter cannot be preserve when the cleansing brush is &e-216. ^ tASTE.quietly applied. Where polished metal is used, brass isthe richest and warmest, and harmonises best with the generalityof colours ; but it requires much labour to keepclean, especially in damp weather. Silver is more adaptedto summer colours, having a cool appearance ; but in winterit has the advantage of not tarnishing so readily as brass.Brass might of course be blackened to keep it from the actionof the weather ; but the lacker would give it a tawdryand unseemly appearance. Gold would be the desirablemetal, were there not two strong reasons against its use —the expense and the temptation to robbery.The most conspicuous objects in a carriage are thelamps. In dress carriages these are usually of polishedmetal, and there is much room for taste in them ; but fortravelling carriages the lamps are usually black.In the lining or trimming of a carriage, form, colour, andproportion are all requisites. All dress carriages have ham?'mer-cloths, or coloured drapery surrounding the driver'sset. This forms a most prominent object, and if it doesnot harmonise with the rest of the vehicle, the proportion ofparts is destroyed. The general form of the outlines mustbjB regulated by the lines of the iron-work or framework onwhich it is supported. The effect of it is architectural.It commonly has a base of deep lace or fringe : the centralelevation is composed either of a panel work of cloth withlace outlines, or of massive cloth flutes ; and the top has acapital of horizontal lace to surmount it. The size of thevarious parts, and the relative size of the whole to the carriage,must be regulated by the artist's eye; for so manyconsiderations intervene, that no particular rules can be laidTASTE. 217down to follow out every detail. In brown and green carriages,it is customary to make the cloth or ground colourof the hammer-cloth the same as that of the body, and torelieve it with the differing shades occurring in the textureof the lace. But with other colours decided contrasts arepreferred, not only in the carriage, but occasionally in thehanger-cloth itself. The design of the carriage builderis occasionally ruled by the family livery of the owner.Thus, sometimes a dark blue body is seen with a deepcrimson hammer-cloth, a dead white hammer-cloth with adeep blue lace, and so on. Yellow carriages are sometimesfitted with blue hammer-cloths, and sometimes withdrab ones ; and the effect is equally good in both caseswhen well managed. In the formation of hammer^clothsto stand the rough usage to which they are constantly exposedin the ascent and descent of the coachman to thedriving box, considerable judgment is required, to enablethem to preserve their shape. A worn or defaced ham-neckclothdestroys the general effect of the best madecarriages.The interior lining of carriages is regulated by the samegeneral rules which determine the form, colour, and proportionof hammer-cloths, with the necessity for greatercomfort superadded, which is made the first consideration.The form of the cushions and squabs must necessarily beregulated to the convenience of the passenger. Theseforms are regulated by means of the canVass and stuffing.The general covering is cloth ; but for those parts whichwear or are apt to get soiled, it is customary to substitutemorocco or silk : thus one side of the cushions is cloth,218 TASTE.and the other silk ot morocco, in order to reverse them ifnecessary. The vertical cushions at the back and sides,not being made to turn, are only covered on one side, witheither silk or morocco. The roof is covered with cloth, aswell as the other parts. The steps, which are made to foldinto cavities in the doors, are covered with morocco andcarpet. Pockets are arranged on the doors, and in a chariot,in front also. In carriages painted brown or seen, it isvery much the custom to use cloth of the same colour asthe paint, and a different coloured morocco or silk. Thus,green cloth and crimson silk are not uncommon, or browncloth and crimson or yellow silk. The lace which is usedgenerally contains the same colours as the cloth and silk,and one of the colours is in relief. A breadth of three-inchlace is generally placed horizontally around the wholetop as a kind of capital, and vertical lines descend from iton either side at the doors. The outlines of the pocketflaps are marked in the same manner, like a livery coatThe fronts of the seat cushions, ^d hanging loops for thearms, as well as the glass strings, are of the same lace.Along the seat a valant of vertically fluted cloth is earned,and the bottom of it is bound in a similar way. Thother parts of the-lining aire bound with a kind of liaii^^^edging lace. Different makers have different modes oftrimming ; some put mote lace, and some less ; •- but there idno exact rule on the subject, ind the general appeanitc^must be the principe;! guide to the artist. In the summertimeit id customary io cover the lining with a false Hnitigof chintz, generally striped, and sometimes in filtered patterns.In this Case no lace or binding edges sure shown,Tate. 219and the effect is very good. Mannerly it was the customto use brass or plated metal for the hooks, handles, glassrollers, and other mechanical arrangements ; but ivory isnow advantageously substituted, and in some cases pearlshell.CHAPTER XV.Varieties of Carriages. Distinguishing characteristics. — Coach withUnder-springs — Without Under springs. — Landau. — DrivingCoach. — Town Chariot. — Post Chaise. — Landaulet. — BritzschkaChariot. — Elliptic Spring Chariot — Barouchett. — Barouchett. — Britz-schka. — Elliptic Spring Britzschka.— Droitzschka. — Driving Phaeton.— Elliptic Spring Phaeton. — Pony Phaeton. — BritzschkaPhaeton. — ancient Phaeton. — Cabriolet Phaeton. — Elliptic SpringCabriolet^Phaeton. — Curricle. — Cabriolets — tilbury. — Stanhope.—Open framed Stanhope.— Dennet. — Gig.— One-horse Chaise, orWhiskey.Not many years back, the varieties of carriages werevery limited in number, and there was little room for theexhibition of taste in form. But this fault has of late beencorrected, and the varieties of shape and make have becomeso numerous that it is difficult even for practised observersto be familiar with them all. The convenience ofthose who ride in carriages is now the first thing the builderhas to study ; and after that, to accommodate the formto it with as much of elegance as his taste will allow himto produce. Very ugly specimens are of course occasionallyproduced ; but, on the whole, the increase of practicetends materially to the increase' of good taste. Art hasshaken herself loose from the trammels, and it is not surprisingthat she should make a few ungraceful gambols inthe first burst of unrestrained energy.VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 221Though it would be difficult to describe every particularvariety of carriage now in use, it is comparatively easy to setforth the leading features, — the original models, as it were,x)f each particular class. The distinguishing characteristicare to be found in the form of the bodies, and not in themechanism of the springs or framework. Thus a particularshaped body entitles a carriage to the term Chariot,whether Jt be constructed with inter-springs or C springs,or with both, or whether it be with or without a perch.This rule obtains throughout the whole varieties of carriages; and in those bodies which are formed by a combination,it is customary to call them by a double name,— as,Cab-Phaeton, Britzschka-Chariot, Britzschka-Phaeton, &c.The chief carriage of all, and from which the tradetakes its name, is the Coach ; though it is now little used a^compared with other carriages.A Town Coach, after the best models, is constructedwith C springs and under-springs, hammer-cloth seat,Salisbury boot, and hind standards. The colours may befilled in according to taste.The form of this body is agreeable to the eye. Thecentral horizontal line should be straight in the middle, tocorrespond with the framing of the door, and the elbowsshoxdd curve upwards into elliptic lines. The loops orhanging brackets should come outwards from the lowerquarters, like the insertion of a flower-stalk. The rockeror false bottom beneath the bottom framing, intended togive greater height, scarcely shows at all in perspective.The sword-case, though a great convenience, is an ungrace-rful lump. The curved lines of the Salisbury boot are222 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.pleasing ; but the 1>ase line of the hammer-cloth, rangingbelow the elliptic curve, verging from the central horizontalline of the body, is a marked defect The blocks on whichthe hind standard rests are usually rich and of gracecurve. The standard itself, though composed of pleasingcurving lines, does not harmonise well with the outlines ofthe spring. The serpentine line of the perch, correspondingwith the general outline of the body and loops, is verypleasing in its effects ; but the under-springs are notgraceful, being placed at two different heights. Wheelsof differing heights are an anomaly. The C springs arepleasing lines, being in form about two-thirds of a circle,with a tangent for a base. The braces which connect themwith the loops, and also with the body, are fair from unsightly.If it be intended to use the coach for the puispose of travelling, the Salisbury boot and hammer-clothare removed, and a platform substituted in it place, whichcarries a trunk inside, and an impend on the top of it.The standard behind is also removed, and a boot on twolight springs is substituted for it, capable of carryingtwo persons and a small box beneath their seat. At theback of the body is placed a cap-case, and on the roofeither one or two imperials.A reference to the drawing of the Town Chariot willenable the reader to comprehend this description.A Coach of a simpler kind is devoid of inter-springs.A platform in front, and a boot behind, are suspended onthe C springs. To make a Town Coach of it, the imperialsand cap-case are removed, and a hind standard substitutedfor the boot. In front, the platform is removed.VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 2S3and a hammer-cloth seat is fixed to the hcxm of the loopby means of branch iron-work. To do ajl this work, ofcourse, the C springs must be made larger and heavier thanwhere the servants and luggage are carried on the under-springs.For the servants this kind of carriage is preferable,inasmuch as they ride on the same springs as theiremployers : whereas in the other carriage they are commonlyplaced on the under-springs alone, which are hard and jarviolently.* The total weight of this carriage is less thanwhen under-springs are used ; but it is mush less durableand is harder to the draught, unless where the roads happento be very soft. Coaches are not materially heavierthan chariots in actual weight ; but being constructed tocarry a double number of passengers, of course additionalstrength is required. But they are not very pleasant vehicles,as they have no convenient look-out in front.A Landau in its general form is similar to that of aCoach. But it is made with a jointed head to throw openoccasionally. The two S formed irons which appear onthe upper quarters are jointed levers for the purpose ofholding the head firmly together when closed. . It is usualto have a framed driving seat with a guard iron to this cartinge, as it is more convenient ; and when the head is down,it has a better appearance. But hind standards are occasionallyused. Sometimes Landaus are made with underThe Macadamised streets of London, and excellent roads' generally,permit of the use of springs which are found too hard on pavementsand rough roads. The author has understood that Englishcarriages with under-springs, when used in the streets of Paris, havecaused French servants to spit blood, from violent and continued conciliation.224 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.springs ; but their weight then becomes very great. Theunder side of the body is strengthened by very heavy ironworkto support it when open ; and, of course, for a heavybody, heavy springs and heavy frame work are required.This is an expensive carriage to build, and very liable toget out of order, as the leather and wood work of the headis affected by cold and heat, damp and dryness. The expenseof repairs is considerable.A Driving Coach is a vehicle formerly much used bygentlemen fond of driving and attending race-courses. Theperch is short and straight, and the wheels nearer togetherthan in ordinary coaches. The body and boots are framedtogether, and suspended on telegraph springs before andbehind, — the connexion with the carriage being by meansof carved blocks. This carriage will carry four passengersinside — two on the driving box, two on the seat behind, andsix on the roof, in all fourteen persons, besides possessing *great space for luggage. This is a very convenient carriagefor families travelling on the Continent. Sometimes thisCoach is constructed as a Landau, to open ; but the weightis much increased by it. It is an anomalous-looking vehicle,as the lines are inharmonious. The perch is straight,and the bottom of the body is circular ; while every line ofthe boots and springs is straight. The form of the perchand springs clearly indicate what the bottom line of thebody ought to be; but in this, as in many other cases, habitprescribes. It would seem as though it could not be con-fordered a Coach without a circular bottom line.Plate No. I, represents a Town Chariot, generally esteemedabove all others as a dress or court carriage whenVARIETIES OF Carriages. 225highly ornamented, though commonly used for other purposes.This carriage is by the French called a troupe,being in fact a coach cut down ; a portion of the fore endbeing cut away and only one seat left. The effect is pleasing; the lines of the fore end falling into each other ingraceful curves, and the reduced portion above affordingspace for the lamp without interfering with the outline.In all other respects the carriage resembles the TownCoach before described, and is capable of the same alterationsfor the purpose of travelling, when it becomes aPost Chaise. — In this drawing the skilful observer will discoverseveral defects. The front under-spring is too lowdown, and the distance is too great between the upper andlower curves. The front C spring does not rise gracefullyfrom its bedding. The front body loop is not delicatelytapered, and is badly set on to the body. The hind bodyloop is defective also, and the bottom of the Salisbury boothas no defined line. The bottom curve of the body is alsounequal.A similar carriage is constructed, without under-springs,and with a swinging fore and hind end ; passengers andluggage being all borne on the C springs. The hind endhas a boot for two servants ; and the fore end has a platform,which can carry a trunk inside, and an imperial onthe top. On the roof of the body is an imperial ; and atthe fore end of the body is affixed a large splashing framecovered with japanned leather, between which and the bodyis carried a cap-case. This altogether forms the regularPosting Chariot or Post Chaise. The lamps are black,and made to shift and hide the glass in the day-time. For226 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.town use, the travelling furniture can be shifted, and ahammer-cloth seat and standard substituted. For personswho wish to lie at full length, the front panel can be takenaway, and the fore end lengthened into a boot called adormeuse.A Landaulet bears the same relation to a Chariot thatthe Landau does to the Coach ; and the remarks which applyto the Landau will apply to the Landaulet also— if possiblemore forcibly.A Britzschka Chariot is distinguished from the ordinaryPosting Chariot by the form of the body, the lowerpart of which is shaped something like a Britzschka.This is a very unsightly carriage ; the lower lines beingungraceful curves, which do not harmonise with the upperpart. But it is a very convenient carriage for travellingin foreign countries, especially for those who experiencea difficulty in finding convenient beds, or who may beobliged to travel by night. There is ample room to lieat full length ; and the step is placed outside, in order notto incommode the interior. A projection behind is adaptedfor bedding, and the front part is an elongation for thelimbs. In addition to the ordinary lamps, a reading lampcan be attached behind to the back light, — an importantconvenience for travelling. One or two servants maybecarried on the boot behind ; and attached to the lockerbefore is a board, which, when let down, forms a footboard; — a seat being placed on the locker, an arrangementis thus made for driving. An imperial can go onthe roof; and if the hind boot be taken away, one or twolarge trunks may be substituted, she front foot-board»Po<nMa.VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 227may also be let down to a horizontal level, and thus carrya large trunk. This carriage is much better adapted fordiplomatic travelling than for family purposes. The roofcan be made to open.A light Posting Chariot is sometimes constructed onelliptic springs. This carriage is light, but not graceful,as the curved form of the body does not harmonisewith the elliptic springs. The lockers before and behindare framed into the body, and form part of it. The seatis projected backwards from the hind locker, to allow thesitters' legs to go inside. The front locker is large androomy, for the purpose of containing abundant luggage :an imperial goes on the top of it. The well beneath servesfor a dressing-case, and other light articles. There can beareading-lamp behind, and an imperial may be placed onthe roof if required. The use of this carriage is to travelvery rapidly with one pair of horses ; but it is a noisyvehicle, owing to the rattle produced by the wheel-plate,which is communicated to the hollow boots, and thence tothe body, with ftiU effect. It may be considered a bachelor'sor sportsman's carriage rather than one for family use,being well adapted for the purpose of leaving town andgoing to cover at a short notice.The foregoing descriptions comprehend nearly everyvariety of vehicle known inter the name of *' close carriages*'The varieties of "open carriages" are morenumerous.Plate II. represents the principal of all open carriages,a Barouche. This was formerly a very fashionable carriagefor the summer season, though little adapted forq22S8 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.winter, or for travelling purposes. Of late years Britzschkashave taken the place of Barouches, on account of theirgreater applicability to various uses. The body of a Baroucheis usually made like that of the Coach without theroof. It is, properly speaking, only a town carriage, beingunprovided with travelling furniture. The driving seatis similar to that of a Landau, and is intended for thecoachman and footman to sit together, the hinder partbeing unprovided with a standard, which. would be useless,as when the head is down there is little convenience forthe servant's holders, and he would, moreover, be unpleasantlyplaced, looking down on the sitters within,and listening to all the conversation. The lines of theBarouche have for the most part a very graceful appearance; but there is a striking defect in the hinder quarter,which, owing to the dark head, appears much smaller thanthe front, while it is in reality of the same size. This givesthe body something the appearance of a ship going stemforemost, " cutting the waves with her taffrail.'*' — anotherdefect is the door-handle, which breaks the surface of thepanel in an unpleasing manner. For the purpose ofshortening the carriage and getting a high fore-wheel, thefront quarter line is sometimes turned sharp up from thedoor line, and arched in a serpentine form, to give morespace beneath. This is called a '' step-piece body'' It isadvantageous as regards the mechanism, but ' exceedinglyungraceful, and moreover inconvenient, as it interfereswith the leg-room of the sitters. The Barouche has twoseats, like a Coach ; and when the head is thrown back andthe knee-flap elevated, it will hold four or six personsVARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 229inside; but in wet weather only two or three can be accommodated,or the lining will be spoiled by the rain, andthe passengers wetted. Occasionally, to remedy this inconvenience,the carriage is fitted with a mahogany roofand sides, to close against the head, and provided withglass windows. But this is a miserably inconvenient expedient,and exceedingly unsightly. For fine weather theBarouche is one of the most delightful of all carriages.It is sometimes made with rider-springs ; but the effectis not so good, as it then makes a heavier appearance.Much of the beauty of the Barouche depends upon itslight exterior. Of course it is not so light as it appears,owing to the bottom strengthening plates.There are several defects in this drawing. The broadupper moulding shows a broken line ; the back elbowline is the same ; the back quarter line is defective, andthe front loop and the stay branching from it to the footboardare clumsy and ungraceful.A Barouche is to a Barouche what a Landaulet is toa Landau, and the same remarks apply to both. The baroucheis, however, generally constructed as a very IJghtcarriage of small size, to be drawn by one horse. It is nowbut rarely built, as much lighter carriages can be constructedwith the elliptic springs so commonly in use. TheBarouchett is not a graceful carriage.Plate III. represents a Britzschka. It is little morethan ten years since this carriage, or rather the originalmodel of it, was first introduced from Germany ; and now,after many succeeding modifications, it has become themost onion of all carriages. The reason of this is its2S0 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.exceeding convenience, and adaptability to a great varietyof purposes. This drawing shows a Britzschka after thebest models, as adapted for travelling. The body andseats all swing alike on the C springs. The boot behindwill accommodate two persons. The body, when theknee-flap is open, will hold four ; but in wet weather it isonly fitted for two. The step is outside, to leave theinterior less cramped. The front part of the head hasacalash attached to it, which is easily put up and down ;whereby the facility of entrance is increased, as the headdoes not slope too far forward. The access of rain is thuscarefully guarded against ; and in case of cold weather,there is an ingeniously contrived glass shutter, which foldsup in a recess of the head, and which when let downwill fill the whole front, closing with an air-tight joint inthe front of the knee-flap. The sword-case behind is largeand convenient ; and the leg-room in the interior isabundant for reclining at full length if necessary, whenconstructed without a front seat in the interior. Thefront trunks can be taken off and replaced by a driving-seat.The lines of this carriage are pleasing to the eye andharmonise well together. The marked distinction betweenthis and the foregoing carriages is the adoption of a straightbottom line. This, and the end curves, together withthe deep panel behind and the long elbow sweep before,tend to give it a ship-like and first-going appearance ; whilethe foot-board in front points the line of progress. Thesword-case is unpleasing in its outline, beauty having givenplace to convenience. The lamp is well arranged for use.VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. SelA defect in this carriage is the unequal size of the frontand hind springs. The motive is to balance the weightmore equally. This defect would have been more perceptiblehad the largest spring been in front; but thesmall wheel and small spring being together, the defectis lessened. What adds very much to the generalgood effect of this carriage, is the broad elbow line,which forms a distinct outline, like the shear line ofa ship.It is said that the first German Britzschka was broughtto England by the Earl of Clanwilliam, who liked it forits lightness ; — for which reason it probably obtained,amongst coachmen and mechanics, the translated nameBrisker, or Briskly." But the German carriage waftlight, being intended only for three persons, with littleluggage ; therefore its low wheels were not a very seriousobjection. English convenience afterwards required thatgreater accommodation should be provided both for personsand luggage ; but the carriages, though they have attainedgreat convenience, combined with grace, have become inreality as heavy to the draught as ordinary Posting Chariots.Some of them are now occasionally made withadditional under-springs, like the Chariots. This increasesthe weight and height at the same time. Owing to itsmovable head and greater exposure ^ of the lining tothe air, the wear is considerably greater than that of aChariot.There are two slight defects in this drawing, — thecurve of the hind spring, and the bottom line of thebody.232 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.Britzschkas are also made without a perch, and supportedon elliptic springs. The locker behind has a door toput in luggage. It is also sometimes made to open at thetop, to form a servant's seat. In this case, the front seatcan be taken away, and a cap-case and imperials substitutedfor it. This carriage has a pleasing light appearance in itsgeneral lines ; but in the fore part there is a great defect ofconstruction. In the hind part, the body rests on a curvedblock, which is bolted to the centre of the spring. In the forepart,there are two curved blocks on which the body rests ;but instead of being placed over the centre of the spring,or the wheel-plate above it, they are usually placed behind,whereby a considerable amount of mischievous leverage isproduced, and a most unsightly effect, which must immediatelybecome apparent to a practised eye. This kind ofcarriage is calculated to run very light, but must necessarilybe very noisy.A Droitzschka — or, as it is commonly called, a Drosky —was in the outset of Russian origin ; being in feet in itssimplest form an improvement on the sledge, by addingsprings and wheels, the single passenger sitting with hislegs on each side of the perch, as he would sit on a horse.But the Droitzschka as made in England is a modificationof the elliptic spring Britzschka, by placing the passengers'seat nearly at the level of the hind axle, and sinking thecentral part of the body below the level of the axle, for thelegs. This carriage can only carry two persons inside, andtwo on the driving-seat. The form of it is not graceful ;neither is the carriage convenient, as the space inside forthe legs is cramped by the necessity of shortening it inVARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 233front to allow the fore wheels to turn under : and whileit appears light, it is in reality very heavy for its size, thepeculiar form necessitating very strong iron-plates to holdit together. The principal utility of the Droitzschka is for'languid, aged, or nervous persons, and children, as it is lowon the ground, and consequently easy of access and difficultto turn over. It is made for one horse, or two ponies, butis very heavy to draw.Plate IV. represents a double-bodied Driving Phaeton,which was at one time in very extensive use, but hasbeen much superseded by the Britzschka. This carriageis not very graceful, the front and hind springs assortingaltogether, and the long black locker looking too like acoffin. It is, however, a convenient carriage either fortown use or for travelling, being light and having proportionatelylarge wheels. It is generally used in town bythose who like to drive themselves ; for which reason thebest seat is placed in front. But the seats are sometimesmade to shift, in order that a servant may drive in bad weather.It is only intended to carry four persons. For travellingpurposes, a large box is placed under each seat, andone behind the front body : one also is suspended behindthe back seat. Like all open carriages, of course, it wearsout faster than a close one. The position of the lamp disfiguresthe panel ; but it is the most convenient arrangement,and appearance cedes to utility. The springs arenow usually connected by short leathern braces instead ofiron links, in order to reduce the noise.A Phaeton of the same class, but borne on elliptic springs,and without a perch, is in common use. It is consequently234 Varieties OF CARRIAGES.much lighter, and altogether less noisy, as the springs worktogether on smooth centres ; but the noise from the wheel-plateis greater than in the other mode of suspension.The fore carriage and springs are attached by carved blocksin the same defective manner as the uncovering Brit^^schka before described, and consequently the same unsightlyappearance is produced. This carriage is the verysimplest form of four-wheeled vehicle in ordinary use. Itis literally a long box, with an arm-chair in front, and abench behind. An arch in the locker is usually contrived,to permit the fore wheel to pass beneath, and thus allow itto be somewhat higher. This convenience is attained bymeans of cramping the servant's leg-room.Pony Phaetons of a Cabriolet form were at one timevery fashionable. They are intended for two sitters, oneof whom drives, and a boy may be seated on the bar behindif required ; or a boy may ride as postilion on one of theponies. The form of the half-curved body is graceful,with the exception of the straight lines of the seat. Thebranching iron stays, which connect it with the springs andwheels, are also well managed after the pattern of thegrowth of the tendrils of flower-stalks. The lines of thehind spring also fall in well with the curl of the stay.But there the beauty ends. The step is unsightly, andthe front framework looks like a mass of disproportionedparts. The small fore wheel and the low fore spring areseen in all their defects, being unrelieved by a driving-seat.It appears at first sight that this carriage is lightand easy to draw ; but such is not the fact. The spacebetween the fore and hind wheels is considerable, and coh-^VAJElIETr&S OF CARRIAGES. 335sequently the branching iron stays, which are in realitycrane necks, must be very stout and heavy, to resist thestrain upon them. These carriages are principally used forparks, where ladies drive themselves.A Britzschka Phaeton rests its claim to the title ofPhaeton on the mode of hanging ; the springs being preciselyon the same principle, though not in the exact formas those used in the Phaetons of the last century. Thebody is a modification of the Britzschka, and of rathermore elegant form. The drooping of the lines from thefront seat gives a pleasing effect, while the elevation of thehind seat above prevents any nakedness of appearance.The seats are constructed to shift at the pleasure of theowner. Two persons can sit in front, and two or four behind,according as the head may be shut or open. Thestep is made to slide under the bottom, as an outside stepwould much disfigure this form of body, and to fold it upinside the door would be inconvenient. The object ofusing the double springs in front, instead of the C spring,is to leave the space perfectly free for ascending the frontseat without inconvenience. But the motion is far frompleasant, as the points of the front springs form a centrearound which the hinder part of the body moves in an areof a circle as it sways up and down, instead of an agreeablehorizontal motion. This carriage, though elegant in appearance,is heavy. If used for travelling, it could carrylittle luggage, as there is no seat behind. Consequently, atrunk behind, and a box under each seat, would be thetotal amount.A mon8trous-look;ing vehicle was known under the name286 Varieties OF Carriages.of a Phaeton at the end of the last century, and the commencementof the present. What connexion there could bebetween this vehicle and the fabled car of the Sun-God, toobtain for it such a title, it is difficult to conceive. It wasat one time a most fashionable vehicle, and the favouritedriving carriage of the Prince of Wales, afterwards Georgethe Fourth. The object in alluding to it here, is to serveas a standard to show the great progress which a comparativelyshort period has developed in the art of the carriageconstructor. The vehicle looked like a mechanical illustrationof the play of " Much ado about Nothings' Itwas a contrivance to make an enormously high and dangerousseat for two persons, inconvenient to drive from, andat the same time to consume as much material and mix upasmany unsightly and inharmonious lines as possible. Theframework of the carriage was constructed with two ironperches, the outline of which was hideously ugly ; but thecamel-looking hump had at least the mechanical advantage ofpermitting a higher fore wheel than could otherwise be used.'The shape of the body was as though the rudest possibleform capable of affording a seat had been put together.An ungraceful form of upright pillar or standard was firstselected, into which was framed a horizontal ugly curve foraseat, connected at the top by an ungainly-looking elbow,and a formal serpentine curve behind, from which was projectedlike an excrescence an ugly leathern box called asword-case. The front of the upright pillar was continuedinto a most formal curve, and from its point rose an ungracefulbracket, to support a foot-board, on the extreme'edge of which was coiled an ugly piece of leather calledVARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 237an apron. The construction of the. body was such that itcould not possibly hold together by the strength of its ownframing ; and to remedy this, a curved iron stay. was introducedin the worst possible taste. The leathern head rosefrom the body at an angle which seemed to indicate that itcould get no rest ; and the black box or locker introducedto fill up the under part of the body was made with, straightlines, as if to make the whole still more heterogeneous andunsightly. The huge double curved hired spring, with itsleathern brace, was so contrived as to occupy one half ofthe total length of the vehicle, and the odd-looking staywhich prevented it from falling over in front, marked itstotal insecurity. The crooked-shaped iron loop whichconnected the body with the brace looked as though it hadbeen partly wrenched away by violence, and were waitingrepairs. The fore springs rather resembled the flourishingstrokes made by a schoolmaster, when heading a copy-bookor Christmas piece, than any legitimate mechanical contrivance; and the motion must have been detestable, renderingthe act of driving difficult, and lessening the power of thedrivers over their horses. The servants seat behind, placedon curved blocks without any springs, completed this vehicle. To sit on such a seat, whenthe horses were going at much speed, would require asmuch skill as is evinced by a rope-dancer at the theatre.None but an extremely robust constitution could standthe violent jolting of such a vehicle over the stones of apaved street.A Cabriolet Phaeton is made with C springs behind,and double-lever springs in front. The shape of the body238 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.is elegant ; but this is its only advantage, the defects of thesprings being the same as in the Phaeton last described.This carriage is heavy, and the fore wheels low : it is usedprincipally to drive from, but sometimes with a boy mountedon one of the horses.A Cabriolet Phaeton is also constructed on ellipticsprings, without a perch. From its great convenience thiscarriage has been very much used. The seat in front isconveniently high to give command over the horses ; whilethe seat behind is low, and gives great facility of access.But it is not possible to give the lines of this carriage anelegant appearance without making it very long and heavy ;and even then the fore wheel must be kept small, to enableit to turn. When made short, the straight lines of thefore body and the curved lines of the hind ones can in nowaybe made to harmonise. It is a light vehicle, thoughnot so light as it appears, and will carry four persons—twoon each seat.There are various other four-wheeled carriages constructedand known under different names, either of simpleor compound forms, some hermaphrodite, and somenondescript ; but those already described are sufficient forall poetical purposes. The range of invention is of coursevery wide, and the artist or mechanic may modify or improveaccording to will and capability.The two-wheeled vehicles are less numerous thin thosewith four.The Curricle is the only two-wheeled carriage used withmore than one horse abreast, and therefore approachesnearest in its mechanism to the antique classic Car. InVARIETIES OF CARRIAGES. 289fond, however, it is very different. The shape of the bodyis extremely unsightly. The hinder curve and the sword-caseare positively ugly. The elbow and head are un-gracefullyformal, and the crooked front line and dashingiron are in the worst possible taste. The lines of the carriageframework and under-spring are graceful ; but themode of hanging the body is unsightly and inconvenient.The step preserves the general formal character of thewhole vehicle. The mode of attaching the horses is preciselythat of the classic Car, only more elegant. A pole isfixed to the square frame, and is suspended from a brightsteel bar, resting in a fork on each horse's back. In spiteof the ungraceful form of the vehicle, the effect of thewhole was very good. A seat for a servant could be attachedto the hind frame if required. This carriage fatiguesthe horses much less than one with four wheels, onaccount of its superior lightness ; but it has been whollydisused of late years, probably on account of the risk attachedto it if the horses become restive. The whole ofthe security depends upon the strength of the pole, whichserves as a lever to sustain the weight of the vehicle andpassengers, as well as to guide it. It is not essentially necessarythat the vehicle should be ugly in its form ; for itaffords facilities for constructing the most elegant of allvehicles.A Curricle of another form was built many years backfor the well-known Mr. Coates. The shape of the bodywas that of a classic sea-god's car, and it was constructedin copper. This vehicle was very beautiful in its outline,though disfigured by the absurdity of its ornamental work.240 Varieties OF CARRIAGES.Plate V. represents a Cabriolet, a vehicle much used inthe present day. It is in reality a regeneration of the oldOne-horse Chaise, in a newer and more elegant form,which has been borrowed, together with its name, from theFrench ; and, as is common in most such cases, it has beenimproved on. The principal reason why this carriage isso much liked, is its great convenience. It carries twopersons, comfortably seated, sheltered from sun and rain,yet with abundant fresh air, and with nearly as much privacyas a close carriage, if the curtains be drawn in front.It can go in and out of places where a two-horse carriagewith four wheels cannot turn ; and a boy is carried behind,cut off from communication with the riders, save whenthey wish to alight and give the vehicle into his charge.This is a very convenient vehicle for unmarried men to goout in at night, and return either from a dinner, or fromthe theatre or opera, or houses of parliament : it saves theinconvenience of a close carriage, two horses, a coachmanand footman, which, when out late at night, involve alarge amount of trouble as well as expense. The drawbacksare, its great weight, — which requires very powerfuland expensive horses, — and the unpleasant movement arisingfrom its mode of hanging. To run a Cabriolet abouttown during a whole day, two horses are required ; and touse it day by day requires three in use. But this factgives a Cabriolet greater estimation than a Stanhope, inthe eyes of those who regard it as an indication of stationand wealth. It is, however, an impracticable vehicle forthose who wish to drive out of town frequently, ten ortwelve miles and back. Another disadvantage is the un-varietiesOF CARRIAGES. 241pleasant motion consequent on the mode of hanging thebody. To some persons this motion is excessively . disagreeable.As Cabriolets are much used at night ad aredriven at a very rapid pace, many accidents have hap-^opened, in consequence of which some of those who usethem have adopted the practice of hanging bells round thehorses collar, as is done in many countries where sledgesmove rapidly and noiselessly over the hardened snow.On paved streets the Cabriolets make noise enough ; buton those which are Macadamised, two of them may runfoul of each other at night before the sound can efficientlywarn the ear.The peculiar feature of the Cabriolet, is the gracefulform of the body, which resembles that of the nautilusshell, and with which the shape of the head harmonises well.The dark portion in front shows the side of the knee-flap,which, instead of being flexible, as in the old-fashionedaprons, is stretched tightly across a frame, to the greatconvenience of the sitters. The lamp in front is usefullyplaced ; but it is unsightly, and harmonises ill with theshape of the body. The shaft forms a graceful curve, andthe spring behind falls well in with it. The spring beneaththe shaft also is well adapted to the line. Thestraight leather brace which connects the spring with theloop behind, looks defective and formal. The step lookswhat most steps do— an excrescence ; and the wheel appearssmall when compared with the size of the vehicle :but necessity rules this. The wheel must be kept so farback as not to interfere with the access to the vehicle;and the axle must be kept so far forward as to balance itBSes VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.correctly, without throwing too much strain on the horseback.Other modes of construction might be adoptedwhich would prevent the necessity of avoiding one fault bycreating another. The motive for curving the shafts soconsiderably, is to have the point at the level of thehorse's shoulder, and keep the hinder part low for theconvenience of the passenger.The defects in this drawing are, that the bottom line istoo much curved, the front point throws up too much,and the hind spring is not delicately enough tapered.Plate VI. represents a Tilbury. This vehicle was firstinvented by a carriage builder of that name, and was formany years very fashionable. The probable reason forits being liked, was its apparent lightness. In all otherrespects it is an unsightly vehicle, and the mode of hangingis still worse than that of the Cabriolet. The action on thecross spring behind has a tendency to twist it. The darkportion under the seat represents a drop-box, which in theconstruction has a still worse appearance than in the design,while without it, the body looks as though it weretemporarily put together and never finished. The motionof the body is most unpleasant, and lessens much the commandof the driver over the horse. Originally thesevehicles were built without springs between the shaft andthe axle, instead of which a deep carved block was used ;but the jar was so great, that springs are now always substituted— i. c. for the few which are made, for the disadvantagesof this mode of construction are now becomingmore obvious as the art of carriage building advances.While apparently light, the Tilbury is in reality the hearOF CARRIAGES. S43vilest two-wheeled vehicle which is constructed, except theCabriolet. It has altogether seven springs, and a considerableweight of gibbet-looking iron-work besides, tosupport the hind spring. In addition to this, massive ironplates are attached all round the framework of the body,to hold it together and resist the strain upon it.In this drawing the central horizontal line of the bodyis distorted, the under spring is too straight, the step istoo upright, and the general appearance of the body tooformal.Plate VII. represents a Stanhope, taking its name fromthe inventor, a brother of the Earl of Harrington. Thisis a &r more sightly and compact vehicle than the last.The body is in reality of the same shape as that of theTilbury; but, resting on the dark locker, the space is agreeablyfilled up, while great convenience for luggage or parcelsis obtained. It rests on two cross springs, whoseends are suspended from two side springs. By this meansthe body is placed at two removes from the concussion ;but the shafts, and consequently the horse, are exposed tothe whole of it ; — over the stones this is considerable.The connexion between the side and cross springs wasformerly, merely by links, as in ordinary stage-coaches,from whose construction the idea was taken; but thejingling noise soon caused noiseless shackles to be contrived,working on smooth centres. When these shacklesbecome galled, of course they must be replaced by others.Of late, short leather braces have been substituted for them,as being less noisy, and yielding greater freedom of actionto the springs. One defect of this construction is, thatR 3S44 VARIETIES OF CARRIAGES.if the horse falls on his knees, a violent jerk takes placeon the front cross spring, which yields, while the hindspring offers no resistance, and the consequence mostly isthat the riders are pitched out.In this drawing, the spring, instead of a graceful curvedline, look as though they had been forcibly bent in thecentre ; and the hinder part of the shaft looks as thoughit were weighed down.Another variety of the Stanhope, adapted for town use,has the light look of the Tilbury, with less real weightthan the ordinary Stanhope. A pleasing open outline isgiven ; and the upper part of the body, round the seat,being wrought with a network of cane, has an agreeableeffect, especially for fine weather. The open part beneathis not unsightly, and, if required, can be filled inwith a drop-seat box for the purpose of carrying parcels orluggage. In such case, this vehicle is well adapted'fof asummer tour.A Dennet has a body resembling the Phaeton in PlateII. Instead of four springs, the Dennet has but three—;two at the sides, and one cross spring behind. , ' Thisvehicle is easier for the horse, as it is lighter j and thshafts rest on the side springs at their front points'. Forthis reason the hackney. Cabriolets of the streets are thusconstructed. But they are uneasy to the passengers, onaccount of the unequal motion ; and if the horse ells, thedanger of being thrown out is greater than with a Stanhope.The origin of the name the author is unacquaintedwith ; but he has heard that the three springs were thusnamed after the three Miss Denies, whose elegant stage-varietiesOF CARRIAGES. 245dancing was so much in vogue about the time the vehiclewas first used.The vehicle formerly known as a Gig was the lightestone-horse vehicle used in England. It is simply an openrailed chair, fixed on the. shafts, and supported on twoside springs, the hinder ends of which were connected tothe loop irons by leathern braces to give more freedom ofmotion. The wheel was larger and the body kept higherthan the Stanhope; for which reason the shaft requiredless curvature. . ,This vehicle ran exceedingly light after the horse ; andthe shafts were usually of lance-wood, to give sufficientplay. The side-springs were long and easy, and thewhole vehicle was well adapted for travelling purposes, thespace underneath the seat conveniently holding a portmanteau.Occasionally the were used for sporting, when thelocker was made with Venetian blinds to carry the dogs,and then it became a " dog-carte'' The American sulkiesare constructed on this plan,' but without springs, andwith higher wheels, to carry one person. Their totalweight is from eighty to ninety pounds.The old One-horse Chaise, or Whiskey, was as heavyas the modern Cabriolet, without its grace of form.The defects criticised in tha drawings are not originalerrors of design, but have arisen from technicalities ofexecution not within the author's control.CHAPTER XVI.Purchasing and Jobbing Carriages. — Carriages made to order. —Ready-made Carriages. — Judgment. — Preservation of Carriages. —Sun , — Frost. — Rain . — Dust. — Mud. — atmospheric Air. — Moisture.— Dryness.—^ Metal-work. — Rust. — Leather. — Cloth. — Silk . —Lace. — Paint and Varnish. — Coach-houses.With very few exceptions, it is to be supposed thatthe greater number of those who can afford to indulge inthe luxury of carriages are desirous of enjoying them onthe most economical terms, consistent with good taste,not merely as an economy of money, but also of time andconvenience.There are three modes of obtaining the use of carriages.First, by luring them for short periods, as a few weeks ormonths ; secondly, by taking them on lease for a termof years ; thirdly, by purchasing them outright, eitherready-made, or made to order.The first method is the most expensive, and at the sametime the most inconvenient, as they are generally inferiorcarriages, and charged at a high rate to make up for theuncertainty of their being occupied except at intervals.The second method is far preferable, as the builder, bymaking sure of the consumption of his commodity duringa term of years, can afford it at a lower rate of profit : andthe customer has the advantage of a carriage built to suitPurchase AND Preservation OF CARRIAGES. 247his own taste and convenience, knowing at the same timethe total amount of his expense for it for a certain term,without any anxiety as to repairs. The usual plan is, foran agreement to be entered into between the builder andthe customer for the term of four or five years, the carriageto be once painted during the period, and found inall needful repairs, including wheels ; but the customer isresponsible for all accidents. At the end of the term, thecarriage becomes the property of the builder, who sells it,or perhaps enters into a new arrangement for three yearslonger, at a reduced rate. A gentleman taking a carriageon this plan, has all the advantages of a ready-furnishedhouse. It is essentially his own so long as he needsit, without causing him any anxiety ; and on the average,unless of methodical habits, it will be a pecuniary savingto him. He might certainly buy a carriage for about thesame price as four years rent' would amount to, and at theend of the time he would have a second-hand carriage todispose of: but during the whole time the expenses ofrepairs would fell on him ; and of course he must be atthe trouble of directing his servants, and ordering his ownrepairs. He in fact takes all the responsibility, and relievesthe coach-maker from it.The third method — purchasing — is most for the interestof the coach-maker, as he needs less capital to carry onhis business, and also of the purchaser whose habits areregular. But in some large establishments where immensecapitals are employed, large premises are kept witha view to carry on the system of jobbed or hired carriages,and it is indifferent whether the customer purchases or248 :^ PURCHASE ANDnobis. There are shine establishments where no carriagesare ever built except to order : there are others, again,where few are built to order, and large quantities on speculation.Occasionally, good carriages are built on thelatter plan ; but as a gen^^l rule they are decidedly inferior.The reason must be obvious. Carriages requireconsiderable capital for their construction ; and being articlesof taste. as well as convenience, their sale is uncertain.Moreover, the rate of profit on an expensive articleis always smaller than on articles of little outlay. Therefore,those who build carriages .on speculation naturallycut down their outlay all they can, and not unfrequentlyuse inferior materials, which could hot be at all employedin carriages made to order by those desirous of maintainingprofessional reputation. A large portion of the carriagesgot up for sale are of not only inferior materials, but ofinferior workmanship. Like Hodges razors, they are madeto sell. Poor men out of work get credit for materialsand put them together " anyhow' They :then standthem in some place of public sale, and reap a bare livingat most ; the heavy expenses eating up their profit, andfrequently encroaching on the prime cost. Those whopurchase them as bargains find too late that they arebitten, when, after a fortnight or three weeks'* use, theyare obliged to send them at a heavy expense to be repaired,or perhaps half rebuilt. The act is, that all locomotivevehicles are exposed to severe tests ; and the badly-builtcarriage has to sustain the same trials as that which isfirst-rate. Plaster and ornament may conceal the defectsof a badly constructed house for a long period, but a carriage.PRESERVATION OF CARRIAGES. 249like a steam-engine, is required to perform work, and thusthe defects must become apparent.Of course there axe good carriages to be purchased ready-made; but, generally speaking, the purchaser is ignoranthow to distinguish the good from the bad. If the purchaserbe skilful in detecting the &ults of carriages and possessAccurate judgment as to their excellence, he can go intothe market and purchase the best, at the lowest price forwhich it can be obtained. If he be also a man of taste, hewill know how to select an elegant form without being;c6n-fined to any particular build. But few carriage purchaserspossess these advantages, and therefore the wisest way isto' pay a higher price and secure the best commodity. Ascarriages are articles of taste as well as convenience, hewho merely requires convenience may go cheaply towork; But whoever requires taste in addition, . must inaimless pay an additional per heritage to the artist. ' Ifa person ignorant of mechanism were to require a* watchfor astronomical purposes, in which accuracy were paramountto all other considerations, his wisest course wouldbe to pay the highest price ; and thus, though he mightpay more than was absolutely necessary, he would at anyrate secure himself against disappointment in his coniijio-dity. And thus' it is with carriages. We may use ourjudgment in that which we understand ; but when ourjudgment is at fault, we must trust ourselves in the handsof those who are of most repute in the matter. . .'After the purchase of a carriage, the next considerationis, how it may be best kept in order and preserved fromthe various atmospheric and other influences which tend250 PURCHASE ANDto destroy its beauty and utility. To ascertain this, wemust remember the numerous materials which enter intoits composition-wood, metal, leather, wool, hair, cotton,silk, linen, paint, varnish, &e.Carriages are used in the open air, in sun, frost, rain, dust,and mud ; and all have a tendency to destroy their beauty.The general temperature most congenial to the durabilityof the carriage, is that of the workshop in which it hasbeen constructed. In atmospheric air of a given compositionas to moisture, wood possesses a certain standard ofbulk. If it be removed to an atmosphere of greatermoisture, it increases in bulk, or swells : in one of lessmoisture it shrinks, and is apt to crack. To resist thistendency, all the wood used in carriages is well coveredwith paint, the surface of which will resist moisture. Butas the covering of paint is rarely perfect in all parts,moisture will at last find its way to the wood, if care benot taken ; and so also, if the carriage be placed in too drya situation, the panels will split, just as a ships deckswould leak if not wetted several times a day during theheat of the sun. This should be a rule also with carriagesin very hot weather, and especially with their wheels.The metal-work of carriages, on the contrary, sustainsno injury from heat, but much from moisture. Iron andsteel especially suffer. Where the paint happens to bechipped from the surface of iron, rust seizes it, and graduallyinsinuates itself beneath the whole covering of thepaint, which strips off in flakes. Beneath the surfaces ofthe spring plates also, rust is continually working damage,and disfiguring their beauty with dirty brown lines on thePreservation OF CARRIAGES. 251exterior. The plated and brass work about the carriagealso suffers much from damp.Leather suffers equally from exposure to sun and wet,and in compound proportion when alternating betweenthe one and the other. Toughness and tenacity are thequalities principally required in leather for carriages ; andthese qualities depend principally on the presence of acertain quantity of oil or &tty matter, which the leatherimbibes like a sponge. On this matter the oxygen of theatmosphere acts strongly, and at length consumes it entirely; and if it be not renewed, the leather cracks. Ifthe leather be exposed to wet, this process is still morerapid : but when leather is frequently oiled, it is apt tolook dull, and occasion much trouble to the coachman,who prefers blacking it, and the materials of which theblacking i« composed tend to the decomposition anddestruction of the leather. Leather which is painted orjapanned possesses little or no tenacity, and is never oiled*.The patent grained elastic leather which has been somuch used of late for heads and knee-flaps is a very beautifulsubstance to the eye, and is quite water-proof so longas it is free from cracks ; but if exposed long to heat, it isapt to crack. Also, if one portion of the surface be keptsome time in contact with another portion during warmweather, it is liable to adhere and strip away. Whencracks take place in it, the water gets in and it rots rapidly.Altogether it is preferable to oiled leather for heads, ifordinary care be used : for although it will not last solong, the saving of labour is very great, and the appearanceis greatly superior.952 , Purchase AND/ The cloth, silks" and lace, composing the lining andhammer-cloth generally, combined with wool, hair, cotton,and linen, suffer .from the sun's rays by losing their richcolours, and from' the damp by becoming mildewed androtten. The cloth, hair, and wool suffer from anothercause — moths. In open carriages this last is a very seriousevil. The patent India rubber cloth now so muchused.asa wat^i^r^oof cover for hammer-cloths has thesame effect on the moth as cedar shavings; bUt it: is impossibleto use it much for inside work, as the odour,.especially in warm weather, is very unpleasant. It would^esm ia desirable thing", "however, to introduce a portion of<;edar'shaviiigS into the stuffing of the linings. ■ •'.Paint and varnish suffer little from simple damp, unlessit be salt water which is very destructive. But heat,especially that of the ' powerful rays of the sun, is verydestructive to "them. The colour changes, and the lustreof the. varnish disappears amidst a multitude. of intersectingcracks ; and to restore the beauty, there is no remedybut reprinting. Another mischievous influence to paintand' varnish are the various gaseous bodies to which theyare exposed. It is customary, for the sake of convenience,to stand carriages close to the horses'* stables,, generally, inamews, where large muck-heaps are piled up in all stagesof .fermentation. ' During this process, various gases areevolved, which act on the varnish much in the same waythat nitric acid acts on copper ; though fortunately theyreach the varnish much diluted with atmospheric air.It must therefore be clear that such coach-houses asare at present commonly used are not the best that couldPreservation OF CARRIAGES. 253be adopted. The materials of a carriage are as delicate,and require as much care, as the furniture of a drawing-room;and therefore they should be as carefully-preservedfrom stable contact as the satin couches of the drawing-room.After the carriage has been out, whether; in thsun or the rain, it should be caJreMly-. washed, ,ands-aboveall, dried, taking care to wet the leather as little as possibleduring the operation. It is a common piiictice' towash the carriage, and then leave the water to drip awayAfter drying, the leather, and especially the braces, shouldbe slightly rubbed with" an oily rag to restore all that hadbeen consumed in the day ; and the carriage should thenbe placed to stand in a dry well-ventilated apartmentwith a boarded floor, leaving a clear passage for the airbeneath it, and, if at all convenient, having warm air passingthrough to ensure its dryness. Above all, it should beaway from all stables, dung-heaps, cesspools, or open drains.A gentleman should avoid placing his carriage in any situationwhere he would not wish to place his wardrobe ; andwith regard to the interior lining, he should treat it muchin the same manner. If the carriage be laid by for atime, it should occasionally be brushed out, and have acurrent of warm air passed through it. Cedar shavingsshould also be placed in it. If an open carriage, it willrequire more care than a close one. The hammer-clothshould be covered with the water proof India rubber material,and cedar shavings slj^ould be interposed betweenthem. The blacking should also be washed off the leatherwork, and a composition of oil and tallow rubbedinto it to preserve it. The iron-work should be kept254 PURCHASE AND Preservation OF CARRIAGES.painted wherever it may have been chipped, and the wholeof the wood-work, and especially the wheels, frequentlywashed over with waters-this more particularly in thesummer time. The metal-work should be cleaned occasionallywith whitening or plate-powder, and rubbed every daywith a soft leather : it will thus last much longer thanwhen it is suffered to tarnish frequently. If onionaxles, they should never be suffered to run more thanseventy or eighty miles without fresh greasing. If mailaxles, they should be looked to when new every threeweeks; — if old, every week. If the patent oil axles, theywill run between three and four thousand miles without freshoiling ; and when this is done, it is better to send for thecarriage-builder or engineer to do it, if practicable, than totrust to a servant, unless he has been previously well instructedin it. The wheel-plate will also require occasionalgreasing, and new leather will be required to the transom.The suspending braces should also be carefully watched,as they are apt to cut and strain at the eyes and angles.A carriage carefully attended to in this manner will yieldone third more service than one which is neglected.CHAPTER XVII.New Intentions. Imperfections of English Carriages. — UnequalWheels. — Unequal Motion, unequal Wear, unequal Durability.Elastic and Rigid Wheels. — Modes of making Spring Wheels.author's Invention of a Circular Spring Wheel. — Improved OilChamber. — author's Invention of Equirotal Carriages. — EquirotalPhaeton. — Advantages of the equal Wheels. — Equirotal CabrioletPhaeton. — Equirotal Pony Phaeton. — the same with a low body.Equirotal Droitzschka. — Equirotal Chariot ; advantages. —Equirotal Carriages adapted for Posting with one Horse, beingvery light. — Equirotal Omnibus; advantages.— Author's Inventionof an Adjusting Bow Spring, adapted equally for light andheavy loads in Carriages, and universally applicable.Cabriolets and Omnibuses. — Hansom's Cabriolet. — Association Omnibuses.— Patent Cabriolet, with door behind and Boulnois' EllipticSprings. — Defects of the Patent Cabriolet. — Imitations. — Go-carts.Four-wheeled Cabriolet. — Deep-ranked Axles. — author's Inventionof a deep-ranked Axle. — author's Invention of a Cabrioletopen or close at pleasure, and driven from behind. — Author'sInvention of a Coal and general Burden Waggon, adapted tonarrow Streets and Wharves.It has been asserted in print, that English pleasurecarriages are in their present condition specimens of perfectionin the art of locomotion with animal power ; andvery many persons there are ready to attest their belief inthis. It is, in short, a common error, the source of whichis not difficult to discover. English carriages, take themaltogether, are the most perfect carriages constructed in anypart of the world, and the mistake has been in confoundsNEW INVENTIONS.ing high superiority in existing art with absolute perfection.To show that English carriages are still &r short ofperfection will be no very difficult task.A large wheel following a smaller one without beingable to overtake its is the description applied by somequaint author to a carriage. Herein consists the source ofthe principal part of the defects of carriages.If two axles be made permanently parallel in a carriage,it is evident that carriage can only advance in a straightline, and that all power of turning will be precluded, unlessby a sliding motion instead of a rolling one ; and even thenit can only turn in a very large space. To obviate thisdifficulty, the front axle-tree is made to turn on a centralpivot called the perch-bolt. But inasmuch as the body ismade to hang between all four wheels, whenever the frontaxle turns or is placed at an angle with the hinder ones,the front wheels must necessarily strike against the body.To remedy this second evil, the front wheels are so muchdecreased in size as to pass beneath the body ; and thusa third evil is created, of so great magnitude, that to alleviateit as much as possible a fourth evil was devised ; viz.to raise the body to a greater height, and thus permit alarger wheel to pass beneath it. The centre of gravity wasthus made higher than before. The last evil has occasionallybeen remedied by a sacrifice in the form of the body ;viz. cutting away a portion of the front under part, in theform of what is technically called a " step-pieces Thenumerous general defects of form incident to the unequalsize of the wheels, have been already dwelt upon. Thegreat mechanical defects are unequal motion, and consequentlyunequal wear, and decreased durability of theNEW INVENTIONS. ;257machine, together with want of ease to the passenger,and an abundance of noise, arising &oi¥i the necessarilydefective construction incident to a bad principle.The attention of the author had long been drawn tothese defects ; but he had not seriously reflected on thebest modes of remedying them till the pursuit of a collateralobject forced them on him. He had noticed the frequentfailures of wheels, especially in carriages used for rapidmotion ; and all the reasons alledged by " practical mpn"to account for it, seemed to him so unsatisfactory, thathe was led to pursue a series of experimental analysis inorder to discover the cause. He found by repeated experiments,which were corroborated by every-day practice,that the wheels which would bear the greatest dead weightwhen at rest, were not those which proved most durablewhen in motion ; — that the most durable wheels were not ofthe cylindrical, but the conical form ; and that the principleof the durability consisted in the absence of rigidity.Further examination proved that the wheels called conicalwere not really conical, but dome-shaped ; the spokes beingbent into arches by the shrinking on of the hot tire. Thueach pair of opposite spokes really formed a bow similarto that of the archer ; the nave representing the handgripe, and the felloes the nocks. It was easy to deducefrom this, that the principle of elasticity was the true causeof the durability of the 90-called conical wheels, and thatthe resilient action caused them to withstand shocks whichwould have destroyed those of a cylindrical form. Subsequentexperiments confirmed this as a act.A definite object now offered itself for pursuit. In268 NEW IKYSKTIONS.what fond of wheel could the principle of elasticity bemade the most available ? It was clear that the principleof the ordinary spoke wheel, with arms radiating from acentre to a periphery, was that of a construction the nearestapproaching to rigidity, and some other form must headopted, in which elasticity might have free action in everydirection from which concussion would approach. Butother considerations were involved. It was necessary thatthe wheel, though elastic, should be sufficiently strong notto break, or permanently to alter its form. It was alsonecessary that the periphery should be sufficiently rigid notto lose its circular shape ;— in short, the principle must beto confine the elasticity to the space usually occupied byspokes, between the centre and the periphery, in suchmanner that when the carriage was at rest, the axis mightremain in the true centre, and in case of concussion, mightslightly depart from it, and be instantly restored by theelastic action. Having well considered this principle, theauthor began to calculate the mechanical advantages whichwere to be gained in a practical point of view ; as, in casethey might prove trifling, the mere attainment of increaseddurability would not have been an object worth pursuing,at a considerable cost of time and expense. These advantageshe had reason to believe sufficiently numerous.The increased durability of the elastic wheel over therigid one is sufficiently obvious : the former eludes concussion,while the latter in resisting it is strained orbroken. The fable of the oak and the rush is £Similar tomost people ; and the boy who catches the cricket ballNEW IXYEl^fTIONS. 259knows that his hands suffer least when he permits thenslightly to recoil.The object for which horizontal springs are placed betweenthe axles and framework of carriages, is to diminishthe concussion caused by the wheels rolling ove roughsurfaces. But such horizontal springs do not efficientlyrelieve it, as their action is vertical, or at right angles withthe lin of the spring ; whereas the line of concussion is atan angle nearly midway between the horizontal line, whichis the line of progress, and the vertical line inrwhich thespring acts. Consequently, to act efficiently, th springsought not to be placed horizontally, but at right angleswith the line of concussion ; viz, at an angle of about 22^with the horizon,— supposing the carriage to run on levground. Therefore, an elastic wheel acting in all directionswould be a great and obvious improvement to meetsuch a defect. -When a carriage has attained its maximum speed, thehorses draw it with a less exertion of power than is requiredat first starting iron a state of rest. As the carriage advances,every inequality ci the surface over which it. rollshas a tendency to restore it to a state of restore in otherwords, requires a greater expenditure of power to keep upthe speed. With rigid wheels, every concussion which theperiphery encounters is carried to the axis with undiminishedforce ; and thus the momentum .is checked and thehorses are baffled and fatigued. This evil would be matereally lessened by the use of elastic wheels.In most carriages, scarcely any provision is made to eases2^ /. • . .260 NEW INVENTIONS.kteral concussion. Therefore it would be a desirable, thingto construct a wheel which might be elastic in all directionsHaving satisfied himself that the object was worth pursuing,the author began to investigate what had been doneby others before him in the same field of experiment. Theexperimenters had been numerous, but unsuccessful ; and itis sufficient to notice a few of their plans.One of the earliest was, to substitute leathern straps betweenthe centre and the periphery, in lieu of the rigidwooden spokes. Want of firmness, to say nothing ofwant of durability, was quite a sufficient defect to renderany such plan ineffective.Another plan was, to substitute spiral springs in lieu ofrigid spokes. This was quite as futile as the last.Another plan was, to substitute, in lieu of rigid .spokes,springs formed in the shape of a double ellipse, radiating inthe direction of their length som the centre to the periphery.It is evident that in action these springs must allhave a tendency to counteract each other ; and thus to allpractical purpose the wheel would be as rigid as an ordinaryspoke wheel, and at the same time much heavier and lessfirm.Another plan was, to substitute, for rigid spokes,ribands of steel bent into the form of an S, and securelybolted at either end, to the centre and the periphery,This plan is &r better than the last, as the springs wouldnot interfere with each other's action, and would be capableboth of extension and compression, and at the sametime of elastic resistance ; which last is absolutely necessaryin order to restore the nave to the exact centre afterNEW inventions: 26rbeing disturbed by concussion. The wheel would' dish be'very sightly in its external appearance : but the expense oPconstruction, the want of firmness, the difficulty of efficientlysecuring the springs, and the necessity of constant'repairs, added to the great extra weight, furnish almostinsuperable difficulties to its practical utility.The last plan that the author is aware of, is a propositionin the Mechanics'* Magazine. It is, to form a doublewheel, consisting of a rigid cast-iron wheel of small size,'and a cast-iron ring of considerably larger size ; the ring andwheel being connected together by several small circularhoops of steel, similar in form to those used to holdbunches of keys together. These rings are not to be fixed*or bolted, but are to play loosely in semicircular groovesprepared for them in the castings. This wheel would possessfree action, and the springs would not interfere witheach other : but the defects are numerous. In action, theupper springs would be loose in their bearings, while thelower ones would have to sustain all the weight of the carriage.The noise consequent on all this would be intolerable,and the springs would be continually breaking. Inshort, it would be a crazy, inconvenient, and unsightly combination.Having well considered all these different plans, the authorcame to the conclusion that the circular form of springwas the only one which could be efficiently adapted for awheel, as only that form would permit free action in everyposition of the wheel, and only that form was capable ofan efficient means of firm fastening, combining the principlesof extension and compression, resisting and yielding86® New INVENTIONS.at the saine time. The train of experiments was thenc^cwwienced, and proved. both costly and protracted, owingprincipally to the difficulty of getting women to executewell that which diffi^edfirom their ordinary routine. Thefirst; pur of wheels was constructed on the principle ofallowing the ends of the springs to play freely on rollersati the centre, increasing or diminishing the size of the circles,the backs being made thidc and secured to the periphery.But the expense of construction and the rattlingnoise produced by the rollers caused the author to abandonthespian. Many experiments followed ere the author accomplishedhis object, for which he secured a patent right.The present construction of the wheel is as follows :— -A cylindrical iron ring, similar in appearance to an outertire, but of considerably less weight, is first prepared.Around this ring are fitted eight felloes of wood, formingtrue segments of a circle. The joints of these felloes areaccurately cut in radial lines converging to a centre; andeach pair of ends is connected by a dowel as in ordinarywheels. Over these felloes an outer tire is shrunk on hot,and the whole three strata are riveted together. An outercircle is thus made, which by its mode of construction mustnecessarily have a tendency to preserve its circular formiunder all circumstances. It will be slightly resilient underconcussion ; but nothing less than a positive crushing of theparts could possibly make a permanent alteration of itsarched form. To the interior tire of this ring are firmlybolted at equal distances four circular hoops of steel ; a smallblock or raiser of wood being interposed between the hoopNEW INVENTIONS. sandthe tire as a bedding or packing. The axle-box, whichsupplies the place of the ordinary nave, is cast in the formof a Maltese cross ; and to the projecting arms of it thefour hoop-springs are efficiently secured on wooden blocks,similar to those at the periphery. One very important advantagearising from this mode of constructing the axle-boxis, its capacity for containing a circular oil-chamberround the centre of the axle-arm, so that the oil is inactual contact with it, instead of feeding by a capillaryaction, and the due lubrication cannot by any possibilitybe impeded. In the naves of ordinary wheels this verydesirable advantage cannot be attained.It must be evident that the four hoop-springs, being allfirmly bolted to the same centre and the same periphery,must all act together. No one of them can alter its formwithout the others doing the same ; and those alterationsof form must be from exact circles into ellipses. But ifany alteration of form were to take place at those portionsof the springs which are bedded on the blocks, they wouldsoon work loose and probably break at the fastenings.Therefore, the springs must be so contrived, that at thebearing points the thickness and width of the metal maybeso increased as to prevent all movement by their, rigidity; while at the spaces between the bearings, the platesmay be gradually diminished both in width and thickness,so as to afford the needful elastic action. In this modeeach spring does in feet constitute a double bow ; the bearingsor blocks constituting the grips or hand-pieces. Theelastic action therefore takes place at about an equal NEW INVENTIONS.tance between the centre and the periphery all round thewheel. In Plate VIII. the wheel is shown front andsection,A wheel of this construction, accurately made, is in theauthors judgment calculated to last as long as the carriageto which it may be applied, with the exception of the wearing part, viz. the outer tire, which of course would needrenewal from time to time. Their external appearance hasbeen generally admired by those who have seen them, asthey are fer lighter to the eye than ordinary wheels. Iftherefore their utility prove to be as great as the authorhas endeavoured to show, two objects will have beendined, — mechanical advantage limited with graceful form.Having been thus far successful in applying the wheelsto a two-wheeled carriage, a difficulty occurred as to theiradaptation to four-wheeled vehicles. For hind wheelsthere could be no objection, as the size leaves abundantspace for the springs ; but in very small front wheels thesprings must necessarily be so much reduced in diameterthat they would cease to be springs, and become rigid in thecase of heavy carriages. For light carriages the objectionwould not be so great, as the metal might be very considerablyreduced in thickness, in order to compensate for thereduced diameter of the springs ; but still it would be disadvantageous.In this difficulty the author called to mind the fact thatwheels of unequal size in the same carriage were only aproof of defective construction ; equal-sized wheels beingreally the desirable point to aim at. After much reflection,he constructed some models for the purpose of experiment,CIRCULAR SPRING WHEEL.PLATE VIII.NEW INVENTIONS.' 265.and ascertained that the lock or turn could be attainedmuch more advantageously, by placing the central pivot ofperch-bolt near the centre of the perch, between the frontand hind wheels, instead of placing it over the front axle,as is commonly the case. In the common mode, the frontwheels lock round on the perch-bolt nearly at a right anglewith the hind ones ; and in turning, one of the hind wheelsserves as a pivot around which the front wheels describe alarge circle. But when the perch-bolt is placed at the centreof the total length, in the act of turning, both front andhind wheels lock together, and stand on lines forming thecircumference of the circle in which the carriage is intendedto turn, the two axles radiating towards a commoncentre. Thus not only is the circle described by the commoncarriage larger than the improved one, but the resistanceis greater ;— in other words, the improved carriage willrequire less force to turn it. In the common carriage alsoas the wheels must necessarily turn beneath the body, theymust be kept small. In the improved carriage, with theperch-bolt at a nearly equal distance between the wheels, thefore wheels have so large a radius that they do not touch thebody in turning, and therefore maybe made of the full size.After fully ascertaining the principles of construction,the author proceeded to build a light Phaeton of the simplestkind, with equal-sized wheels on elliptic springs, withouta perch, such as is shown in Plate IX.By comparing this drawing with that of the Phaetons onthe common plan in Plate V., it will be at once seen thatthe fore part of it possesses a much lighter appearance,being devoid of the complicated mass of framework ; while266 Kew INVENTIONS.the lines of the springs, being placed at the same horizontallevel, show much more gracefully. The central division intotwo parts, with the curved outlines, also tends very muchto improve the appearance, and alter the coffin-like lookwhich is so great a defect in the common Phaetons. Thedefects of this drawing are the ungraceful hind line of thebody and also of the elbow. The springs are harsh andabrupt in their curves ; and the spokes of the wheels makethe cords of the springs look as though they were dippingdownwards.A pair of shafts were attached to this Phaeton, and asingle horse, of not very powerful make, was harnessed toit.With a load of four stout men, the result wastFirst. The horse drew it with great ease, as comparedwith an (ordinary carriage of similar form and weight.Secondly. The driver was always square behind the horse,whether locking or not, as his seat turned with the frontwheels, and consequently he had the same command overhis horse as in a Stanhope. In ordinary four-wheeled vehicles,serious accidents frequently arise from restive horseswhen locking, as in that position the driver loses thegreater part of his power over them.Thirdly. The springs, being all at one horizontal level,played exactly aUke, with uniform motion, very easily, and,as one of the men remarked, " Like a boat on the water''Fourthly. In consequence of the smoothness of the turningcentres and the absence of a wheel-plate, there wasnone of the unpleasant rumbling noise common to ordinarycarriages. For persons of delicate nerves this is amost important advantage.NEW INVENTIONS. 267Fifthly. The carriage, though thing with perfect freedom,was yet perfectly firm, and free from tremulous motionfrom end to end.It is evident that these carriages, from the simplicity oftheir construction, require much less labour to cleansethem ; and for the same reason, their general durabilitymust be much increased. When fitted up with the circularspring-wheels, and the improved springs hereafterdescribed, the author conceives that they will leave littleto be desired so far as regards ease of motion. Thename by which he proposes to distinguish them from carriagesof the ordinary class is,EauiROTAL Carriages.Having successfully conducted his experiments to theirconclusion, the author commenced a series of designs forthe purpose of applying the principle to every variety ofcarriages.One, is a design for a Phaeton, with a Cabriolet-shapedbody in front, for the purpose of driving from, and a lockerseat behind, for servants. This design is not in good taste,for the sea-shell form of the body does not harmonise withthe straight lines of the locker; but it would be a convenientcarriage for any one wishing to enjoy easy driving.Plate X. is a design for a Pony Phaeton, with theconnecting framework of the lockers so constructed, thatthe bottom is within fourteen inches of the ground ; theends being arched upwards to rest on the elliptic springsabove the axles. On the hinder locker is placed a body, behind which there is room for a boy2B8 NEW INVENTIONS.to stand when the head is up, or to sit when it isthrown back. A low platform is placed on the front locker,and to this is attached a driving-seat, capable of beingremoved when the sitters wish to drive themselves fromthe body. The lines of this carriage harmonise well together;' — the locker beneath being merely a basement, whichin the construction would scarcely be seen at all, as the eyeWould look downwards at it in perspective ; whereas in thedrawing it appears much more prominent, owing to thethe geometric elevation. This carriage would run verylightly behind a pair of small ponies or cobs, and lookingood proportion. The locker beneath would serve asawell to carry light luggage or parcels, without the slightestinconvenience to the sitters. By removing the frontdriving-seat and platform, and placing a trunk there instead,a convenient light travelling carriage would be attained.In this drawing the springs are shown extremely clumsyand ungraceful. The platform beneath the front seat projectstoo far forwards ; the bottom curve of the body is toostraight and irregular, and the elbow line at the forepartbr^ks abruptly into the front line ; while the leatherheadshows too heavy in front.A light Phaeton may be so constructed by means ofcranking the axles, that the locker will be within a footof the ground, and the level of the hind seat but a fewinches above the axle-arm. The driving-seat can be raisedon a platform to a sufficient height. With the knee-flapthrown up, this carriage would accommodate four personsin the hinder part, and two on the box. With the knee-newINVENTIONS. SpSflap closed, two only could sit behind ; but the headmight be entirely closed by means of a folding glass shutter,and thus all the convenience of a close carriage beattained. Under the seat there would be considerablespace for luggage, . and also in the front locker. Fortravelling, the driving-seat might be removed, and verylarge trunks placed on the front locker. This carriagewould be well adapted for infirm or nervous, persons, oryoung children, and' there would be as much leg-room ainan ordinary Britzschka, though it would require but asingle step to enter it, and the centre of gravity would bieso low that it would be a very difficult matter to oversetit even were any. one to try, while all the advantages ofhigh wheels would be retained. It might be drawn eitherby a large horse or two ponies.Plate XI. represents an equal-wheeled Droitzschka,the bottom within fourteen inches of the ground. Thelockers are arched upwards to clear the axles. The linesof this carriage harmonise well together, the various curvessidling in to each other with good effect. This is a &rmore convenient carriage than the ordinary Droitzschka,as the leg-room is not impeded by the necessity of allowingspace for the wheels to turn under. The driving-seatis on a platform, like the Pony Phaeton ; and that plat-pform might be made deeper, if required, for the convenienceof carrying parcels. Taking the driving-seat away, therewould be plenty of room for trunks and luggage. Two personscould be accommodated inside ; and with the knee-flapup, two children besides. Behind, there is accommodationfor a servant boy ; and two could Bit on the box. This NEW INTENTIONS.rage is exceedingly safe, and would run very light, eitherwith a hoise or two ponies. The head could, if required,be fitted with a folding shutter to form a close carriage.The defects in this drawing are, the too great thicknessof the springs, the too great flatness of the door-top,and a want of ease in the lower curve of the door.*Plate XII. represents a Chariot adapted for town orcountry use. At first sight, the lines of this carriage donot appear so graceful to a superficial observer as thoseof the ordinary chariots, on account of the straightness ofthe bottom ; but a closer examination will show, that withelliptic springs placed at the same horizontal level, no otherline could be so advantageously adapted. The carriage isa whole, composed of parts of equal sizes and proportions,and not filled in with heterogeneous ornaments for thepurpose of covering defects. The central parts join togetherin lines which are portions of segmental curves; thuspreventing a heavy appearance. The hind end curves upwardsin an elliptic form ; and the front, with a return curvesomewhat resembling the light figure-head of a ship ; thusdenoting the line of progress. The lower line of theThese carriages can be constructed so light that they might beeasily posted with one horse; the postilion not riding, but driving froma very small and light seat in front of the luggage. By this meansmany persons who keep light carriages might be induced to travel bythem on excursions, instead of using public vehicles. Two travellerswith light luggage might thus travel in their private carriage nearlyas rapidly and as economically, and with much more convenience,than by the mail. In this age of progress such a plan is well worththe attention of post-masters, the total amount of whose businessmight thus be much increased. The necessary arrangements wouldnot be difficult.NEW INVENTIONS. 271hammer-cloth is made to range with the central horizontalline of the body. The lamp, instead of being ungracefullyattached to the fore part of the body as is commonlythe case, stands on a branching iron in the openspace left for it between the body and the hammer-cloth ;thus becoming a prominent object, like a classic Pharos.The general harmonious appearance of the vehicle wouldwith unprejudiced observers immediately obtain for it apreference over ordinary carriages, saying nothing of itsmechanical advantages ; but the eye, after being long accustomedto arbitrary forms, seldom remains unprejudiced,and it is difficult to divest ourselves of attachments thathave grown on us by the force of habit. Thus, manypersons are still found to prefer the barbarous grotesquelywhich has caricatured the true Louis Quatorze taste, andto look with contempt, alike on the beauty of Greek simplicityand Gothic art.But, leaving all questions of external appearance to bedecided on their own merits, and taking the mechanicaladvantages for granted, the question of comfort remains tobe considered. In this point of view, the carriage will befound to possess qualities not attainable in any of the ordinaryvehicles. Though appearing larger than an ordinaryChariot, it actually stands on a less space of ground,the axles being one foot nearer to each other than is commonlythe case. But the whole of the length is usefullyoccupied. The body for the sitters, instead of being acramped box confining the limbs, as the ordinary chariotsdo, is in reality more nearly approaching the form of anapartment, being sufficient for two persons of the verys272 .NEW INVENTIONS.largest size to recline at full length, without incommodingeach other ; while the bottom is straight, like an ordinaryfloor. Britzschkas, it is true, also afford a facility for recliningat full length ; but from want of space above forair, they are almost suffocating to the passenger : whereasin this kind of chariot ample space is afforded for air. Onlooking at the drawing, it will be seen that the ordinary^ appearance of the side door is preserved, though it is not inreality a door, but merely a window to draw up and downas usual. From the fore part of this apparent door, thebody is continued forward in a circular form ; and thus theinterior presents a large bow front, with a window on eitherhand, through which a perfect view is obtained on all sides.The floor of the body is in fact in the form of a horseshoe.The doors open in the bow front on either side.This body is well capable of accommodating four or sixpeople; and the locker in front will hold a very large quantityof luggage ; while the coachman and footman go on thebox. If required, a stand for the footman might easily beattached behind, by light iron stays or brackets. On ajourney, imperials might be placed on the roof, and alsoon the fore locker ; and supposing two persons only to occupythe interior, they might have a very convenient tablebefore them. In addition to this, the author has contriveda very simple arrangement, by means of a large lamp belowthe bottom, to heat small water-pipes carried round the interior,and thus maintain a comfortable warmth in the wintertime.The ordinary mode of constructing carriageswill scarcely permit this.The principal defects in this drawing are, the absence ofIiiNEW INVENTIONS. 273a graceful curve in the springs, and the enormous disproportionof the mouldings which composed the outlines ofthe body.This principle of carriage construction is well adaptedfor Stage-coaches, as well as the Omnibuses with which thestreets are crowded, and which i;<4th the advent of railroadswill continue to increase.Plate XIII. is a design for an Omnibus. It is jointedin the middle, where the circular sides are made flexiblelike a leathern head or hood. It will turn with facility inthe narrowest streets, without impeding the passage-wayalong the interior, as the flexible sides move in a circle-withthis omnibus two horses would do the work of three:there would be great facility of access and egress ; perfectcommand over the horses ; increased ease to the passengers; greater head-room, and more perfect ventilation ;greater general durability, and absence of the usual rattlingnoise, accompanied by entire safety against overturning.This design is calculated for the accommodation oftwelve inside passengers, but it might easily be lengthenedbehold twenty ; and two horses would draw it with thesame facility as fourteen are drawn on the present plan, onaccount of the height of the wheels, which so much aids thedraught.After completing these designs, the author was led toreflect that the novel mode of locking was not well adaptedfor the use of C springs. This induced an analysis ofthe ordinary elliptic springs, with a view to their improvement.Upon further reflection, the reason of the doubleelliptic springs being easier than the single straight springs274 NEW INVENTIONS.seemed to be, the feet of the body placed on them beingtwo removes from the concussion. It immediately struckthe author that a flexile medium attached to a single springwould be a more perfect combination than a double spring,and experiments with an archer's bow confirmed his expectations.He then constructed a spring of a single plateof shear steel, and fitting the ends with adjusting screws,applied a cord of sufficient size to draw the arch to theright'span. The result was, a very perfect spring of universalaction. In Plates IX. to XIV. it is shown, attachedto the equivocal carriages, and the annexed cut defines itmore clearly.REGULATING BOW-SPRING.The spring is a single plate of steel tapered both waysfrom the centre to the ends, which are forcibly curved bythe adjusting bolts. The spring is firmly fixed by theback to the cross-bar of the carriage, and the cord is attachedto the axle by proper fastenings. Consequently,the cord, being flexile, will relieve the concussion of thewheel in whatever direction it may strike. It will also beseen that this spring has no tendency to break, and thatby the action of the cord it will resist the upward reboundas easily as the downward pressure. There are also threeother material advantages attending it. One half the usualweight of steel will suffice for its construction — the adjustingscrews will adapt it at pleasure for a light or heavyKEW INVENTIONS. 275load — and being a single plate, it may be efficiently coveredwith paint to preserve it from rust. The authorhas reason to believe that this spring will be found a veryperfect substitute for the unwieldy C spring and leathernbrace,*It is now upwards of two years since the attention ofthe author was drawn to the probable increase of publicvehicles, and more especially Cabriolet and Omnibuses,which must be the natural result of railroads and otherimprovements in distant locomotion. With this motivehe prepared the designs for the improved Omnibus, andalso one for an improved Cabriolet for street use*These designs were lying by him, when Mr. Hansom,the well-known architect of the Birmingham Town-hall,gave the first active impulse to the dormant spirit of publicimprovement in street vehicles, by introducing the Cabrioletwhich bears his name. Mr. Hansom had remarkedthe defects of the common Cabriolets, their inconvenientmheight, and danger to the passenger as well as driver. Hewas well aware also of the mechanical advantage of highwheels, accompanied by a low body for the sitters ; but heassumed, without verifying, the common error of most carriageconstructors, '^ that it was impossible to make a deepranked axle to stand its work, without being enormouslyIf it be desirable to convert swords and spears into ploughsharesand pruning-hooks, it must be equally desirable to convert cross-bowsinto carriage springs. The death weapon of former ages will thusplay a new part in a sphere of extensive utility, administering to thepleasures of mankind, instead of adding to their sufferings.T 2276 NEW INVENTIONS.heavy*" This error led him to contrive the very ingeniousbut very complicated and inefficient framework which supportsthe convenient though inelegant body. The quantity ofwood and iron used in this framework was so great as to counterbalancenearly all the friction saved by the high wheels.The invention was taken up by a company, and the publicmind was immediately excited, so that an Omnibus Associationwas forthwith set on foot. The disadvantages of theold Omnibuses were so great, and especially in their greatheight from the ground, that a new design was planned forthem in which the horses were entirely sacrificed to theconvenience of the passengers. The axles were rankedto get the body low; and the front wheels were so reducedin size, that the friction was very considerably increased,and what the passengers gained in ease of access, they lostby increased jarring. The horses also suffered in compoundproportion ; for the front springs were placed at the extremityof the crank instead of the centre of the axis, so thata considerable leverage power was added to the resistance ofthe front wheels.* In spite of these disadvantages, the gainsof the Association were, or were supposed to be, so great,that all kinds of rival schemes were set on foot.It was soon found that Mr. Hansom'*s Cabriolets, thoughan improvement on the old ones in public use, were farfrom perfect. One of the disadvantages was the mode ofThe planner of this vehicle would seem to have possessed thefavourite fallacy of many carriage constructors — " that a large hindwheel pushes on a small front wheel." This prejudice has been humorouslysatirised by the author of the " Pickwick Papers'' who makesa cab driver-describe '' a pair of big wheels*' as forcing on a horseagainst his will.New INVENTIONS 27Tfentry, close to the very large wheel. A foreign patent wastransplanted to England, and the vehicle being united to anewly-invented spring of English growth and patent, thefirst of those Cabriolets plied for hire, which was not inaptlydesignated as a " Slice off an Omnibus." It was thenfirst acknowledged that a deep-ranked axle "would standits work*" This vehicle was found exceedingly convenient iit was comparatively light, not weighing more than fiveand a half hundred weight ; the entrance was from behind,free from mud and risk on entering ; and the springs, whichwere patented by Mr. William Boulnois, were found easierthan the common springs. They were double ellipsesacting both vertically and laterally ; a great improvementon the old method of constructing elliptic springs, whichonly admit of a vertical action. They must of course bemore expensive to construct, from having more movingjoints, and at the same time they require more frequentrepairs ; but still they were a considerable improvement.The defects of this Cabriolet were — that the passengersmust necessarily sit sideways, — that they were exposed tocontinuous public view from behind, instead of the passingglances of foot passengers, — that they were much exposedto mud from vehicles following, — that their forward visionwas prevented — and that the risk to the driver from thehorse falling, was very great indeed. From this last defectMr. Hansom'^s Cabriolet is free, inasmuch as if the horsefalls, the bottom almost instantly rests on the ground.The advantages, however, of this " Slice off an Omnibus''were so great, and the mode of construction so simple andeconomical, that a shoal of imitations were instantly put278 NEW INVENTIONS.forward, pit Chariot bodies were cut down, and. numberlesstransformations made, some with judgment and somewithout. The truth is, they all more or less bear a strongresemblance to the vehicles called. "go-carts'' which plyfor hire as a sort of two-wheeled stages in the neighbourhoodof Lambeth, the deep-ranked axle being the principaldistinction.The next attempt in the " service of the public'' wasthe introduction of a vehicle with the somewhat anomaloustitle of a Four-wheeled Cabriolet. This is a modification ofthe vehicle not long introduced under the name of a Plenum,which, again, is a Droitzschka with a curved bottomline instead of a straight one. This Four-wheeled Cabrioletis, for passengers, the most convenient vehicle which hasyet been introduced. It is a close carriage, with windowsto give sight and air on each side; it is easy of access,and of more easy motion than the common two-wheeledvehicles, and is as perfectly free from mud andthe intrusive gaze of foot passengers as though it were aprivate vehicle ; and it is, moreover, safe for the driver.This is well for the public ; but its great expense, weiglit,iand consequent consumption of horse-flesh, will probablydemand a larger sum per mile than the Cabriolet oresestablished by law, in order to remunerate the capitalists.If those who upheld the error respecting ranked axleshad analysed the subject, they would have found that theonly difference in strength between a ranked axle and astraight one, consists in the extra length, and therefore thecompensation must be made for it, by giving extra thicknessin the direction of the strain, just the same as thoughNEW INVENTIONS. 279it were straight. In constructing ranked axles, the authoruses a combination of wood and iron where great strengthis required, similar to the mode of making ordinary perches,by which means he gets lightness combined with strength ;and for very light axles, he increases the width in the directionof the strain, at the same time diminishing the thicknessin the other directions. By this means he constructsaxles sufficiently strong, and much lighter than by the ordinarymethods.The Author's Improved Cabriolet, to be drawn by onehorse, is a two-wheeled vehicle, with the wheels from four feetsix inches to five feet in height. The wheels are connectedtogether by a deep-ranked axle, upon which the shafts aresuspended by a bow-spring. The shafts are connected togetherby a single bar in front of the body, and to which thehorse is attached. The body is suspended between theshafts, resting on the elbow projections on each side. Theform of it is adapted to the form of the human body whetin a sitting posture. It hangs within a foot of the ground ;and the entrance is from behind, by a door which whenclosed is air-tight. The front is provided with ample glasswindows above the level of the knees, made to open or closeat pleasure ; and one half of the roof above the windowsis made to fold back on the other, so that in fine deathsit becomes an open carriage. The two passengers sit withtheir faces forwards, so that the vision is unimpeded. Thedriver is placed behind, on a standard, with his back recliningagainst an elastic brace, in the same mode in whichpost-chaises are driven ; and his arms recline on the hindpart of the roof as on a desk, the reins going over the roof,280 NEW Inventions.SO that he can observe his horse and wheels equally well, tosteer clear of obstacles. Should the horse trip, the drivercan exert his whole force to save him, without fear, as hecannot possibly be thrown off by any jerk ; and the bottombeing so close to the ground, even if the horse fells no riskcan occur either to passenger or driver. When the vehiclestops, the driver can open the door with one hand and retainthe reins with the other, conveniently dismissing hisfare without leaving his place. This Cabriolet thereforecomprises the six points of, lightness — ease — safety — isolationbetween the driver and the passengers — and an openor close vehicle at pleasure.Upon the same principle as the Omnibus and the otherEquirotal Carriages, the author constructs Four-wheeledWaggons for the conveyance of coals, flour, wheat, andother heavy burdens. This kind of Waggon is entirely ofsheet iron, and requires less draught power than ordinaryWaggons. It has all four wheels each five feet in height ;the bottom is within a foot of the ground ; it may bedrawn from either end at pleasure ; it discharges at theside instead of the end, and one man can unload it withperfect facility.With the present Waggons, all the coals and other heavyburdens carried, are lifted four feet high on loading, andlowered four feet on discharging. With the ImprovedWaggon, they are lifted one foot high and lowered one foot ;so that there is a saving of human power equivalent to asix-feet lift on all the heavy burdens carried by waggon.The advantages to be gained by the facility of shifting thehorses to either end, in narrow streets and wharves, need notNEW INVENTIONS. 281be dwelt on. Narrow wharves without extended sweeps orturns, are with these Improved Waggons equally available,as the larger wharves are with Common Waggons. Incrowded cities, where every foot of space is valuable, thisis an important advantage.CHAPTER XVIII.Existing Mail Coaches. their defects. — Author's Intention of anImproved Mail Coach. — The advantages of it.The attention of the author having been drawn to thesubject of the public Mail Coaches, he proposed the designshown in Plate XIV. ; and he will now give a statement ofthe imperfections of the existing Mail, and the advantages tobe gained by the use of the one he proposes. This will servethe reader as a general summary of the principles on whichthe art of carriage construction should be based, and whichhave been stated more diffusely in the foregoing chapters.A succinct statement of the errors in principle on which RailroadCarriages and Railroads are constructed, with severalnew propositions for their improvement, will conclude hiswork.The construction of the Coaches hitherto used for theconveyance of the Mails has not developed to the greatestpossible extent the qualities they ought to exhibit ; viz.ease of draught with the minimum of friction — ^fecUity ofturning round in the smallest possible space— securityagainst oversetting, by keeping the centre of gravity low—an advantageous position for the driver to ensure his powerover the horses— ease to the passengers — sufficient and securespace for the mail-bags — general durability — simpleMail-coaches. 283city — little liability to derangement-and lastly, economyin the first cost.Ease of draught they have not to the greatest possibleextent ; as the fore wheels are considerably smaller thanthe hind ones, and the friction is thereby increased.Facility of turning in a small space they Have not ; forthe fore wheel is so close to the body that it can make butasmall angle, and consequently the coach must desire alarge circle in going round. An unskilful driver, whowould be apt to turn too short round, would therefore overset the coach.The liability to overset is also increased by the weightbeing considerably above the axles, even as regards thedead load, and, above all, by passengers being carried onthe roof, causing the coach to sway about with every ine-iquality of the road.The power of the driver over his horses, though sufficientwhen in a straight line, is almost lost when turningan angle. The leaders may in fact defy his efforts tocontrol them by the reins, and the whip is his only resource.The space for the luggage and mail-bags is small, andinsecure, as is evinced by the frequent robberies whichoccur.The durability is not great, as is shown by the constantrepairs which are needed to the carriage framework.They are far from simple, inasmuch as a double framework,called the upper and under carriages, is used to supportthe springs on which the body is fixed. The axles arealso imperfect, and complicated in their wheel fastenings ;284 IMPROVED Mail-coach.a great disadvantage, as to guard against accidents it is necessaryto examine the wheels after every journey.The carriage represented in Plate XIV. is calculated toobviate the foregoing defects.All four wheels being of equal height — i. e. the frontbeing made as large as the hind ones ; the axle friction,and the rolling friction also, are considerably diminished.When the front wheels are smaller than the hind ones, aportion of the horses' power is expended in a tendency tolift their centres into a line with the centres of the hindwheels, and the trace fastening at the collar, unless relievedby the clumsy expedient of raising the splintrebar above thewheel-centres. The small wheel also has less power of overcomingobstacles, by reason of its diminished leverage ; andit has. also to make more revolutions round the axis. Thetire consequently wears much faster. From these defectsthe high front wheels are free.The facility of turning round in a small space is ensuredby the substitution! of central pivots or axes nearly in thecentre of the framework, connecting together two separatebodies, in place of the ordinary perch-bolt usually placedat the foremost extremity of the framework. By thismeans the carriage is enabled to turn in little more spacethan its own length, without the smallest risk of oversettingit, and at the same time without increasing the lengthbetween the axles. The friction of the central pivots isalso much less than that of the ordinary perch-bolt, andthe carriage will follow the horses more easily, as it will notbe so stifle.The centre of gravity is kept low, by reason of the lug-improvedMail-coach. ^5gage being placed in wells beneath the axles. The outsidepassengers also are seated very low, and neither passengersnor baggage are carried on the roof: and if one of thewheels should chance to come off, the carriage would notoverset, but rest on the well.The ease of the carriage is greater than that of the ordinaryMail Stages, inasmuch as it is supported on four ofthe regulating bow-springs, which yield readily to all inequalitiesof surface over which the carriage may pass :and the pole also being on springs, will not fatigue thehorses by concussion.The power of the driver over his horses in this coachis far greater than in any other four-wheeled carriage.As the horses turn, his seat turns with them, and he isconstantly behind them, with his whole force capable ofexertion in a straight line ; whereas in ordinary coaches,when in the act of turning, the driver loses his command,and is occasionally pulled off his box by restive horses.The advantage here gained seems most important, as ameans of avoiding risk from unquiet cattle, independentlyof the facility in turning, which on level ground rendersit almost impossible to overset this coach.*The space for the mail-bags is a well or wells below theaxle centres, with doors opening at the ends — the hinder one** Be it remembered that if the body of a coach could be made tolock with the carriage, she would go round a comer at full speed withoutdanger. But as this cannot be done "Nimrod. The Road, p. 120.The author having shown that this can be done, calls upon this cleverwriter to aid with all his influence the introduction of these vehiclesinto the service of the Post-office, for ' all lines of road not traversedby steam, and also into the service of private proprietors.286 IMPROVED Mail-coach.immediately beneath the feet of the guard. These wellare attached to it bodies ; but all chance of cutting throughthe floor for the purpose of robbery may be prevented bythe application of a sheet of thin iron loosely fastenedbeneath the floor-boards. The wells may be made of ordinarywood-work ; but the author would recommend thinsheet iron in preference, tinned and painted, and consequentlynot so liable to get out of order, besides beingmuch safer.The general durability of this coach must be greaterthan that of ordinary coaches, inasmuch as the whole isupon springs except the axles and wheels. The facilityof turning, and the height of the wheels also, tend to removemuch of the concussion. If required, the height ofthe wheels may be increased still further without raisingthe bodies, — ^by cranking the axles.This coach is simpler than ordinary coaches, inasmuchas all the under framework, which adds so much to theweight of ordinary coaches, and gives them so clumsy anappearance, is entirely removed.The expense of building this coach, as a branch ofmanufacture, would be less than that of ordinary coaches,as it is less complicated ; but that of course does not referto a pattern coach, which must necessarily be more expensiveon account of the loss of time caused to the workmenwhile learning a new branch of art.The seat of the guard is so arranged, that when seatedhe is sheltered from the wind in front ; and when standingup, he can look over the roof of the coach to survey theroad in front : and he is also in close attendance at thedoor.IMPROVED Mail-coach. 287The facility of access to the interior is rather more thanin ordinary coaches, the body being larger, and far moresafe also, as the inside passengers run no risk of beingthrown under the wheels by the horses starting suddenly.The outside passengers can also gain their seats withgreater facility ; and both they and the inside passengersare less cramped in their limbs while sitting.As before stated, if a wheel comes off by accident, thecoach would not overset, but rest on the well.The whole of the fore body beneath the feet of theoutside passengers is contrived to contain a very largequantity of luggage.When ordinary coaches break down in an unfrequenteddistrict, there is sometimes great trouble experiencedin forwarding the letter-bags. But this carriage is so constructed,that if an axle or wheel were to break, the twobodies might be separated by taking out the pivots orbolts, and thus the horses could proceed with one half;the pole being so adjusted as to fit either, and thus formakind of curricle. In heavy falls of snow this would beanadvantage, for the horses might force their way witha two-wheeled carriage where a four-wheeled one wouldbe impracticable.**The impediments to inland communication during the late winter,and the stoppage of the Mails by the snow, was partly owing to theform of the vehicles. The small fore wheels act on the snow somewhatlike a plough. In mechanics, the worse the road, the highershould be the wheels ; and soft snow is about the worst of all roads.Had the coaches been worked with the large wheels in front, the frictionwould have been found considerably diminished. A very small288 IMPROVED Mail-coach.The axles used for the present Mails are only greased ;and the wheels require taking off every journey, —which is a very destructive process, and increases the riskof casualties. Collinge's patent oil-axles will run fromfour to five thousand miles after once oiling, if no accidentoccur. But the very best axles at present in usefor ordinary wheels are those known as Mason^s ImprovedPatent. These axles have all the advantages of Col-lingerspatent axles ; and in addition, the boxes have threelongitudinal grooves, which contain a supply of oil, — inactual contact with the axle-arm : whereas Collinge's axle-armsare supplied by a capillary process like a paintingaction, which is liable to be checked, and then the wheelsticks fast. Prom this defect Mason^s Improved PatentAxle is free.The distance between the axles, and also the widtH ofthe wheel-tracks, are precisely the same as in the presentMail Coaches.A pamphlet was lately published by Mr. RowlandHill, advocating the reduction of all postage on lettersto a penny. It has been objected to this, that the Mailswould thereby either be overloaded, or would be too smallfor the amount of correspondence. If so, the plan theauthor proposes would, by the very great increase of ,remedy the defect.portion of contrivance would have sufficed to remove the pole andsplinters bar from the front and attach them to the hinder end andthen coachman, guard, and passengers, would all have marvelledalike at the effect, as the collective wisdom of Spain did at the egg ofCristal Colon.CHAPTER XIX.Railroad Transit. Clashing Opinions. — Engineers and CarriageBuilders. — Railroads still only experimental. — Manchester andLiverpool Railroad. — Railroad Bubbles. — Steam veris Horses.Iron-tired Wheels an argument for Iron Bearings on Roads.Defects in the Original Construction of the Manchester andLiverpool Railroad and Carriages. — Great Destructive Wear. —Causes— Absence of Elasticity. — Springs. •— Relative Speeds.—^Diameter of Wheels. — Enormous Weight and Unscientific Constructionof Railway Passenger Carriages. — Parallel Axles. —Flanges. — Coned Wheels. — Advantages. — Sledge-like Motion.—Improvement in the Position of Rails. •— Author's Invention of aRailway Train to pass freely round a Curve. — Propositions for increasedSpeed on Railways premature. — Stephenson's Six-wheeledEngine. — Earl of Dundonald's Two-wheeled Engine. — Methodsof constructing Railroads. — analysis of Common Roads. — MacadamisedRoads. — Imitations.— Combination of Wood and Ironfor Railroads. — Durability of Wood. — Artificial Means of increasingDurability. — author's Inventions of a Railroad of Wood andIron — Of a Mode of keeping the Wheels on the Rails withoutFlanges — sand of a Mode of keeping the Bearings of the Axlesabundantly oiled without waste. — Summary of the Defects of Railroadsand Railroad Carriages, and the Remedies which are desirable.—Conclusion.As the public mind is at present largely occupied withthe subject of inland transit in the particular form of Railroads,any remarks tending to elucidate details connectedwith their economy will not be out of place in this wort. *With respect to the question of national advantage involvedin the general application of railroads to the purposesu290 RAILROAD TRANSIT.of inland transit, the disputes have been long and bitter.The advocates for railroads proclaim them all that is excellent; their opponents a ruinous absurdity. The truth liesbetween. They cannot be in a state of perfection, for asyet there is no existing railroad which can be consideredmore than experimental, either in the roadway, orthe vehicles used on it. No conclusion is yet arrivedat, and the experiments are costly. The engineersaccustomed to stationary machines had much to learnin locomotion, and laughed to scorn the practical carriagebuilders. The carriage builders, on the contrary, thoughtit presumption in the engineers to interfere with theirtrade ; and the result has been, that they hs^ve separatedthe branches of the art : — the carriage builder for railroadshas become a mere wooden box maker ; and the engineerhas gone through a part of the process of getting at whatwill do, by consecutively finding out what will not do.That under such circumstances any railroad should haveproved a source of profit, and especially of large profit, isremarkable.The excitement of the public mind after the success ofthe Liverpool and Manchester road, called forth a host ofprojectors of new lines of roads, many of them more anxiousto sell shares than to promote commercial transit.That speculations of this kind should prove unfavourableto the shareholders, was not to be wondered at ; and thereforerailroads generally were decried, because some plansfor railroads were a failure. It must be clear that all roadswhich are not wanted must cause an unprofitable expenditure,whether rail-roads or common roads. But it isRAILROAD TRANSIT. 291also clear that for the purposes of stationary work, steamis a cheaper and harder working servant than animals, —provided there is constant work for it;— otherwise, animalsare the best. The same principle holds good in locomotivework ; and therefore common roads must be continuedwhere the transit is limited, and not capable of sufficientincrease. To make a steam-road is more costly than ananimal road, because it imperatively requires a more exactlevel ; but the nearer an animal road approaches to a level,the better it is for purposes of economy. Where theamount of transit is unlimited, and the saving of time is thesaving of money, the steam-road is undoubtedly the best ;and though the first cost is greater, the expense of maintenanceis less, when once it has been made durable.The question can hardly yet be fairly tried. The experimentson railroads have been condensed into the spaceof a few years, and we look at the cost of them in a mass ;but we say nothing of the cost of the experiments spreadover a long number of years, by dint of which our commonroads have attained their present state of perfection.The same reasons which hold good for applying iron tothe bearing surfaces of our wheels, will be found ultimatelyto hold good with regard to the bearing surfacesof our roads, whether our draught power be steam oranimals.*One important item in swelling the cost of railroads is the increasedvalue of the land purchased for them, saying nothing of thejobbing. The common roads have been made by small portions at atime, and improved gradually. To make a new line of commonroad now, for a great distance, would be found a sufficiently costlyundertaking.u 2S92 RAILROAD TRANSIT.Railroads are not a late invention, as has been supposedby many persons : they have long been in use in the coal andiron districts, where steam vehicles have also been employedon them ; but in their adaptation to the purposes of generallocomotion, they date their origin from that between Manchesterand Liverpool. That undertaking was a costlyone ; and while its practicability was practically unproved,the difficulty of getting capitalists to embark in it wasgreat. Therefore, the economy of outlay was more studiedthan the economy of after efficiency. The lines of rails werelaid so close together, in order to diminish the expense ofthe embankments and deep cuttings that subsequently itwas found impracticable to place the carriage bodies, — atleast for passengers — between the wheels.* They weretherefore placed above the wheels; and then, in order to diminishthe risk of oversetting, consequent on the centre ofgravity being placed too high, wheels were used of a reducedsize, varying from three feet to three feet six inches. Formoderate speeds — under twenty miles — these wheels migli,tanswer well enough ; but when the speed varies from twentyto thirty miles and upwards per hour, they tell quite perceptiblytheir defects in the heavy items of repairs, bothSince this was written, it has been stated to the author, by a Manchesterresident of some eminence, that this error in the. width of therails arose, not from a consideration of cost, but simply from thesheep-like habit of imitation so strongly implanted even in the mostoriginal human beings. The rail-tracks and coal-waggons ef theNorth of England were used of a certain width and pattern ; theyhad been found to answer in practice, and — they were imitated. ItVas not taken into the account that coals and cotton required differentlyshaped vehicles for convenient transport, and the profits from passengertrains were not anticipated.RAILROAD TRANSIT. 293of rails and carriages. Curiously enough, the fault has alwaysbeen laid on the rails, while the carriages have beenoverlooked. As first as failures took place, the weight ofthe rails was increased ; and new varieties of supports andkeys and fastenings were introduced, and rewards offeredfor discoveries therein.* Then came forth the "fish-belliedrails*" and a large amount of discussion, ending in theexperiments of Professor Barlow ; one main feature of whosereport is, a recommendation to leave the rails as lightly fasteneddown as possible, and to place the chairs or beddingon felt, or some such material as may yield slightly topressure. The object of this is evidently to obtain theprinciple of elasticity, the only true means of eluding concussionwhen it is found impracticable to resist it. Butthe costly wear and tear still continues, and will continuetill the carriages shall be better constructed.Springs are used in carriages to avoid concussion ohrough woods. As a consequence, the rougher the road, theMuch trouble was experienced at the commencement of runningon the Manchester and Liverpool railroad, owing to the frequentfailures of the wheels. They were at last made strong enough ; butthen the rails were found to feiil in a greater proportion. The simplefact is this : When wheels are put in motion over a plane surface, greatspeeds and slight inequalities are equivalent to slow speeds and greatinequalities. Where the inequalities exist, concussion must takeplace; and the only means of eluding concussion— for resisting it isout of the question— is by elasticity. Not taking this feet into the considerationof the subject, one person makes wheels by substituting rigidplate iron drums in lieu of spokes ; and another, as the author has beeninformed, makes solid welded wheels of wrought iron. What then '!The wheels will endure ; but concussion will transfer its attacks to theremainder of the carriage, if the rails be made too strong for it to actonthem.294 Railroad TRANSIT.greater is the amount of elasticity required. The smootherthe road, the lesser is the anoint of elasticity required.This is supposing a given speed in both cases : but if thespeed be increased, the amount of elasticity must abo beincreased, as the concussion will be greater in proportion.The speed of twenty ndles an hour on a coition roadwould be destructive to a carriage fumidied with the shortheavy springs advantageously used for that Velocity on therailroads ; and when the twenty is increased to thirty onthe railroads, concussion and destructive wear take place.As the speed increases, small obstacles and inequalities becomemagnified in proportion ; and therefore it becomesnecessary to increase the counteracting power. The elasticagency of springs is not the only counteracting power. Anobstruction which proves a formidable obstacle to a smallwheel is comparatively enormous when opposed to a largeone ; a fact which is proved by the circumstance that ass roadshave improved, small wheels have been substituted for largeones : or, — where the same sized wheels have been retained,the loads have progressively increased in weight, or — thespeed has been increased. Thus, cm a railroad, if a wheelthree feet six inches in diameter be sufficient to carry agiven load twenty-five miles per hour without destructivewear, as a maximum, it must be evident that if the speedbe increased, the size of the wheel must also be increased,as a compensation, in order to avoid destructive wear.That the wheels of railway vehicles are not at present ofsufficient size for the speed used, is one great cause of thedestructive wear and tear experienced on railroads. Itwere a task worthy of the scientific and experimental accu-RAILROAD TRANSIT. 295racy of Professor Barlow, to construct a table of the proportionswhich the diameter of wheels should bear to theweight they are intended to carry, and the speed at whichthey are intended to travel, in order to prevent destructivewear either by axle friction or rolling friction. If this benot done, costly indeed will be i\^e experiments which mustbe gone through on a large scale ere the velocity of fiftyand sixty miles per hour, — ^whidb has been pronouncedattainable*— will be verified in ordinary practice.It may be perhaps objected, that increasing the size ofthe heavy metallic wheels in use on railroads would addvery materially to their weight. This however, even iftrue, might be more than compensated for. by subtractingfrom the passenger carriages a quantity of surplus weightarising from their imperfect construction ; and thus, evensupposing the mean wight of the vehicle and wheels toremain the same, a great advantage would undoubtedly begained by the diminution of the axle friction. But, if wetake as an example the passenger carriages of the mostapproved kind, now used on the Greenwich railroad, weshall find that a considerable reduction of the total weightmay be made. It is a curious thing, that on commonroads, the heavy lumbering framework in fouivwheeledprivate vehicles, technically called the *' carriages is nowfor the most part dispensed with, and the axles and wheelsare attached directly to the body ; and yet upon railroads,where there is still less necessity than on common roads, asthe bearing surfiu^ is always comparatively level, we findan enormously heavy " carriages' constructed entirely ofmetal, supporting a " body," which,, if properly framed,296 Railroad Transit,would do all the work required of it, without needing anycarriage whatever.Another disadvantage attending the vehicles used onrailroads is, the permanent parallelism of their axles, andtheir consequent unfitness to move in any line but a straightone. During the first experiments made by the elder Mr.Stephenson on the Manchester railroad, he foimd considerabledifficulty in preventing the wheels running off therails, notwithstanding he used very large flanges. It soonoccurred to him to make the external circumference of thetires conical instead of cylindrical, the smallest diameter ofthe cones being on the outside of the wheel. An advantagewas thereby gained, more than he had calculated on,by the comparative facility these wheels afforded for movingin a circular line, though still a circle of very largediameter. It must be evident, that if a double cone, taperingfrom the centre to the ends, be strongly impelledwith a rolling motion on two straight parallel and horizontalbars or rails, there will be a tendency in the centre of thecone to keep a central line parallel to the two bars ; but ifthe bars, instead of being straight, be made portions of twoconcentric circles, then the double cone, being violently irpellet with a rolling motion, will have a tendency to astraight line, and the centrifugal force it possesses willcause the cone to increase on the outer circle, and diminishon the inner one ; thus compensating by an increased anddiminished diameter for the increased and diminishedlength of road. The wheels used on the railroad beingfixed on their axles, each pair represents the double conejust described. But when four wheels are used to a car^ I% IP« S•S ^t<8 S>^SrM5=II* •8 i ^rgboIa•aIs«uari>XM«<RAILROAD TRANSIT. 297rage, with the axles permanently parallel, they cannotmove in a circular track without their rolling motion beingpartly converted into a sliding one. This is one forciblereason why curves on a line of railroad are so much deprecated,and especially when of small diameter. The slidingmotion, though scarcely perceptible, must add very considerablyto the friction ; and the coning of the wheels mustalso act like a wedge, tending to thrust the rails outwards,and unsettle them from their bearings.It must be evident that a four-wheeled carriage runningin a circle, should have its axles, not parallel to each other,but in lines radiating towards the centre of that circle.This, together with the coning of the wheels, would makea nearly perfect railway carriage. But, as the coned wheelsact like wedges on the rails, the rails ought to be so reinforcedon their outer sides as to compensate for the outerthrust of the wheels : or perhaps a better method would be,to make the upper bearing surface of the rails parallel tothe cones of the wheels, instead of a horizontal surface,and of course making the rib of the rail at* right angleswith that bearing surface. Stones or dirt would thus beless apt to lie on the rails.The mode of constructing the passenger carriages whichthe author would propose, and which he would much liketo see verified by experiment, is, to construct a body ofwood properly framed, and capable of containing, saytwelve passengers, like an ordinary omnibus. This bodyshould be placed on two springs of the bow and stringprinciple before described, crossing the axle on either side.The cords of the springs shoidd be secured to the axle, and^ 298 Railroad Transit.the whole placed between two wheels, four feet or four feetthree inches in height. Two carriages being thus prepared,they should be coupled together by the jointed iron-workused for the equivocal carnages before descended, leavingabout three inches of space between the bodies, in orderto allow the axles to accommodate themselves to the line ofdraught.With carriages of this description, a whole train mightbe jointed together, without the necessity for buffingsprings. There would be no jerks, as the train would becontinuous, though jointed, like the vertebrae of a snake.The elasticity of the springs would be found to act in alldirections, and the wheels would revolve with a greatlydiminished amount of friction ; thus permitting, withoutdetriment, a greater amount of speed. The general appearanceof such a train is shown both in elevation andplan in Plate XV.Plate XVI. shows the train in a circle, and a back elevationof the train carriage.It is a constant theme amongst those connected withrailroads, to enlarge on the desirability of increasing the[: speed used on them. This is somewhat premature, whilei; the speed already attained is not absolutely devoid of risk,owing to the wheels getting off the rails. To diminishthis risk was the object of Mr. Stephenson in constructinghis engines with six wheels, — the two first and the twolast being provided with flanges, and the centre ones,which are the propelling wheels, being left without. Butthis method is very imperfect, inasmuch as it increasesstill further the difficulty of passing round sweeps, and ofrII '(IifI:Hind Elevation of a Railway Carriage, shewing the timber edge railsand their capping set at an angle corresponding to the coning of thewheels.THE FLEXIBLE CARRIAGE-TRAIN DRAWN .INTO A CIRCLE.PLATE XVI.Railroad TRANSIT. 299course increases the lateral friction, by placing axles whichare permanently parallel at a very wide distance from eachother. And moreover, the difficulty of making the propellingwheels adhere efficiently on the rails when theyare two out of six, is greater than when they are two outof four. Even with four-wheeled engines the difficulty ofgetting sufficient adhesion is considerable; and this led theEarl of Dundonald to patent a method of making two-wheeledengines, connective the engine with its tender bya similar contrivance to that used in the army for connectinga gun-carriage with its tumbril. But the contrivancesthe Earl has resorted to are so extremely clumsy and inartificial,that they do not mend the matter.The question has been much agitated as to what is thebest method of constructing a railroad so as to ensure thegreatest amount of durability united with efficiency andeconomy. In order to decide this, it will be well first toexamine what are the common roads which have been foundin practice to exhibit the largest amount of these qualities.The most durable, without adverting to cost, have beenthose constructed of the heaviest blocks of stone with largebearing surfaces. A road of solid granite would of coursebe still more durable than this. But such a road would beinefficient for horses to travel on, for want of hold for theirfeet ; and the larger the blocks used, the heavier would betheexpense. And when smaller blocks are used, whichgive joints at sufficient intervals to prevent horses feetfrom slipping, it has been found in practice, that theweights of heavy waggons which occasionally rest on a singlestone, force it down below the level of the others ; and300 RAILROAD TRANSIT.thus the softer material in which it is embedded is forcedupwards. This process, repeated on stone after stone,aided by the fluctuations of wet and dry weather, at lastbreaks up the continuity of the pavement, and the wholeis destroyed.We may therefore assume it as a principle, that allpaved roads, constructed of separate blocks of stone whichdo not mechanically key or bond together, must have eachstone of so much bearing surface as to prevent it sinkingwith the heaviest weight which may be put upon it — concussionincluded — sin the course of traffic; and if thestones be of less bearing surface, such a road must be exposedto destruction by other than fair wear.The stones of pavements are usually bedded on gravel;and this gravel is sometimes made into concrete by theaddition of lime. If an artificial beating be thus or otherwisemade, of course smaller stones may be used thanwhen the bearing is less solid or firm. When properlyconstructed, such a pavement becomes a solid mass.Were it not for the consideration that it is frequentlynecessary to dig up the pavement in order to get at thewater and gas-pipes for the purpose of repairs, the mostpermanent mode of constructing it would be, to lay a substratumof flag-stones well bedded in cement, and uponthat — with a sufficient depth of concrete first placed on itssurface — to bed the ordinary stones forming the roadway.This would be expensive ; but it would always be dry andvery permanent, and save much of the expense in scavengers'work, as mud would not force up between the stones.But, inasmuch as such a pavement would be very ex-railroadTRANSIT. 301pensive, ft would not be available for long lines of road,and it is necessary to seek some cheaper substitute. Mr.MacAdam has found this for us in the process which goesunder his name. Granite, which is a tough solid stonethe fracture being very rough, is broken up into angularfragments about the size of walnuts, and is then spread ona road in depths varying from eight inches to twelve. Bythe gradual pressure of the wheel vehicles rolling over itssurface, the fragments of granite are shaken and pressedtill the flat sides for the most part bear against each other ;and being rough, they do not slide, but hang together andthus preserve the position which is least adapted to be disturbed.The small particles which are ground in thecourse of this process slide into the few interstices ; andthus, after a time, a road is formed whose upper surface isone continuous crust, resembling a solid rock of an archingform, from which the rain-water will run off instead of penetratingthrough it. By the action of the wheels, portionsof the upper surface are continually ground away ;and this powder thus formed should be carefully scrapedoff, or it will form mud, acting as a sponge to keep theroad wet. After long wear, the central portion of the road,which is most used, becomes too thin to sustain the weightsrunning on it, and the arch or crust breaks into holes.The remedy then is, to pick it up and incorporate with itafresh layer of broken stone.Granite being expensive on account of its distant carriage,it is customary, under a system of fiilse economy— pin lessening the first cost without regard to the ultimateresults — to substitute for it other and cheaper material ;302 Railroad Transit.such, for example, as Thames gravel, and nodules of flint,the latter broken ito pieces, like the granite. The former,from its being composed of rounded instead of angularfinns, must, it is evident, continually shift its positionunder the pressure of heavy weights, and can nev bondtogether. It therefore always remains a loose and heavyroad. The flints, though angular, being polished on theirsurfaces, slip past each other on pressure being applied,and are thus continually loosened ; and moreover, beingvery brittle, and not tough, like the granite, they arerapidly crushed into powder, forming mud in wet, anddust in dry weather, the mass never binding together. Tocall a road of this description a Macadamised road, is alibel on the inventor.It is clear, therefore, and it has been verified by longpractice, that the Macadamised road, taking all things intoconsideration, is the cheapest and the best : for althoughthe outlay is more considerable in making and keeping up,still it will enable wheel carriages to do more work in a givenspace of time, and with a less amount of destructive wearso that the balance of the whole account will give a largeamount of savings. The principle of the road, as beforeshown, consists in making it one continuous crust in anarched form, which most probably is prevented from crackingunder the concussion of the wheels, by having withinitself a power of vibration on the soft under sur&ce« Aftera heavy rain has washed a Macadamised road quiteclean on a declivity, it presents an appearance much resemblinga Mosaic work.The same principle which is found good on a commonRAILROAD TRANSIT. 308road must also be good on a railroad ; viz. a continuousequable surface. If this surface can be made perfectlysolid and unchangeable, it may answer ; but in default ofthis, it is absolutely necessary that it should possess thequality of vibration. The earliest railroads were made ofwood ; and to prevent rapid wear from friction, plates ofiron were affixed to them. Wood was found to decay,and heavy cast-iron plates were substituted for the combinationof wood and iron. For slow speeds they answered; but when greater speed became necessary, cast-ironwas found unavailing. Wrought-iron bare were thereforeresorted to ; and these bard were firmly attached tolarge blocks of stone not continuous. The result was, thatthe bars vibrated between the intervals of their supports,but not on the supports themselves ; and this, togetherwith the alternate contraction and expansion of the barsfrom cold and heat, were found to be defects causing theroads rapidly to get out of repair. The evident imperfectionof the roads so constructed has now led someof those connected with them to consider the practicabilityof using wood and iron in combination.To consider this well, we must refer to analogous cases ;i. e. the results obtained by the use of wood and iron incombination, where concussion has been found destructive.In ordinary carriages used on common roads this principleis very commonly applied, and it is foimd effective,and this is a case of very great concussion. In machineryalso, it is found that for cog-wheels, wood and metal work&r better together than metal alone, — that noised concussionare removed by the use of wooden teeth working with304 RAILROAD TRANSIT.metal ones. Here, again, is another case of destructiveconcussion.* If we assume, then, that it is desirable to usewood and iron in combination, the next question is as tothe quality and durability of the wood.It is essentially necessary that it should possess a tolerablystraight fibre, and not be disposed to warp withwet or dryness, or change of temperature. If subjectto warp, the strength will be impaired by unequal strains.The durability of wood is artificially affected, principally bymoisture, and more especially when the moisture is confinedand cannot escape. The natural durability of woodwhen not exposed to artificially-hastened decomposition dependsmuch on the quality of the glutinous substance whichunites the fibres together. If it be a resin not soluble inwater, as is the case with the fir tribes, the durability willbe greater than in those woods whose fibres are united bygums which are soluble in water. Thus, pitch-pine, whichcontains much resin, will last longer than ash, which containsnone. Another quality resistant of decomposition,is the quantity of tannin the wood may contain. Thus, thered cedar, which is a very light wood, will resist decompositionas long as oak, which is a very heavy wood. Athird quality in wood resistant of decomposition is its teatthe Rotherhithe ironworks the concussion of the heavy tilthammer was found very destructive to the engine which worked it.The intelligence of the proprietor devised a simple remedy for this.He applied two cross bars, or arms of elastic timber to the mainshaft, which connects the engine with its work, at right angles witheach other, and loaded the ends with heavy weights, so that theypresented the appearance of four hammers. The result was, that theconcussion was expended in the vibrating timber, which interceptedits progress towards the engine, and the destructive wear ceased.RAILROAD TRANSIT. 305gree of density, and freedom from pores, which preventmoisture from acting on it. But this last quality haslittle to do with the question now under discussion, inasmuchas the hard woods are too expensive to use commonlyin large quantities, and for railroad bearers they would betoo brittle.As durability is so essential a quality in wood, meanshave of course been resorted to, to make it artificially durable.The commonest means have been, by covering itwith substances impervious to moisture ; such as paint,grease, pitch, or varnish. In carriages this plan answersvery well, for the paint is laid on with such care thatthe wood is hermetically sealed against the atmosphere ;but in ordinary painting this is not the case. In spiteof the greatest care, flaws, cracks, and shakes remain openlike mouths for the admission of moisture, which, cannotagain exhale, because the paint keeps it in like a cup.Therefore, for all exterior work, wood which is unpaintedwill generally prove the most durable.As it must be clear that the chief natural resistantto decomposition in wood are resin and tannin, or otherantiseptics, endeavours have consequently been made toimpregnate wood artificially with antiseptic substances,just as fishermen and barge-owners on fresh water areaccustomed to tan the sails of their vessels. The modeadopted by Mr. Kyan^ for impregnating wood with a solutionof arsenic is said to be effective ; but the author hasno data to found an opinion on, whether this be correctornot.The ordinary process of decomposition in wood by what806 Railroad TRANSIT.is technically termed ^< rotting is in reality a kind of colonisationof the pores of the wood by tribes of animals orvegetables which feed on the juices uniting the fibres together.If therefore the wood be impregnated with any substancedestructive to animal and vegetable life, such asarsenic or copper, or other mineral substance, or withalkalies uniting with the acids of the wood, it is evidentthat decomposition may be protracted for an indefiniteperiod.But supposing wood not to be very durable, one certainway of not unfairly diminishing its durability is, toleave it as fSsir as possible free to the action of the atmospherewhen it must be exposed at all ; so that wheremoisture gets in, it may at least have the same chance ofgetting out. And this will bring us to the considerationof the best form of rail, and the best mode of securing itin its place. If this can be done simply, without fasteningsinvolving expense of material or skilled labour, agreat advantage ^U be gained.In railroads newly constructed, the road varies in solidity.In some parts it consists of deep cuttings, hereof course a solid foundation may mostly be obtained ; inother parts it consists of lofty embankments, made of un-firmearth which can scarcely be expected to become firmtill two or three years have passed away; in other partsthe road is permanently infirm by reason of the swampyand boggy nature of the ground. Therefore the mode ofconstruction which is good in one case is not good inmother. On the infirm road, a bedding of timber workmust be constructed, on which to lay the rails, and theRailroad TRANSIT. 307same on the swamps ; on the firm ground, other meansmay be used.For fixing iron bars, stones of considerable weight placedat short distances have been found the most eligible, becauseholes could be drilled in them to drive wooden plugsin, to fasten the chairs to ; but the author would not recommendthem in combination with wooden rails. Themode he would adopt as the best, not taking cost into theconsideration, will be readily understood by a reference toPlates XV. and XVI.The elevation in Plate XV. represents the edge line ofthe rail with a portion of the carriage train on it.The hind elevation, in Plate XVI. shows the end sectionof the road, with the back of the carriage.The plan, shows the road, with the carriages turned upsidedown.a a are brick and cement piers or basements of sufficientbearing surface to sustain the weight to be placed onthem, constructed with a deep groove on their upper surfaceto receive the longitudinal wooden rails b b. The endof the wooden rail is placed half-way upon one basement,runs quite through the next one, and half-way on the followingone, where the end of the next wooden rail abutsagainst it, and so on throughout the line. When in theirbearings, the rails are to be cemented in the joints to renderthem firm against the brick-work ; and they are placedin their beds with a slight outward thrust corresponding tothe angle of the coning of the wheel, as shown in the backelevation Plate XVI.The joints of the wooden rails ar covered by plates of808 RAILROAD TRANSIT.cast or wrought iron, enclosing the top and clipping* downboth sides of the rails. They are the exact length of therails, allowing for expansion ; and they are secured to theside of the rail by a single screw or nail in the centre oneach side, and by a key through a slot cut at each end ofthe bar affording longitudinal motion with expansion orcontraction. The plates are so placed that their abuttingjoints are over the pier which supports the centre of thewooden rail ; and the centres of the plates cover the jointsof the wood on the alternate piers.If the piers can be made sufficiently secure withoutfarthing up to the bottom of the wooden rails, so as toleave the whole of the wood within the piers exposed tothe action of the atmosphere, the durability will be increased.The portion of the train which is shown represents twopairs of carriages. Each pair has a turning centre aboveand below, so that they form a jointed four-wheeled carriage.But each pair is connected with the following pairby means of a ball and socket joint giving universal action.For this joint might at certain intervals be substituted abuffer spring, on the bow and string principle, if requiredto give facility of overcoming the vis inertia Bet starting.If — as the author believes — these vertebrated trains willbe found adapted for more rapid speeds than those hithertoused, the next question that occurs is, how to diminish therisk of accidents, from the flanges of the wheels surmountingthe rails by their great lateral adhesion on curves, whenthe speed is increased. The best method that occurs tohim is to dispense with the flanges altogether, and subsoilTRANSIT.tune in place of them horizontal guide-wheels, runningon vertical axles attached to the bearers or brasses ofthe horizontal axles opposite each wheel. The form ofthese guide-wheels should be similar to that of the presentrunning-wheels, viz. a conical edge terminated by a flange.The wheel being placed on the fixed vertical axle with theflange side downwards, and the upper part just level withthe surface of the rail, will, when the train is going rounda curve, bear against the outer rail ; and if tie rail be formedwith a side lip or moulded edge, in extreme cases theflange of the guide-wheel will clip beneath it, and thusprevent the possibility of the train escaping without absolutelytearing the rail up from its bedding. And if byany accident a train were to get oflT the rail, in such casesthe flat surfaces qf the guide-wheels would take a bearingon the ground, and the further progress of the train wouldbe arrested. The annexed woodcut shows the lateralframework of the carriage with the bow-spring attached,and the vertical axis and horizontal guide wheel suspendedfrom the bearing brasses, and passing through side bearersMODE OF APPLYING HORIZONTAL GUIDE WHEELS ON VERTICAL AXES,TO DISPENSE WITH THE FLANGES OF THE RUNNING WHEELS.Railroad TRANSIT.attached to the framework to preserve it in a vertical position.Using these guide-wheels, the mnnin^-wlieels wouldmerely be made conical on their circumference, with thesmallest diameter outward, as at present, but omitting theflanges altogether.The present mode of oiling the axles of railway carriagesis by keeping a continual stream of oil pouring overthem by means of a syphon wick, one end inserted in anoil-can, and the other lying on the axle as it revolves.The oiling is thus very perfect, but very slovenly andwasteful. To obviate this waste, the author proposes toconstruct the bearers in the mode shown in the wood cutsbelow. A recess or chamber of large size is formed in thelower half, to contain oil, and a similar channel of smallwidth is formed in the upper one. Two vanes or slips ofthin metal are then attached to the axis, and revolvingwithin the chamber, pass continually through the oil in thelower chamber, and thus throwing it on the surface of theaxle, make the lubrication perfect. The upper cut representsthe bearers laterally, with the side of the chamber removed."^s^F®^3sscIMPROVED MODE OF OILING THE BEARING BRASSES, BY AN OII^CHAMBER AND Revolving DIPPERS ATTACHED TO THE AXIS.RAILROAD TRANSIT. 311to show the chamber and vanes. Above, there should be anoil-pin for feeding. The cords of the springs are attachedby shackles. The lower cut is the chamber seen in crosssection.The author has not entered into any question of cost inthis construction. His object has merely been to pointout what seems to him the best mechanical arrangementfor producing a firm and durable road, with sufficient vibrationin the wood to elude concussion, and sufficient freedomin the plates to permit the necessary contraction andelongation, without any troublesome or expensive fasteningsor framing. The plates and rails are alike simple in theirconstruction. The proportions of parts and the estimates ofexpense must be regulated by the weight to be borne andthe means at command. The summary of the conclusionsarrived at in this brief analysis is as follows :—That roads with an iron surface are as desirable in practiceas wheels with an iron surface.That railroads in their existing state are imperfect, becauseThey are neither perfectly rigid nor perfectly vibratory,but are alternately rigid and vibratory at intervals correspondingto the distance between the supports of the rails.That even supposing it practicable to make a perfectlyrigid road, it is not clear that it would be desirable, as concussionwould be much more mischievous than on a slightlyvibratory road.But inasmuch as it is not practicable to make a perfectlyrigid road, the desirable object is to construct a road slightly31S RAILROAD TRANSIT.vibratory, sufficient to elude concussion, but making thevibration equal in all parts.The rails are usually fixed down ; so that the alternateexpansion and contraction from heat and cold tend to loosenthem.The rails are usually fixed in a vertical position, whilethe wheels are coned at a considerable angle with thehorizon ; so that the lateral thrust, when the wheels strikeagainst the sinuosities, obtains a considerable destructiveleverage.Therefore it is desirable to fix the rail down with an outwardthrust corresponding to the coning of the wheels, andby a combination of wood clipped with an iron rail, tomaintain a continuous under-structure, 'while the metalabove is see to expand and contract ; and by this processa rail may be obtained with fewer lateral sinuosities.That railroad carriages in their existing state are imperfect,becauseThe quantity of material used in them gives an enormousamount of superfluous weight, without correspondingstrength or other advantages.The wheels are of a diameter too small for the weightthey bear and the speed at which they are made to travel.The bulk or volume of the body being raised above thetotal height of the wheels, the centre of gravity is therebyplaced so high as to cause violent oscillations when thewheels strike the lateral sinuosities of the road.The springs which are used to relieve the concussion ofthe wheels act imperfectly, and that only in a verticalRAILROAD TRANSIT. 313position. With respect to the advancing motion of thecarriage they are scarcely of any service ; and laterally, —in the direction in which the flanges strike the rails, — theyare of no service whatever.The two axles in each carriage, being permanently parallel,axe only adapted to advance in a straight line ; so that,when drawn round a curve, the rolling motion of the wheelsis partly converted into a^ sliding motion.In consequence of the great extra weight of the carriages,it is necessary that they should be loosely attached to eachother, or the engine cannot otherwise overcome; their inertiaat first starting. The result of this is, that the carriagesstrike against each other with considerable concussion :to obviate which defect, the clumsy expedient of a heavybuffing apparatus*' is resorted to ; thus increasing still furtherthe total weight.Therefore it is desirable so to construct the carriages, thatthey shall not weigh proportionably more than the Omnibuseswhich ply on common roads — ^by which means thebuffing apparatus may be dispensed with ; that the wheelsmay be of sufficient height for the desired speed, withoutthe centre of gravity being placed too high ; and that thesprings be of universal action, to alleviate equally, forward,vertical, and lateral concussion, while the axles are left freeto adjust themselves in radii, or at angles with each other,suited to the lateral sinuosities or curved line of road.It is left to those who are or may be interested in railroads,to determine how far the proposed plans of the authorcomply with these conditions.CONCLUSION.The authors task is ended. It was not taken up withthe desire of merely " making a book." That could, ofcourse, have been better performed by any one pursuingliterature as a profession. The desire of the author hasbeen to give to the public in simple language the results ofhis own experience, with the view of adding something, ifpossible, to the general stock of knowledge. If uponexamination it be found that he has in any way contributedto remove physical obstacles to either animal or elementallocomotion, or to economise individual or nationalexpenditure in this most important branch of progressingcivilisation, his labour, so far as it has been a ^^ labour oflove'' will have been rewarded.With regard to the new inventions he has put forth, theauthor is aware that he must be open to the same objectionsthat are urged against all projectors, of being ^^ paperplanners*' —-that is, projectors of false theories which cannotbe verified in practice. He trusts that in giving apractical answer to such an objection he shall not be accusedof the leading commercial vice of the age— Puffing.A patent has been taken out for the improvements ; andthe brother of the author, who is a dormant partner in thefirm of Hobson and Co. of Long Acre, has fitted up convey316nient working premises attached to his offices, situated No.159, Drury Lane, where the Equirotal Carriages for privateuse are manufactured in the best manner, and where orders,personally or by letter, will be promptly attended to*The Equirotal Carriages are particularly recommendedto the attention of merchants and others who may wish toconvey them a distance by sea, on account of the facilitythey offer for packing, by their simple mode of separationinto two equal parts. Their facility of turning in narrowstreets also rends them peculiarly advantageous for theContinental cities.With regard to the Railway Trains, Omnibuses, StageCoaches, Cabriolets, and Burden Waggons, the author willreadily give any further information which may be requiredby those interested in them.Mr. John Buchanan, of Glasgow, is manufacturing theEquirotal Carriages for private use, under the Scotch patent; and the author has appointed him his sole agent inScotland for granting licences to those who may wish tobuild or use any of the other vehicles.LONDONPRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.