ANORATIONADDRESSED TO THECITIZENS OF THE TOWN OF QUINCY,FOURTH OF JULY, 1831,Fifty-fifth ANNIVERSARYINDEPENDENCEUNITED STATES OF AMERICA.BY JOHN QUINCY ADAMS.BOSTON:RICHARDSON, LORD AND HOLBROOK.1831.Entered according to Act of Congress, in tl^e year 1831,By Thomas Phipps, Noah Curtis and William Sever,in the Clerk's Office of the District of Massachusetts.BOSTON PRESS vater STREET.QuiNCY, July 6, 1831.Hon. John Q. Adams.Sir, — Agreeably to a vote passed on the 4th inst. at the Town Hall, bythose who listened to your learned and eloquent address, and in behalf of theCommittee of Arrangements, chosen by the citizens of Quincy, wo present toyou our united thanks therefor, and respectfully request a copy for the press.Th. Phipps, 1Noah Curtis, \ Sub-committee.William SeversPS, ^and >VER. 5Messrs. Thomas Phipps,Noah CurtisWilliam LeaveQuincy, 13th July, 1831.Gentlemen,A copy of the address, prepared at the request of the citizens, inhabitantsof Quincy, on the occasion of their recent celebration of our national anniversary,is, in compliance with your request, submitted to your disposal. It maybe properto apprize you, that, to avoid too great prolixity, some passages of it were omittedin the delivery.I am, with great respect, gentlemen,yow friend and fellow citizen,John Quincy Adams.ORATION.Friends, Countrymen, and Fellow Citizens —The celebrations of this anniversary have beenso frequent and multiplied throughout the Union, foraperiod now largely stretching upon a second halfcentury, that a speaker, far more competent to borrowfor support in his flight the wings of imagination,than he who now addresses you, might well openhis discourse, by entreating your indulgence, and deprecatingyour censure. Even the powers of speech,the special prerogative of man, as a member of theanimal creation, are not unlimited. The discourseof reason, though looking before and after, is boundedin its vision by an horizon ; and Eloquence herselfperhaps best performs her appropriate office by silenceupon exhausted topics.The independence of the North American Unionis, however, susceptible of being considered under agreat variety of points of view. The contemplationof its causes must indeed ever remain the same ;but that of its consequences varies from year toyear. A speaker, on the first anniversary after theDeclaration, in the midst of the terrific conflict tomaintain it, and while its expediency, if not itsjustice, was yet pending upon the issues of war, hada far different theme from him who now, after thelapse of nearly two generations of men, is called toreview the progress of principles then proclaimed, astheir influence has expanded upon the mind of civilizedman. The test of all principle is time ; andthat which when first announced as truth, may betreated by the almost unanimous voice of mankindas pernicious paradox or hateful heresy, when scrutinizedby long observation, and felt in practical results,may become an axiom of knowledge, or anarticle of uncontroverted feiith. The astronomer,who in his nightly visitation of the heavens perceivesa ray of light before unobserved, discovers no newphenomenon in nature. He is only the first to discernthe beam which has glowed from the creationof the world. After-observation and the calculationsof science, will disclose whether it proceeded from astar fixed in the firmament from the birth of time,from a planet revolving around the central luminaryof our own system, or from a comet, " shaking fromits horrid hair, pestilence and war."The Declaration of Independence was a manifestoissued to the world, by the delegates of thirteendistinct, but united colonies of Great Britain, inthe name and behalf of their people. It was aunited declaration. Their union preceded their independence; nor was their independence, nor has itever since, been separable from their union. Theirlanguage is, " We the Representatives of the UnitedStates of America, in General Congress assembled,do, in the name and by the authority of the goodPEOPLE of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declarethat these United Colonies, are, and of rightought to be, free and independent States." It wasthe act of one people. The Colonies are not named ;their number is not designated ; nor in the originalDeclaration, does it appear from which of the Coloniesany one of the fifty-six Delegates by whom itwas signed, had been deputed. They announcedtheir constituents to the world as one people, andunitedly declared the Colonies to which they respectivelybelonged, united, free and independent states.The Declaration of Independence, therefore, was aproclamation to the world, not merely that theUnited Colonies had ceased to be dependencies ofGreat Britain, but that their people had bound themselves,before God, to a primitive social compact ofunion, freedom and independence.The parties to this compact were the people of thirteenColonies of Great Britain, located upon the continentof North America, occupying territories contiguousto each other, and holding a political existencefounded upon charters derived from successivesovereigns of that island. These charters were of variousimport, nor was there any link of union, or even ofconnexion between them ; but in all, the rights ofBritish subjects had been solemnly secured to thesettlers under them, and among the first of thoserights, was that of freedom from arbitrary taxation.The first of the charters had been granted byJames the First of England and Sixth of Scotland,the first British monarch of the House of Stuart.The most recent of them had emanated from George.II., of the House of Hanover, a family, which, bya revolution in the maternal island, had supplantedthat of the Stuart on the British throne. Thatrevolution itself had been the result of a long andsanguinary conflict between the primary principles ofhuman authority and of human freedom. In thepreceding ages, England had been, for nearly one hundredyears, the theatre of desolating civil wars upona question in the theory of goverment, as insignificantto the people of the realm, as if it had been upon themerits of the badges respectively assumed by theparties to the strife.If an historian" or an orator should affirm, that oneof the most spirited and intelligent nations upon earthhad inflicted upon itself, for a term little short of acentury, all the horrors and desolations of a civil war,to ascertain and settle which, of a White Rose or aRed Rose, breathes the sweetest fragrance — the assertionmight not be literally, but it would be more thanfiguratively true. The question between the Housesof York and Lancaster, was, whether upon the deathof a King of England, childless, the right to his crowndevolved upon the son of a brother, previously deceased,but who had been next to himself by birth, orto his own surviving younger brother. This is a questionwhich could not possibly arise under any government,other than a hereditary monarchy, and inwhich the people who were the victims of the controversy,had, abstracted from the respective personalqualities of the pretenders to the crown, no more interestthan in the dissensions in the kingdom of Lilliputon the question whether an egg should be brokenat the big or at the little end. But the civil wars ofthe British nation in the seventeenth century were ofa very different character. The question then was,not who had the right to the throne, but what werethe rights of the throne ; not, upon whose head thepolished perturbation and golden care of the crownshould descend, but what was the lawful extent ofpower in him who wore it ; what the extent of obligationupon the people to yield obedience to him ;what their right and duty to defend themselvesagainst his encroachments ; and what their just andlawful remedy against the abuses of his authority.It was the question between right and might, betweenliberty and power ; — a question the most solemnand momentous of any that can be agitated amongmen ; — a question upon the issues of which war becomesthe most imperious of human obligations, andthe held of battle the sublimest theatre of heroic martyrdomand patriotic achievement.In the progress of this controversy, the Britishnation had been twice brought to the decision, thatthe individual at the head of their government, had,by his usurpations and oppressions, forfeited hisright to the crown ; and in the first of these instances,his life. In the exasperation of feelings, stimulatedby a long and cruel civil war, they had tingedthe scaffold with the blood of their king ; and then,by one of those reactions of popular sensibility, whichnever fail to follow the violation of the laws of humanity,they had passed from one extreme to another,and worshipped as a saint and martyr him whomthey had beheaded as a tyrant. Proceeding in thesecond instance with more caution, they had sufferedthe offender to escape, and then construed his flightfor life, as a voluntary abdication of his power.This they declared he had done, hy breaking the originalcontract between king and people. And thus,by the deliberate and solemn determination of theBritish nation, it had been settled, that the supremepowers of government, under their political constitution,were possessed and exercised by virtue of an originalcontract with the people.The charters of the thirteen North American Colonieswere also original contracts between the kingand the people to whom they had been granted. Itwas a right exercised by most of the European monarchsin those ages, and also by the republican governmentof the Netherlands. 13y long usage andcommon consent it had become an acknowledgedattribute of colonizing power ; and in Great Britainwas a royal prerogative in which the Parliament hadno agency. The existence of the Colonies, therefore,was from the beginning independent of the authority ofParliament. Their contract was with the king.In the reign of George III., when, by a successionof wars commenced after the final downfal of theHouse of Stuart, the British nation had become heavilyburthened with debt, and consequently with taxation,an English Chancellor of the Exchequer conceivedthe ingenious idea of recommending himselfto the people of his own island, by casting off a portionof their burdens upon the people of the Colonies ;as the Knight of La Marcia was disposed to propitiatethe lady of his affections, by scourging the backof his Squire : and as it had been well ascertained,since the days of John Hampden and ship-money,that the royal authority, however competent to thegrant of charters, did not extend to the arbitrary levyof money by taxation, the minister undertook to performby act of Parliament, that which he did notdare to attempt by the mere authority of the king.By their original constitution, the Colonies wereindependent of the Parliament. They were not representedin that body. They had no share in theelection of the House of Commons. The ]ewingof taxes upon them by Parliament was preciselythe same usurpation, as the levying of ship-moneyhad been in Charles I. It was the privilege ofBritish subjects, that no part of their property couldbe taken from them but by an authority in whichthey were represented. To this principle the Coloniesappealed in their first remonstrances and resistanceagainst the Stamp Act. It was not the burdenof tax to which they objected. It was to theinherent servitude of the principle.Alarmed at the vehemence and unanimity withwhich the first attempt at arbitrary taxation wasresisted in the Colonies, the ministers of George III.prevailed upon Parliament to repeal the tax, but atthe same time to declare their right to make laws forthe Colonies in all cases whatsoever.This declaration of right, was a mere declarationof power. The judges of England had declaredthat Charles I. had the right to levy ship-money ;and that declaration was neither more unjust normore absurd than this. In either case the mere questionwhence the right was derived must be fatal toits assertion. In both cases the claim was foundedupon an erroneous first principle of government,very far from being eradicated even at this day, inour own age, and our own country ; a principle underwhich the pillars of our Union are tottering whileI speak, and which, if once permitted to prevail, willleave us a monumental ruin,To point a moral, or adorn a tale."The British Parliament derived their claim of rightto make laws for the Colonies in all cases whatsoever,from a principle of government which is stated by thegreat commentator upon the laws of England thus ; —There is, and must 6e," says he, " in all forms of government,however they began, or by what right soeverthey subsist, a supreme, irresistible, absolute,uncontrolled authority, in which the jwr« summit imperiior the rights of sovereignly, reside." These arehis words, which he further explains by saying, thatby the sovereign power is meant the making of laws.And in treating of the power of Parliament, headds ; — " This is the place where that absolute despoticpower, which must in all governments residesomewhere, is entrusted by the constitution of theBritish kingdoms." These are again his words.Behold, my fellow citizens, the cause of the NorthAmerican Revolution ! Look at that cold exanimateflint, which, clashing with the steel of your fathers'hearts, struck out the spark and kindled the flamewhich reduced to ashes the British dominion in theseUnited States; — nor ceasing there, its burning brandshave floated on the wings of the winds back to Europe,instinct with inextinguishable fire, and spreadingat once light and conflagration throughout theregions inhabited by civilized man, — a false definitionof the term sovereignty ; an er: onerous estimate of theextent of sovereign power !It is not true that there must reside in all governmentsan absolute, uncontrolled, irresistible, and despoticpower: nor is such power in any maimer essentialto sovereignty. The direct converse of the propositionis true. Uncontrollable power exists in no governmentupon earth. The sternest despotisms, in everyregion and every age of the world, are and have beenunder perpetual control ; compelled, as Burke expressesit, to truckle and to huckster. Unlimitedpower belongs not to the nature of man ; and rottenwill be the foundation of every government leaningupon such a maxim for its support. Least of all can itbe predicated of any government professing to befounded upon an original compact. The pretence ofan absolute, irresistible, despotic power, existing inevery government somewhere, is incompatible withthe first principle of natural right. Take for examplethe right to life. The moment an infant is born,it has a right to the life which it has received fromthe Creator. Amiable and benevolent moralists havesometimes denied that this right can be forfeited tohuman laws, even by the commission of crime. Withoutconcurring in that sentiment, we may safely affirm,that no human being, no combination of human beings,has the power, I say not the physical, but themoral power, to take a life not so forfeited, unlessin self-defence or by the laws of way. No powerin government exists to take it without a cause ;none, surely none, in the British Parliament. Norlet me be told that governments have exercised anddo exercise this power ; that the ancient Romans;md the modern Chinese hold it no wrong in the parentto expose his new-born child, and leave it to perishin its own helplessness. — Fathers ! Mothers !is this the law of nature ? Christians ! is this thelaw of your Redeemer r Americans ! ask the Declarationof Independence, and that will tell you thatits authors held for self-evident truth, that the rightto life is the first of the unalienable rights of man, tosecure, and not to destroy which, governments are institutedamong men, and that the sovereignty whichwould arrogate to itself absolute, unlimited power,must appeal for its sanction to those illustrious expoundersof human rights, Pharaoh of Egypt, andHerod the Great of Judea.Yet upon this false position, and upon this alone,rested the claim of the British Parliament to tax theColonies, and to make laws for them in all caseswhatsoever. Take away this imaginary attribute ofsovereignty, and the Stamp Act and the Tea Taxwere no better than highway robbery. Take itaway, and the British Parliament had no more rightto tax the Colonies, than the Parliament of Paris,or the Sultan of Constantinople.The power of Parliament to tax the Colonies, wasdenied in America, from the first appearance of theStamp Act, with a vigor and energy, characteristicof a just claim of right. But the independence ofthe Colonies upon Great Britain, was neither pretendednor contemplated by the great body of thepeople. The relations between a parent state andher colonies, are founded upon the laws of natureand nations, modified by the civil constitution of thecolonizing state. In the administration of humanafiiiirs, there is, in all countries, a reluctance at recurringto the first principles of government. Practicalmen are apt to entertain the opinion that theyhave little influence upon the conduct of nations,and theoretic men are often wild and fanciful in theirapplication of them. The first British coloniesupon this continent were settled precisely at thetime when the English nation were in the very feverof controversy preceding the civil wars. Those ofNew England were settled by the Puritans, a conscientious,intrepid and persecuted race of men, whomDavid Hume, the Atheist Jacobite, at once their revilerand their eulogist, acknowledges to have beenthe sole and exclusive founders of all the freedom ofthe British islands. This record is true, and oceansof calumny will never wash it out.In their emigration from Europe, they had wellconsidered the rights to which they would be entitledin the land of their new habitation, and the obligationsby which they would be bound to the landof their nativity. They retained their affection fortheir country, and acknowledged their allegiance tothe sovereign from whom they had received theircharters. It was impossible, however, that the sentimentof local patriotism should be transmitted totheir descendants, with the same intenseness withwhich they had felt it themselves ; and the ties ofallegiance to a sovereign beyond the seas, changingin rapid succession from a Stuart to a Commonwealth,from a Commonwealth back to a Stuart,then to a William of Orange, to the wife of aPrince of Denmark, and finally to a family and nativeof Germany, however strong as political ligaments,by the unchangeable laws of nature, couldnot have a very tenacious hold upon the heart. TheScottish poet, who has emblazoned his country withsuch a resplendent crown of glory , and has arrayedin the gorgeous coloring of imagination this sentimentof patriotism, supposes it to burn only in thebosom of him who in colloquy with himself can exclaim,This is my own, my native land."But to what land would this exclamation, so natural,so affecting, so pathetic, have applied uponthe lips of Carver and Bradford, of Endicott and Winthrop? Their native land indeed was England : butthis might more emphatically be termed their ownland, for it had become their own by sacrifices, dangers,and toils. And what, five generations later,would have been the purport of the same impressiveline,This is my own, my native land,"upon the lips of your Quincy, and your Hancock, patriots,if ever the name existed in other than poeticalimagery, one born in the metropolis within reach ofyour eyes, and the other within hearing distance ofthe voice, which now joys in recalling him to yourmemory, as your native townsman and his own.The dependence, then, of the Colonies upon GreatBritain, at the time when the British Parliament declaredits own right to make laws for them in allcases whatsoever, and undertook to give effect tothis declaration by taxation, was a dependence ofparchments and of proclamations, unsanctioned bythe laws of nature, disavowed by the dictates of reason.To this condition, however, the Colonies submittedas long as they were suffered to enjoy therights of Eii^iiishmoii. The attempt to tax them bya body in \A'l.icli they had and could have no representative,was in direct violation of those rights. Theacts of Parliament were encountered by remonstrance,deprecated by petition, and resisted by force.Ten years of controversy, and more than one of civilwar, preceded the Declaration, " that these UnitedColonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independentstates ; that they are absolved from all allegianceto the British crown, and that all politicalconnexion between them and the state of GreatBritain, is, and ought to be totally dissolved."The union of the Colonies had preceded this Declarationand even the commencement of the war.The Declaration was joint, that the United Colonieswere free and independent states, but not that anyoneof them was a free and independent state, separatefrom the rest. In the Constitution of this Commonwealthit is declared, that the body politic isformed by a voluntary association of individuals ;that it is a social compact, by which the whole peoplecovenants with each citizen, and each citizenwith the whole people, that all shall be governed bycertain laws, for the common good. The body politicof the United States was formed by the voluntaryassociation of the people of the United Colonies.The Declaration of Independence was a social compact,by which the whole people covenanted witheach citizen of the United Colonies, and each citizenwith the whole people, that the United Colonieswere, and of right ought to be, free and independentstates. To this compact, union was as vital as freedomor independence. From the hour of that Declaration,no one of the States whose people wereparties to it, could, without violation of that primitivecompact, secede or separate from the rest. Each waspledged to all, and all were pledged to each by aconcert of souls, without limitation of time, in thepresence of Almighty God, and proclaimed to allmankind. The Colonies were not declared sovereignstates. The term sovereign is not even to be foundin the Declaration ; and far, very far w as it from thecontemplation of those who composed, or of thosewho adopted it, to constitute either the aggregate community,or any one of its members, with absolute, uncontrollableor despotic power. They are united,free and independent States. Each of these propertiesis equally essential to their existence. Without unionthe covenant contains no pledge of freedom or independence; without freedom, none of independenceor union ; without independence, none of union orfreedom.In the history of the world, this was the first exampleof a self-constituted nation proclaiming to therest of mankind the principles upon which it wasassociated, and deriving those principles from thelaws of nature. It has sometimes been objected tothe paper, that it deals too much in abstractions.But this was its characteristic excellence ; for uponthose abstractions hinged the justice of the cause.Without them, our revolution would have been butsuccessful rebellion. Right, truth, justice, are allabstractions. The Divinity that stirs within the soulof man is abstraction. The Creator of the universeis a spirit, and all spiritual nature is abstraction. Happywould it be, could we answer with equal confidenceanother objection, not to the Declaration, butto the consistency of the people by whom it wasproclaimed ! Thrice happy, could the appeal to theSupreme Judge of the World for rectitude of intention,and with firm reliance on the protection of DivineProvidence for support, have been accompaniedwith an appeal equally bold to our own social institutionsto illustrate the self-evident truths which wedeclared !The Declaration of Independence was not a declarationof liberty newly acquired, nor was it a formof government. The people of the Colonies werealready free, and their forms of government werevarious. They were all Colonies of a monarchy.The king of Great Britain was their common sovereign.Their internal administrations presented greatvarieties of form. The proprietary governmentswere hereditary monarchies in miniature. New Yorkand Virginia were feudal aristocracies. MassachusettsBay was an approximation to the complex governmentof the parent state. Connecticut andRhode Island were little remote from democracies.But as in the course of our recent war with GreatBritain, her gallant naval warriors made the discoverythat the frigates of the United States were lineof battle ships in disguise, so the ministers of GeorgeIII., when they brought their king and countryinto collision with these transatlantic dependencies,soon found to their astonishment, that the UnitedAmerican Colonies were republics in disguise. Thespirit of the people, throughout the Union, was republican; and the absurdity of a foreign and a royalhead to societies of men thus constituted, had remainedunperceived, only because until then that headhad been seldom brought into action.The Declaration of Independence announced theseverance of the thirteen United Colonies from therest of the British Empire, and the existence of theirpeople from that day forth as an independent nation.The people of all the Colonies, speaking by their representatives,constituted themselves one moral personbefore the face of their fellow men. FredericI., of Brandenburg, constituted himself king ofPrussia, by putting a crown upon his own head.Napoleon Bonaparte invested his brows with the ironcrown of Lombardy, and declared himself king ofItaly. The Declaration of Independence was thecrown with which the people of United America,rising in gigantic stature as one man, encircled theirbrows, and there it remains ; there, so long as thisglobe shall be inhabited by human beings, may it remain,a crown of imperishable glory !The Declaration of Independence asserted therights, and acknowledged the obligations of anindependent nation. It recognised the laws of nations,as they were observed and practised amongChristian communities. It considered the state ofnature between nations as a state of peace ; and, asanecessary consequence, that the new confederacywas at peace with all other nations, Great Britainalone excepted. It made no change in the laws —none in the internal administration of any one of theconfederates, other than such as necessarily followedfrom the dissolution of the connexion with GreatBritain. It left all municipal legislation, all regulationof private individual rights and interests, to thepeople of each separate Colony ; and each separateColony, thus transformed into a State of the Union,wrought for itself a constitution of government.There remained to be formed a confederate governmentfor the whole Union ; and of this, an abortiveexperiment was made by the co-operation ofCongress with the State Legislatures, without recurrenceto the fountain of power, the people. Thiserror proved well nigh fatal to the Union, and to theliberties of the whole. It palsied in a great degreethe subsequent operations of the war ; it prostratedthe faith and energy of the nation in peace ; it becamea source of impotence in all the relations of thecountry with foreign powers ; of mutual irritation,discord and anarchy at home. It disabled the nationfrom the performance of its engagements to others,and from the means of exacting the fulfilment oftheirs in return. It degraded the country in the eyesof the world, and disgraced the glorious cause inwhich our national independence had been achieved.It embittered the hearts, and armed the hands of ourcitizens against one another, till our judicial tribunalswere sullied with trials for treason, and our legislativerecords blackened with proclamations of rebellion.In our own Commonwealth, the blood of her citizenswas shed by each other, on the field of battle, andthe scaffold thirsted for that of her children. Never,even during the gloomiest moments of the revolutionarywar, had the condition of the country beenso calamitous as in the years immediately succeedingthe peace, in the very triumph of our cause, and in thefull and undisputed enjoyment of our independence.The primary cause of all these misfortunes and allthese crimes, was the same mistaken estimate ofsovereignty which the British Parliament had made,when they undertook to levy money upon the Coloniesby taxation. The separate States of the Union,using a term which appears to have been studiouslyavoided in the Declaration of Independence, declaredthemselves, not only free and independent, but sovereignStates ; — and then their lawyers, adopting thedoctrine of Blackstone, the oracle of English law, inferredthat sovereign must necessarily be uncontrollable,unlimited, despotic power. Assuming, like theeminent commentator, that in all governments thispower must exist somewhere, and that it is inherentin the very definition of sovereignty, with about asmuch plausibility as he deposits it in the BritishParliament, they made no hesitation to entrust it tothe governments of the separate States.It were an abuse of your time and patience, fellowcitizens, to recall to your memory all the vagariesinto which this political sophism of identity betweensovereign and despotic power, has led, and continuesto lead, some of the Stations of this our happy but disputatiousUnion. It seizes upon the brain of a heatedpolitician sometimes in one State, sometimes inanother, and its natural offspring is the doctrine ofnullification ; — that is, the sovereign power of anyoneState of the confederacy to nullify any act ofthe whole twenty-four States, which the sovereignState shall please to consider as unconstitutional ; —an error sustained by reasoners too respectable to betreated with derision, and, apart from that consideration,too absurd to be encountered with serious argument.Even iHider our present Federal Constitution,it his been directly asserted, or imprudently countenanced,at one time in Virginia and Kentucky, atanother in Massachusetts and Connecticut, now inthe temperate climate of Pennsylvania, and again inthe warmer regions of the South. Fortunate has itbeen for our country, that the paroxysms of this feverhave hitherto proved not extensively contagious ! Butwee are admonished by one of the profoundest philosophersof modern ages,* not to measure the dangerof discontentments in the body politic by this, — whetherthey be just or unjust ; nor yet by this, whetherthe griefs whereupon they rise, be great or small —neither to be secure, because they have been oftenor long, without ensuing peril. Not every fume orvapor turns indeed to a storm, but from vapors andexhalations imperceptibly gathered, the tempest ofdesolation does come at last.It was this hallucination of State sovereignty, identifiedwith unlimited power, which blasted the Confederationfrom its birth. The delegates in Congresswere representatives of the State Legislatures ;for as such only they acted in the formation of thearticles of confederation. The State Legislatureswere representatives of the people of each separateState. Between these two representative bodiesprimary and secondary, of the same parties, a Confederationwas elaborated for the whole Union, memorableonly for its impotence.It was formed by many of the same pure and exaltedpatriots, who had pledged their lives, their fortunes,and their sacred honor, to the independence oftheir country. It was made with long, painful andLord Baeoii.anxious deliberation, animated with the most ardentlove of liberty, purified with perfect disinterestedness,and digested with consummate ability. It was abloodless corpse ! Fire from Heaven alone couldhave given it life ; and that fire, unduly sought, broughtwith it Pandora and her box. in the establishmentof the Confederation the people of the whole Unionhad no part. It was an alliance of States, intentabove all things to preserve their sovereignty entire ;averse above all things to confer power, becausepower might be abused ; and also because they perceivedthat every grant of power to the confederatebody could be made only by the relinquishment oftheir own. These, however, were errors, not of intention,nor even of judgment so much as of inexperience.The Union was a novelty. Self-government was aninnovation. The idea of recurring to the people ofthe Union for a constitution, does not appear to havepresented itself then to any mind. Yet the Declarationof Independence had been issued in the nameand by the authority of the whole people. The totalinefficiency of the Confederation to fulfil any of thegood offices for which it was intended, inspired theidea of recurring to the first source of all politicalpower, the people.Thus rose to birth the Constitution of the UnitedStates under which we yet live. It was formed bya Convention of Delegates, appointed by the Legislaturesof the respective States, upon a recommendationof Congress, under a profound conviction of itsown incompetency to administer the affairs of theUnion, either at home or abroad. The work of theConvention, when completed, was by their President,Washington, transmitted to Congress ; and by themto the Legislatures of the several States. These,without undertaking to decide upon it themselves, referredit back to the people, by whom it was sanctionedthrough the medium of Conventions speciallyelected in every State, who, after long investigation,and severe scrutiny, accepted, adopted, andmade it the supreme law of the land, anything inthe constitution or laws of any State to the contrarynotwithstanding.In the formation of Constitutions for the severalStates, similar errors of inexperience were committed.The Constitutions were all republican, all popular— not monarchical — not military. An article amendatoryto the Constitution of the United States, declaresthat the powers not delegated to the UnitedStates by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to theStates, are reserved to the States respectively, or to thepeople. There are powers, then, powers of government,reserved to the people, and which never havebeen delegated either to the United or to the separateStates ; nor do the United States, nor the separateStates possess any powers, not delegated tothem by the people — by the people of the wholeUnion to the United States — by the people of eachseparate State to that State. Hence it follows, too,that the people of each State were incompetent to delegateto the State, any power already delegated bythe people of the whole Union to the United States.It was the people of the whole Union, who had declaredthe United Colonies free and independentStates. But those States possessed no powers butsuch as has been delegated to the Colonies by theircharters, or as, after their becoming States, were delegatedto them by the people. There was no suchthing in their constitutions as an absolute, irresistible,despotic power, lurking somewhere under the cabalisticdenomination of sovereignty. In some of theStates, the people thought it unnecessary to form newConstitutions. They abided by the forms of governmentestablished by their charters. In one, the ordinaryLegislature of the State modified their governmentwithout consulting the people ; — an usurpationsanctioned by the acquiescence of the people, until avery recent day, but now rectified. Of those whichdid form Constitutions during the revolutionary war,every one. New Jersey perhaps excepted, has withinthe first half century found a revisal of its own necessary.New powers have from time to time been delegatedby the people of each State to their government; powers previously delegated have been annulled: but in vain would you search all the Constitutionspast or present of the States, for a power tonullify any act of the United States in Congress assembled.The people of no State were competentto grant such a power. The pretence to grant itwould itself have been null and void — a violation ofthe Constitution of the United States ; a violationof the Declaration of independence.The most momentous error committed in the formationof several of the first State Constitutions, wasthe establishment of the legislative power in a singleassembly of the representatives of the people. Inthe true theory of republican government, all the publicfunctionaries are representatives of the people.proxies to perform the will, and give action to thepower, of the community. To mere theorists in theconstruction of the social edifice, there is no idea soseducing as that of simplicity. Now the simplest ofall forms of representative government would be, thatall the officers of the State should at short intervalsof time be chosen by majorities of the people ; andthat all the powers of government should be exercisedby one elected body of men. This system was, however,never proposed by any one in the United States.The division of the offices of government into legislative,executive, and judicial, had been long establishedin the British Colonies, though not very effectivelysettled in their organization. At the time of theDeclaration of Independence, Montesquieu was oneof the most recent and esteemed writers upon government,and he had shown the division of powersto be essentially necessary to the preservation of liberty.Legislation, however, being merely the expressionof the will of the community, is an operation sosimple in its nature, that inexperienced reason cannoteasily perceive the necessity of committing it to twobodies of men, each having a decisive check upon theaction of the other. At the first formation of ourState Constitutions it was made a question of transcendentimportance, and divided the opinions of ourmost eminent men. All the arguments derived fromthe analogy between the movements of political bodies,and the operations of physical nature ; all the impulsesof political parsimony; all the prejudices againsta second co-ordinate legislative assembly, stimulatedby the exemplification of it in the British Parliament,were against a division of the legislative power. Inseveral of the States the force of these argumentswas found irresistible. Pennsylvania was told, that alegislature in two branches was a wagon drawn bya horse before and a horse behind, in opposite directions; and she invested a single assembly with herlegislative authority. Other States were actuatedby the same image or by others equally plausible ;and a European philosophical statesman, once reputedprofound, expressed, in his private and confidentialcorrespondence with another, his dissatisfaction thatmost of the American States had confided their legislationto two concurrent bodies, instead of depositingall their authority in one centre, and that centre thenation.The experience of a very few years brought backall the members of the confederacy who had tried theexperiment of the wagon with a single horse, to theteam tackled with a pair ; and, as it was not foundnecessary to tackle them in front and rear of the carriage,they have seldom manifested a disposition todraw in opposite directions, and never so obstinatelyas to arrest the progress of the car. When the Constitutionof the United States came to be formed, theproblem was sufficiently solved to settle opinions onthis continent ; and not a solitary voice was heard topropose that the legislative power of the Union shouldbe vested in a single assembly.This Constitution, rising from the ashes of the firstexperimental and imbecile Confederacy, has now beenin successful operation upwards of forty years. Ithas undergone, since its first establishment, very few,and, comparatively speaking, unimportant alterations.It has passed through the ordeal of six successive administrations; and is at this time in the hands of aseventh. It has stood the test of one formidableforeign war, and of two apparent changes of principle,effected by the conflict of parties, but resultingin no material change of the Constitution; and nonein the administration itself, affecting in any perceptibledecree the interest of the nation. It was originallythe work of the party denominated Federal, inopposition to that party which adhered with the mosttenacious inflexibility to the unlimited sovereignty ofthe separate States. The administration of the generalgovernment, however, has been alternately confidedto individuals attached to the one and the otherof those parties ; and it is a circumstance which willnot escape the observation of a philosophical historian,that the constructive powers of the national governmenthave been stretched to their extremest tensionby that party when in power, which has been mosttenderly scrupulous of the State sovereignty, whenuninvested with the authority of the Union themselves.Of these inconsistencies our two great parties canhave little to say in reproof of each other. Thecharge on either side can be much more easily retortedthan repelled. Our collisions of principle havebeen little, very little more than conflicts for place ;and in the mean time the nation has been advancing:,with gigantic strides, in population, wealth and power.That this has been, under the blessing of Providence,the result of the system, no one can doubt who willcompare the condition of the country under the Confederacyof State sovereignties, and under the Constitutionordained by the people of the United States.Yet no one of the administrations of the general governmenthas ever given entire satisfaction to thewhole people. Partial discontents have at differenttimes been prevalent in different portions of the Union ;and the degree of inflammation with which they haveraged, has seldom been proportioned to the magnitudeof their exciting causes. Washington's administration*encountered an insurrection in arms. His immediatesuccessor was upbraided for sparing the lifeof a convict for treason. Many attempts have beenmade to array separate, and even combined State sovereignties,against the government and laws of theUnion ; and even at this day, the people of twenty-threeof our States might shudder at the imminentdanger of a dissolution of the Union, but for the anticipationthat the most ardent instigators to thatcatastrophe at this time, may, on recovery from theangry passions by which they are stimulated, erasefrom their own memories, and strive to expunge fromthose of others, the records of their delusion ; wonderthat they should ever have been suspected of disloyaltyto the Union, for which even now they professan affectionate regard ; and, if their words anddeeds should be too faithfully remembered by theircountry, recur to the acknowledgement of the poet,and exclaim,We angry lovers mean not half we say."It is not to be expected that the present, or anyfuture administration, will ever prove satisfactory atonce to the whole people. A condition of relativecomfort and happiness is all that the lot of mankindupon earth can attain ; and if a denizen of the NorthAmerican Union would form a candid estimate ofthe good and evil of his own destiny, let him compareit with that of any other inhabitant of the globe ;or, contracting the comparison to that of the civilizedand christian portion of the earth, let him lookabroad among the nations of Europe, and of their descendantsin our own hemisphere, — the portions ofmankind whose opinions and feelings and fortuneshave been most deeply agitated and extensively influencedby the principles proclaimed in our Declarationof Independence, — and draw an impartial parallelbetween their condition and our own.The first of the European nations, which followedus in the revolutionary career, was France. Hergovernment was an absolute monarchy. The uncontrolled,irresistible, despotic power, which, Blackstoneand the jurists of the English school insist,must in every government reside somewhere was inFrance vested in the person of the king. There wasindeed an obsolete record of a constitution ; an assemblyof the States General in three orders, nobles,clergy and commons or third estate, whichwore the semblance of a representation of the people.The very same year when the present governmentof the United States was first organized, this uncontrolledmonarch was compelled to call an assemblyof the States General, a body which had not beenpermitted to meet before for nearly two hundredyears. And this body did then no sooner assemble,than, under the influence of the principles promulgatedby our Declaration of Independence, the thirdestate, or popularrepresentation, assumed the supremepower to themselves, constrained the two other ordersof nobles and clergy to unite with them in aself-constituted National Assembly, abolished themonarchy, and, under the name of a royal democracy,fabricated in the space of two years the first ofa succession of constitutions, which now, at the endof forty years after that event, they are still makingand mending with enthusiasm scarcely less ardentthan when they first began. In the mean time theyhave been scourged with five and twenty years ofcivil and of foreign war ; have inflicted on most ofthe other European nations, and suffered themselves,all the miseries and humiliations of conquest ; haveshed rivers of blood upon the scaffold ; have rangedthrough all the extremes of popular anarchy and ofmilitary despotism ; have beheaded, proscribed, recalled,reinstated, and expelled again the family oftheir ancient kings ; and now acknowledge a collateralmember of the same family as their hereditarysovereign. It is obvious that the career of revolutionthere is not yet closed. Throughout all thesechanges, the principles proclaimed in our Declarationof Independence, often overwhelmed by physicalpower, cowering under the sword of the soldier,withering under the imperial sceptre, laughed toscorn by the moral lectures of a foreign field marshal,and trampled in the dust by the heel of theCossack, have never been effectively subdued. Theyhave always re-emerged from the pressure to keepthem down, as if destined, like the immortal soul ofman, to survive the ruins of creation.Fellow Citizens, I trespass upon the indulgencethat I have invoked. Time fails me to pass in reviewthe experiences of the other nations of the Europeancontinent, which, in the last half century, have been,and yet are, convulsed with the revolutionary spirit.In comparing their history during this period withour own, there is one point of difference betweenthem, on which our attention cannot be too intenselyrivetted. Our Declaration of Independence, ourConfederation, the Constitution of the United States,and all our Slate Constitutions, without a single exception,have been voluntary compacts, deriving alltheir authority from the free consent of the partiesto them. It may be doubted whether a single constitutionhas been formed in Europe or in SouthernAmerica, without some violence, some admixtureof conflicting physical force in its confection. In theearly and significant age of the ancient mythology,the god of boundaries was the only deity never to bepropitiated by sacrifices of blood. He, too, was theonly god who refused to yield his place, even to Jupiter.Here is the land-mark, bloodless and immoveable,more unerring than the magnet from thepole, firm as the everlasting hills, between freedomand force. It is not in the proclamation of principles.Declarations of the rights of man, as full, ascopious, as formal as our own, have decorated theconstitutions of Europe. Those constitutions, aftera short and fitful existence, have passed into the memoryof things beyond the flood ; leaving the principlesbehind — blood-stained and defaced — monumentsonly of their own mutilation. We have proclaimedthe principles, we have adhered to the practice ;and our history has been a record of internal peaceand general prosperity almost uninterrupted. Letthe contemplation of the past, be the instructive lessonof the future. And in this connexion let ussurvey with calm, uiiblenching eye the newly reviveddoctrine of nullification ; a word which containswithin itself an absurdity, importing a pretendedright of one State in this Union, by virtue of hersovereignty, to snake that null and void, which it presupposesto be null and void before. The doctrine isnot new, nor are those who now maintain it responsiblefor its introduction. It has been the vital diseaseof confederacies from the day when Philip ofMacedon obtained a seat among the Amputationsof Greece. It has never been, perhaps, involved inquite so much absurdity, as when appearing in itsnewest shape. It is now the claim for one State ofthis Union, by virtue of her sovereignty, not only tomake, but to unmake the laws of the twenty-four,each equally sovereign with herself. This claim inits extent is most emphatically illustrated by its applicationto a revenue law. The Constitution of theUnited States declares that all duties, imposts, andexcises shall be uniform throughout the United States.It forbids any preference to be given, by any regulationof commerce or revenue, to the ports of one Stateover those fo another. The claim for the sovereignState is to nullify these provisions of the Constitution,indissolubly connected with all the acts of Congressfor raising revenue. The Constitution of theUnited States, in express terms, supersedes all StateConstitutions and laws conflicting with it. The sovereignState claims by her laws to supersede theConstitution of the United States, and the laws ofall the other States in the Union. As a member ofthe Unioii, this advances a claim of appeal from thewhole to a twenty-fourth part. As a sovereign State,a claim to make laws, not only for herself, but forothers. Philosophically, politically, morally considered,it is an inversion of all human reasoning ; itcannot be conceived without confusion of thought ;it cannot be expressed without solecism of language,and terms of self-contradiction.Its most hideous aspect is, not that its practicaloperation must issue in a severance of the Union,but that it substitutes physical force in the place ofdeliberate legislation. Stripped of the sophisticalargumentation in which this doctrine has been habited,its naked nature is an effort to organize insurrectionagainst the laws of the United States ; to interposethe arm of State sovereignty between rebellionand the halter, and to rescue the traitor from thegibbet. The plan which it proposes, if pursued bymerely individual association, would be levying waragainst the United States. It would not the less belevying war against the Union, if conducted underthe auspices of State sovereignty ; but as a Statecannot be punished for treason. Nullification wouldcase herself in the complete steel of sovereign power,as the heroes of ancient poetry were furnished withpanoply from the armory of the gods.You have seen, my fellow citizens, from the Declarationof Independence, that the States of thisconfederation were the offspring of the Union ; thattheir sovereignty is not, and never was, a sovereigntyas defined by Blackstone and the English lawyers,identical with unlimited power ; that sovereignty,thus defined, is in direct contradiction to the Declarationof Independence, and incompatible with thenature of our institutions ; that the States, united,and the States, separate, are both sovereign, butcreatures of the people, and possess none but delegatedpowers ; that the power of nullifying an act ofCongress, never has been delegated to any oneState, or to any partial combination of States, andthat any, and every attempt at such nullification, byone or more States, less than the number required,and otherwise than in the forms prescribed foramendment of the Constitution, would, however colored,and however varnished, be neither more norless than treason, skulking under the shelter ofdespotism.Nullification is the provocative to that brutal andfoul contest of force, which has hitherto baited allthe efforts of the European, and Southern Americannations, to introduce among them constitutional governmentsof liberty and order. It strips us of thatpeculiar and uninitiated characteristic of all ourlegislation — free debate. It makes the bayonet thearbiter of law ; it has no argument but the thunderbolt.It were senseless to imagine that twenty-threeStates of the Union would suffer their laws to betrampled upon by the despotic mandate of one.The act of nullification would itself be null and void.Force must be called in to execute the law of theUnion. Force must be applied by the nullifyingState to resist its execution —Ato/liot. from Hell,"Cries, Havoc! and lets slip the dogs of war."The blood of brethren is shed by each other. Thecitizen of the nullifying State is a traitor to hiscountry, by obedience to the law of his State ; atraitor to his State, by obedience to the law of hiscountry. The scaffold and the battle-field streamalternately with the blood of their victims. Let thisagent but once intrude upon your deliberations, andFreedom will take her flight for heaven. The Declarationof Independence will become a philosophicaldream, and uncontrolled, despotic sovereignties willtrample with impunity, through a long career of afterages, at interminable or exterminating war withone another, upon the indefeasible and unalienablerights of man.The event of a conflict in arms, between theUnion and one of its members, whether terminatingin victory or defeat, would be but an alternative ofcalamity to all. In the holy records of antiquity, wehave two examples of a confederation ruptured bythe severance of its members ; one of which resulted,after three desperate battles, in the extermination ofthe seceding tribe. And the victorious people, insteadof exulting in shouts of triumph, " came to theHouse of God, and abode there till even before God ;and lifted up their voices, and wept sore, and said, —O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass inIsrael, that there should be to-day one tribe lackingin Israel ? " The other was a successful exampleof resistance against tyrannical taxation, and severedforever the confederacy, the fragments forming separatekingdoms ; and from that day, their historypresents an unbroken series of disastrous alliances,and exterminating wars — of assassinations, conspiracies,revolts, and rebellions, until both parts of theconfederacy sunk in tributary servitude to the nationsaround them ; till the countrymen of David andSolomon hunjj their harps upon the willows of babylon,and were totally lost amidst the multitudes ofthe Chaldean and Assyrian monarchies, " the mostdespised portion of their slaves"*In these mournful memorials of their fate, we maybehold the sure, too sure prognostication of our own,from the hour when force shall be substituted fordeliberation in the settlement of our Constitutionalquestions. This is the deplorable alternative — theextirpation of the seceding member, or the neverceasing struggle of two rival confederacies, ultimatelybending the neck of both under the yoke of foreigndomination, or the despotic sovereignty of a conquerorat home. May Heaven avert the omen ! The destinies,not only of our posterity, but of the human race,are at stake.Let no such melancholy forebodings intrude uponthe festivities of this anniversary. Serene skies andbalmy breezes are not congenial to the climate offreedom. Progressive improvement in the conditionof man is apparently the purpose of a superintendingProvidence. That purpose will not be disappointed.In no delusion of national vanity, but with a feelingof profound gratitude to the God of our Fathers, letus indulge the cheering hope and belief, that our countryand her people have been selected as instrumentsfor preparing and maturing much of the good yet inreserve for the welfare and happiness of the humanrace. Much good has already been effected by thesolemn proclamation of our principles, much more bythe illustration of our example. The tempest whichthreatens desolation, may be destined only to purifythe atmosphere. It is not in tranquil ease and en-tacitusami Cibbun.payment that the active energies of mankind are displayed.Toils and dangers are the trials of the soul.Doomed to the first by his sentence ?t the fall, man,by submission, converts them into pleasures. Thelast are since the fall the condition of his existence.To see them in advance, to guard against them by allthe suggestions of prudence, to meet them with thecomposure of unyielding resistance, and to abidewith firm resignation the final dispensation of Himwho rules the ball, — these are the dictates of philosophy— these are the precepts of religion — these are theprinciples and consolations of patriotism ; — these remainwhen all is lost — and of these is composed thespirit of independence — the spirit embodied in thatbeautiful personification of the poet, which may eachof you, my countrymen, to the last hour of his life,apply to himself.Thy spirit, Independence, let me share,Lord of the lion heart, and eagle eye !Thy steps I follow, with my bosom bare,Nor heed the storm that howls along the sky." *In the course of nature, the voice which now addressesyou, must soon cease to be heard upon earth.Life and all which it inherits, lose of their value asit draws towards its close. But for most of you, myfriends and neighbors, long and many years of futurityare yet in store. May they be years of freedom —years of prosperity — years of happiness, ripening forimmortality ! But, were the breath which now givesutterance to my feelings, the last vital air I shoulddraw, my expiring words to you and your childrenshould be, independence and union forever !Smollett.NOTE.The following version of the 149th Psahn was sung byth 6 Choir, immediately before the delivery of the Oration.Sing to the Lord a song of praise ;Assemble, ye who love his name ;Let congregated millions raiseTriumphant Glory's loud acclaim.From earth's remotest regions come ;Come greet your Maker and your King ;With harp, with timbrel, and with drum,His praise let hill and valley sing.2.Your praise the Lord will not disdain,The humble soul is his delight ;Saints, on your couches swell the strain.Break the dull stillness of the night.Rejoice in glory ! Bid the storm,Bid thunder's voice his praise expand ;And while your lips the chorus form,Grasp for the fight his vengeful brand.Go forth in arms ! Jehovah reigns ;Their graves let foul oppressors find ;Bind all their sceptred kings in chains ;Their peers with iron fetters bind.Then to the Lord shall praise ascend ;Then all mankind, with one accord,And Freedom's voice, till time shall end.In healing anthems — Praise the Lord.