RosewoodA ROMANCE.I see how Ruin, with a palsied hand,Begins to shake our ancient house to dust.Yorkshire Tragedy.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET(successor to henry colour.)1834.LONDON :PRINTED BY T. BRETTELL, RUPERT STREET, HAYMARKET.^^3i'^'TO HTS MOTHERTHESE VOLUMESARE DEDICATED BY THE AUTHORWITH EVERY SENTIMENT OFLOVE AND VENERATION.^Rosewood,BOOK I.Cage Smelling lying.It has been observed, and I am apt to believe that it is anobservation that will generally be found true, that before aterrible truth comes to light, there are certain murmuringwhispers fly before it, and prepare the minds of men for thereception of the truth itself.Gallick Reports.Case of the Count St. Gerav.BOOK THE FIRSTCHAPTER I.I saw great Satan like a sexton standWith his intolerable spade in hand.Charles Lamb.Within the deep recesses of a vault, the lastabiding place of an ancient family — many generationsof whose long line were there congregated— and at midnight dreariest hour, twofigures might be discovered, sitting, wrapt insilence as profound as that of the multitudinousdead around them. Beings of this nether worldthey seemed, yet so moveless was the attitude ofeach, so breathless the repose maintained, and sotLockwood.shadowy and fantastical the appearance of thefigures themselves, as imperfectly revealed in theclair-obscur, occasioned by the light of a singlecandle struggling with the gloom, that had anyhuman eye gazed upon them, the impressionproduced upon the spectator's mind woulddoubtless have been (if, perchance, with lessof superstition, he had not put a constructionequally horrible upon the meeting), that theobjects he beheld were embodied spirits of thedeparted, enacting the spot, which had burstthe leaden bondage of the tomb, and werestill hovering nigh the place of their imprisonment.So far as it could be discerned, the cemetery wasof antique construction, and of no inconsiderableextent ; its walls and roof were of solid stonemasonry, the latter rising in a wide semicirculararch ; to it might be the height of some seventeenfeet, measured from the centre of the ceiling tothe ground floor. The sides of the sepulchreROOKWOOD. Swere subdivided, by thin walls of stone, intoranges of low, narrow, but deep compartments,adapted to the reception of the dead. The entranceto each recess consisted of a door-way,surmounted by small, obtusely-pointed arches,resting upon slender pillars, also of stone; thespandrils between each being filled up witha variety of escutcheons, shields, and othertrophies and inscriptions, relating to the occupantsof each particular cell. There were nodoors to these recesses; and within might betraced huge heaps of coffins, reared pile uponpile, the accumulation of ages, packed with aprodigality worthy of a miser's stores, one uponanother, till the floor groaned with the weight oflead; and in some instances the lower layershad been crushed and flattened Ijy the superincumbentmass. Numerous, however, as werethese receptacles, the proportion of bodies exceededtheir capabilities; and in the furtherextremity there was an additional range ofcoffins, which could not be included in the cells,4 Lockwood.encroaching upon the limits of the vault, andattesting, by their increase, the dread ravages ofthe Destroyer.Depending from a hook, fixed in one of thestone pillars previously described, hung a rackof old time-out-of-mind hatchments, seeminglyplaced there in solemn mockery of the sunkengreatness, the fall whereof they so eloquentlybespoke. Stained and tarnished was their onceflaunting emblazonry — tattered and threadbaretheir once spotless quarterings — even their triumphant" Resurgam'^ was obliterated andeffaced, as if Hope itself had been annihilated.Another remarkable feature of this phantasma-logicalpicture should be noticed. In the centreof the chamber loomed the ghostly outline ofthe erect effigies of an armed warrior. Sirllanulph Lockwood, the builder of the mausoleum,and the founder of the family that sleptthe sleep of death within its walls. Wrought inblack marble, of the size of life, this stern, andsable statue, of rare workmanship, and greatROOKWOOD. 5antiquity, differed from most monumental sculpture,in that the posture chosen for the warlikefigure was erect and life-like, not recumbent andsupine. The warrior was represented as sheathedin a complete suit of plate armour, decorated withthe armorial surcoat, and grasping the pummelof a weighty curtal axe, his usual weapon ofdefence ; a conically-formed helmet rested uponhis gloomy brow, revealing his harsh but commandingfeatures ; the golden spur of knighthoodwas on his heel, and beneath, enshrined in a costlymarble sarcophagus, rested the mortal remains ofwhat had once been one of the " sternest knightsto his mortal foe that ever put spare in the rest""The effect of the light, or light and shade,within the vault, must not pass unobserved.Darkness with light so daringly doth tight,That each, confounding other, both appearAs darkness light, and light but darkness were*.Stuck in a rusty sconce against one of thecolumns overhead, the flickering candle in-• Drayton.6 EOOKWOOI>.effectually contending with the dank, heavyatmosphere that pervaded this house of death,not only lent additional duskiness to the depthsits rays were unable to penetrate, but increasedthe apparent size of the tomb, producing thestrangest combinations, and multiplying theimages of horror a hundred fold, by givingample range and scope for the most hideousspeculations.Streaming in a wavering, transverse line uponthe ribbed roof, the yellow flare partially fellupon the human figures, before alluded to, throwingthem into bold, black relief, and castingtheir opaque fantastical shadows along theslabbed floor. Dilated, in the darkling twilight,to gigantic proportions, the marble form ofthe Knight received a gleam of the samelustre, which, striking more particularly uponthe grim features, communicated to the rigidaspect a wild and terrible expression. Coupledwith the other group, and in connectionwith the awful scene, the figure might be likenedROOKWOOD. 7to a knight of romance, in the act of burstingsome spell of hell-engendered sorcery; or itmight be compared to one of those mystic,warrior creations that are said to watch perpetuallythe never-failing lamps that burn at thetombs of the true Disciples of the Rosy Cross,ready to quench their flame for ever, shouldunhallowed footsteps approach.Covered with a mouldering pall, and laidupon a bier, an old oaken coffin served thetwo parties for a seat ; between them stood abottle and a glass ; the latter, although emptiedof its contents, giving token, from the perfumethat " hung round it still'' of the most pellucid,but not least potent, of spirituous instalments;and showing, that whatever might be the objectof this stealthy communion, the comfort of thecreature had not been altogether overlooked. Atthe feet of one of the personages, were laid amattock, a spade, a horn lantern, a bunch ofkeys, and some other matters symbolical of hisvocation, together with a little bristly, blackguardsROOKWOOD.tan terrier, curled up like a hedgehog besidehim. He was, apparently, a very old man,with a bald head, hoar as the summit of MontBlanc, and partially protected from the coldby that description of woollen canon, vulgarlydenominated a Welch wig. His elbow restedupon his knees, his wrist supported his chin,and his grey, glassy eyes, glimmering like marshmeteors in the candle-light, were fixed upon hiscompanion with a glance of keen, searching scrutiny,worthy of a cynic philosopher.The object of his investigation, a much moreyouthful and interesting person, seemed lost inthe depths of reverie, and alike insensible to time,place, and the object of the meeting. AVith bothhands grasped round the barrel of a fowlingpiece, and with his face leaning upon the samesupport, the features were entirely concealedfrom view; the light, too, being to the back,and shedding its rays over, rather than upon hisperson, aided his disguise. Yet, even thusimperfectly defined, the outline of the head, andROOKWOOD.proportions of the figure, were eminently strikingand symmetrical.Attired in a rough, savage costume, a sortof dark-green chasseur or sporting dress, ofthe fashion of George the Second's day (theperiod of our Tale), perpetrated in such wise, asmight be expected, from the hands of some untutored,rustic professor of the shears— attiredthen in a forester's dress, of the roughest textureand rudest make, his wild garb would havedetermined his rank as but lowly in the scale ofsociety, had not a certain loftiness of manner, andbold, though reckless deportment, argued pretensions,on the part of the wearer, to a more elevatedstation in life, and contradicted, in a great measure,the impression produced by the homelyappearance of his habiliments.A cap of shaggy brown fur, fancifully but notungracefully formed, covered his head, frombeneath which, dropping in natural clusters overhis neck and shoulders, a cloud of blackest hairescaped. Subsequently, when his face was mcweb510 ROOKWOOD.fully revealed, it proved to be that of a youngman, of dark aspect, and grave, melancholyexpression of countenance, approaching even tothe stern, when at rest ; but sufficiently animatedand earnest when engaged in conversation, orotherwise excited; then was it lighted by apair of flashing eyes, that showered fire, likeelectric sparkles from a full-charged cloud. Hisfeatures were regular, delicately formed, andmight be characterized as singularly beautiful,Were it not for a want of roundness in the contourof the face, occasioned, possibly, by care, anxiety,over-exertion, want of repose, &c., any, or allCombined, which gave the lineaments a thin,.worn look, totally distinct, however, from haggardnessor emaciation ; some such countenanceas an active, abstemious Hindoo might be supposedto possess, wherein there was no superfluousflesh. The nose was delicate and fine; thenostril especially so, keen and sensitive as that ofan Arabian with a pedigree of a thousand years ;the upper lip short, curing, graceful, andROOK WOOD. 11haughtily expressive. As to complexion, his skinhad a truly Spanish warmth and intensity ofcolouring; the tint might have originated instain of juicy herb, or root, or from exposure tothe sun and " skiey influences," with certainnative aids to boot ; but the result was anembroiled swarthiness of hue that would havedone credit to the tiniest Gitano of Andalusia,even with the true Morisco blood purpling in hisveins. His form, when raised, was tall and masculine,and though slight, exhibited great personalvigour, and muscular resources, and but for therecklessness of manner, and unrestrained carriageand deportment before noticed, his appearancemight be designated as prepossessing and attractivein the extreme.We have before remarked, that at the precisemoment whence our narrative commences, bothparties were starless, hushed, and still ; not aword was spoken by either — scarce a breathdrawn. It was a silence befitting the place. Inthe mean time we shall take advantage of thepause (as it must evidently have been), to hazardIS Lockwood.a slight preliminary account of the old man, withthe great, grey, glassy eyes.Peter Bradley, of Rosewood, in the countyof York, where he had exercised the vocation ofsexton, for the best part of a life already drawnout to the full span ordinarily allotted to mortality,was one of those odd, grotesque, bizarrecaricatures of humanity, which it occasionallydelighteth our inimitable George Cruikshank tolimn. So attenuated in the region of the legsand arms, as scarcely to remove him fromabsolute identity with the skeleton society heso much affected, Peter's unnatural length andlankiness of limb, combined and contrasted withhis round dropsical-looking paunch, puffed outto a very pincushion plumpness, made himno inapt representative of a huge, bloated,and overgrown spider. Totally destitute ofhair, his bald head reminded one of a bleachedscull, allowing for the wrinkled furrows in theforehead, and thick beetle brows, that projectedlike the eaves of a barn ; his hands were I in,long, and skinny, as the Ancient Mariner's ; hisi£)jjaooKwooD. 13fingers spread out like claws. After all, his eyeswere his most remarkable feature ; " like thetoad, ugly and venemous, he bore a preciousjewel in his head"' and, like that noxiousreptile, his eyes were large, lambent, andluminous, though cold as the fire of an ignisfatuus and grey as the slaty hue of earliestday-break ; — and then his laugh ! that hollowchuckling laugh, distinguishable from all otherlaughter by an occasional wheezing choke, whichthreatened, during its paroxysm, to terminate theexistence and merriment of the cachinnator,one and the same time ; this laugh had, besides,something so horrible about it, that, thoughseldom heard, it never failed, when indulgedin, to excite a shuddering response in theauditor, whoever the luckless wight might be.It was a something between the gibbering ofa ghoul and the grin of an hyaena.The inward man corresponded with his outwardappearance. His soul was in his spade.He was essentially a man of graves — " of the1 4 Lockwood.earth, earthy ; ^ of the dead, deathly. Habitualcontact with the mould, and with the mouldering,had, so to speak, mildewed and worm-eaten hisbetter sensibilities, crusting his mind " as witha scurf'' and turning the wholesome currentof his blood to black and melancholic bile.Something akin to nothingness he seemed, andyet endowed with animation — a connecting linkbetwixt the breathing body and the bony coi-ipse—Materiality and Immateriality in one.The night-mare Life in Death was he,Who thicks men's hood. with cold.The churchyard might be called his domain —the tomb his dwelling-place — the charnel-househis museum of rarities ; and he displayed as intimatean acquaintance with the relics of thelatter, as his brother of the spade did with thescull of that " mad rogue Yorick, the king'sjester ;" and exhibited as much assurance inaffixing a name or a date to a " hapless mazzard,"or fragmentary bone, as any satan ofROOK WOOD. 15them all could do in illustrating the fossil tusk ofa mammoth, the giant jaw of the mastodon, orother incomprehensible remnant of the extinctcreation of the Antediluvian World.Some other peculiarities had Peter Bradley,which we shall leave to be developed in thecourse of our story, contenting ourselves withthe mention of one faculty which he wassupposed to enjoy; the possession of which madehim an object of no little apprehension to thehabitants of Rosewood, and the neighbourhood;— this was the power of predicting theapproach of death. How he acquired thisfaculty was matter of abundant conjecture, andhad never been satisfactorily explained; or ratherthe explanations offered had left people more inthe dark than before. Some said that long practiceenabled him to detect a 7norihund subject ata glance — that, like the vulture, he could scent hisprey from afar — and that his predictions weredoom;— others, that being familiar with hobgoblins,spectres, and all sorts of devilry, he16 ROOKWOOD.gained his knowledge from such unholy association; and, consequently, was little betterthan a wizard, or sorcerer, and ought to betreated as such, and burnt at the stake, or atleast ducked in a blanket ; — that his lone, andlong, midnight vigils in the church porch,could be for no good, or christian-like purpose— nay, they even went on to say, that hehad entered into a compact with the King ofTerrors, to furnish food for his insatiate maw,on condition of his own personal exemption.Others, more sceptical, thought there was nothingmarvellous in the case. With them Peter wasno prophet — people were fools to be frightened,and die, only because he said they would do so ;they ought to recover, if only to prove him inerror. Be this as it may, whenever there wasan occasional instance of mortality in the parish(and sometimes it would so fall out), predictedor not, Peter had the credit of the catastrophe.Such was, and so ranked in men's esteem, PeterBradley, of Rosewood, sexton in ordinary.Lockwood. 17Wearied with the prolonged silence, Peter wasthe first to speak. His voice was harsh andgrating, as a rusty hinge.Another glass," said he, pouring out a modicumof the pale fluid.His companion shook his head.It will keep out the cold,'^ continued thesexton, pressing the liquid ; " and you, who arenot so much accustomed as I am to the dampsof a vault, may suffer from them. Besides,*^added he, sneeringly, " it will give you courage rCourage !"" echoed the other, raising hishead, while the flash of his eye resented thefm plied reproach.Ay, courage !'" retorted the sexton ; " Nay,never stare at me so hard, man. I doubtneither your courage nor your firmness ; but asboth may be put to the test to-night, I see nogreat harm in making certainty sure ; and therefore'tis that I press the glass upon you. Well,as you please ; I don't want to poison you — thisis no doctor's stuff* — no damned decoction, or18 ROaKWOOD.mixture, but honest, wholesome gin, distilledbefore you were born or thought of. 'Tis asharmless as mother's milk, and as mild ; and soitshould be, for it has lain more years in thisvault than you can number to your head, grandsonLuke; and time is a great improver of liquor,whatever it may be of men. Here in this vault,my cellar, as I call it, hath it been hoarded thesetwo-and-thirty years. But if you won't drink,I will ; so here goes. Ah ! capital !'' smackinghis lips — " that flavour puts me in mind of knight I had here long ago."You must know, that when old Sir ReginaldRosewood was gathered to his fathers — therehe lies — two-and-thirty years ago, as I saidbefore (and a grand burial it was, that of SirPiers, tomorrow night, will be nothing to it-nothingat all). Well, when the coffin had beenlowered down, and the lights put out in thechurch, I crept back again to the vault, with threebottles under my arm, for I like society of a certain,sort but it must be my own choosing;ROOKWOOD. 19and I always think spirit has a keener relish insuch an atmosphere as this. So I sat down, andswallowed glass after glass, bumper after bumper,and all to Sir Reginald's repose — ha ! ha ! Ishall never forget how drunk I got ; and, as theliquor mounted to my brain, how I laughed, andsung, and shouted, till the roof rang again. Rarerevelling it was — ha ! ha ! and no lack of fellowshipeither — no lack of boon companions ; for asmy head reeled, and my eyes danced, it seemed asif the dead, men and women, in their shroudsand sere-clothes, came thronging about me,jesting and jabbering, laughing as I laughed,singing in screaming chorus, and dancing andwhirling round me till it made me giddy to lookat them — such white grinning faces had they —so horribly distorted by their laughter. At lastthey all broke into a wild hullabaloo ; there wasa stir amongst the grisly company, and up rosegrey, old Sir Reginald, whom I had just buriedhe seemed strange at first, and distant, with his20 ROOKWOOD.phantom friends, but soon became more reconciled; and then his three ghostly wives — for hehad three in his lifetime — darted towards him,and wound their bony arms around his neck, in away that must have certainly strangled him hadany life been left ; and they kissed his livid lipspah! — Well! at last he perceived me, andnodded ; so I pledged him a brimmer — and then,all at once, fell back, as if struck with a shotright through the heart. Ha ! ha ! that was anight ! Out of the three bottles I then broughtwith me, this is the last : I stowed it away inone of the niches, and there it has remained eversince. This is a famous cellar for keeping liquorsin; but, for fear of accidents, as I've not beenhere for some time latterly, and may not oftencome again, I'll not throw away the bottle whilethe screw's at hand ; and, as the first was drainedto his father's memory, why, be this quaffed tothe son. Here's to the rest eternal of Sir PiersRook wood. You'll say amen to that pledgeLockwood. 21Luke, or you've no grandchild of mine (^ — andhaving once again emptied the beaker, he replenishedit, and handed it to his grandson.To his eternal damnation !"" fiercely exclaimedLuke — and seizing the glass, he dashedit to fragments upon the coffin lid.The crash of the broken glass was instantlysucceeded by a noise like that of rattling bones,proceeding from the coffin whereupon thespeakers sat. It seemed as the dead within,whose repose had been thus wantonly violated,were about to arise, and avenge the insult offeredto his sanctuary. Luke recoiled in horror at thesound : a clammy moisture burst from out hispores.What means this ?'^ he faltered."Tis but a rat*" returned the sexton, grinningcontemptuously ; " thou art safe, it will notharm thee. Thou hast not learned the art ofraising a spirit yet, though it seems thou can stlay other people's spirits and thine own withouttutorship :"" and, chuckling at his own conceit, he^ ROOKWOOD.applied his knuckles to the lid. A smart rapproved the truth of his assertion. A monstrousgrave-rat sprang from a hole underneath thecoffin, and was immediately killed by the dog.Well done, Mole'' cried the sexton. " I tellthee what, Luke'' added he, turning to hisgrandson, who was sullenly gazing at the dog,the next time thou art in the mood for blaspheming,I trust thou wilt not exercise thyselfat the expense of my glasses, and good liquor.Thy fright may teach thee better conduct infuture. Marry, but thou art a pious son, andspeaks with becoming reverence of thy deadfather!"Why should I reverence his memory,"answered Luke, bitterly, " who showed no fatherlylove for me ? He disowned me in life — indeath I disown him. Sir Piers Rook wood wasno father of mine."He had at least the reputation of being so ;but thou art, doubtless, better informed," returnedthe sexton, " than I can possibly be on aLockwood. 523subject that so nearly concerns thyself. Whoseson art thou, then'"Whose? Do I hear thee ask the questionedCertainly you do, and repeat it; AVhoseson art thou P'"*Thy daughters, Susan Bradley""That I know ; but thy father ? — for I presumethou hadst a father'" — asked the sexton,with a diabolical grin.Accursed fiend !"' muttered Luke, " since itmust be, and thou hast said it, he was myreputed father. Father ! — ha ! the name soundsstrange in my ears; and with Sir Piers 'twasbut the name, and not the heart."He was as surely thy father, as Susan-bradley,thy mother, was my daughter'' rejoinedthe sexton.And, surely," cried Luke, impetuously,thou needs not boast of the connection ! — ^'Tisnot for thee, old man, to couple their namestogether — to exult in thy daughter's disgrace andthine own dishonour ! Shame — shame — speak24 Lockwood.not of them in the same breath, if thou wouldstnot have me invoke curses on the dead. I wouldbe at peace with him now'Reverential prayers and tears were fitter,methinks, than curses from thy lips,"*"* persistedthe sexton, anxious to rankle the wound whichhe perceived he had inflicted, " a theme likethe present'Prayers and tears !" vociferated Luke,my prayers would turn to curses, my tears toblood ! I have no reverence (whatever thoumay'st have) for the seducer — for the murdererof my mother""Murderer !"*"* repeated the sexton, apparentlystartled, and affecting astonishment — " Thouhast choice store of epithets; Sir Piers a murderer!''Tush !'"* answered Luke, indignantly, " pretendnot to be ignorant. Thou hast betterknowledge of the truth or falsehood of the darktale that has gone abroad respecting my mother'sfate than I have ; and unless report has belied youROOKWOOD.foully, have had substantial reasons for keepingsealed lips on the subject. This you know bestyourself; you will answer for it hereafter, if youhave bartered eternal justice for unrighteousgold. But whether she died of a broken heartbrokenby his perfidy — whether she fell a victimto remorse — to despair — her crushed spiritsinking under the pressure of penitential sorrowfor her crime, a crime of which he was the authorand origin — whether more subtle and efficientmeans were taken to remove her — may rest indoubt, vague and uncertain as are hopes hereafter.Yet thus much is assured ; namely, thathe, Sir Piers Rook wood, was the primary causeof her death ; and in effect, if not in intent, herdestroyer""Sorrow never broke Susan's heart*" said thesexton, with a ghastly grin ; " die as she might,she died impenitent""Her sin then rest with him — her blood criesout for vengeance"'VOL. I. cROOKWOOD.Vengeance belonged to the Lord'' quoththe sexton. " Leave Sir Piers to settle hisaccount elsewhere. I warrant me he will notwant thy assistance to help him towards the brinkof the pit that is bottomless. And now, seeingthat he has thrown off this mortal coil, and hathnever a word to say in his defence, or power to actin offence — though I grant that during life heshowed thee no great sympathy, no markedpaternal attention, such as a youth in thy situationwas entitled to claim — for he knew thouwert his son — yet, considering that he is gone,bury thy hatred with him; let not thy angerreach beyond the grave. Say thou forgives him''For myself, I could forgive him ; nay,more, I do. May God forgive his injuries tome;but for her'"^' And why except her ? why not extend thy^rd^Q fca* her ? Both are dead and gone, and the<3,ay will surely come when both will be adjudged.Abide thee that time in patience, for it availedROOKWOOD. 27thee little now, fume and fret as thou wilt. Fromthy hand she is now safe at least. And onething I will tell thee, that I, who have seen SirPiers at times, when no other eye but my ownand that of heaven has looked upon him, andwhen he knew not of my presence, can avouch,that if remorse, and penitence, and suffering,may serve to expiate a sinner's offences, he is notutterly without the pale of mercy."Grant it may be so. For myself, I freelyand fully forgive him; though to me he hathever been the worst of foes — the fullest of enemies— the most unrelenting of persecutors —wronging me at my very birth — injuring me onthe threshold of existence, and branding me withthe foul stamp of illegitimacy. Yet, believingthat to him I owe my being, for all the slights,for all the contumely, for all the persecutionsI have endured at his hands while living, I forgivehim dead — my wrongs I bury with him.""*Why, that is right, and fairly spoken, thoughthou art still far from a fair understanding of^8ROOKWOOD.thy case, grandson Luke, and gives vent to idlevaunting for imaginary wrongs. Listen whileI expound it to thee. It seems that thou boldestit in high dudgeon that Sir Piers should haveany share in thy paternity at all, and certainlyit was no great good, either to thyself or to him,that he had so; but as it hath occurred, contraryto the inclinations of both parties, e'en letit pass. Thou art a brave lad, and never theworse for thy illegitimacy'"In thy opinion "^Ay, or in that of any other person of discrimination.It is no disparagement to thee, ifthou couldst only think so. Thou art a lad ofspirit, and shouldst be superior to vulgar prejudices.Illegitimacy — how can it harm thee.^Art thou less active, less able, less energetic, lessenterprising'' Hast thou fewer faculties thanany one begotten in lawful wedlock ? Art thoua whit less capable of aught becoming manhood ?And as to the reproach, that exists but in theopinion of the world, and, as such, should beROOK WOOD. 29lightly esteemed. Oh ! Luke, you want a littleof my philosophy sadly. Mark the differencebetween us: Sir Piers makes love to mydaughter Susan — seduces her "*"'Blisters upon thy tongue''Be calm ; hear me to the end. Seduces her,I say ; an act I am not going to defend; far beit from me to do so ; but neither do I view it inthe peevish light thou dost — no, my philosophycomes in aid "Philosophy !'" repeated Luke, with scorn.I reflect"" continued the man of graves,without noticing the interruption, " upon thedifference of our station in life ; how natural it isthat a weak, vain, country lass, like Susan, shouldbe tempted and fall, and that Sir Piers had noespecial exemption from the passions incident toman.It is human nature — frail, erring, humannature, but human nature still. I would ratherit had not been so, but I blame neither party ;and as to the dishonour which thou mayest30 ROOKWOOD.attaches to me, I think I have sufficiently manifestedmy disregard of what the world esteemsdishonour, to make it necessary to repeat myutter contempt, if, indeed, dishonour could everattach to one like me. I never was sensitive onthe subject. As to thee, I hold thee to be asmuch my grandson, as if thou wert absolutely ofthe right line ; nay, am prouder of thee, as SirPiers's bastard, than if thou wert lawful issueof some honest hind."No more of this."One thing more, and I have done. ' "Tislong since I have seen thee ; never since thou werta mere brat ; but I have often heard of thee, andlearnt, to my surprise, from one of thy gipsyfriends, that thou wert in this neighbourhoodyesterday. Thy roving life has prevented allfriendly intercourse betwixt us."Was that all that prevented it ? Didst thouever display any anxiety before this ?"My surprise was great to see thee yesterday."ROOKWOOD. 31Let it pass. I had no opportunity ; but Ihave heard of thee often, in different ways, and ofthy roving life, and wild exploits, and so has SirPiers too, God help him ! But what I was goingto say was this: that thou art mistaken inattributing the persecutions thou hast endured tohim ; they were the work of another, in his name.He ever watched thy vagabond coarse withfearful interest, and could he have found theeat the last ''''He might have found me, had he wished it.""*How so — didst thou ever see him ?"^See him ! I shunned him, as I would apestilence. Twelve years have past since last Ibeheld him.'^The worse for thee. It was his wish to seethee ; but no traces could be discovered of thee,when thou wert most wanted'Ha ! ha ! I baffled him, then''Baffled Aim— baffled thyself. Do I not tellthee Sir Piers wished to see thee for thy good.Thou hast lost much by thy folly."32 ROOKWOOD.I care not if I have; but how was I toconjecture that Sir Piers was friendly disposedtowards me. It hath ever appeared the contrary ^But it was as I tell thee. The wrong thouconiplainest of was all another's work''What other rHis wife, the Lady Rook wood. You knowher not, or you would not ask, but you may hereafter,and I would put you upon your guard, orshe will ensnare you. The dead Sir Piers wasyour friend ; your enemy yet survives, in LadyRosewood. I tell thee, Luke, Jezebel was anangel of light, to that woman. She will go anylengths — she sticks at nothing ; stand in her way,and mark the end of it. And then she is a matchfor the devil himself in cunning, as well as malice.Kindle her anger, and it will not burn out like aquick flame, as that of any decent person would.No ; it smoulders, and smoulders in secret, tillsome sudden wind shall rise, and then — puff ! —no end to the blaze and ruin. All thou hastendured, originated with her. She early learntROOKWOOD. 33the story of thy birth ; I know not from whom,perhaps from Sir Piers ; but from that moment,thou wert surely marked out as an object of hervengeance. Her engines were set to work. Shedrove thee hence ; nay, twice, as Sir Piers himselftold me, hath assailed thy life, but he foiledher horrible purposelessAm I to believe this ?*' asked Luke, with anexpression of doubt.Assuredly ! Poor Sir Piers ; thou tallestof his having broken thy mothers heart ; it wasa fate himself 'escaped not, and at his o^vn wife'shands""So my mother was avenged, I care not whowas the instrument. There may be truth in whatthou say est, in regard to Lady Rookw(iod"senmity to me; most circumstances seem towarrant the belief; but devil as thou describesher, I doubt whether even she coidd have ]brokeso stubborn a heart as that of her husbandsThou hast yet to know her. The hardestrock will yield to constant dropping. Sir Piers'sc 554 ROOKWOOD.breast was no such flinty substance. Drop bydrop, her biting words wore their way to hisheart's core ; the venom was slow in its effect, butsure. Needs' t thou further proof — she is awidow rAnd I am motherless r added Luke, withbitter emphasis on the epithet.CHAPTER II.Let me know fully, therefore, the intentOf this, thy dismal preparation —This talk fit for a charnel.Webster.The acrimony with which Luke expressedhimself brought the discourse to a termination.No reply was attempted by the sexton, who sawat once that any thing he could add would beunavailing, and that he had already trifled toomuch with his grandson's feelings. Luke rosefrom his seat, and, flinging his gun over hisshoulder, began to pace the vault rapidly to andfro, bestowing a casual glance at each niche as hepassed it, his tramp sounding dully on the floor,and his tall form now almost disappearing from36 Lockwood.view — now suddenly rushing on the sight. Meanwhilethe sexton was not without occupation.Busying himself in preparations for the melancholyceremonial of the morrow, he beguiled thetime with snatches of odd, out-of-the-way ditties,as strange and, as it might almost seem, as supernaturalas himself, occasionally whistling a kindof accompaniment, with about as much fitness tothe air as the latter itself bore to the ordinarystandard of musical composition. In one of theintervals of this uncouth performance, Lukeapproached him, and asked —At what hour did Sir Piers Rosewood die.?"'He died on Thursday last, in the night time ;but the exact hour I know not''Of what ailment ?"'Neither do I know that. His end was sudden,yet not without a warning sign''What warning ?^'' inquired Luke.Neither more nor less than the death-omenof the house. You look astonished. Is it possibleyou have never heard of the ominous LimeROOK Wood 37tree, and the fatal bough ? — why, 'tis a commontale hereabouts, and has been for centuries : anyold crone would tell it thee. Peradventure thouhast seen the old avenue of lime trees leading tothe hall, near a quarter of a mile in length, andas noble a row of timber as any in the county.Well, there is one tree — the last on the left handbefore you come to the clock house — larger thanall the rest — a huge piece of timber, with broadspreading branches, and of I know not M'hatgirth in the trunk. Ah ! there is somethingfearful and portentous even in the look of thetree ; its leaves have all a darker green than thoseof any others ; its branches are flung out like thearms of a giant; and on wintry nights it willshriek in the tempests like a human being inagony. Some say it was planted in old times bySir Ranulph, he who built the mansion, anddesigned the avenue, and whose statue standsbefore you ; and that beneath its roots arescattered the bones of a-witch, whom hehunted and worried with his blood-hounds,38 ROOKWOOD.denying Christian burial to the accursed remains.This is likely enough ; but I have heard othertraditions, not so probable; one of which runs,that the tree was originally a stake, which, driventhrough the body of a murderer, and nurturedin the soil, enriched and fattened with his blood,took root, and, contrary to the course of nature,flourished. This I heed not. One thing, however,is certain, that the tree is, in some mysteriousmanner, connected with the family ofRosewood, and immediately previous to thedeath of one of that line, a branch is sure tobe shed from the parent stem, prognosticatinghis doom''And such an omen, thou wouldst add, precededSir Piers's demise," said Luke.Even so. No later than Tuesday morning''replied the sexton, " I happened to be saunteringdown the avenue ; I know not what took methither at that early hour, but I rambled leisurelyon till I came nigh the tree ; and lo ! there wasa huge bough cumbering the ground, rightROOK WOOD. d9across my path : an adder would not have startledme so much. There it was, a green, strongbranch, broken from the bole — no wind, nostorm, no axe, had done it ; so I stood still, andpaused. Just then, as ill-luck would have it,with a loud, cheering cry, a burst of hounds, anda merry crew of friends at his heels, out gallopsSir Piers from the gate. Full tilt he comestowards me ; when directly his horse rears at thebranch, and out of his saddle he tumbles.He was not hurt by the fall, only startled ; butmore when he beheld the cause of the accident,than by any thing else. He put a bold faceon the matter, but I could see it sickened him,and well it might — it was his death-warrant — Icould see it in his face, even then. At first hestormed, and asked who had done it. Everybodywas questioned — all denied a hand in it.Hugh Badger, the keeper, held his horse, but hewould not mount, and returned dejectedly to thehall, breaking up the day's sport. Before departing,he addressed a word or two to me in privateLockwood.respecting thee, and pointed, with a melancholyshake of the head, to the branch : there was athought of other days in his look. Doctor TitusTyrconnel tried to cheer him, but it would notdo ; it was all over, his sand was run. Twodays afterwards his doom was accomplishmentsAnd do you place faith in this idle legend ?"'asked Luke, with affected indifference, althoughit was evident, from his manner, that he himselfwas not so entirely free from a superstitious feelingof belief as he would have it appear.Undoubtedly I do'" replied the sexton ; " Iwere more difficult to be convinced than theunbelieving disciple else. Thrice hath it occurredto my own knowledge, and ever with the sameresult : firstly, with Sir Reginald ; secondly,with thy own mother ; and lastly, as I have justtold thee, with Sir Piers"'I thought ye had said, e\ en now, that thisdeath-omen, if such it be, was always confined tothe immediate family of Rosewood, and not tomere inmates of the mansionsROOK WOOD.To the heads of that house, be they male orfemale""None other''None."Then how could it apply to her ? Was sheof that house ? Was she a wife ?'"Who shall say she was not T' replied thesexton.Who shall say she was T"* cried Luke, repeatingthe words with indignant emphasis —Who will avouch that TPerchance such a one might be found""Might ! what new perplexity wouldst thouconjure up in a mind perplexed almost beyondendurance ? If thou hast aught to say, speak out,and keep me not on the rack of doubt andsuspense''A smile played upon the sexton's countenance :it was cold as wintry sunbeam.I will bear this no longer," cried Luke ;** anger me not, or look to yourself. In a word,42 ROOK WOOD.hast thou any thing to tell me respecting her ? ifnot, let me be gone.""'I have ; but I will not be hurried by a boylike thee"" replied Peter, doggedly. " Go, if thouwilt, and take the consequences ; my lips areshut for ever, and I have much to say — michthou wouldst gladly learn."Then out with it ; why else came I hither ?When you sought me out this morning, in myretreat with the gipsy gang, you bade me meetyou in the church porch at midnight; I was trueto my appointment.""And I will keep my promise; sit down.Thou knowest where thou art ; 'tis the burialplace of the Rook wood family."I know it."Interrupt me not. What I have got to sayconcerns you, and your mother likewise, as youwill find anon. Look around. See how eachcell within this sepulchre is tenanted. Thecoffins swarm like chests in a store-house. Ah !ROOKWOOD. 43how much useful lead is wasted ; better meltit down to good balls, and thin superfluousmankind, than keep it to preserve the rottenmasses it contains ; a few planks are all that isneeded for the best of us : give me a deep grave,a thin board, and a gravelly soil. What is achurchyard for — eh? — But no matter, therethey are, in all the honour dust can have —fathers and sons — leaden lumber all — lying intiers of three and four, ay, and as many in placesas five. Draw closer, that I may whisper in thineear. Of every Rosewood that lies around us —and all that ever bore the name, except Sir Piershimself, who lies in state at the hall, are here —not one — mark what I say ! — not one male branchof the house but has been suspected — ""Of what rMurder !'" replied the sexton, in a hissingwhisper.Murder ^ re-echoed Luke, recoiling.There is one dark stain — one foul blot onall — blood — blood hath been spilt''44 ROOK WOOD.«Byall?^'Ay, and such blood ! their's was no commoncrime. Even murder hath its degrees —their's was of the first classesTheir wives — you cannot mean that P""Ay, their wives ! — I do. Thou hast heardit then. Ha ! ha ! 'tis a trick they had. Didstever hear the old saying? it's in every oldcrone's lips hereabouts : —Never mate brook would,A Rook of the Rook wood.'And a merry saying it is, and true ; no womanever stood in a Rosewood's way, but she wasspeedily removed, that's certain. They had all,save poor Sir Piers, the knack of stopping atroublesome woman's tongue, and practised it toperfection — a rare art, eh ? As I told you before,yonder lies old Sir Reginald, with his three wivesbeside him — three — and he survived them all.Oh ! he was a brave man ; 'tis pity he could notteach his son. That coffin at the bottom of thepile, flattened like a piece of kneaded clay, con-rookWOOD. 45pains his first wife ; she died of a blow dealt byher husband, at a time when women have mostneed of kindness: but Sir Reginald, though ateat Courtier abroad was no flatterer at home —oit was a kiss and a cufF with him. Notwithstandingthis — for you will observe women areever prone to wedlock, and think no man toohard to manage till they find out their mistakewhen too late — Sir Reginald married again, ay,and again after that — two other wives — Mihe wedded for her money, that for her beauty :the one he hated, that her looks did not pleasehim ; the other, that she inflamed him with jealousy.Both he removed, and died full of yearsand honours.Sir Ralph heads the niche beyond his son :he was a jovial man I've heard, for he was beforemy time, and loved his bottle and his lass;but lie had a wife, and a jealous one, whomust needs be meddling. Your jealous womenare ever meddlesome. Better had it been for herhad she taken no thought at his pastimes ; butshe must needs drive a wench out of the village46 ROOKWOOU.that Sir Ralph had taken a fancy to ; and so onemorning my Lady was found, a swollen corpse,in the fish pond. Sir Ralph swore lustily thatshe had done the deed herself — that she was anoutrageous creature, and had drowned herselfmerely to malign him ; but others thought otherwise,and he only escaped the gibbet to have hisbrains knocked out in battle. Catch a Rook-wood,if you can.Pass over the rest, and come to this side.There, in that old shell, lies Sir Ranulph, thesecond of that name, and grandson of the grimold knight of the marble monument. I neverheard tell exactly how he disposed of the twodames with whom he allied himself; but bothwere wealthy, both short lived. His greatanxiety, like Sir Reginald's, was to increase hispatrimony, for he knew what the old saw says : —There's thriving in wiving ; for when we buryWives by half dozens, the money makes merry."And after he had rid himself of all incumbrances,he paid courtship to an heiress — but she tookROOKWOOD. 47the alarm at the fate of her predecessors, and therumours that went abroad about them — ^''I have heard sufficient'' interposed Luke ;what have the misdeeds of his ancestry to dowith Sir Piers, much less with my mother,unless indeed — "Every thing. If he could not rid himself ofhis wife (and she were a match for the devilhimself), it follows not that the mistress mightbe more readily set aside'Hast thou absolute knowledge of aught ?"cried Luke, his voice tremulous with anxiety.Nay, I but hinted."Such hints are worse than open speech. Letme know the worst. Did he kill her?" AndLuke stared at the sexton as if he would havelooked into his secret soul.But the sexton was not easily fathomed. Hiscold, bright eye returned Luke's gaze stedfastly,as he answered, composedly —I have said all I know."But not all thou thinker48 ROOKWOOD.Thoughts should not always find then-utterancein words, else should we often endangerour own safety, and that of others,"An idle subterfuge ; and from thee, worsethan idle. I will have an answer, yea or nay.Was it poison — was it steel ?"'Neither""But there are other ways by which the sparkof life may be extinguished""Enough — she died""No, not enough. When ? — where ?"^'' In her sleep — in her bed"'Why, that was natural"*A wrinkling smile crossed the sexton brow.What means that horrible gleam of laughter ?""exclaimed Luke, grasping his shoulder with suchforce as nearly to annihilate the man of graves.Speak, or I will strangle thee. Ha ! Athought flashes across my brain. She died, yousay, in her sleep .?""In her sleep"" replied the sexton, shakingoff Luke's hold. " The evening saw her blithe,ROOKWOOD. 49healthful, blooming— the morning, stark, stiff,breathless'I see'' ejaculated Luke, with a frightfulgesture. " Was it so T' —« May be''No marks of violence ?"« Not that I beheld."You saw her, then ?"I saw her — dead."And was it to tell me this you brought mehitherto Was it to tell me, I had a mothersmurder to avenge, that you brought me to thetomb of her destroyer — when he is beyond thereach of my vengeance .^"Luke exhibited so much frantic violence ofmanner and gesture, that the sexton entertainedsome little apprehension that his intellects wereunsettled, by the shock of the intelligence. Itwas, therefore, in what he intended for a soothingtone, that he solicited Luke's attention.I will hear nothing more," replied Luke,VOL. I, D50 ROOKWOOD.and the vaulted chamber rang with his passionatelamentations. Suddenly pausing, he exclaimed,in a loud voice, as if addressing the vacancy,Am I the sport of this mocking fiend, towhom my agony is derision — ^my despair a sourceof enjoyment — beneath whose withering glancemy spirit shrinks — who, with half-expressedinsinuations, tortures my soul, awakening fancies,that goad me on to dark and desperatedeeds? Dead mother! upon thee I call. If inthy grave, thou canst hear the cry of thy mostwretched son, yearning to avenge thee — answerme, if thou hast the power. Let me havesome token of the truth or falsity of these wildsuppositions, that I may wrestle against thisdemon. But no'' added he, in accents ofdespair ; " no ear can hear me, save his to whommy wretchedness is food for hellish glee'''' Could the dead hear thee, she might do so.She is not far off."« She— who?"HOOK WOOD. 51« Thy mother !"Devil ! I will not tolerate this mockery.Tempt me not."I mock thee not. Why should I ?'^^' Why ? I know not. Thou saidst she wasnot afar off. Can thine aged eyes see into thegraves ? Is she here in bodily presence P"'She lies within this space''Luke staggered back, as if struck by a thunderbolt!He spoke not, but fell with a violentshock against a pile of coffins, at which he caughtfor support.'' Ay, there cried the sexton, extending askinny finger, " thou hast hit it."What have I done ?" exclaimed Luke, recoiling.What hast thou done ? Ha ! — have a care ?"A thundering crash resounded through the vault.One of the coffins, which Luke had dislodged fromits position, tumbled to the ground ; it alightedupon its side, splitting asunder in the fall.Great heavens ! what is this .?" cried Luke;UBRA.R^i^;;'s>TVO.au^.o.s52 ROOKWOOD.as a dead body, clothed in all the hideous apparelof the tomb, rolled forth to his feet.It is thy mother's corpse'' answered thesexton. " I brought thee hither to behold it ;but thou hast anticipated my intentions."This my mother ?^'' shrieked Luke. " Canthe dead indeed hear?" he shudder ingle added.This is a solemn token : she was not insensibleto my adjuration."He dropped upon his knees by the body,seizing one of its chilly hands, and bending overthe countenance of the dead, as it lay upon thefloor, with its face upwards.The sexton took the candle from the sconce.Art thou sure 'tis she?" demanded Luke, asheapproached with the light.As sure as that thou livest," was the reply.Can this be death ?" shouted Luke, halffrantic : " Impossible ! Oh God ! She stirs —she moves. The light! — quick — I see her stir! ;This is dreadful — intolerable."'^ Do not deceive yourself," said the sexton, inROOKWOOD. 53a tone which betrayed more emotion than was hiswont. " 'Tis the bewilderment of fancy : shewill never stir again, poor wench." And heshaded the candle with his hand, so as tothrow the light full upon the deadly visage. Itwas motionless as that of an image carved instone. Pale was that face as monumental marble ;beneath the reflex of the yellow flame it wore awarlike tint, sicklied to a banish white. Notrace of corruption was visible upon the rigid, yetexquisite tracery of its features. No livid huedeformed the delicacy and beauty of its lineaments,but, lovely as it had been in life, unrivalledfor its fairness, so was it in death.The sight was indeed a marvel and a mystery ; itwas as if some pitying spirit had seized themomentBefore Decay's effacing fingersHad swept the lines where beauty lingers,to arrest the hands of the Spoiler, ere one witheringtouch had been laid upon her brow — ere a breathof his blighting atmosphere had fallen upon54 Lockwood.his victim, and, failing to avert the stroke of fatCjhad invested the fine clay it could not re-animate,with a perpetuity of living loveliness. A profusecloud of raven hair escaped from itsstatements in the fall, which hung like adark veil over the bosom and person of the departed,and presented a startling contrast to theprevailing paleness of the skin and the whitesere-clothes. Flesh still adhered to the hand,though it smouldered into dust within the gripeof Luke, as he pressed the fingers to his lips.The garments of the dead were disposed likenight-gear about her person, and from withouttheir folds a few withered flowers had fallen. Astrong, aromatic odour, of a pungent nature, wasdiffused around ; hence it was evident that theart by which the ancient Egyptians endeavouredto rescue their kindred from decomposition, hadbeen resorted to, to preserve the fleeting charmsof the unfortunate Susan Bradley; making itevident, also, that he who, living, loved lier not,or loving, had destroyed hers yet when dead — :KOOKWOOD. B5lost to him for ever — had sought, actuatedby some inscrutable revulsion of feeling, to savefrom utter extinction those fatal endowments ofperson, which had first found favour in hiseyes, and ultimately ensured the destruction ofthe hapless possessor.A pause of awful silence succeeded, brokenonly by the panting respiration of Luke. Hespoke not — groaned not — moved not ; but hisbreast laboured heavily with suppressed emotion,and there was a quivering in the muscles ofhis limbs, like that proceeding from severe,paralytic affection. The sexton stood by, apparentlyan indifferent spectator of the sceneof horror. He rendered no assistance — pronouncedno word of sympathy — expressed nocommiseration, but remained fixed for a fewmoments in the attitude we have described. Hiseye wandered from the dead to the living, andgleamed with a peculiar and indefinable expression,half apathy, half abstraction. For onesingle instant, as he scrutinized the features of56 Lockwood.his daughter, his brow, contracted as in anger,immediately afterwards was elevated as in scorn ;but otherwise you would have sought in vain toread the purport of that cold, insensible glance,which dwelt for one brief space on the face of themother, and settled eventually upon her son.Worlds would that son have given to have beenat that instant equally insensible. A prey to thekeenest anguish — to agony almost insupportable,he yet obtained no relief in tears — nodrop of moisture found its way to his eyes. Theagony of his emotions can only be conceived bythose who have endured (and which of us hathaltogether escaped ?) the martyrdom of momentslike to those — who, like him, have felt the ironenter into their soul, and have drained to thedregs the bowl of bitterness.Brother! hath it been thine, to look thy lastupon the lifeless form of one who has been tothee thy tenderest friend — thy gentlest adviser —thy fondest, truest counsellor — the only partnerof thy boyish hopes — the sole sharer of.aooKwooD. .57thy boyish fiefs — the confidant of thy matureryears — the one, alone, to whom all thy hiddenthoughts were poured forth — in whom thy love,unalloyed by passion, unmixed with jealousy,was centred ? Hast thou seen the light of tenderness,that beamed in those dear eyes, dimmed,extinguished? Hast thou known the momentwhen the silver music that dwelt upon thattongue hath become mute ?Father ! hast thou gazed thy last upon thychild — thy young, thy beautiful child — thy dailyprayer — thy nightly dream — thy cherished hopethy fairest flower — thy one, sole star — thebreath of thy nostrils — the apple of thine eye ?And thou husband ! divorced by death — thybride hath been torn from thy arms in thefull fruition of thy happiness — the cup ofcontent was too full — it hath been dashedto the ground — broken in pieces. She isgone ! she is fled ! The arm that clung to theeis nerveless — the lips that showered their warmcaresses upon thine, can caress thee never again -^d558 ROOK WOOD.the bosom that cherished thee, heaves no longer —the heart that worshipped thee, beats no more.Son ! the last link that bound thee to thy fellowsis snapped in twain ; all others have discardedthee, have cast thee from them, save her, who nowlies in death before thee. Thy mother, throughgood and ill report, hath been always faithful tothy fortunes — ever soothing, never reproachingthee — calming thy wrath — mitigating thymiseries. Now thou art utterly desolate — thouhast lost every thing — even her.All ye who have similarly suffered, needno description of the extent of Luke's suffering— of the heart-quake that shook him.Of an earnest vivacity of temperament amountingeven to the fierce, he at the same time wasendued nth the tenderest sensibilities. His casewas not ike one of those we have enumerated.He had known no mother's love — no mother'swatchful care — no mother's gushing tenderness ;for him lead beamed no mother's well-rememberedsmile ; but the absence of this reality had createdROOK^'OOD. 59in his ardent, enthusiastic mind, possessed frominfancy with but one fanciful image, that of hismother — an image — a phantasm, such as hauntsa dreamer's brain, of something like the object ofhis love, such as he dreamed she would havebeen, had she ever blessed him with her presence ;peopling his imagination with a thousand visionarynotions, of smiles, and tears, and looks,remembered like the indistinct perceptions ofchildhood, and dwelt upon as fondly ; till whathad been but a dream, nay, the memory of adream, assumed, as Kfe advanced, a substance, anda shape, distinct and positive ; so that when, forthe first time, he actually beheld the object of hisidolatry before him in death, no wonder that allthese hoarded emotions of years should burstforth with irresistible vehemence, and the longsealed fountains of the heart be unloosed.The sexton, as has been before observed, madeno effort to console him. For some space heneither spoke, nor altered his position ; at length60 Lockwood.the withered flowers attracted his attention. Hestooped to pick up one of them.Faded as the hand that gathered ye, as thebosom on which ye were strewn V he murmured.No sweet smell left — but — faugh ."^ Holdingin disgust the dry leaves to the flame of thecandle, they were instantly ignited, and themomentary brilliance played like a smile uponthe features of the dead. The sexton observedthe effect. " Such was thy life's*' he exclaimed ;a brief, bright sparkle followed by dark,utter, extinction"' and he flung the expiringashes of the floweret from his hand.CHAPTER III.Duck. You are very cold.I fear you are not well after your travel.Hah ! lights. Oh horrible IFer. Let her have lights enough.Such. What witchcraft doth he practise, that he hath leftA dead hand here.Duchess of Malt.The sexton's waning candle now warned himof the progress of time ; and having completedhis arrangements, he addressed himself to Luke,intimating his intention of departing. Havingreceived no answer, and remarking no signs oflife about his grandson, he began to be apprehensivethat he had fallen into a swoon. Drawingnear to Luke, he took him gently by the arm.Thus disturbed, Luke groaned aloud.62 ROOKWOOD.I am glad to find thou canst breathe, ifit be only after that melancholy fashion'' saidthe sexton ; " but come, I have wasted timeenough already ; you must indulge your griefelsewhere."Leave me," cried Luke.Leave you ! What, here ? It were as muchas my office is worth. You can retuni someother night ; but go you must, now — at least, ifyou take on so. I never calculated upon a scenelike this, or it had been long ere I brought youhither. So come away ; but first lend me a handto replace the body in the coffin."Touch it not," exclaimed Luke ; " she shallnot rest another hour within these accursedwalls. I will bear her hence myself."Thou wilt do no such thing," cried the sexton.I have the keys, and the custody of this place ;and I will suffer no man but the vicar himself tointerfere with my prerogatives and rights. Thouart a fool to think of such a thing ; is it not toher honour and her credit that she is decentlyROOK WOOD. 63interred here ? And what could'st thou do withthe body — sell it to the doctor, Mister TitusTyrconnel, and get me the credit of aiding andabetting a body-snatcher ? No, grandson Luke,bethink thee twice, ere you deprive your mother'sremains of Christian burial."It was well for the sexton that the whole ofthis speech did not reach Luke's ears, or hemight have been tempted to put an unpleasanttermination to his taunts. As it was, he repliednot; and after another interval of silence,Peter asked, " AVhat wouldst thou do with it .^"I know not," answered Luke. " I cannotthink ; but here she shall not stay." He sobbedhysterically, and relapsed into his former insensibility.At least, place the body decently within thecoffin. If thou art bent upon committing a rashact, I will not baulk thy humour ; it is not myway to interfere, so if thou comest to harm 'tisof thine own doing. I wash my hands of it.But why do I clatter thus ? he heeds me not.ROOK WOOD.Pol — this is worse than Midsummer madness""continued the sexton ; " but the lad iscrazed with grief, and all about a mother whohas been four-and-twenty years in her grave. Iwill even put her out of the way myself""Saying which, he proceeded, as noiselessly aspossible, to raise the corpse in his arms, depositingit softly within its former tenement. Carefullyas he executed his task, he could not accomplishit without occasioning a slight accident to thefragile frame. Insensible as he was, Luke hadnot relinquished the hold he maintained of hismother's hand. And when Peter lifted thebody, the ligaments, connecting the hand withthe arm, were suddenly snapped asunder. Itwould appear afterwards, that this joint bad beentampered with, and partially dislocated. Butwithout entering into further particulars in thisplace, it may be sufficient to observe, that thehand, detached from the socket at the wrist, remainedwithin the gripe of Luke. Ignorant of the .mischief He had occasioned, the sexton continuedROOK WOOD.'65his labours, unconsciously, until the noise whichhe of necessity made, in stamping with his heelupon the plank, was the means of recalling Luketo sensibility. The first thing he perceived,upon collecting his faculties, were the skeletonfingers, which he found twined within his own.His frame thrilled as he regarded the severedlimb.** What have you done with her ? Why haveyou left this with me ?"" said he.It was not my intention to have done so,"*^answered the sexton, suspending his occupation.*' I have just made fast the lid, but it is easilyundone. You had better restore it."Restore it'' echoed Luke, staring at thebony fragment.Ay ! of what advantage is a dead hand ?'Tis an unlucky keepsake, and will lead toharm. The only use I ever heard for such athing, was in the case of bow-legged Ben, hewho was hanged in irons for murder, on Hard-chaseHeath, and whose hand was cut off at the06 ROOKWOOD.wrist the first night, to make therewith a Handof Glory, or dead man's candle. Old MistressAshton had her throat cut that night, andthe candle, held by the glorious fingers, lightedher murderers the while, and subdued thepoor woman and her servants into an awakeningsleep — not even a cry was heard. Ho !ho! — But you have no such intentions, I'msure; if you had, this would never serveyour turn, for it must be the limb of a hangedmalefactor, and the candle must be of the meltedfat ; therefore "^< Look there'' exclaimed Luke, extending thehand towards the sexton. " What seest thou .^"What I have seldom seen, two hands in one—a dead and a living — a son's and a mother's."Seest thou nothing upon that finger ?"I see something shine. Hold it nigher thelight. Ha ! that is strange, truly. How came itthere?"How came it there ! Ask of Sir Piers !ask of her hushed /" shouted Luke, with a wildROOKWOOD. $Tburst of exulting laughter. " Ha ! ha ! ha ! 'tisa wedding ring ; and look, the finger is bent ; itmust have been placed thereon in life. There isno deception in this ; no trickery — hah !'"'"It would seem not ; that sinew must havebeen contracted in life. The tendons are pulleddown so tightly, that the ring could not bewithdrawn without breaking the fingers''Thou art right ; it is so. This is her hand ;it must be so. She was his wedded wife. Ha !ha! ha''"It would seem so."Seem I it is undoubted. Thou art sure thatcoffin contains her body ?"Thy mother's ? Sure as this carcase is myown."The hand — 'tis her's. Can any doubt exist ?"Wherefore should it ? That hand was brokenfrom the arm by accident within this moment. Inoticed not the occurrence, but it must havebeen so."68 ROOKWOOD.Yes — yes, of course ; and she was wedded,and I am not "Illegitimate ! — For thy own sake, I am gladof it."*' Glad ! my heart will burst. Oh ! could Ibut establish the fact of this marriage — herfame, my wrongs, would be indeed avenged."Be not too sanguine ; thou wilt find it noeasy task to establish. Granting it were thefact, and I am inclined to think it might be so,consider whom thou hast to contend with."Lady Rosewood ! Why, she was lady Rook-woodbefore her. She shall know it ! She shallknow it !"Ay, and her son, young Sir Ranulph. Thinkyou he will tamely yield his birthright to you ?"isis birthright I Mine! if this be so. SirRanulph — that title belongs to me. I'll stripthem of their borrowed honours. Ill — — . Ha 'ha! — I shall go mad for joy."A word."Lockwood.I cannot talk — cannot listen, now""You are beside yourself. This can never be."Never! Give me but a hope — but an inchof ground to stand upon — a thread to cling to,and thou shalt see how I will maintain my hold""I give thee no hopes. I can give thee none.Even hadst thou the right, how canst thou, unfriended,poor, make head against those alreadyin possession, and wealthy to boot ?"I will brave every difficulty, every danger,to assert my claims."Grant you will do so; you must haveevidence beyond this ring, whereon to found thoseclaims. It may satisfy you, and other credulouspeople — as myself, for instance — that such amarriage hath taken place ; but it is scarce likelyto meet with implicit belief with others, nor whatis more, to obtain for thee the broad lands, andthe proud name of Rosewood. And after all,"tis the union you mist establish, beyond adoubt, between Sir Piers and your mother ; forit is possible, at least there may be those will say70 nooKwooD.so, that she was a married woman, and yet nowife to Sir Piers."They will not repeat the assertion in myhearing. Why say this to me ?"I do not say so, nor do I think so ; all Ifear is, that Sir Piers' precautions were so welltaken, that you may never be able to adduceproof positive that such a marriage did exist""But we may disprove any other allegedalliance, and if Sir Piers did act with so muchcaution, why left he this speaking evidencebehind, to point, like an index, to the secret ?""It is not easy to account for it ; and yet thechances were against the occurrence of an eventlike the present. Looking more narrowly at thewrist-joint, it would appear as if he had reallyintended to prevent such a discovery, but haddesisted when his work was partially completed,for Sir Piers was ever apt to act one moment,and repent of it the next ; and his allowing thatring to remain, most likely proceeded from somepassing feeling of remorse; besides, as I saidROOKWOOD. 71before, he, probably, did not calculate upon such acontingency as this. He took care nobody shouldsee this vault, without his permission, during hislifetime. I have not had the keys myself beforeyesterday, these four-and-twenty years, althoughhe has often visited the place during thatperiod.""Indeed!"Ay, I have seen him — watched him, whenhe thought no human eye beheld him; hitherwould he often steal at night, and fasten himselfwithin."« With what intent ?"You shall hear Hush — Was not that afootstep ?"I hear nothing — proceed."The sexton gave a preparatory cough.One night, happening to be within thechurch porch as he entered, I followed himunobserved. He descended to the vault, leavingthe door ajar; I crept softly down the steps,ROOKWOOD.and there I saw him standing, even where nowthou stances, beside an open coffin"""That '''' Ay, that ! He then unscrewed the lid.He was gazing on the dead within ! his backwas towards me — I could not see his face,but I heard his groans, his convulsive sobs, hisheart-rending cries. If I ever pitied humanbeing, I could have pitied Sir Piers*"And yet thou doubtless his having a weightof secret sin upon his soul ; thou thickest hishands were not embrued in blood ?**"*Said I so ? I never doubted it. You askedme if I had seen the deed done ; I saw her uponher death-bed ; there were no indications of aviolent end upon her person, further thanexist upon it now, as thou hast seen her;no bruise — no blow — no wound; and yet Idoubt not that she came to that end untimely.Doubt I she was his wife? — No, I doubt itnot ; and yet I saw no ceremony take place —ROOK WOOD. • 7Sheard no priest's blessing pronounced upon them—saw no ring placed upon her finger— nordreamed of such a thing until now. Howbeitthere is one living can make doubts certainties.But to return to Sir Piers. There he stood,making lamentation, moaning, and beating hisbreast like one distracted, tearing his hair, andinvoking destruction upon himself; until, atlength, the violence of the fit worked its own cure,and he became calmer. He then bent himselfover her body, and kissed its cold lips as reverentlyand tenderly as if she had been his brideasleep beside him"'And this you witnessed ?^I did ; his next proceeding was, to pray byher side long and fervently ; and seeing him arise,as if with the intention of departing, I was aboutto retreat from my hiding-place, when my attentionwas arrested by his voice. At first I thoughthe had perceived me, and glad was I whenI found myself mistaken, for I make no doubt,had he discovered me spying upon his privacy,VOL. I, E74 ROOK WOOD,but that he would, in his wrath, have dispatchedme outright. He was talking to himself: — Iventured once more to look round — his face wasthen towards the door, and as I looked throughthe chink at the opening, I could see the fierceglances of lies eyes. Thine bum with a like fire atthis moment — that alone would prove thou art thyfather's son, and a true Rosewood. Well, hisglances flew like flashes of lightning round thevault ; and he stood with one foot upon that oldmarble monument, and his arms spread out, as ifabout to strike the senseless statue, and I couldhear that he was cursing the warrior within thetomb. His words still ring in my ears, and Icould almost fancy I heard the frenzied, fearfultone in which he pronounced them. Thou shalthear it, for each word dwells upon my memory.First of an accursed race!' he cried, ' thou parentsource from whence that stream of hot andtainted blood, which hath raged like lava withinthe veins of thy sons for generation after generationsucceeding thee, had its. rise! — whatBOOK WOOD. 15hindered me from pouring out upon thy tomb arich libation of that blood, as an offering tothy manes, and to the infernal gods, to whomthou hast sold thyself, and haply all thy race ?Nothing should hinder me, did I deem thatit would act as an expiation of my offences, as anatonement of my guilt. But would it cleanseand purify my soul ? — Would it not deepen myguilt — darken my doom — would it not plungeme beyond redemption to instant perdition ? Ifeel that such an act would do so. Yet would Iask of thee, wherefore is it — that this heritage ofcrime hath descended from son to son, through allthy line — each struggling against inevitable fateeach filled with remorse! — none escaping? —Wherefore is it, that, through thine agency, wearedoomed to have our names blotted for everfrom the fair page of heaven — to be inscribedupon the blackest scroll of hell ? Better had itbeen for them — for me — that thou hadst neverlived, or that thy race had expired with thee.But as this cannot be, take back the ten-fold76 Lockwood.curse wherewith thou hast visited us: may itrecoil, with all its accumulated horrors andagonies, upon thy own devoted head** — And hetrampled and spat upon the tombsI forgive him,'*' said Luke, " Heaven havemercy upon his soul""Amen !" responded the sexton. " His deadliestfoe would not have refused him mercy atthat hour. I heard no more. Apprehensive ofdiscovery, I hastened to conceal myself; and wellwas it that I did so, for scarce a moment hadelapsed, ere I heard Sir Piers'* departing footstepspacing along the aisle.'Tis a dreadful tale'' said Luke, " but tellme, I beseech of you, how came she buried here P''It was Sir Piers' wish — she was secretlybrought hither — I could tell thee such a taleabout that— but another time — the candle isdying in its socket — we shall be in darkness."AVhat matters it ? art thou afraid ? or canstthou not find thy way from hence without alight?"ROOKWOOD. 77« Afraid !— Ha, ha !— What is there that Ifear? these gentry? — Not I, in light or darkness;and as to the door, I have little apprehensionof missing that. Besides, it is now brightmoonlight within the church : and therefore, ifthou wilt, thou shalt have the story — and here ton.Now we are, indeed, in complete darkness ; thatflash was the last. Let us seat ourselves ; placethyself near me, that I may know that thoulisteners""Fear not that,'** replied Luke.CHAPTER IV.Fer. Let me see her face again ; —Wliy did'st not thou pity her ? What an excellentHonest man might'st thou have been,If thou had'st borne her to some sanctuary!Or, bold in a good cause, opposed thyselfBetween her innocence and my revenge.I hate thee for it^yEBSTER.Groping his way to his former seat, and comingfortunately in contact with the bottle, the sextonapplied his lips to its mouth. Luke followed,having first carefully placed the skeleton handwithin the folds of his waistcoat.Art thou seated ?" inquired the sexton.I am here, beside thee," was the reply.aooKwooD". 79*' You have seen your mother," began thesexton, " and I need not waste words in describingher. If she is beautiful, as you beheldher in death, you may conclude she did not lackattractions when alive. In truth, she was, atthat time, reckoned the prettiest girl in thevillage, and would have been the prettiest in anyvillage. I, her father, say this, and the morefreely, that beauty has no weight with me, butrather the reverse. I never loved her as Ishould have done, and for that very cause. Shewas her mother's child, and when her motherdied, she left me to live ^dth her aunt. I didnot grieve to part with her : she was more thanindifferent to me — she was insulting — I gaveher a parting word of advice — Do you hearme?"I hear thee," answered a hollow voice, thetones of which startled the sexton, as theysounded differently from those of Luke.I told Susan," continued he, recovering fromhis momentary surprise, and satisfied of his80 jtooKwooiy,companion's attention, " that her beauty would beher bane — that 'twas a fatal gift, and would proveher undoing. It hath proved so since ; but sheturned a deaf ear to me then. We saw little ofeach other, but I heard of her sometimes, andheard also of the admiration she excitedamongst the hinds of Rosewood, and of the lifeshe was leading her admirers ; for Susan had atricksy, coquettish way with her, that gainedher many followers. However, I never heard awhisper against her fame, not a breath, till shewent to live at the hall, as the squire's mistress ;and then nobody spoke of her, at least, not tome.However, I was secretly pleased with therumour, and determined to satisfy myself, andhave my fling at her. She had been there thenfull six months. I went to the hall, and askedto speak with her ; she refused to see me, but Iwould not be denied. I dodged the menial, whobrought her message, to the room. I saw, in amoment, how it was with her — I saw why sherefused me — I saw that my boding words hadROOKWOOD. ^1come true; she was pregnant — I had my revenge.I spared not my reproaches : she entreatedme to be silent — implored my blessing.My answer was a word coupled with a curse ; Iturned upon my heel, and left the room""Go on," said Luke, grinding his teeth.I saw her not again in life. Some monthsafterwards she gave thee birth ; and it might bewithin the year, that I heard of her demise : shehad expired, they said, suddenly. It was thenthat Sir Roger sought me out. He was in greattrouble — he was frantic — he told me an unconnectedstory about her decease, and hurried meto the hall. I saw her upon her death-bed, but Ifelt no compassion for her ; she was beautiful asever, and seemed to smile. I sickened at thesight, and felt my hatred revive."Monster!" muttered Luke,I killed her not — I could not have harmed ahair of her head — but I did not regret her. Myrevenge had been executed by another. Mywords had come true; her bloom had been58^ROOKWOOD.blighted— yea, even at its freshest. I shed notear for her — vented no sigh in sorrow — for, intruth, I pitied her not''I could strangle him," mentally exclaimedLuke, " though he is my own blood !"Where is the bottle ?" cried the sexton,searching for it ; " thou art cold as ice, Luke ;we had better leave this,"My pulse throbs with fever," replied Luke;thou hast not touched me But go on ; I willhear it out, now."Not touched thee ! what was it I felt, orimagined I felt ? but no matter. Ah ! whencebreathes that chill upon my face ? I would we hada light — where is Mole?" And he called, to hisdog ; but Mole had slunk away, and answerednot to the call.This is strange," said the sexton.^' Proceed," cried Luke ; " if thou wouldst nothave me deem thee dastard, as well as dotard."Well," continued Peter, fortifying hisnerves with a di-aught, " to return, — ' WhatROOKWOOD. 03would you have me do ?^ said I to Sir Piers, aswe stood together by the bed-side ; for I wasanxious to know for what motive he had broughtme thither. I thought it was not, surely, toindulge me with a sight of my daughter, as hewas not ignorant of our sentiments towards eachother, but it seemed I was mistaken, for he replied,I have suffered none to approach her besidethyself, and my housekeeper, Agnes — thouknowest her — nor will I do so." — ' Indeed !' saidI, surprised, 'but will you have no crown er's questupon the body ?' — ' Crowner's quest !' cried heinamazement. ' No ; she died in her sleep,wherefore should it be so ? No, no — I will sufferno eyes to look upon her but those she loved.She was ever so modest, that I will have no rudegaze profane her countenance, now that she cannotavert it. I tell thee what, good, excellentPeter' (for he had at length discovered my will),do my bidding in this, and thou shalt have gold—glittering gold — in heaps ; ay, in heaps, if thouwilt do it. I would have her interred — privatelyLockwood.interred — this night, within our family vault ;the coffin will be brought hither ; thou and Iwill carry it to the place of burial.' — ' I only seetwo objections to this"* I answered. ' Namethem,' said Sir Piers. ' The one is, that a hastyfuneral, like this, may tend to scandal, and maybring you into trouble ; the other, and the lesser,that I have heard that none but those of thehouse of Rosewood, their wives and daughters,are ever buried within that vault ; it hath everbeen the rule.' — ' For thy first objection,' repliedSir Piers, ' if there be scandal, it will attach tome— I will bear its brunt ; for the second, it ismy pleasure to break the rule in favour of thydaughter, who hath ever been dear to me as awife — and who is there shall say me nay ? I amresolved.' — ' If so be you are resolved. Sir Piers,'I rejoined, ' I have nothing to further say, andam ready to do your bidding. But reflect !' —Reflect !' said he. ' I have reflected. Oh ! butto part with her !' And he burst into a torrentof tears. < To lose her for ever — never more to seeROOK WOOD.that beauteous body — to nail it down within ahideous chest — to deliver it to the rioting wombthe thought is insupportable ! Oh ! that Icould save it, at least from that." — ' Such thingshave been done,' answered I ; for I preservedmy composure, and was not, like him, carriedaway by my grief. ' They have,' answered he ;but it is too late to think of it now : whereshould I find one who could embalm her dearbody ?' and he burst into a fresh torrent of tears.I once knew of such a one,' I replied ; ' agipsy woman, who professed that art, and isaccounted an adept amongst her tribe. I haveindeed spoken with her myself upon the subject,being one connected with my calling.'Tell me her name," eagerly demanded Luke.Barbara Lovel."Great God ! is it possible ? Barbara Lovel !"« The same."Thou hast perhaps met with her in thywanderings with that wild race. She must be8b Lockwood.old and wrinkled now, if she hath not gone theway of all flesh long ago."*'She is yet alive; I saw her but yesterday*"replied Luke.Alive ! Barbara Lovel, yet alive — I did notthink it;'And you found her ? She did your bidding ?""She did. Sir Piers implored me to seek herout. I found her without difficulty, told her myobject, and she readily consented to accompanyme to the halL Sir Piers was impatient formy return. He bound us by a terrible oath notto divulge, during his lifetime, what was aboutto take place. I hesitated not to take it; for, tospeak truth, and whatever misgivings I mighthave as to Susan s end, I had no desire to betraythee. Barbara likewise agreed. She listened tohis promises — she accepted his offers''There was a moaning sound at that momentheard within the vault, and the dog whined inthe corner, whither he had crept. The sexton inROOK WOOD. 87his own mind attributed the noise to the coldcurrent of air he had before perceived upon hischeek, and which now breathed upon him again.He noticed the interruption only with a slightinvoluntary shudder, and proceeded : —Barbara Lovel had brought with her a boxof spices, and gums, and fragrant herbs, besidessome curiously-fashioned instruments, of which Icaught a glimpse, of odd shape and manufacture.She asked for a chafing dish, and charcoal ; shemade her preparations, had linen fetched for her,and basons, and I know not what. She theninsisted upon being left alone. Sir Piers wouldfain have remained in the room, but she wouldnot hear of it, and locked the door. Silently shewent to work; and, as we kept watch without,we perceived a rich steam issue from out thecrevices of the door. Sir Piers thought someaccident had happened, and was about to forcean entrance, when he was checked, in his intent,by the loud voice of Barbara, angrily commandinghin to desist, upon pain of her instant88 lockwood.departure, and the leaving her work unfinished.So he made no further attempt, and at nightfallBarbara came forth, looking as white as a shroud.She took the key from out the door, delivered it toSir Piers, and asked to have an interview with himalone. Their conference was long ; and Barbaradeparted, I have reason to think not dissatisfiedwith Sir Piers' bounty — but this I only conjecture,never having met or spoken with her sincethat night. Presently the coffin was brought —we were admitted to the room. The windows werethrown wide open — the steam had evaporated —Susan was as thou hast seen her. She was laidout, placed within the shell ; and before all wasmade fast. Sir Piers, with a trembling hand, cutoffone long lock from her black hair, which hesaid he would keep to his dying day ; and I makeno doubt he kept his word. That night, a drearyand a dark one 'twas, we bore our burthenhither."Something like a groan followed the conclusionof the sexton's discourse. It was evidentROOKWOOD. 89that it proceeded not from Luke, as an exclamationburst from him at the same instant. Lukestretched out his arm, an unsubstantial somethingseemed to press against him, communicatinga chill like death to his frame.Who is between us P"** he ejaculated.Between us !" cried the sexton, leaping fromthe coffin lid with an agility that did himhonour. " Is aught between us P^'I will fire off my gun. The flash will lightus''Do so'' hastily rejoined the sexton ; " butnot in this direction."Get behind me," cried Luke, and he pulledthe trigger.A blaze of vivid light illumined the darkness.Still nothing was visible, save the warrior figure,that showed suddenly, and then vanished like aghost. The buck-shot rattled against the fartherend of the vault.Let us hence," cried the sexton, who hadrushed to the door, and thro\Mi it wide open.Mole! Mole!" The dog sprang after him.90 ROOKWOOD.^* I could have sworn that I felt something""said Luke; " whence issued that groan'"*^ Ask not whence' replied Peter, " Reachme my mattock, and spade, and the lantern; theyare behind thee. And stay, it were better tobring away the bottle*"Take them, and leave me here''Here, in the vault ? — I could tell you a storyof that statue, that "Not now."You will rue it — there is danger — the archfiendhimself is not ^"Leave me, I say; or await, if thou wilt, mycoming, in the church. If there is aught thatmay be revealed to my ear alone, I will notquail from it, though the dead themselvesshould arise to proclaim the mystery. It maybe— but — go — there are thy tools ;" and he shutthe door, with a jar that shook the sexton'sframe.Peter, after some muttered murmuring at thehardihood and madness, as he termed it, of hisheadstrong grandson, disposed his lengthy limbs toROOKWOOD. 91repose, upon a cushioned seat without thecommunion railing. As the pale moonlightfell upon his gaunt, cadaverous, and demoniacalface, he looked like some unholy thing, suddenlyannihilated by the presiding influenceof that sacred spot. Mole crouched himselfin a ring at his master's feet. Peter had notdozed many minutes, when he was arousedby Luke's return. The latter was very pale, andthe perspiration stood in big drops upon hisbrow.Hast thou made fast the door ?'^ was his firstinterrogation.Here is the key''What hast thou seen ?" he next inquired,remarking the deathly paleness of his face.Luke made no answer. At that moment thechurch clock struck two, breaking the stillness ofthe place with an iron clang. Luke raised hiseyes. A ray of moonlight, streaming obliquelythrough the painted window, fell upon the giltlettering of a black mural entablature. The92 ROOKWOOD.lower part, the inscription, was in shade, butthe emblazonment, and jKeginal&us Ire Koofetoootr, IHpcs Sluratus,"were clear and distinct. Luke trembled, he knewnot why, as the sexton pointed to it.Thou hast heard of the hand-writing uponthe wall," said the scoffer ; " Look there — ' Hiskingdom hath been taken from him.' — Ha,ha !"Let us quit this place, and get into the freshair; I am faints*' said Luke, striding past hiscompanion, and traversing the church-floorwith hasty steps. Peter was not slow to follow.The key was applied, and they emerged into thechurchyard. The grassy mounds were bathedin the moon-beams, and the two yew trees,throwing their black, jagged shadows over thegrave hills, looked like evil spirits, broodingover the sanctified repose of the righteous.The sexton noticed the deathly paleness ofLuke's countenance ; but it might be the tinge ofthe sallow moonlight.ROOKWOOD. 93I will be with thee at thy cottage, ereday-breaks*" said the latter ; and, turning an angleof the church, he disappeared from view.He is crazed, beyond all question*" saidPeter, shouldering his spade, and whistling toMole; " though it must be confessed, his brainmust have been a strong one, to have withstoodthe trial of this night. Mischief, I foresee, willcome of it; but I don t trouble my head withthese matters further. A dram and a song willput Care to flight'' Draining the bottle to thelast drop, he flung it from him, and commencedchaunting, in a high key and cracked voice, awild ditty, the words of which ran as follow:—THE sexton's song.The Carrion Crow is a Sexton bold,He taketh the dead from out the mould;He velvet the ground like a miser old,Stealthily hiding his store of gold.Caw! Caw I94 ROOKWOOD.The Carrion Crow hath a coat of black,Silky and sleek, like a priest's, to his back ;Like a lawyer he grubbeth — no matter what way — »The fouler the offal, the richer his prey.Caw! Caw! the Carrion Crow!Dig! Dig! in the ground below!The Carrion Crow hath a dainty maw,With savory pickings he crammed his craw;Kept meat from the gibbet it pleaseth his whim,It never can hang too long for him.Caw! Caw!The Carrion Crow smelled powder, 'tis said,Like a soldier eschewed the taste of cold lead;No jester or mime hath more marvellous wit,For wherever he lighted he maketh a hit.Caw! Caw! the Carrion Crow!Dig! Dig! in the ground below!The cottage which Peter inhabited adjoinedthe churchyard, so that he had scarcely concludedhis song when he reached the door ; and as soonas he had disposed of his tools, he betook himselfto slumber.CHAPTER V.Brian. Ralph! hearest thou any stirring ?Ralph. I heard one speak here, hard by, in the hollow.Peace ! Master, speak low. Nouns ! if I do not hear a bow gooff, and the buck bray, I never heard deer in my life.Bri. Stand, or I'll shoot.Sir Arthur. Who's there ?Bri. I am the keeper, and do charge you stand.You have stolen my deer.Merry Devil of Edmonton.Luke's first impulse had been to free himselffrom the restraint the sexton's society imposed.He longed to commune with himself. Leapingthe small boundary-wall that defended thechurchyard from a deep, green lane, he hurriedalong in a direction contrary to that taken bythe sexton, making the best of his way until heROOK WOOD.arrived at a gap in the high-banked hazel hedge,which overhung the road. Heedless of the impedimentsthrown in his way by the undergrowthof a rough, ring fence, he struck through theopening that presented itself, and, climbing overthe moss-grown paling, trod presently upon theelastic sward of Rosewood Park.A few minutes rapid walking brought him tothe summit of a rising ground crowned with agedoaks, and as he paused beneath their broadshadows, his troubled spirit, soothed by thequietude of the scene, in part resumed itsserenity.Luke yielded to the gentle influence of thetime and hour. The stillness of the spotsobered the irritation of his frame, and thedewy chilliness cooled the fever of his brow.Leaning for support against the gnarled trunkof one of the trees, he gave himself up tocontemplation. The events of the last hour — ofhis whole existence — passed in rapid reviewbefore his mental vision. The thought of theLockwood. 97wayward, vagabond life he had led— of the wildadventures of his youth — of all he had been^ofall he had done — of all he had endured —crowded his mind ; and then, like the passing ofa cloud flitting across the autumnal moon, andoccasionally obscuring the smiling landscapebefore him, his soul was shadowed by the remembranceof the awful revelations of the lasthour, and the fearful knowledge he had acquiredof his mother's fate — of his father's guilt. Shudderinglyhe called to mind the horrors he hadwitnessed, but the occultation was of briefendurance ; the cloud passed away, the moon wasfull again in all her ancient lustre — the future—the bright glorious future, was before him,and he eagerly longed for the coming struggle,the result of which, his sanguine anticipationspictured as guerdon with success.'' Then why should I perplex myself withfears r he cried ; " why admit a doubt ? thehand of Fate directs me, beckons me to the goal.It will be so; of that I am assured. No moreVOL. I. Ff8 ROOKWOOD.c^ doubt ! Now that I am away from thathorrible place, the tightness that restrained mychest is gone. I can breathe again. I havethrown off the sickening torpor that deadenedmy faculties. How calm, how soothing, howtranquil, is this lovely scene ! The face of nature—nature — whose loveliness has ever found amirror in my bosom, smiles upon me — welcomesme. I hail this welcome as a harbinger ofreturning peace,And this lordly park ! these proud domains!these towering trees ! yon ancestral mansion ! allthat my eye can reach, shall call me lord; and Ishall be rich — powerful — happy. Shall I behappy? Wherefore not? I will not shacklemyself with the bonds and fetters the enslavedworldling imposed upon himself. I will not bowdown to the habits and fashions acknowledgedby fools, who sacrifice their own free will to thewhims and caprices of what is called society. Idespise them. I will conform to no mode of lifebut that which lieth me. My freedom ofROOKWOOD. 99purpose shall be subject to no such trammelsand restraints. Such as I have been, such I willcontinue to be, with none to say me nay. Icannot change my nature. I will not attempt it.My wild pastimes, my dangerous enterprises, Imust and will forego — and my companions — ha !How would they grace the board of the Lord ofRosewood, should I be lord of that house.?How would their names sound in my halls?Shall I replace them with new faces ? Shall Icast them off? — I have no alternative.Wealth, they say, heareth the heart of thepossessor ; lands enlarge not the freedom oftheir lord. Even I, a wanderer, homeless,houseless, friendless, feel as much liberty andlicense to roam over this fair park as they could,who deem themselves its owners. It is not, then,the imaginary right to certain portions of thisearth that can confer, along with the freehold ofthe soil, a freedom entire and uncontrouled,such as I have ever courted, ever obtained ; and100 ROOKWOOD,to lose which were to lose life itself, and all thatsweetens life. 'Tis not mere possession that canconfer this, if the spirit be wanting ; but withnw used as I shall use it, increase of power,acquisition of wealth, of lands and liberties,will but be an extension and enlargement ofindependence, and, as such, of enjoyment andhappiness.But, were it otherwise, there is one gratificationin store that will not fail me — Revenge !That thought alone would goad me on toprosecute my purpose — nothing fearing — nothingshunning — braving every thing. As hewho swims against a headlong stream, keepshis eye fixed on one certain point, and makesfor that, though wave, and tide, and currentbe adverse, even so will I — the mark is fixed,reach it I win, or perish in the effort.Yes, they who have persecuted me — whohare contemned my mother's memory — who havedeemed me insignificant — who have scorned me.aooKwooD. 101as incapable of retaliation — who have hunted medown — shall find that, like the hart at bay, Ican turn, and gore. — Ay, gore /" —Panting with choler, like the proud creatureto whom he had likened himself, Luke threw afierce and angry glance around, as if in search ofsome object whereupon to expend his risingwrath ; and if he encountered nothing, he foundat least that which had the effect of subduinghis excitement. Exquisite as the work of enchantment,lay the beautiful scene before him,and his heart melted beneath the witchery of itsspell, as he drank its loveliness into his soul.The eminence whereon he stood was one of thehighest points of the park, and commanded aview of the hall, which might be a quarter ofa mile distant, discernible through a brokenvista of trees, its whitened walls shimmering inthe moon-light, and its tall chimneys spiring farfrom out the round masses of wood wherein it layembosomed. The ground gradually sloped in thatdirection, occasionally rising into swells, studded102 ROOKWOOD.with magnificent timber — dipping into smoothdells, or stretching out into level glades, until itsuddenly sunk into a deep declivity, that formedon effectual division, without the intervention ofa ha-ha, or other barrier, between the Chaseand the Home Park, A slender stream strayedthrough this ravine, having found its waythither from a small reservoir, hidden in thehigher plantations to the left; and further on,in the open ground, in a line with the hall,though, of course, much below the level of thebuilding, assisted by many local springs, andrestrained by a variety of natural and artificialembankments, this brook spread out into anexpansive sheet of water. Crossed by a rusticbridge, the sole mean of communication betweenthe parks, the pool found its outlet into themeads below ; and even at that distance, and inthat still hour, you might almost catch the soundof the rushing waters, as they dashed dowTi theelevation in a foaming cascade ; while far away,in the spreading valley, the serpentine mean-logwood.mterms of the slender current might be traced,glittering like silvery threads in the lambentmoonshine. The mild beams of the queen of night,then in her meridian, trembled upon the topmostbranches of the tall timber, quivering, likediamond spray upc»i the outer foliage, andpenetrating through the interstices of the trees,Ml upon the light wreathes of vapour thenbeginning to arise from the surface of the pool,steeping them in misty splendour, and lending tothis part of the picture a character of dreamy andunearthly beauty.All else was in unison — ^no sound interruptedthe silence of Luke's solitude, exceptthe hooting of a large gray owl, that, scaredat his approach, or in search of prey, wingedits spectral flight in continuous and mazycircles round his head, uttering at each wheelits startling whoop; or a deep, distant bay,that ever and anon boomed upon the ear, proceedingfrom a pack of hounds kennelled in ashed adjoining the pool before mentioned, but104 KOOKWOOD.which was shrouded from view by the rising mist.No living objects presented themselves, save aherd of deer, that crouched in a covert of brownfern beneath the umbrage of a few stunted treesimmediately below the point of land whereonLuke stood ; and although their branchingantlers could scarcely be detected from theshadowy ramifications of the wood itself, theyescaped not his practised ken.How often*' murmured Luke, " in yearsgone by, have I traversed these moonlit glades,and wandered amidst these woodlands, on nightsheavenly a& this — ay, and to some purpose, asyon thinned herd might testify ! Every dingle,every dell, every rising brow, every bosky valeand shelving covert, have been as familiar tomy track as to that of the fleetest and freestof their number: scarce a tree amidst thethickest of yon out-stretching forest, with whichI cannot claim acquaintance: 'tis long sinceI have seen them. — By heavens ! 'tis beautiful !and it is all my own — my o^\ti !ROOKWOOD. lOoCan I forget that it was here I first emancipatedmyself from thraldom? Can I forgetthe boundless feeling of delight that dancedwithin my veins when I first threw off* theyoke of servitude, and roved unshackled,unrestrained, amidst these woods ? — The wildintoxicating bliss still tingles to my heart.And they are all my own — my own ! Softly,what have we there ?"Luke's attention was arrested by an objectwhich could not fail to interest him, sportsmanas he was : a snorting bray was heard, and alordly stag stalked slowly and majesticallyfrom out the copse. Luke watched the actionsof the noble animal with great interest, drawingback into the shade ; a hundred yards or thereaboutsmight be between him and the buck —it was within range of ball — Luke mechanicallygrasped his gun ; yet his hand hadscarcely raised the piece halfway to his shoulder,when he dropped it again to its rest.What am I about to do'' he exclaimed,f5106 aooKwooD.Why, for mere pastime, should I take away yonnoble creature's life, when his carcase would beutterly useless to me ? Yet such is the force ofhabit, that I can scarce resist the impulse thattempted me to fire; and I have known thetime, and that not long since, when I shouldscarce have shown so much self-controul."Unconscious of the danger it had escaped,the animal moved forward with the same statelystep; suddenly it stopped, with ears pricked,as if some sound had smote them. At that instantthe click of a gun-lock was heard, at a littledistance to the right of Luke — sit had missedfire; an instantaneous report from another gunsucceeded — and, with a bound high in air,the buck fell upon his back, struggling in theponies of death. Luke had at once divinedthe cause; he was aware that poachers wereat hand. He fancied that he knew the parties ;nor was he deceived in his conjecture. Twofigures issued instantly from a covert on theright, and, making to the spot, the first whoLockwood.reached it, put an end to the animal's strugglesby plunging a knife into its throat. Theaffrighted herd took to their heels, and wereseen darting swiftly down the Chase. Luke,meantime, had recognised the voices of themen, and considered within himself whetherhe should make kno^\Ti his vicinity to themor not. He felt half inclined to resent thedeed of slaughter he had witnessed, as aninsult to huTiself, and to treat his companions,for such they were, as aggressors of his o\\tiimaginary rights. At first, he resolved torush upon them, and comp a relinquishmentof thar prey : but a moment's reflectionconvinced him of the futility, as well as risk ofsuch a proceeding, and, resolving to abide theirdeparture where he was, he kept a watchful eyeupon their movements.Compressing one knee forcibly on the stillthrobbing heart of his victim, with the reekingknife between his teeth, one of the twain unoccupiedin feeling for the deer's fat, when108 ROOKWOOD.he was approached by the other, who pointedin the direction of the house. The formerraised himself from his kneeling posture, andboth appeared to listen attentively. Luke fanciedhe heard a slight sound in the distance ;whatever the noise proceeded from, it was evidentthe deer stealers were alarmed — they laid holdof the buck, and, dragging it along, concealedthe carcase amongst the tall fern; they thenretreated, halting for an instant to deliberate,swithin a few yards of Luke, who was concealedfrom their view by the trunk of the tree, behindwhich he had ensconced his person. They wereso near, that he lost not a word of their mutteredconference.The games spoiled, this time, Dick, anyhow's growled one, in an angry tone; "the hawksare upon us, and we must mizzle, and leave thefallen bird to take care of itself. Devil damnhim ; who'd a"* thought of Hugh Badger's puttinghis queer games in motion to-night? Cursehim, though the tattler be up, and blinking likeBOOK WOOD. 109a glim, I did think he'd have kept quiet houseto-night, if only for decency's sake ; but there'sno thought of the old squire's finny* running inhis addled head""I see 'em," returned the other, " thanks toold Oliver — there they are — two — three — and amuzzled bouser*!-, too. There's Hugh at the headof 'em — shall we stand, and show fight ? — I havehalf a mind for it."No, no ;" replied the first speaker, " thatwill never do, Dick — why run the risk of beinggraced for a bit of venison ? Had Luke Bradleybeen with us, indeed, it might have been anotherguess business ; but he's with that old resurrectioncove, his grand-dad, in the church — I saw'em going there myself. Besides we've that todoat the hall, that may make men of us forthe rest of our nafral lives. It won't do to beenabled in the nick of it — so let's lope off,and make for the pray, in the lane — keep inthe munge as much as you can." And awaythey scampered down the hill-side.♦ Funeral. + Dog. J Darkness.110 ROOKWOOD.Shall I follow," thought Luke, " and runthe risk of falling into the keeper's hand, just atthis crisis, too ? No — but if I am found here, Ishall be taken for one of the gang. Somethingmust be done — ^ha ! devil take them, here theyare, already."Further time was not allowed him for re-reflection — a hoarse baying was heard, followedby a loud cry from the keepers. The dog hadscented out the game ; and, as secrecy was nolonger necessary, lies muzzle had been removed.To rush forth now were certain betrayal ; toremain was almost equally certain detection;and, doubting whether he should obtain credencefrom the keepers, if he delivered himself over inthat garb, and armed, he at once rejected theidea. Just then it flashed across his recollectionthat his gun had remained unloaded, andhe applied himself eagerly to repair this negligence,when he heard the dog in full cry,making swiftly in his direction. He threwhimself upon the ground, where the fern wasthickest; but this seemed insufficient to baffleROOKWOOD. Illthe sagacity of the hound — he had got hisscent, and was baying close at hand. Thekeepers were drawing nigh — Luke gave himselfup for lost. The dog, however, stopped wherethe two poachers had halted, and was therecompletely at fault : snuffing the ground, hebayed, wheeled round, and then set off, withrenewed barking, upon their track. HughBadger and his comrades loitered an instant atthe same place, looked warily round, and then,as Luke conjectured, followed in the hound'strack.Swift as thought, Luke leapt on his feet, andwithout even pausing to ascertain which routethe keepers had taken, started at full speed,shaping his course in a cross line for the lane,and keeping as much as possible under cover ofthe trees. Rapid as was his flight, it was notwithout a witness : one of the keeper's assistants,who lead lagged behind, gave the view holloa inaloud voice. Luke pressed forward with redoubledenergy, endeavouring to gain the shelter112 BOOK WOOD.of the plantation, and this he could readily haveaccomplished, had no impediment been in hisway ; but his rage and vexation were boundless,when he heard the keeper's cry echoed byshouts immediately below him, and the tongueof the hound resounding in the hollow. Heturned sharp round, steering a middle course,and still aiming at the fence. It was evident,from the cheers of his pursuers, that he was infull view, and he heard them encouraging anddirecting the hound.Luke had gained the park palings, alongwhich he rushed, in the vain quest of somepracticable point of egress, for the fence washigher in this part of the park than in the otherparts, owing to the inequality of the ground. Hehad cast away his gun as useless; but evenwithout that incumbrance, he dared not hazardthe delay of climbing the palings. At thisjuncture a deep breathing was heard close behindhim — he threw a glance over his shoulder —within a few yards was a ferocious blood-rosewood.113hound, with whose savage nature Luke waswell acquainted ; the breed, some of which he hadalready seen, having been maintained at the hallever since the days of Sir Ranulph. The eyes ofthe hound were glaring, blood-red — his tonguehanging out, and a row of keen white fangs displayed,like the teeth of a shark. There was agrowl — a leap — and the hound was close uponhim.Luke's courage was undoubted ; but his heartfailed him as he heard the bark of the remorselessbrute, and felt that he could not avoid anencounter with it. His resolution was instantlytaken : he stopped short, with such suddenness,that the dog, then in the act of springing,flew past him with great violence, and the time,momentary as it was, occupied by the animal inrecovering itself, enabled Luke to drop on hisknee, and to place one arm, like a buckler,before his face, while he held the other inreadiness to grapple his adversary. Uttering afierce yell, the hound returned to the charge,114 aooKwooD.darting at Luke, who received the assaultwithout flinching ; and in spite of a severe lacerationof the arm, he seized the animal bythe throat, and hurling it upon the ground,jumped with all his force upon its stomach,A yell of agony, and the contest was ended,ad Luke at liberty to pursue his flight unmolested.Brief as had been the interval required forthis combat, it had been sufficient to bring the pursuerswithin sight of their victim. Hugh Badger,who from the uplands had witnessed the fate ofhis favourite, with a loud oath discharged thecontents of his gun at the head of its destroyer.Fortunate was it for Luke, that at that instanthe stumbled over the root of a tree — the shotrattled in the leaves as he fell, and the keeper,concluding that he had at least winged his game,descended more leisurely towards him. As he layupon the ground, Luke felt that he was wounded ;whether by the bite of the dog, from a strayshot, or from bruises inflicted by the fall, heLockwood. 115could not determine ; but, smarting with pain,he resolved to wreak his vengeance upon thefirst person who approached him. He vowednot to be taken with Hfe — to strangle any whoshould lay hands upon him. At that momenthe felt a pressure at his breast — it was the deadhand of his mother.Luke shuddered. His wrath was curbed —the fire of revenge quenched. He mentally cancelledhis rash oath; yet he could not bringhimself to surrender at discretion, and withoutfurther effort. The keeper and his assistantswere approaching the spot where he lay, andsearching for his body — Hugh Badger wasforemost, and within a yard of him. " D — ^nhis blood'' cried Hugh, " the rascals not halfkilled, he seems to breathe." The words werescarcely out of his mouth ere the speaker wasdashed backwards, and lay sprawling upon thesod. Suddenly and unexpectedly, as an Indianchief might rush upon his foes, arose Luke,propelling himself with tremendous impetus116 ROOKWOOD.against Hugh, who happened to stand in hisway, and before the startled assistants, who wereeither too much taken by surprise, or unwillingto draw a trigger, could in any way lay handsupon him. Exerting all the remarkable activitywhich he possessed, he caught hold of a projectingbranch of a tree, and swung himself, at asingle bound, fairly over the paling.Stout Hugh Badger was shortly on hislegs, swearing lustily at his defeat. Directinghis men to skirt alongside the fence, and makefor a particular part of the plantation which henamed, and snatching a loaded fowling-piecefrom one of them, he clambered over thepales, and guided by the crashing branches, andother sounds conveyed to his quick ear, he wasspeedily upon Luke's track.The plantation through which the chase wasnow carried, was not, as might be supposed, acontinuation of the ring fence which Luke hadoriginally crossed, on his entrance into the park,though girded by the same line of paling, but,ROOKWOOD. 117in reality, a close pheasant preserve, occupyingthe banks of a ravine, which, after a deep andtortuous course, terminated in the declivity heretoforedescribed as forming the park boundary.Luke plunged into the heart of this defile, fightinghis way downwards, in the direction of thebrook. His progress was impeded by a thickundergrowth of briar, and other matted vegetation,as well as by the entanglements thrown inhis way by the taller bushes of thorn, and hazel,the entwined and elastic branches of which, intheir recoil, galled and fretted him, by inflictingfrequent, smart blows on his face and hands.This was a hardship he usually little regarded ;but, upon the present occasion, it had theeffect, by irritating his temper, of increasing thethirst of vengeance raging in his bosom.Through the depths of the ravine welledthe shallow stream before alluded to, andHugh Badger had no sooner reached its sedgymargin than he lost all trace of the fugitive.He looked cautiously round, listened intently,118 Lockwood.and inclined his ear to catch the faintest echo ;but all was still, not a branch shook, not a leafrustled. Hugh was aghast. He had made sureof getting a glimpse, and, perhaps, a stray shot,at the poaching rascal, as he termed him, in theopen space, which he was sure the fellow wasaiming to reach ; and now, all at once, he haddisappeared, like a wilW-the-wisp or a beggar ofthe clough. However, he could not be far off, andhe endeavoured to obtain some clue to guide himin his quest. He was not long in detecting recentmarks deeply indented in the mud on theopposite bank. Hugh leapt thither incontinently.Farther on, some rushes were trodden do^vn, andthere were other indications of the course thefugitive had taken.Hark forward !" shouted Hugh, in the joyof his heart, at this discovery ; and, like a well-traineddog, he followed up, with prompt alacrity,the scent he had opened. The brook presentedstill fewer impediments to expedition than thethick copse, and the keeper pursued the gyra-ROOKWOOD. 119tons of the petty current, occasionally splashinginto the stream. Here and there was an appearanceon the sod that satisfied him he wasin the right way. At length he became aware,from the crumbling soil, that the object ofhis pursuit had scaled the bank, and he forthwithmoderated his career. Halting, he perceived,what he took to be a face peeping athim from behind a knot of alders that overhung,half way up the steep and shelving bank immediatelyabove him. His gun was instantly at hisshoulder.^ Come down, you infernal deer-stealingscoundrel," cried Hugh, " or I'll blow you toshivers, that will I, and be d d to you."No answer was returned: expostulation wasvain; and fearful of placing himself at a disadvantageif he attempted to scale the bank,Hugh fired without further parley. The sharpdischarge rolled in echoes down the ravine, anda pheasant, scared at the sound, answered thechallenge from a neighbouring tree. Hugh was120 ROOKWOOD.an unemng marksman, and on this occasionhis aim had been steadily taken. The resultwas not precisely such as he had anticipated. Afur cap, shaken by the shot from the boughwhereon it hung, came rolling down the bank,proclaiming the ruse that had been practisedupon the keeper. Little time was allowed himfor reflection; before he could reload, he felthimself collared by the iron arm of Luke.The keeper was a man of great personalstrength — square-set, bandy-legged, with a prodigiouswidth of chest, and vast volume ofmuscular power; and energetic as was Luke'sassault, he maintained his ground withoutflinching. The struggle was desperate. Lukewas of slighter proportion, though exceeding thekeeper, in stature, by the head and shoulders.This superiority availed him little; it was rathera disadvantage in the conflict that ensued. Thegripe he fastened upon Hugh's throat was likethat of a clenched vice ; but he might as wellhave compressed the neck of a bull, as that of theROOKWOOD. 121Stalwart keeper. Defending himself with hishobnail boots, with which he inflicted severalsevere blows upon Luke's shins, and strugglingvehemently, Hugh succeeded in extricatinghimself from his throttling grasp; he thenclosed with his foe, and they were locked togetherlike intertwining snakes. In the mannerof bears at play, they hugged each other,straining and tugging, and practising everysleight and stratagem coming Within the scopeof feet, knees, and thighs — now tripping, nov'jerking, now advancing, now retreating ; but allwith doubtful result. Victory, at length, seemedto declare itself in favour of the sturdy keeper.Aware of his opponent's strength, it was Luke'schief endeavour to keep his lower limbs disengaged,and to trust more to skill than to forcefor ultimate success. To prevent this was thekeepers object : he guarded himself againstevery feint, and ultimately succeeded in firmlygrappling his agile assailant. like's spineVOL. I. G122 ROOKWOOD.was almost cracked in twain by the shock, whensuddenly he gave way, and, without losing hisbalance, drew his adversary forward, at thesame instant kicking the keeper's right leg fromunder him, and dashing him backwards. Witha crash ike that of an uprooted oak, Hughtumbled, with his foe upon him, into the bed ofthe rivulet.Not a v/ord had been spoke during the conflict.A convulsive groan burst from Hugh'shardy breast, enforced by the weighty bodyabove him. His hand sought his girdle, but invain ; his knife was gone. G gazing upwards, hisdancing vision encountered the glimmer of theblade — the knife had dropped from its case inthe fall — Luke brandished it before his eyes.Villain !" gasped Hugh, ineffectually strugglingto free himself, " you will not murder me ?"And his efforts were desperate.No,"*"* answered Luke, flinging the upliftedweapon into the brook ; " I will not do that, thoughKOOKWOOD. 123thou hast twice aimed at my life to-night ; but Iwill silence thee, at all events." — And with that hedealt the keeper a blow on the head that terminatedall further resistance on his part. Leavingthe inert mass to choke up the current, with whosewaters the blood, oozing from the wound, beganto commingle, Luke prepared to depart.His perils were not yet past. Guided by thefiring, the report of which alarmed them, thekeeper's assistants hastened in the directionwhence they imagined the sound proceeded,presenting themselves directly in the path Lukewas about to take. He had either to retrace hissteps, or face a double enemy. His election wasmade at once. He turned, and fled.For an instant the men tarried with theirbleeding companion — they dragged him from thebrook — then, with loud oaths, followed in hotpursuit.Threading for a second time the bosky labyrinth,Luke sought the source of the stream. This124 Lockwood.was precisely the course his enemies would haveselected for him; and when they beheld himt^ike it, they felt confident of his capture. On —on — they sped.The sides of the hollow became more andmore abrupt as they advanced, though lesscovered with brushwood. The fugitive madeno attempt to climb the bank, but still prestforward. The road was tortuous, and woundround a jutting point of rock. Now he wasa fair mark — no, he had swept swiftly by, andwas out of sight, before a gun could be raised.They reached the same point — lie was still beforethem — but his race was nearly run. Steepslippery rocks, shelving down to the edges of asmall but deep pool of water, the source of thestream, formed an apparently insurmountablebarrier in that direction. Rooted (heaven knowshow?) in some reft or fissure of the rock, grew awild ash, throwing out a few boughs over thesolitary pool ; this is all the support Luke canROOKWOOD. 125hope for, should he attempt to scale the rock.The rock was sheer — the pool was deep — yetstill he hurried on. He reached the muddyembankment — he mounted its sides — she seemedto hesitate. The keepers were now within ahundred yards — both guns were discharged —and sudden as the reports, with a dead, splashesplunge, like a diving otter, the fugitive droppedinto the water.The pursuers were at the brink. They gazedat the pool. A few bubbles floated upon itssurface, and burst. The water was slightly discolouredwith sand. No ruddier stain crimsonedthe tide — no figure rested on the naked rock —no hand clung; to the motionless tree.Devil take the rascals' growled one; *' Ihope he hart escaped us, after all""No — no, he's fast enough, never fear""rejoined the other ; " sticking like an eel at thebottom o' the pond ; and damn him he deservesit, for he's slip'd out of our fingers, eel fashion,126 ROOKWOOD.often enough, to-night. But come, we'll dragfor the body in the morning. Let's be moving,and give poor Hugh Badger a helping hand.A pretty business he have made of it, to be sure.Come along."Whereupon they returned to the assistance ofthe wounded and discomfited keeper.CHAPTER VI.am right against my House — Seat of my Ancestors !Yorkshire Tragedy.We shall now conduct our readers to the seatof the family, so frequently alluded to in thepreceding chapters.Rosewood Place, was a fine, old, irregularpile, of considerable size, presenting a rich, picturesqueoutline, with its innumerable gable-ends,its fantastical coigns, and tall crest oftwisted chimneys. There was no uniformity ofstyle about the building, yet the general effectwas pleasing and beautiful ; its very irregularityconstituted its chief charm. Nothing butconvenience had been consulted in its construction; additions had from time to time been128 ROOK WOOD.made to it, but every thing had dropped intoits proper place, and, without apparent effortor design, had grown into an ornament, heighteningthe beauty of the whole. It was, inshort, one of those glorious, manorial houses,that, like realized visions of Eld, sometimesunexpectedly greet us in our wanderings,and gladden us as the discovery of ahidden treasure. Some such ancestral hall(though not precisely of the same character)have we accidentally encountered in unlookedfor quarters in our native county of Lancaster,or in its smiling sister shire, and never withoutfeelings of intense delight, rejoicing to beholdthe freshness of its antiquity and the greennessof its old age; for be it observed, inpassing, that a Cheshire or Lancashire Hall,time-honoured though it be, with its often renovatedblack-and-white squares, fancifully filledup with trefoils and quatrefoils, rosettes,and other figures, seems to bear its years solightly, that its age, so far from detractingROOKWOOD. 129from its beauty, only lends it a grace ; and thesame mansion, to all outward appearance, freshand perfect as it existed in the days ofElizabeth, may be seen in admirable preservationin the days of William our Liege.Such is Bramble — such Moreton, and manyothers which we could name : the former ofthese houses may, perhaps, be instanced as thebest specimen of its class (and its class, in ouropinion, is the best) to be met with in theshire, considered with reference either to thefinished decoration of its exterior, rich in thechequered colouring we have alluded to, preservedwith a care and neatness almost Dutch, or tothe consistent taste exhibited by its high-mindedowner in the restoration and maintenanceof all its original and truly national beautywithin doors. As an illustration of old Englishhospitality (that real, hearty, boundless hospitality,for which the Squirearchy of this countrywas once so famous — ah ! why have they barteredit for other customs less substantially English ? )G 5130 ROOKWOOD.may be mentioned, that a road conductedthe passenger directly through the great hall ofthis house, literally " of entertainment'' where,if he listed, strong ale, and other refreshments,awaited his acceptance, and courted his stay.Well might old King, the Cheshire chronicler,in the pride of his honest heart, exclaim, " Iknow divers men, who are but farmers, thatin their housekeeping may compare with a lordor baron, in some countries beyond the seas ; —yea, although I named a higher degree, I wereable to justify it'' We have no such " goldenfarmers" in these degenerate days.The mansion was originally built by SirRanulph de Rosewood, the first of thename, a stout Yorkist, who flourished inthe reign of Edward the Fourth, and receivedthe fair domain and broad lands upon whichthe edifice was raised, at the hands of hissovereign, in reward for good service, retiringthither in the decline of life, at the close ofthe wars of the Roses, to sequestrate himselfROOKWOOD. 131from scenes of strife, and to consult his spiritualweal in the erection and endowment of theneighbouring church. It was of mixed architecture,and combined many of the peculiaritiesof each era. Retaining some of the sternerfeatures of earlier days, the period ere yet theembattled manor-house peculiar to the reigns ofthe later Henries had been merged in the gracefuland peaceable Hall, the residence of the Rook-woodshad early anticipated the gentler characteristicsof a later day, though it coidd boastlittle of that exuberance of external ornament,that luxuriance of design, and prodigality ofbeauty, which, under the sway of the virginQueen, distinguished the residence of thewealthier English landowner, and rendered theHall of Elizabeth, properly so called, the prideand boast of our Domestic Architecture.The site which Sir Ranulph had selected forhis habitation, had been already occupied bya vast fabric of oak, which he in part removed,though some vestiges mitrht still be traced of132 ROOKWOOD.that ancient structure. A massive pile succeeded,with gate and tower, court and moatcomplete, stable enough, one would havethought, to have endured for centuries; buteven this substantial change grew into disuse,and Sir Ranulph's successors, remodelling,repairing, almost rebuilding the whole mansion,in the end so metamorphosed its aspect, that atlast little of its original and distinctive characterremained. Still, as we said before, it was afine, old house, though some changes had takenplace for the worse, which could not be readilypardoned by the eye of taste : as, for instance,the deep, embayed windows, had sunk intomodernized casements, of lighter construction ;the wide porch, with its flight of steps leadingto the great hall of entrance, had yieldedto a narrow door ; and the broad, quadrangularcourt was occupied by a gravel drive. Yet,despite all these mutations, the house of theRookwoods, for an old house (and, after all,what is like a good, old house ?) was noROOKWOOD. 133undesirable, or uncongenial abode for any worshipfulcountry gentleman " that hath a greatestate'The Hall Was situated near the base of agently declining hill, terminating a noble avenueof limes, and partially embosomed in an immemorialwood of that same timber, whichhad given its name to the family that dweltamongst its rook-peopled shades. Descendingthe avenue at the point of access afforded bya road that wound down the hill-side, towardsa village distant about half a mile, asyou advanced, the eye was first arrested by asingular octagonal turret of brick, of more recentoriginal than the house, though in all probabilityoccupying the place where the partizansgateway stood of yore. This tower rose to aheight corresponding with the roof of the mansion,and was embellished on the side facingthe house, with a flaming gilt time-piece,peering, like an impudent observer, at all thatpassed within doors; two apartments, which itcontained, were appropriated to the housesROOKWOOD.porter. Despoiled of its martial honours, thegateway still displayed the achievements of thefamily, carved in granite, which had resisted thestorms of two centuries, though stained greenwith moss, and mapped over with lichens. Tothe left, overgrown with ivy, and peeping fromout a tuft of trees, appeared the summit ofthe dovecot, indicating the near neighbourhoodof an ancient bam, contemporary withthe earliest dwelling-house, and of a little worldof offices and out-buildings, that lay buried inthe thickness of the foliage. To the right wasthe garden — the pleasaunce of the place — formal,precise, old-fashioned, artificial, yet exquisite !—(for commend us to the bygone, beautiful,English garden — really a garden — not thatmixture of park, meadow, and wilderness*,Payne Knight, the scourge of Repton and his school,speaking of the licence indulged in by the modern landscapegardeners, thus vents his indignation: —But here, once more, ye rural muses weep —The ivy'd balustrade, and terrace steep —Walls — mellowed into harmony by time —On which fantastic creepers used to climb —ROOKWOOD. 135brought up to one's very endows — which, sincethe days of the innovators, Kent, and his " boldassociates'' Capability Brown and Co., hasobtained so largely) — this teas a garden ! Theremight have been seen the stately terraces, suchas Watteau, and our own Wilson, in his earlierworks, painted — the trim alleys, exhibiting allthe triumphs of Topiarian art —The sidelong walls,Of shaven yew ; the holly's prickly arms,Trim'd into high arcades; the tensile box,Wove in mosaic mode of many a curl.Around the figured carpet of the lawn*.the gayest of parterres and greenest of lawns,with its admonitory sun-dial, its marble basinin the centre, its fountain, and couched water-god— the quaint summer-house, surmountedMason's English Garden.While statues, labyrinths, and alleys pentWithin their bounds, at least were innocent I —Our modern taste, alas ! no limit knows ;O'er hill, o'er dale, tltrovgh wood and field it flaws ;Spreading o'er all its prolific spawn,In never-ending sheets of vapid lawn"" —The Landscape, a didactic Poem, addressed toUvedale Price, Esq.136 ROOK WOOD.with its gilt vane — the statue, glimmering fromout its covert of leaves — the cool cascade — theurns — the bowers — and a hundred luxuries beside,suggested and contrived by Art to renderNature most enjoyable, and to enhance therecreative delights of home-out-of-doors (forsuch a garden should be), with least sacrifice ofin-door comfort and convenience.When Epicurus to the world had taught,That pleasure was the chiefs good ;(And was perhaps i' th' right, if rightly understood)His life he to his doctrine brought —And in his garden's shade that sovereign pleasure sought*.All these delights might once have been enjoyed; but at the time of which we write, thisfair garden was for the most part a waste. Illkept, neglected, unrewarded, the gay parterreswere disfigured with weeds — grass grew on thegravel walk — several of the urns were overthrown— the hour upon the dial was untoldthe fountain choked up, and the smooth-shavenlawn only rescued, it would seem, fromCowley.ROOK WOOD. 137the general fate, that it might answer thepurpose of a bowling green, as the implementsof that game, scattered about, plainly testified.Diverging from the garden to the house, wehave before remarked that the more ancientcharacteristic features of the place had been forthe most part obliterated and destroyed, less bythe hand of time than to suit the tastes ofdifferent proprietors ; this, however, was not soobservable in the eastern wing, which overlookedthe garden. Here might be discerned manyindications of its antiquity. The strength andsolidity of the walls, which had not been, aselsewhere, masked with brick-work — the low,Tudor arches — the mullions bars of the windows— all attested its age. Within, this wingwas occupied by an upper and lower gallery,communicating with suites of chambers, for themost part deserted, excepting one or two, whichwere used as dormitories, and another little roomon the ground-floor, with an oriel windowopening upon the lawn, and commanding the138 ROOKWOOD.prospect beyond — a favourite resort for thematting refection of the late Sir Piers; theinterior was curious for its ceiling, moulded inplaster, with the arms and alliances of theRookwoods. In the centre was the royalblazon of Elizabeth, who had once honouredthe hall with a visit during a progress.To return, for a moment, to the garden,which we linger about as a bee around a flower :below the lawn there was another terrace,edged by a low balustrade of stone, whichcommanded a lovely view of park, water, andwoodland — high hanging woods in the foreground,and an extensive sweep of flat champaigncountry, stretching out to meet a lineof blue, hazy hills that bounded the distanthorizon.From the house to its inhabitants, the transitionis natural. Besides the connection betweenthem, there were many points of resemblance —many family features in common — the same originalgrandeur, the same character of romance,ROOKWOOD. 139the same fanciful display. Nor were the secretpassages, peculiar to the one, wanting to thehistory of the other : both had their mysteries.One blot there was in the otherwise proudescutcheon of the Rookwoods, that dimmed itssplendour, and made pale its pretensions : theirsun was eclipsed in blood from its rising toits meridian; and so it seemed would be itssetting. This foul reproach attached to allthe race; — none escaped it. Traditional rumourswere handed down from father to son,throughout the county, and, ike all otherrumours, had taken to themselves wings, andflown abroad : their crimes became a by-word.How was it they escaped punishment? Howcame they to evade the hand of justice?Proof was ever wanting — justice ever baffled.They were a stern and stiff-necked people, ofindomitable pride and unconquerable resolution,with, for the most part, force of charactersufficient to enable them to breast difficultiesand dangers that would have overwhelmed140 ROOK WOOD.ordinary individuals. No quality is so advantageousto its possessor as firmness — everyobstacle will yield to it, and the determinedenergy of the Rookwoods bore them harmlessthrough a sea of troubles; besides, they hadtaken their measures properly. They werewealthy; lavish even to profusion — and goldwill do much, if skilfully administered ; yet,despite of all this, a dark, ominous cloudsettled over their house, and men wonderedwhen the vengeance of Heaven, so long delayed,would fall, and consume it.Possessed of considerable landed property,once extending over nearly half a county, thefamily increased in power and importance for anuninterrupted series of years, until the outbreakof that intestine discord which ended in theCivil Wars, when the espousal of the royalistparty, with sword and substance, by Sir RalphRook wood, the then lord of the mansion (a dissolute,depraved personage, who, however, hadbeen made a Knight of the Bath at the corona-rosewood.141tion of Charles I.) ended in his own destructionat Naseby, and the wreck of much of his property;a loss, which the gratitude of Charles II.,on his restoration, did not fail to make goodto Sir Ralph's youthful heir.The young Sir Reginald had attended Charlesin the character of page during his exile, andif he could not requite the devotion of the sonby absolutely reinstating the fallen fortunes ofthe father, the Monarch could at least accord himthe fostering influence of his favour and countenance,and bestow upon him certain lucrativesituations in his household, as an earnest ofhis good will; and thus much he did. Remarkablefor his personal attractions in youth,it is not to be wondered at that we should findthe name of Reginald Rookw^ood recorded in thescandalous chronicles of the day, as belonging toa cavalier of infinite address and discretion,matchless wit, and marvellous pleasantry, andeminent beyond his peers for his successes with142 ROOK WOOD.some of the most distinguished beauties thatornamented that brilliant and voluptuous court.A career of elegant dissipation ended inmatrimony. His first match was unpropitious.Foiled in his attempts upon the chastity of a ladyof great beauty, and high honour, he was rashenough to marry her: rash enough, we say, forfrom that fatal hour all became as darkness ; thecurtain fell upon the comedy of his life, to riseto tragic horrors. When passion subsided, repentanceawoke, and he became anxious fordeliverance from the yoke he had so heedlesslyimposed on himself and on his unfortunatelady. Her's was a wretched life of sufferancefrom domestic tyranny and oppression; butit was brief: her end has been already hintedat. The manner of its occurrence we shallnow more fully detail.The hapless lady of Sir Reginald was a fairand fragile creature, floating in the eddyingcurrent of existence, and hurried to destnic-ROOK WOOD. 143tion as the summer gossamer is swept awayby the rude breeze, and lost for ever. Sobeautiful, so gentle was she, that ifSorrow had not madeSorrow more beautiful than Beauty's self,it would have been difficult to say whether thecharm of softness, and sweetness, was more to beadmired than her faultless personal attractions;but when a tinge of sorrow came saddening andshading the once smooth and smiling brow —when tears dimmed the blue beauty of thosedeep and tender eyes — when hot, hectic flushessupplied the place of healthful bloom, anddespair took possession of her heart, then wasit seen what was the charm of Lady Rosewood,if charm that could be called, which was asaddening sight to see, and melted the beholder'ssoul within him; and all acknowledged, thatexquisite as she had been before, the sad,sweet lady was now more exquisite still.Seven moons had waned and flown — sevenbitter, tearful moons — and each day Lady ROOK WOOD.woods situation claimed more soothing attentionat the hand of her lord. She had it not.Fascinating as sin was Sir Reginald, if itpleased him; ruthless as the striped tiger, if notin the mood to constrain himself.About this time his wife's brother, whom hehated, returned from the Dutch wars. Struckwith his sister's altered appearance, he readily divinedthe cause: indeed, all tongues were eager toproclaim it to him. Passionately attached to her,Lionel Vavasour implored an explanation of thecause of his sister's griefs. The bewildered lady answeredevasively, attributing her wo-begone looksto any oilier cause than her husband's cruelty,and pressing her brother, as he valued her peace,her affection, never to allude to the subject again.The fiery youth departed; he next soughtout his brother-in-law, and taxed him sharplywith his inhumanity, adding threats to hisupbraiding. Sir Reginald listened silently andcalmly. When the other had finished, with asarcastic obeisance, he replied, " Sir, I am muchROOKWOOD. 145beholden for the trouble you have taken in yoursister s behalf; but when she entrusted herself tomy keeping, she relinquished, I conceive, allclaim on your guardianship : however, I thankyou in her name, for the trouble you havetaken, but for your own sake, I would venture,as a friend, to caution you against a repetitionof interference like the present''Interference ! Sir Reginald ?""Interference, Sir, was my word ; unwarrantableimpertinence were perhaps the more suitablephrase. I give you your choice; but wouldagain renew my caution*"And I, Sir, caution you. See that you giveheed to my words, or, by the living God, I willenforce attention to them""You will find me. Sir, as prompt at alltimes to defend my conduct, as I am unalterablein my purposes. I love your sister not.I loathe her. She is my wife ; what more wouldyou have ? Averse she a harlot, you should haveher back and welcome; but the fool is virtuous.VOL. I. H146 ROOK WOOD.Devise some scheme, and take hef with youhence — so you rid me of her, I am contentsSir Reginald, you are a villain''« Go on""A ruffian''Proceed, I pray you."A dastard! will nothing rouse you?" andVavasour spat upon his brother's cheek.Sir Reginald's eyes blazed. His sword startedfrom its scabbard. " Defend yourself," heexclaimed, furiously attacking Vavasor Passafter pass was exchanged; fierce thrusts madeand parried; feint and appeal, the most desperateand dexterous, resorted to; their swordsglanced like lightning flashes ; till in the strugglethe blades became entangled. There was a moment'scessation ; each glanced at the other withdeadly inextinguishable hate. Both were admirablemasters of defence; both so brimful ofwrath as to be regardless of consequences.They tore back their weapons. Vavasour's bladeshivered. He vias at the mercy of his advertWOOD. 147say — an adversary who knew no mercy. SirReginald's rapier was instantly passed throughhis body, the hilt striking against his ribs.Sir Reginald's ire was kindled, not extinguished,by the deed he had done ; like the tiger,he had tasted blood. He sought his home. Hewas greeted by his wife. Terrified by his looks,she yet summoned courage sufficient to approachhim. She embraced his arm — she clasped hishand. Sir Reginald smiled. It was cutting ashis dagger's edge.AVhat ails you, sweetheart ?'''' said he.I know not ; your smile frightens me."My smile frightens you — fool ! be thankfulthat I frown not.'^Oh! do not frown. Be gentle, my Reginald,as you were when first I knew you. Smile notin that stern wise, but as you did then, that Imay, for one instant, dream you love me, as youswore you did."*"*Dream that I love you !"Ay, dream, my Reginald ; it is no longer a148 Lockwood.reality. I feel your love is gone — that I havelost . But oh ! let me not think you areutterly insensible to me. Smile ! smile ! if butfor a moment'"Silly wench ! There — I do smile""That smile chills me — freezes me. OhReginald! could you but know what I haveendured this morning, on your account. Mybrother Lionel has been here''« Well !"Nay, look not so. He insisted on knowingthe reason of my altered appearance"*And no doubt you made him acquaintedwith the cause. You told him your version ofthe story ."'"'Not a word, as I hope to live."A lie."By my truth, no."A lie, I say; he avouched it to me himself."Impossible! He could not."'Tis a tale he will not repeat."Not repeat ? He would not, I am sure, giveROOKWOOD. 149utterance to any scandal. You do but try me.Reginald, I never saw you thus — never before.Ha! what is this? Your hand is bloody. Youhave not — speak — you could not. As you hopefor heaven's mercy, speak, I implore you. Youhave not harmed him? He is well. He is well.Whose blood is this ?'^He spat upon my cheek — I have washedout the stain — ''Then it is his'' shrieked Lady Rosewood,pressing her hands shudderingly before hereyes. " Is he dead ? Does he yet live ?"Sir Reginald turned away.Stay'' cried she, exerting her feeble strengthto retain him, and becoming white as ashes,stay, thou thing of blood! thou cruel andperjured one! abide, and hear me. Me thou hastkilled, I feel, with thy unkindness. I have strivenagainst it, but it would not avail. I am sinkingfast — dying. I, who loved thee, only thee ; yea,one beside — my brother, and thou hast slain him.Thy hands are dripping in his blood, and I150 ROOK WOOD.have kissed them, have clasped them. And now,"continued she, with an energy that shook SirReginald, " I hate thee-^I abhor thee — Irenounce thee — for ever ! May my dying wordsring in thine ears on thy death-bed, for thathour ivill come. Thou canst not shun that.Then think of him! think of me P''Away !" interrupted Sir Reginald, endeavouringto shake her off.I will not away ! I ^vill cling to thee, — Iwill curse thee. My unborn child shall live tocurse thee — to requite thee — to visit my wrongson thee and thine. Weak as I am, thou shaltnot cast me off Thou shalt learn to fear evenI fear nothing living, much less a franticwoman."Fear the dead then."Hence ! or by the God above us "Never!"There was a struggle — a blow — and thewretched lady sank, shrieking, upon the floor.ROOKWOOl). 151Convulsions seized her; a mother's pains succeededfierce and fast. She spoke no more, butdied within the hour, giving birth to a femalechild.Eleanor Rosewood lived to fitful her mother'sboding words. She became her father s idol —her father s bane. All the love he had to bestowwas centred in her; she returned it not. Shefled from his caresses. Inheriting none of hermother s gentleness, she had all her mother'sbeauty — with all her father's pride. His everythought was for his daughter — for her aggrandizement— all in vain. She seemed only toendure him, while his affection waxed stronger,and entwined itself round her alone; yet sheshrank from his embraces as the shrub from theclasping folds of the parasite plant. She grewtowards womanhood. Suitors thronged aroundher — gentle and noble ones. Sir Reginaldwatched them with a jealous eye. He waswealthy — powerful — high in royal favour ; — andcould make his own election — he did so. For152 ROOKWOOD,the first time, Eleanor promised obedience to hiswishes. They accorded with her own humour.The day was appointed — it came — but with itcame not the bride. She had fled, with thehumblest and the meanest of the pretenders toher hand — with one upon whom Sir Reginaldsupposed she had not deigned to cast her eyes.He endeavoured to forget her, and to all outwardseeming was successful in the effort ; buthe felt that the curse was upon him, theundying flame scorched his heart. Once andonce only they met again, in a foreign land,whither she had wandered. It was a dreadencounter — terrible to both ; but most so to SirReginald. He spoke not of her afterwards.Shortly after the death of his first wife, SirReginald had made proposals to a dowager ofdistinction, with a handsome jointure, one of hisearly attachments, and was without scrupleaccepted. The power of the family mightthen be said to have been at its zenith, and butfor certain untoward circumstances, and theROOK WOOD. 153growing influence of his enemies. Sir Reginaldwould have been elevated to the peerage. Likemost reformed spendthrifts, he had become proportionatelyavaricious, and his mind seemedengrossed in accumulating wealth. In themeantime, his second wife followed her predecessor,dying, it was said, of vexation anddisappointment.The propensity to matrimony, always a distinguishingcharacteristic of the Rookwoods,largely displayed itself in Sir Reginald. Anotherlady followed — equally rich, younger, and farmore beautiful than her immediate predecessor.She was a prodigious flirt, and soon set herhusband at defiance. Sir Reginald did not condescendto expostulate. It was not his way. Heeffectually prevented any recurrence. She wasremoved, and with her expired Sir Reginald'swaning popularity. So strong was the expressionof odium against him, that he thought itprudent to retire to his mansion in the country,and there altogether seclude himself. Oneh5154 ROOK WOOD.anomaly in Sir Reginald's otherwise utterlyselfish character, was uncompromising devotionto the House of Stuart ; and shortly after theabdication of James II., he followed thatmonarch to St. Germains, having previouslymixed largely in secret political intrigues ; andonly returned from the French Court to lay hisbones with those of his ancestry, in the familyvault at Rook wood.Sir Reginald died, leaving issue three children,a daughter, the before-mentioned Eleanor(who, entirely discountenanced by the family,had been seemingly forgotten by all but herfather), and two sons by his third wife. Reginald,the eldest, whose military taste had earlyprocured him the command of a company ofhorse, and whose politics did not coalescewith that of his sire, fell, during his father'slifetime, at Killycrankie, under the bannersof William ; Piers, therefore, the second son,succeeded to the baronetcy. A very differentcharacter, in many respects, to his fatherROOKWOOD. 155and brother, holding in supreme contemptcourts and courtiers, party warfare, politicalintrigue, and all the subtleties of Jesuitical diplomacy; neither having any inordinate relish forcamps or campaigns ; he yet displayed in earlylife one family propensity, viz. unremitting devotionto the sex ; and if he rejoiced not in a likeuxoris latitude, yet were his mistresses manifold.Subsequently he allied himself to Maude,only daughter of Sir Thomas D' Aubenev, thelast of a hne as proud and intolerant as his ownThe tables were then turned ; Lady Rosewoodusurped sovereign sway over her lord, and SirPiers, a cipher in his own house, scarce master ofhimself, much less of his dame, endured anexistence so infinitely miserable, that he was oftenheard to regret, in his cups, that he had notinherited, with the estate of his forefathers, thefamily secret of shaking off the matrimonial yoke,when found to press too hardly.At the onset Sir Piers struggled hard to bursthis bondage, but in vain — he was fast fettered,156 ROOKWOOD.and only bruised himself against the bars ofhis prison-house. Abandoning all further effortat emancipation, he gave himself up to theusual resource of a weak mind — debauchery ; hedrank so deeply to drown his cares, that in theend his hale constitution yielded to his excesses.Sir Piers was a good-humoured man in themain; he had little of the old Rosewoodleaven about him, and had been liked by hisassociates ; but of late his temper became soured,and his friends deserted him; for between hisdomestic annoyances, remorseful feelings, and theinroads already made upon his health by constantinebriety, he grew so desperate and insane in hisrevels, and committed such fearful extravagances,that even his boon companions shrankfrom his orgies. Fearful were the scenes betweenhim and Lady Rosewood upon these occasions —appalling to the witnesses, dreadful to themselves;and it was perhaps their frequent recurrence,that, more than any thing else, banished alldecent society from Rosewood.ROOKWOOD. 157At the time of Sir Piers' decease, which bringsus down to the date of our story, his son andsuccessor, Ranulph, was absent on his travels.Shortly after the completion of his academicaleducation, he had departed to make the tour ofthe Continent, and had been absent rather betterthan a year. He had quitted his father indispleasure, and was destined never again tosee his face while having. The last intelligencereceived of young Rook wood was from Bordeaux,whence it was thought he had departedfor the Pyrenees. A special messenger hadbeen dispatched in search of him, with tidingsof the melancholy event ; but as it was deemedimprobable, by Lady Rosewood, that her soncould return within any reasonable space, sheordered that the accomplishment of the last ritesto be paid to her husband should take place onthe night of the sixth day after his decease(for it may be here remarked, that it was thecustom of the Rookwoods ever to inter theirdead at midnight), entrusting its solemnization158 ROOKWOOD.entirely to the care of one of Sir Piers retainers,for which she was greatly scandalized in theneighbourhood.A youth of goodly promise was RanulphRosewood. The stock from which he sprangwould on neither side warrant such conclusion,nor hold out hopes of any such fulfilment ; yetsometimes it happens that from the darkest elementsare compounded the brightest and subtlestsubstances : and so it appeared to be in hisinstance. Fair, frank, and free — generous, open,unsuspicious — he seemed the very opposite of allhis race — their antagonizing principle. Capriciouslyindulgent, his father had allowed himample means, neither curbing nor restraining hisexpenditure ; acceding at one moment to everyinclination, every project, and the next negativingall. It was impossible, therefore, forhim, in such a state of things, to act decidedly,without incurring his father's displeasure ; andeven the only measure he resolved upon, whichwas to absent himself for a time, was conjee-ROOK WOOD. 159tured to have brought about the result he hadendeavoured to avoid. Other reasons there were,which secretly influenced him, which it will beour business in due time to detail.Much of this might be traced to the policyof Lady Rosewood. Of late, whatever plans shehad laid out for her son, had been opposed bySir Piers, who was resolved to thwart and gallher in her only apparently sensible part ; andhence the endless bickering we have noticed.There might be another latent motive ; but this,if any such existed. Sir Piers kept to himself.After his son's departure, he supplied him plentifullywith money ; but it was observed, ley thoseabout him, that he meditated some great changein the distribution of his property, even duringhis lifetime, when the suddenness of his removal,by death, prevented the completion of hisdesigns.The time of the sad ceremonial drew nigh.The hurrying of the domestics to and fro —the multifarious arrangements for the night —160 ROOKWOOD.the distribution of the melancholy trappings, andthe discussion of the concomitant comestibles, furnishedabundant occupation within doors ; without,there was a constant and continual streamof the tenantry, thronging down the avenue,mixed with an occasional horseman, once ortwice intercepted by a large, lumbering carriage,bringing friends of the deceased, somereally anxious to pay the last tribute of regard,but the majority attracted by the anticipatedspectacle of a funeral by torchlight. Therewere others, indeed, to whom it was not matterof choice ; who were compelled, by a vassaltenure of their lands, held of the house ofRosewood, to lend a shoulder to the coffin, anda hand to the torch, on the burial of its lord. Ofthese there was a plentiful noster collected inthe hall ; they were to be marshalled by PeterBradley, who was deemed to be well skilled inthe proceedings, having been present at twosolemnities of the kind. That personage, however,had not made his appearance, to the greatROOK WOOD. 161dismay of the assemblage. Scouts were sent insearch of him, but they returned with the intelligence,that the door of his habitation was fastened,and its inmate apparently absent ; othertidings of the truant sexton could not beobtained.It was a sultry August evening — no breezewas stirring in the garden — no cool dewsrefreshed the parched and heated earth — yet,from the languishing flowers rich sweetsexhaled ; the splash of a fountain fell pleasantlyupon the ear, conveying in its sound asense of freshness to the fervid air — while deepand drowsy murmurs hummed heavily beneaththe trees, making the twilight slumberouslymusical. The westering sun, which had filledthe atmosphere with flame throughout the day,was now wildly setting ; and, as he sank behindthe hall, its varied and beautiful tracery becameeach instant more darkly and distinctly defined,as relieved against the burnished sky.At this juncture a little gate, communicatingLockwood.with the park, was thrown open, and some oneentered the garden, passing through the shrubbery,and not checking his rapid steps till hearrived at a vista opening upon the house : therehe stopped. The spot at which he halted, wasmarked by a little basin, scantily supplied withwater, streaming from a lions kingly jaws.The stranger threw himself upon an adjoiningseat. His dress was travel-soiled, and dusty, andhis whole appearance betokened great exhaustion,from heat and fatigue. Ashe threw off hisriding-cap, and unclasped his throat collar, hedisplayed a finely-turned head and neck, and acountenance which, besides its beauty, had thatrare nobility of feature, which seldom indeedfalls to the lot of the proudest patrician, but isnever seen in one of an inferior order. A restlessdisquietude of manner, showed that he wassuffering from over-excitement of mind, as wellas from bodily exertion. His look was wild andhurried — his waving ringlets were dashed heedlesslyover a pallid, lofty brow, upon which careROOK WOOD.was prematurely written, while his black melancholyeyes were bent, with a look almost ofagony, upon the house before him.And it was here," murmured the youthfulstranger, " that we parted, never again to meet —here he left me, in anger and unkindness — andhere, upon this very spot, I tarried till the sunhad gone down upon his wrath, even as it is nowgoing down upon his grave — and he returnednot ! And that farewell — that dreadful farewell,was to be our last ! Great God ! — had I butthought it — that I should have departed withouthis blessing — without his forgiveness. But thepast is irrevocable. Oh ! for one half hourwith him, were it terrible as the night whenbut I will not think of that. I must believe itnow — the dark, dreadful confirmation is there.In yon mansion death stares at me throughevery casement — grins at me in my path — myfather lies dead within ! If even the dead cannotrest, why need the living trouble themselves?That twilight sky — yon setting sun — v^hy do164 ROOKWOOD.they fill me with forebodings ? — why does the airseem thick — the trees grow black — the cloudsturn crimson? 'Tis death ! — death every where!around me — about me — my existence is poisoned.I have obeyed the call — I am here —what more remains to do ?"And, as if struggling against violent emotions,and some overwhelming remembrance, theyoung man arose, and plunged his hand into thebasin, applying the moist element to his burningbrow. Apparently becoming more calm, hebent his steps towards the hall, when twofigures, suddenly issuing from an adjoiningwalk, arrested his progress: neither saw him.After a brief parley, one of the figures disappearedwithin the shrubbery, and the other,confronting the stranger, displayed the harshfeatures and gaunt form of Peter Bradley. HadPeter encountered his dead master in corporealform, he could not have manifested more surprisethan he exhibited for an instant or two,when he shrank back from the path as theLockwood. 165stranger passed him with a low greeting, takinghis way towards the hall.Wonder upon wonders !" ejaculated the sexton,recovering speech ; " young Ranulph here !what could have brought him hither, now?What but fate ? The hour I have so longdreamed of is fast coming; but Luke shouldknow this — he may still be within hearing ; I'lltry — ^'' and he whistled doA\Ti the shrubbery —No — he is gone — it would be too much troubleto seek for him — besides, he must take his chanceI can only help him so far — Destiny must dothe rest. And who shall say what his shall be ? —Not I. I can only speculate — only look on —only laugh. I know better than to interfere withany man s doom, and yet I should like to seeyoung Ranulph's palm. I might give a guessfrom that. It will be a hard game. Ha — ha!What says the old jingle —When the stray Rook shall perch on the topmost bough,There shall be clamour and screeching I trow ;But of right to, and rule of the ancient nest,The Rook that with Rook mates shall hold him possest.166 ROOKWOOD.which is a riddle I cannot read. Oh ! this isbeautiful — delightful ! — and now for my merrymourners. They're drunk I hope by this time —in which case they'll do their business so muchthe better, and not shed tears out of season''And he crawled, muttering, on to the hall.CHAPTER VII.Xo more pluribus, if you love me : Latin whole-meatsare now minced, and served in for English gallantries ; let us,therefore, cut out our blandish neat's tongues, and talk likeregenerate Britons."Westward Ho.Ax hour or two prior to the rencontre justdescribed, in a small cosy apartment of the hall,nominally devoted to justiciary business by itslate proprietor, but, in reality, used as a sanctumsnuggery, or smoking room, an odd triumviratewere assembled, fraught with the ulterior viewof attending the funeral obsequies of their deceasedpatron and friend, though immediatelyoccupied in the discussion of a stoup of excellentclaret, the bouquet of which perfumed the airlike the fragrance of a bed of violets.168 ROOK WOOD.This little room had been poor Sir Piers'sfavourite retreat ; it was, in fact, the only roomin the house that he could call his own; andthither would he often, with pipe and punch,beguile the flagging hours, secure from interruption.A snug, old-fashioned apartment itwas, wainscotted with rich, black oak, againstwhich stood a fine old cabinet of the samematerial, and a line or two of crazy worm-eatenbook-shelves, loaded with sundry, dusty, consultedlaw tomes, and a slight sprinkling of theelder divines, equally neglected. The only book,indeed. Sir Piers ever read, was Burton, and himonly because the quaint, racy style of thelearned old hypochondriac suited his humour atseasons, and gave a zest to his melancholy, suchas the olives lent to his wine.Four portraits adorned the walls; those ofSir Reginald Rosewood and his wives. Theladies were attired' in the flowing draperyof Charles's day, the snow of their radiantbosoms somewhat sullied by over exposure, andIIOOKWOOD. 169the vermeil tinting of their cheeks darkened bythe fumes of tobacco. There was a shepherdess,with her taper crook, whose large, languishingeyes, ripe pouting lips, ready to melt into kisses,and air of voluptuous elegance, was any thingbut suitable to the innocent, unsophisticatedsimplicity of her costume. She was pourtrayedtending her flock of downy sheep, with azureribbons round their necks, accompanied by oneof those invaluable little dogs, whose length ofear and delicacy of spot evinced him perfectin his breeding, but whose large-eyed indifferenceto his charge, proved him to be asmuch out of character with his situation, as therefined and luxuriant charms of his mistresswere out of keeping with her artless attire.This was Sir Piers's mother, the third wife,a beautiful woman, answering to the notionof one who had been somewhat of a flirt inher day. Next to her was a magnificent dame,with the throat and arm of a Juno, and asuperb bust (the bust was, then, what the bustleVOL. I. I170 ROOKWOOD.ia now — a paramount attraction — whether themodification be an improvement, we leave to theconsideration of the lovers of the beautiful) —this was the dowager. Lastly, there was thesweet, delicate Eleanor-with eyes serenely softas a star in water," blue as the depths of asummer's eve, and a form lightsome lovely asthat of a sylph. Every gentle grace had beenstamped in undying beauty on the canvas by thehand of Lely, breathing a spell on the picture,almost as witching as that which had dwelt aroundthe exquisite original. Over the high carvedmantel-piece was suspended the portrait of SirReginald. It had been painted in early youth ;the features were beautiful, disdainful — with afierceness breaking through the courtly air. Theeyes were very fine, large, black as midnight, andstern as those of Caesar Borgia, in Raphael's unrivalledpicture in the Borghese Palace at Rome.They seemed to rivet the gazer — to retort hisglances — to follow him whithersoever he went —to search into his soul, as did the dark orbs ofROOKWOOD. 171Sir Reginald in his lifetime. It was the workof Vandyke, and had all the fidelity and breathingverisimilitude of that great master; nor wasthe noble countenance of Sir Reginald unworthythe masterly painter.No portrait of Sir Piers was to be met with ;but in lieu thereof, depending from a pair ofbuck's horns, hung the worthy knight's stainedscarlet coat (the same in which he had riddenforth, with the intent to hunt, on the eventfulmorning mentioned by Peter Bradley), his velvetcap, his buck-handled whip, and the residue ofhis equipment for the chase. This attire wasreviewed with melancholy interest and im-affectedemotion by the company, as remindingthem forcibly of the departed, of which itseemed a portion.The party consisted of the Vicar of Rook-wood,Dr. Polyphemus Polycarp Small, andTitus Tyrconnel, self-dubbed Med., an emigrant,and empirical professor of medicine, from thesister isle, whose convivial habits had first ROOKWOOD.duce him to the hall, and afterwards retainedhim there. Mr. Cecil Coates, attorney-at-law,bailiff, and receiver, completed the trio. Wewere wrong in saying that Titus Tyrconnel wasretained. He was an impudent, intrusive fellow,whom, having once gained a footing in the house,it was impossible to dislodge. He cared for noinsult — perceived no slight — and professed, inher presence, the profoundest respect for LadyRosewood: in short, he was ever ready to doany thing but depart.Sir Piers was one of those people who cannotdine alone. He disliked a solitary repast, almostas much as a tete-astute with his lady. Hewould have been recognised at once as the trueAmphitryon, had any one been hardy enough toplay the part of Jupiter. Ever ready to give adinner, he found a difficulty arise, not usuallyexperienced on such occasions — there was no onewherewithal to partake of it. He had the bestof wine, kept an excellent table, was himselfno niggard host; but his own merits, and thoseROOK WOOD; 17*3of his table, were forgotten in the invariablependant to the feast ; and the best of wine lostits flavour when the last bottle found its way tothe guest's head. Dine alone, Sir Piers wouldnot ; and as his old friends forsook him, heplunged lower in his search for society, collectingwithin his house a class of personswhom no one would have expected to meet atRosewood, nor its o^vner have chosen as itsinmates, had any choice remained to him. Hedid not endure this state of things without muchoutward show of discontent. " Any thing for aquiet life," was his constant saying ; and, like thegenerality of people with whom those words formafavourite maxim, he led the most uneasy lifeimaginable. Endurance, to excite commiseration,must be uncomplaining — the aggrieved of thegentle sex should remember this. Sir Piersendured, but he grumbled lustily, and wason all hands voted a bore; domestic grievances,especially if the husband be the plaintiff, beingthe most intolerable of all mentionable miseries.174 ROOKWOOD.Racked by a sick head-ache, or querulous withqualms (for there is a bathos of ebriety beyondsoda-water), Sir Piers was the most injuredman breathing, and consequently the mostwearisome. No wonder that his friends desertedhim ; still there was Titus Tyrconnel — his earsand lips were ever open to pathos and to punchso Titus kept his station. Immediately afterher husband's demise, it had been Lady 'sintention to clear the house of all thevermin, so she expressed herself, that had so longinfested it; and forcibly to eject Titus, and oneor two other intruders of the same class. Butinconsequence of certain hints received fromMr. Coates, who represented to her the absolutenecessity of complying with Sir Piers's testamentaryinstructions, which were particular inthat respect, she thought proper to defer herintentions until after the ceremonial of intermentshould be completed; and in the mean time,strange to say, committed its arrangement toTitus Tyrconnel ; who, ever ready to accommo-ROOKWOOD, 175date, accepted, nothing loath, the charge, andacquitted himself admirably well in his undertaking; especially', as he said, " in the eating anddrinking part of the transaction — the most essentialportion of it all." He kept open house —open hall — open cellar — resolved that his patronsfuneral should emulate as much as possible anIrish burial on a grand scale, " the finest sightin the Avhole world," again to quote his ownwords.No opposition was offered to these proceedingsby Lady Rosewood. She had given Titus thekeys of the cellar, saying to her attendantAgnes — " they might wallow in wine if theyliked — like swine, as they were — it was SirPiers's \vi]\ — they only acted in accordance withhis intentions, which they fulfilled to the letter.The period, required by the law, v.ould soon bepast — she would then easily rid herself of them""Inflated with the importance of his office — inflamedwith heat, sat Titus, like a " robustiousperiwig-pated" Alderman, after a civic feast. —176 Lockwood.The natural rubicundity of his rosily comiccountenance was increased to a deep purple tint,like that of a full blown peony, while his ludicrousdignity was augmented by a shining suitof sables, in which his portly person was invested.The first magnum had been discussed insolemn silence ; the cloud, however, which hungover the conclave, disappeared, under the genialinfluence of " another and a better"' bottle, andgave place to a denser vapour, occasioned by theintroduction of the pipe, and its accompaniments.Ensconced in a comfortable old chair (it is notevery old chair that is comfortable), with pipein mouth, and in full unbuttoned ease, hisbushy, buzz wig laid aside by reason of theheat, reposed Doctor Small. Small, indeed, wassomewhat of a misnomer, as applied to the worthydoctor, who, besides being no diminutive specimenof his kind, entertained no insignificantopinion of himself. His height was certainlynot remarkable ; but his width of shoulder —his sesquipedality of stomach — and obesity ofHOOK WOOD. 177calf — these were unique! Of his origin, weknow nothing ; but presume he must, in somewayor other, have been connected with thatnumerous family " the Smalls,'^ who, accordingto Christopher North, form the predominantportion of mankind.In appearance, the doctor was short-necked,and puffy, with a pasty face, wherein were seteyes, whose obliquity of vision was, in a measure,redeemed by their expression of humour. He wasaccounted a man of parts and erudition, andhad obtained high honours at his university.Rigidly orthodox, he abominated the very nameof papist; amongst which heretical herd he classedhis companion, Mr. Titus Tyrconnel — Irelandbeing with him synonymous with superstition andCatholicism — and every Irishman rebellious andschismatical ; on this subject he was inclined to bedisputatious. His prejudices did not presenthim from passing the claret, nor from his laughingas heartily as a plethoric asthma, and sense ofthe decorum due to the occasion would permit,i5178 ROOK WOOD.at the quips and quirks of the Irishman, who,lie admitted, notwithstanding his heresies, wasa pleasant fellow in the main. And when, inaddition to the flattery, a pipe had been insinuatedby the officious Titus, at the precisemoment when Small yearned for his afternoon'ssolace, but scrupled to ask for, or indulge init — when the door had been made fast, and thefirst whifF exhaled, all his misgivings vanished,and he surrendered himself to the soft seduction.In this elysian state we find him.Ah ! you may say that. Doctor Small," saidlie, in answer to some observation of the vicar.*' that's a most original apophthegm. We allof us hould our lives by a thread. Och ! many'sthe sudden finale I have seen. Many's the finefellow's heels tripped up unawares, when leastexpected. Death hangs over our heads by asingle hair, as your reverence says, preciselylike the sword of Dan Machine*, the flatterer ofQuery, Damocles ? — Printers Devil.Lockwood. 179Dennis, what do you call him, ready to fall ata moment's notice, or at no notice at all — eh ? —•Mr. Coates. And that brings me back again toSir Piers — poor gentleman — ah! we slant soonsee the like of him again. ^Poor Sir Piers I'** said I\Ir. Coates, a weeman, with a brown bob, and a face red andround as an apple, and almost as small, " it is tobe regretted, that his over conviviality should somuch have hastened his lamented demise''"Conviviality!" replied Titus; " no suchthing — it was apoplexy — extravasation ofsarum."Extra vase-action of rum and water, youmean'' replied Coates, who, like all attorneys,rejoiced in a quibble.The squire's ailment," continued Titus,was a sanguineous effusion, as we call it —positive determination of blood to the head, occasionedby a low way he got into just before hisattack — a confirmed case of hypochondriasis, a?that ould book Sir Piers was so fond of, denomi-180 Lockwood.nates the blue devils; he neglected the bottle,which, in a man who has been a hard drinkerall his life, is a bad sign. The lowering systemnever answers — never. Doctor, I'll just troubleyou" — for Small, in a fit of absence, had omittedto pass the bottle, though not to help himself.Had he stuck to this'' — holding up a glass rubybright — " the elixir vitae — the grand panacea —he might have been hale and hearty at thispresent moment, and as well as any of us — buthe wouldn't be advised. To my thinking, asthat was the case, he'd have been all the betterfor a little of your Reverence's perpetual advice;and his conscience having been relieved,by confession, and absolution, he might haveopened a fresh account, with an aise heart andclane breast."I trust. Sir," said Small, withdrawing liespipe from his lips, " that Sir Piers Rosewoodaddressed himself to a higher source than to asinning creature of clay like himself for mediationwith his Creator for remission of his sins;Lockwood. 181but were there any load of secret guilt thaimight have weighed heavy upon his conscience,it is to be regretted that he refused the lastoffices of the church, and died communicate.I was denied all admittance to his chambersExactly my case,'^ said Mr. Coates; " I wasrefused entrance, though my business was of theutmost importance — certain dispositions — specialbequests — for though the estate is entailed, yetstill there are charges. You understand me —very strange to refuse to see me. Some peoplemay regret it — may live to regret it, I say —that's all. Ive just sent up a package to LadyRosewood, which was not to be delivered tillafter Sir Piers's death. Odd circumstance thatbeen in my custody a long while. Somereason to think the squire meant to alter hiswill— ought to have seen me — sad neglectsMore's the pity — but it was none of poorSir Piers's doing !"" replied Titus; " he had nowill of his own, playfellow even on his deathsROOK WOOD.bed ; it was all her doing, Lady Rook wood's'"added he, in a whisper. " I, his medical adviser,and confidential friend, was ordered out of theroom, and although I knew it was as much ashis life was worth to leave him for a momentin that state, I was forced to comply ; and,would you believe it, as I left the room, I heardhigh words. Yes, Doctor, as I hope to be saved,words of anger from her at that terrible time'"The latter part of this speech was uttered in alow tone, and very mysterious manner. Thespeakers drew so closely together, that the bowlsof their pipes formed a common centre, whencethe stems radiated. A momentary silence ensued,during which each man puffed for very life.Small next knocked the ashes from his tube,and began to replenish, coughing significantly.Mr. Coates expelled a thin, curling stream ofvapour from a minute orifice in the corner of hisalmost invisible mouth, and raised his eyebrows,fraught with expectation : all seemed spell-rosewood.183bound. On the strength of a bumper, which heswallowed, Titus mustered resolution to breakthe charm.Och, Sirs !'' said he, in a cautious whisper,as if afraid lest the very walls should betrayhim, " Lady Rook wood's an awful woman — anawful woman — a fit mate for Beelzebub himself,if he weren't a devilish deal too cunning to takea wife. Ill just tell you what happened. Weall of us know the sort of life she led poorSir Piers."Of a surety, do we"" replied Small ; " a mostinauspicious union from the commencement.Pronnha Tisiphone thalarnis idulavlt in ellis,Et cecilia cestui devil carmen avis."I doubt, whether the symphony were promising'"replied Titus : " the song itself was anythingbut melodious. But, as I was saying, ifthere was no love lost between them during life,one would think the near approach of death mightset all to rest : no such thing. When I came184 Lockwood.back to the room, there lay the squire, in a sortof trance, and she glaring at him like a tigressso savage — so full of spite and malice,and devilish rejoicing, my blood ran cold towitness it.'"*Small shook his head, muttering some monosyllabicinterjection, that sounded very like anoath. Mr. Coates looked unutterable things, butsaid nothing, with the characteristic caution ofhis tribe.I approached the bed-side,'^ resumed Titus,as I don t care to confess, with fear and trepidation; for though the man does not live whocan say Titus Tyrconnel dreads him, somehow orother there is that in her ladyship I never couldget over — and which petrifies me like a stone.However, I went up to the bed, and took houldof the dying man's hand. Sinking as he was, thepressure roused him ; whether or not he thoughtthat his wife relented towards him, I canstsay; a slight, sweet smile played upon his features— a. faint motion was perceptible in hisLockwood. 185lips; he tried to fix his gaze upon me, andwhen, through the gathering fin, he perceivedwho it was, he shuddered sensibly, and his eyesfilled with tears. Damme, but my own areblinded, now, to think of it. ' Sir Piers,' says I tohim, ' be calm — be composed — 'tis only I, TitusTyrconnel.' — ' I cannot be composed,' gasped he.I cannot die, unless I am at peace.' — ' Givehim laudanum"* said Lady Rosewood ; ' here isthe phial, it will abridge his sufferings.' — ' Oh, nono,' said Piers, with a look of horror I shallnever forget, and struggling for utterance — ' donot give me that — let me live, if only for a fewmoments.' And he sunk back senseless on thepillow, as I cast away the phial. I was soonroused from a moment's stupor I had been throwninto, by her ladyship, who apparently was notmuch pleased with my proceeding ; indeed shewould me as much — but, frightened as I was ather, I could not help saying, I thought it was notlike a Christian, to harbour hatred at such amoment ; and that whatever difference there wasbetwixt them, she 02fght to be reconciled to her186 ROOKWOOD.husband, before reconciliation should be impossible.Och, Sirs ! I wish you had seen her.She said not a word in reply, but slowly quittedthe room, and returned not till after the Squire'sdeparture. I should like to know, Doctor, whatstuff her heart is made of. Now I know what itis to hate and despise, and may be, when Kilnroused, seeing that I'm an Irishman, I couldknock out a man's brains with all the pleasure inlife ; but to see a fellow-creature expiring (whichwas not without a long and a terrible struggle,all occasioned by her conduct), before one's eyes,and not extend the hand of forgiveness to him —if so doing would ease the parting pang — 'tisbarbarous, unnatural, diabolical"*Sir," said Doctor Small, with emphasis, layingdown his pipe, " it's damnable — enough todraw down a judgment ; such conduct can onlybe excused on the ground of insanity ; thewoman must be mad."I'll swear to it," interposed Titus, " she ismad."I shall think it my duty to advise youngROOKWOOD. 187Sir Ranulph to take out a writ de lunaticoinqidrendo,'" said the lawyer, his keen little eyestwinkling ; " he would be glad, I'm sure, tohave her out of the way'"Ah ! were a beautiful way, in my country,of managing unruly women'' said Titus ; " wel^reak 'em in young — take the vice out of 'emearly. As to Lady Rosewood — "^Can you inform me where she is ?" inquiredSmall ; " for I have heard nothing of her sincemy arrival ?''Oh, faith," replied Titus, " fast shut up inher own room, where deal a body goes nearher, barring her Abigail, ould Agnes, who's"(lowering his voice) " much of the same kidneyas herself ; and there she's been ever since poorSir Piers's death. Bless your heart, I've not seena glimpse of her, except to receive my instructionsrespecting the funeral. — Nothing would she haveto do with it — every thing was left to me ; and,but that decency compels her, Sir Piers mightbury himself, for any thing she'd care to thecontrary."188 . ROOK WOOD.The law"" said the attorney, " luckily wouldenforce that. The Rosewood family havealways laid down laws for themselves respectingtheir interment. The custom of burial by torchlight,and at midnight, hath become a prescriptiveobligation upon the house''And a grand custom it is, eh. Doctor f"^said Titus, who could not resist his propensityto attack Small, " and one, I'm sure, that meetswith your entire approbation. A funeral bytorchlight must have an excellent impressiveeffect upon the peasantry hereabouts, who areall obliged to attend, just as they are at somemagnificent burial in my own country. Oh ! itsa beautiful custom ! "A superstitious custom, you should say*"retorted Small, " and the sooner abolished thebetter. In darker ages, when Truth had notshed her light abroad, and men saw, as througha glass, darkly, such a ceremonial, conductedat such an hour, and in such a manner, mightbe consistent with the spirit of the creed professedby a sect, some of whose objects were toROOKWOOD. 189keep its proselytes in darkness, and to producea strong religious impression upon the minds ofthe ignorant herd who were its votaries. Butwas that impression truly favourable to virtue ?was it favourable to the pure, simple spirit ofreligion ? Was not the attention rather awakenedto the gloomy pageantry, the imposing parade,the shrouding mystery, the glare of the torch,the ghostly train —De more vetusFunereal rapture faces ; lucet via lovgoOrdines flammarum —were these things not rather calculated to excite,to terrify, to act upon the imagination and thesenses, rather than appeal to the heart and thereason, and to instil dread of punishment forvice, rather than inculcate a love of virtue P"^Such a speech, in Sir Piers's time, when quizzingthe Doctor, for the Squire's amusement,was the order of the day, would have excitedthe risible faculties of Titus, and called forthhis powers of ridicule. On the present occasion190 ROOKWOOD.he bestowed great applause upon the Doctor'spowers of argument, maintaining an absurdgravity of countenance during his rejoinder.Ah ! by my faith, Doctors'' said he, inreply, " that's able reasoning — most able reasoning; but for certain little scruples of conscience,I should, may be, be disposed to agree with you.You'll excuse my disputing the point, for thesake of conversation, though I'm not much of acasuist, as you perceive — no great hand atsettling a case of conscience. You grant that animpression is made, but deny that that impressionis favourable to true religion : then comesthe point upon which we don't all agree exactlynamely, what is the nature of true religion ? —If it be one part of true religion, to have thefear of death constantly before our eyes, as aninducement to lead virtuous lives, then, surely,the more forcibly it is presented the better, andthe solemn shows of our church are highly efficacious.And allow me to say, Doctor, withdeference, there are (I speak from my ownROOKWOOD. 191knowledge) thousands, ay, tens of thousands,among the poorer classes of my own countrymen,to whom no other religious appeal could bemade, except through the medium of the senses ;they must see as well as hear, to believe; andyou might as well deny an Irishman his right tosalvation at once, as his glorious prerogativeof a funeral wake. Biu-y lii like a dog, and liewill not mind living like one. I know you willthrow in my teeth, Doctor, the mummers,as you call them — the candles, and incense, andconfessions of my church; but what does thatprove ? nothing. With all its faults, the religionof my country is a fine one, and I'll uphold it.For myself; I must say, that I have seen morefervent devotion — more entire abstraction fromthe world — more prostration of spirit and self-abasement,in a Catholic country, than ever cameunder my observation in His iVIajesty's ProtestantdominionsSirs*' replied Small, with a sneer, " argumentwith you, if such are your opinions, were as192 ROOKWOOD.useless as absurd, nor shall I attempt it. Whateverhas come under your observation, in thisor in any other country, can very little affect thematerial part of the question. That there maybeCatholics who are good Christians, I do notdeny ; I am charitable enough to hope so, andto believe so. That its professors are morefervent in their faith, more exact in its fulfilment,more active in the observance of theduties which it enjoins, is false — as false, as it iscertain that intolerance, bigotry, and superstition,the blindest and the grossest, form the basison which the Romish church rests for support.This burial by torchlight is a relic of papacy,as superstitious as the belief in death-omensindulged in by the same family, by whom thatcustom is continued*"Ah ! well"' replied Titus, " I suppose Imust give up the first point ; but as to the death-presages,surely they're not to be denied. Didn'tI see the fatal bough myself, and ould PeterBradley, standing like a banshee, or deathROOKWOOD. 193fetch, beside it? — and didn't I hear what poorSir Piers said afterwards ? Says he, ' that boughbespoke my doom ! As sure as ever I'm alivenow, I shall be dead presently — that's the death-signof our house — that tree is fatal to us — itnever fails.' I could not help putting somefaith in what he said, for there's an ould oak atBallynacrag, that predicts ill luck much in thesame way. May be you never heard the legend,Mr. Coates?"Never !" replied the attorney.Popular superstition," said Small " rejoicethin such portents; yet is it a vain belief; andthe vanity thereof is well rebuked by Webb,a county historian, who, commenting upon asimilar fatality supposed to attend the ancientfamily of the Bretons of Brereton, in Cheshire,says, ' that Christian faith and religion teacheththe heirs of that and every other noblehouse, that, as they want not a prediction everydayand hour that they live, to tell them thatthey shall die, so must they never look for suchVOL. I. K194 ROOKWOOD.a privilege as to have a messenger to tell themthe certain time when it shall be.' With thissentiment I perfectly coincide. The Rookwoodsare by no means singular in their superstition.According to tradition, the approaching fate ofthe head of the house of Brereton, to whichI have just alluded, is announced by floatingtimber, which arises from the depths of a darklake adjoining the mansion, described by Draytonin his Polyolbion, as —that black, ominous mere,Accounted one of these, that England's wonders are :Of neighbours Black-mere named; of strangers Brereton'slake;Whose property seems far from reason's way to stand ;For near before his death that's owner of the landShe sends up stocks of trees that on the top doe float ;By which the world her first did for a wonder note.As to a tree being ominous of ill, that particularsuperstition is as old as Virgil's day, who,in one of his Eclogues, tells us —Saepe malum hoc nobis si mens non lava fuisseDe coelo tactas gemini predicate quercus."ROOK WOOD. 195That Latin bothers me entirely repliedTitus. " I know nothing about Virgins logs —not I ; but to return to the branch of whichI was speaking — the sight of it broke Sir Piers'sheart. — He returned to the house sad and sorrowful,but rallied his spirits a little towardsdinner-time, when he dressed himself rathersmarter than usual, for there was a party in thehouse; nevertheless, he had an odd look abouthim, as he came into the dining-room — a strange,unsettled look, as if all was not right. He satdown to dinner, and ate a mouthful or two, JackPalmer doing the honours all the while — you'veseen Jack, I dare say, Doctor; a queer chap,whom the Squire picked up one day whenhunting. Well, we all of us cracked our jests,and took our wine, striving to cheer him, but itwouldn't do — he didn't speak, but remained stockstill, with his eyes staring steadfastly at someobject, as it were, across the table. Just then,for I began to fear for his wits, I begged thefavour of wine with him. This called him to196. KOOKVVOOD.himself for a moment — he raised the glass to hislips, and then set it down, untouched, and beganfixing his eyes again in that frightful way, andraising his hand, as if he would drive off somehorrible object. I winked at the company, andno notice was taken. We went through thedinner, as well as we could — no more jests wereuttered, and the wine seemed tasteless. Whenthe cloth was removed, I prevailed on Sir Piersto retire to his own room. He got up stairs, andsat down. I then ventured to remonstrate withhim upon his behaviour in that way before hisguests, as thinking it might set stories in circulationto his prejudice. * Not a word more,'said he, sternly ; ' not a word of remonstrance.Who, think you, was in that room ?^ — * Who's'said I. — ' One who is here"* said he, wildly, andrenewing his gestures, ' and will not be senthence. / have been Lighting with death for thelast hours'' — ' Death!' said I. — < Pooh! pooh!Fact.ROOKWOOD. 197this is mere fancy' — though I felt I was tellinghim a lie all the while — he looked so ghastly ill.You will be better presently, after a littlesleep." — ' No, no,' replied he ; 'it is not fancy —I never shall be better — I shall never sleep againnever, till I sleep for ever. If I can sleep thennever — look there !' he cried, stretching outhis arm. ' It is there again, trailing the boughafter it — see the fatal bough — ^liark! how theleaves rustle, like a knell. See ! it sweeps towardsus — see!' — and he feU into a state of delirium,which endured the whole night''Alas ! I fear poor Sir Piers was not so wellprepared as he should have been, for his removalfrom this world," said Mr. Coates.I fear so, indeed," said the Doctor; " hisseizure was sudden and severe. When the conscienceis not altogether void of offence (thoughfar be it from me to make this assertion inreference to Sir Piers), the approach of death isa dreadful contemplation — the change is fearful198 , ROOK WOOD.to all — but, in that case, truly formidable andappalling.Heu quantum poena misery mens concha don'tQuod Styga, quod Manes, intestate Tartars somnusVide !—The furies have haunted the dreams of theconscience-stricken sinner — his sleep has been aforetaste of hell — and now the dreaded hourapproaches — life is slipping away — there is noretracing his footsteps — no living again — no timeallowed for repentance. Die he must ! ' Hisflesh tremble for fear of the Lord, and he isafraid of his judgments.' Time will not stayhis chariot wheels — the sand runs out — hisextremest moment is come — eternity is beforehim — eternity of torment.^ternitas, eternityVersa coquitque pectus ;Aught haec pcenas indies,Centuplicatque lammas."That's a powerful picture, Doctors'' saidROOK WOOD. 199Titus, " so far as I can comprehend it, and atrue representation, I'm grieved to say, of thelast moments of poor Sir Piers. I have not wouldyou half the horror of that scene, nor can Idescribe it. His pangs were dreadful. Theremust have been something'" continued Titus,again assuming a mysterious manner, and loweringthe tone of his voice, " something frightfulupon his mind — some — nay, there's no usemincing the matter with you — in a word, then,some crime, too deep to be divulged — or repentedof."Crime !" exclaimed Coates and the Doctor,at one and the same time.Ay, crime!" repeated Titus, in the sameunder tone — " hush ! not so loud, lest any onehear us. Poor fellow, he's dead now. I'm sureyou both loved him as I did — and pity him, andpardon him, if he was guilty. Och ! it was aterrible ending. Listen, and you shall hear.When Lady Rosewood had left the room, as Isaid before, what does Sir Piers do, but, ill as he200 ROOKWOOD.was, leaps straight out of bed, before I could preventhim, and, staggering to the door, locks it —yes, locks it, fast — and then cries out to me tohelp him. ' She shall not poison me** said he :I will live out the brief remainder of my life —hell upon earth is more tolerable than hell tocome With that I got him into bed — and hebegan to rave and shout — this delirium all comingback again. I knew death was not far off, then.One minute he was in the chase, cheering onthe hounds. ' Halloo ! tally ho !' cried he ; ' whoclears that fence? — who swims that stream ?"*The next, he was drinking, carousing, andhurrying, at the head of his table. ' Hip ! hip !hip !' — as mad, and wild, and frantic, as ever heused to be, when wine had got the better of him.And then all of a sudden, in the midst of hisshouting, he stopped, exclaiming, ' What, hereaffair? — who let her in? — the door is fast — Ilocked it myself. Devil, why did you open it —you have betrayed me — she will poison me — and Icannot resist. Ha ! another ! Who — who is that ?ROOKWOOD, 201her face is white — her hair hangs about hershoulders — Is she alive again? Susan! Susan!why that look ? You loved me well — too well.Vou will not drag me to perdition ! You will notappear against me ? Xo, no, no — it is not in yournature — you, whom I doated on, whom I lovedwhom I but I repented — I sorrowed — Iprayed — prayed! Oh! oh! no prayers wouldavail. Pray for me, Susan — for ever. Yourintercession may avail. It is not too late. Iwill do justice to all. Fetch me pen and ink —paper — I will confess — he shall have all. Whereis my sister? I would speak with her — wouldtell her — tell her. Call Peter Bradley — I shalldie before I can tell it. Come hither,' said he tome.' There is a dark, dreadful secret on mymind — it must forth. Tell my sister — no, mysenses swim — Susan is near me — fury is in hereyes — avenging fury — keep her off. What isthis white mass in my arms ? what do I hold ? isit the corpse by my side, as it lay that long,long night? It is — it is. Cold, stiff, starlessK 520^ ROOKWOOD.as then. White — horribly white — as when themoon, that would not set, showed all its ghastliness.Ah ! it moves — it embraces me — itstifles — it suffocated me. Help ! remove thepillow, I cannot breathe — I choke — oh !' Thedeath rattle was in his throat — his eyes were fixedfor ever !''A profound silence succeeded TyrconneFsnarrative. Mr. Coates would not venture upona remark. Doctor Small seemed, for someminutes, lost in painful reflection: at length hespoke. " You have described a shocking scene,Mr. Tyrconnel, and in a manner that convincesme of its fidelity ; but I trust you will excuseme, as a friend of the late Sir Piers, in requestingyou to maintain silence in future on the subject.Its repetition can be productive of no good, andmay do infinite harm, by giving currency tounpleasant reports, and harrowing the feelings ofthe survivors. Every one, acquainted with SirPierces history, must be aware, as I dare say youare already, of an occurrence, which cast aROOKWOOD. 203shade over his early life, blighted his character,and endangered his personal safety. It was adreadful accusation — but I believe, nay, I amsure, unfounded. Erring, Sir Piers was undoubtedly; but I trust he was more weak thansinful. I have reason to think he was the toolof others. He is now gone, and with him let usbury his offences, and the remembrance of them.That his soul was heavily laden, would appearfrom your account of his last moments; yet Ifervently trust that his repentance was sincere,in which case, there is hope of mercy for him.At what time soever a sinner shall repent himof his sins, from the bottom of his heart, I willblot out all his wickedness out of his remembrance,saith the Lord.' God's mercy is greaterthan man's sins — and there is hope of salvationfor Sir Piers''I trust so, indeed," said Titus; " and as torelating a syllable of what I have just said,devil a word more will I utter on the subject.My lips shall be shut, and sealed, as close as204 ROOKWOOD.one of Mr. Coates's bonds, for ever, hereafter: butI thought it just right to make you acquaintedwith the particulars. And now, having dismissedthe bad for ever, I am ready to spake of SirPiers's good qualities, and not few they were.What was there, becoming a gentleman, that hecouldn't do, I'd like to know ? Couldn't hehunt as well as ever a one in the county ?and hadn't he as good a pack of hounds.'^Couldn't he shoot as well, and fish as well, anddrink as well, or better ? only he couldn't carryhis wine, which was his misfortune, not his fault.And wasn't he always ready to ask a friend todinner with him ? And didn't he give him agood dinner, when he came, barring the cross-cupsafterwards? And hadn't he every thingagreeable about him, except his wife, which wasa great drawback ? And with all his peculiaritiesand humours, wasn't he as kind hearted aman as needs be ? and an Irishman at the core ?And so, if he wem't dead, I'd say long life tohim; but as he is, here's peace to his memory."ROOKWfKJD. 205At this crisis of the conversation, a knockingwas heard at the door, which some one withouthad vainly tried to open.Titus rose to unclose it, ushering in the individualdesignated as Jack Palmer.CHAPTER VIII.Mrs. Peaches. — Sure the Captain's the finest gentleman onthe road.Beggar's Opera.Jack Palmer was a good-humoured, good-lookingman, with immense, bushy, reddishcoloured whiskers, a freckled, florid complexion,sandy hair, rather inclined to scantiness towardsthe scalp of the head, and garnishing the napeof his neck with a ruff of crisp little curls, likethe ring on a monk's shaven crown. Notwithstandingthis tendency to baldness. Jack couldnot be more than thirty, though his looks weresome five years in advance. His face was oneof those inexplicable countenances, that seemproper to a peculiar class of men — a regularNewmarket physiognomy — compounded chieflyof cunning and assurance — not low cunning, norROOK WOOD. 207vulgar assurance, but crafty sporting subtlety,careless as to results — indifferent to obstacles —ever on the alert for the main chance — gameand turf all over — eager, yet easy— keen, yetquiet. He was somewhat showily dressed, insuch mode that he looked half like a finegentleman of that day, half like a jockey ofour's — this nether man appeared in well-fitting,well-worn buckskins, and boots ^\ith tops, notunconscious of the saddle; while the airy extravaganceof his sky-blue riding coat, therichness of his vest, the pockets whereof werebeautifully exuberant, according to the fashionof the period; the smart luxuriance of his shirt-frillof the finest cambric, and a certain curioustaste in the size and style of his buttons, proclaimedthat, in his own esteem at least, hisperson did not appear altogether unworthy ofadornment : nor, in justice to Jack, must wesay he was in error. He was a model of a manfor five feet ten; square, compact, capitally208 ROOKWOOD.built in every particular, excepting that his legswere the slightest bit embowed, which defect probablyarose from his being almost constantly onhorseback — a sort of exercise in which Jackgreatly delighted, and was accounted a superbrider. It was, indeed, his daring horsemanship,upon one particular occasion, when he had outstrippeda whole field, that had procured himthe honour of an invitation to Rook wood. Whohe was, or whence he came, was a question noteasily answered — Jack, himself, evading all solutionto the inquiry. Sir Piers never troubled hishead about the matter : he was a " d d goodfellow — rode devilish well C that was enough forhim. Nobody else knew any thing about him,save that he was a capital judge of hca-se-flesh,kept a famous black mare, and attended everyhunt in the county — that he could sing a goodsong, was a choice companion, and could drinkthree bottles without feeling the worse for them.Sensible of the indecorum that might attach.ROOKWOOD. 209to his appearance, Doctor Small had hastily laiddown his pipe, and arranged his wig ; but whenhe saw who was the intruder, with a grunt ofdefiance, he resumed his occupation, Withoutreturning the bow of the latter, or bestowingfurther notice upon him. Nothing discomposedat the churchman's displeasure, the new comergreeted Titus cordially, and carelessly salutingMr. Coates, threw himself into a chair. Henext filled a tumbler of claret, which he drainedat a draught.Have you ridden far, Jack ?" asked Titus,noticing the dusty state of Palmer's azure attire.*' Some dozen miles," replied Palmer; "andthat, on such an afternoon as the present, makesone feel thirsty wish. Fm as dry as a sand-bed.Famous wine this — beautiful tipple — better thanall your red fustian. Ah, how the old squireused to tuck it in ! Well, that's all over — a glasslike this might do him good where he's gone to !Fm afraid I'm intruding ; but the fact is, Iwanted a little information about the order of210 ROOKWOOD.the funeral, and missing you below, came hitherin search of you. You're to be chief mourner,I suppose — rehearsing your part, eh ?"Come come. Jack, no joking ; the subjectstoo serious. I am to be chief mourner — and Iexpect you to be a mourner — and every bodyelse to be mourners. We must all mourn at theproper time — there'll be a power of people at thechurch."There are a power of people here already ,"'''returned Jack, " if they all attend""And they all will attend — or what is thewaiting and drinking to go for ? I sha'nH leave asoul in the house''Excepting one," said Jack, slily. " Shewon't attend, I think."Ay, excepting one — she and her maid — allthe rest go with me, and form part of the procession— you go too."Of course — what time do you start?"Twelve, precisely. As the clock strikes, weset out — all in a line, and a long line we'll be.ROOKWOOD. SllI'm waiting for that ould coffin-faced rascal,Peter Bradley, to arrange the order .""How long will it all occupy, think you ?''asked Jack.That I can t say'' returned Titus ; " possiblyan hour, more or less — but we shall startto the minute — that is, if we can get all together,so don't be out of the way. And hark ye, Jack,you must contrive to change your toggery — thatcoat won't do."Never fear that," replied Palmer, " but whowere those in the carriages ? "Is it the last carriage you mane? — they'resquire Forester and his sons — they're dining withthe other gentlefolk, in the great room up stairs,to be out of the way. Oh, we'll have a grandberlin, never fear — and, by the powers, I mustbe looking after it."Stay a minute," said Jack, "let's have acool bottle first ; they're all taking care of themselvesbelow, and Peter Bradley has not made212 ROOKWOOD.his appearance, so you need be in no hurry. Fllgo with you presently — shall I ring for theclaret''By all manes*' replied Titus.Jack accordingly arose, and a butler answeringthe summons, the wine was ordered, andbrought.You heard of the affray, last night, I suppose?" said Jack, renewing the conversation.With the poachers ? — to be sure I did. —Wasn't I called in to examine Hugh Badger'swounds, the first thing this morning — and a deepcut there was, just over the eye, besides otherbruises."Is the wound dangerous?" inquiredPalmer.Not exactly mortal, if you mean that,"replied the Irishman ; " dangerous, certainly."Humph !" exclaimed Jack, " they'd a prettyparish bout of it, I understand. Any thingbeen heard of the body ?"ROOK WOOD. 213<« What body ?" inquired Small, who washalf dozing.The body of the drowned poacher*" repliedJack; " they were off to search for it thismorning."Found the body !" exclaimed Titus, " Ha,ha ! — I can't help laughing, for the life and soulof me — a capital trick he played 'em — capital —ha, ha ! What do you think the fellow did ? —Ha, ha ! — after leading 'em the devil's dance, allround the park, killing a hound as savage as awolf, and breaking Hugh Badger's head, whichis as hard and thick as a butcher's block, whatdoes the fellow do but dive into a pool, with agreat rock hanging over it, and make his wayto the other side, through a subterranean pass,which nobody knew any thing about, till theycame to drag for the body, thinking him snuglydrowned all the while — ha, ha !"Ha, ha, ha !" chorused Jack ; " Bravo, he'sa lad of the right sort — a rum cove. Ha, ha!"He ! who .^" inquired the attorney.214 ROOKWOOD.Why, the poacher, to be sure*" repliedJack ; " who else were we talking about ?"Beg pardon*" returned Coates; " onlythought you might have heard some intelligence.Were got an eye upon him — we knowwho it was'Indeed !" exclaimed Jack, " and who wasit?"An individual, known by the name of LukeBradley."The devil !" cried Titus, " you don't sayit was he ? — Murder in Irish ! that batesevery thing — why he was Sir Piers's ^Natural son"' replied the attorney ; " he hasnot been heard of for some time — shocking:incorrigible rascal — impossible to do any thingwith him.""Ah, indeed!" said Jack; " I've heard SirPiers speak of the lad — and, by his account,he's as fine a fellow as ever crossed colt's back —only a little wildish and unreasonable, as the bestof us may be — wants breaking, that's aU — yourLockwood. 215wildest colt ever makes the best horse, and sowould he. To speak the truth, I'm glad heescaped'So am I," rejoined Titus ; " for, in the firstplace, I've a foolish partiality for poachers, andam sorry when any of 'em come to hurt ; and,in the second, I'd be mightily displeased if anyill had happened to one of Sir Piers's flesh andblood, as this young chap appears to be.Appears to be!" repeated Palmer; " there'sno appearing in the case, I take it. ThisBradley's an undoubted off-shot of the oldsquire. His mother was a servant-maid at theHall, I rather think ; you, Sir, perhaps, can informus."She was something better than a mereservant," replied the Attorney. " I rememberher quite well, though I was but a boy then — alovely creature, and so taking, I don't wonder atSir Piers's fancy being smitten with her. Hewas mad after the women in those days, and216 ROOKWOOD.pretty Sue Bradley, above all others. She livedwith him quite like his lady""So I've heard," returned Jack. " She livedwith him till her death ; and, let me see, wasn'tthere something rather odd in the way in whichshe died, rather suddenish and unexpected — anoise made about it at the time, eh ?''"''^ Not that I ever heard," replied Coates,shaking his head, and seemingly afflicted with aninstantaneous ignorance ; while Titus affected notto hear the remark, but occupied himself withhis wine-glass. The vicar snored audibly. " Iwas too young, then, to pay any attention to idlerumours," continued Coates. " It's a long timeago. May I ask the reason of your inquiry ?"Nothing farther than simple curiosity,"replied Jack, enjoying the consternation of hiscompanions. " It is, as you say, a long whilesince ; but it's singular, how that sort of thingis remembered. One would think the peoplehad something else to do than talk of onesROOKWOOD. 217private affairs for ever : for my part, I despisesuch tattle; but there are persons in the neighbourhood,who still say it was an awkwardbusiness. Amongst others, I've heard that thisvery Luke Bradley talks in pretty plain termsabout it;'Does he, indeed !" said Mr. Coates. " Somuch the worse for him, that's all. Let meonce lay hands upon him, and I'll warrant meI'll put a gag in his mouth, shall spoil his talkingin future."That's precisely the point I want you toarrive at," replied Jack ; " and I advise you byall means to accomplish that, for the sake ofthe family. Nobody likes his friends to betalked about ; so I'd settle the matter amicably,were I you. Just let the fellow go his way, hewon't return here again, in a hurry, I'll bebound ; as to clapping him in quod, he mightprattle — might turn stag."Turn stag !" replied Coates, " what the deuceis that ? in my opinion, he has " turned stag"VOL. I. L218 ROOKWOOD.already; at all events, he'll pay deer for hisnight's sport, you may depend upon it. Whatdoes it signify what he says ? Let me lay handsupon him, that's all."Well, well*" said Jack, " no offence ; I meantbut to offer a suggestion. I thought the family,young Sir Ranulph, I mean, oughtn't like thestory to be revived ; as to Lady Rosewood, shedon't, I suppose, care much about these things ;indeed, if I've been rightly informed, she bearsthis youngster no particular good will, to beginwith, and has tried hard to get him out of thecountry ; but, as you say, what does it signifywhat he says, he can only talk; Sir Piers isdead and gone."Humph !" muttered Coates.But it does seem a little parish, that a ladshould swing for killing a bit of venison in hisown father's park."Which he'd a nafral right to do," criedTitus.*' He'd no natural right to bruise, violentlyLockwood. 219assault, and endanger the life of his father s, orany body else's, gamekeeper. I tell you, Sir,he's committed a capital offence, and if he'staken ''No chance of that, I hope'' interruptedJack.That's a wish I can't help wishing myself,"said Titus; " these poachers are fine boys, whenall's said and done."The finest of all boys," exclaimed Jack,with a sort of enthusiasm, communicated, perhaps,by his love of any thing connected withsport, " are those birds of the night, and men ofthe moon, whom we call, most unjustly, poachers.They are, after all, only professional sportsmenmaking a business of what we make a pleasure ;a nightly pursuit of what is to us a daily relaxation; there's the main distinction. As to therest, it's all in idea ; they merely thin an overstockedpark, as yoic would reduce a plethoricpatient. Doctor ; or as yoic would work a rainedclient, if you got him into chancery, Mister220 ROOKWOOD.Attorney. And then how much more scientificallyand systematically they set to work, thanwe amateurs do ; how noiselessly they bag ahare, smoke a pheasant, or knock a buck downwith an air-gun ; how independent are theyof any licence, except that of a good eyeand a swift pair of legs ; how unnecessary forthem to ask permission to Mr. So and So'sgrounds, or my Lord That's preserves ; they arefree of every cover, and indifferent to any alterationin the Game Laws. I've some thoughts,when every thing else fails, of taking to poachingmyself. In my opinion, a poacher's ahighly respectable character. What say you,Mr. Coates?" — turning very gravely to that gentleman.Respectable character !" echoed Coates ;such a question scarce deserves a seriousanswer. Perhaps you will next maintain that ahighwayman is a gentleman."Most undoubtedly," replied Palmer, in thesame grave tone, which might have passed forROOKWOOD. 221banter, had Jack ever bantered ; " I'll maintainand prove it, I don't see how he can be otherwise.It is as necessary for a man to be a gentlemanbefore he can turn highwayman, as it is foradoctor to have his diploma, or an attorney hiscertificate. Some of the finest gentlemen of theirday, as Captains Lovelace, Hind, Annum, andDudley, were eminent on the road, and they setthe fashion. Ever since their day, a real highwaymanwould consider himself disgraced, if hedid not conduct himself in every way like a gentleman.Of course, there are pretenders in thisline, as in every thing else ; but these are only-exceptions, and prove the rule. What are thedistinguishing characteristics of a fine gentleman?perfect knowledge of the world — perfectindependence of character — eclat in society —command of cash — and inordinate success withthe women — you grant all these premises ; first,then, it is part of a highwayman's businessto lee thoroughly acquainted with the worldhe is the easiest and pleasantness fellow going.ROOK WOOD.Then whose inclinations are so uncontrolled asthe highwayman's, so long as the houses last ?who produces so great an effect by so few words?* Stand, and deliver,' is sure to arrest attention— every one is struck by an address like that.As to money, he takes a purse of a hundredguineas as easily as you would the same sumfrom the faro table. And wherein lies the difference?only in the name of the game — bothare a species of hazard. Who so little need ofa banker, as he ? all he has to apprehend, is acheck — all he draws, is a trigger. As to thewomen, they doat upon him — not even your red-coatedsoldier is so successful. Look at a highwaymanmounted on his flying steed, with hispistols in his holsters, and his cutlass by his sidewhat can be a more gallant sight ? the clatterof his horse's heels is like music to his ear —he is in full quest — he shouts to the fugitivehorseman to stay — the other flies all the faster —what hunt can be half so exciting as that?Suppose he overtakes his prey, which ten to oneROOKWOOD. 223he wills how readily his summons to deliver isattended to — how satisfactory is the appropriationof a lusty purse or corpulent pocket-book —getting the brush is nothing to it. How tranquillyhe departs, takes off his hat to his accommodatingacquaintance, wishes him a pleasantjourney, and disappears across the heath. England,Sir, has reason to be proud of her highwaymen; they are peculiar to her clime, and areasmuch before the cut-throat brigand of Italy —the assassin contrabandist of Spain, or the dastardcut-purse of France, as her sailors are beforeall the rest of the world. The day will nevercome, I hope, when we shall degenerate into thefootpad, and lose our night errantry I Even theFrench borrow from us — they have only onehighwayman of eminence, and he learnt andpractised his art in England''And who was he, may I ask ?*" said Coates.Claude Du Val'' replied Jack ; " and, thougha Frenchman, he was a deuced fine fellow in hisday — quite a tip top maccaroni — he could skip^24 ROOKWOOD.and twirl like a figurant, warble like an operasinger, and play the flageolet better than anyman of his day — he always carried a pipe in hispocket, along with his snappers. And then hisdress — it was quite beautiful to see how smartly hewas rigg'd out, all velvet and lace ; and even withhis vizard on his face, the ladies used to cry outto see him. Then he took a purse with the airand grace of a Receiver-general — all the womenadored him — and that, bless their pretty faces,was the best proof of his gentility — I wish he'dnot been a Monster. The women never mistake— they can always discover the true gentleman— and they were all, of every degree, fromthe countess to the kitchen-maid, over head andears in love with him""But he was taken, I suppose ?" said Coates.Ay'' responded Jack ; " the women were hisundoing, as they've been many brave fellow'sbefore, and will be again." Touched by whichreflection. Jack became, for once in his life,sentimental, and sighed. " Poor Du Val ! heROOK WOOD. Unowas seized at the Hole in the Avail, in ChancesStreet, by the bailiff of Westminster, when deaddrunk ; his liquor having been drugged by hisdells, who were in the bailiff's pay ; and histhree pops, that never missed their mark, and histried toledo, were taken from him ; which, whenhe perceived, on returning to his senses, he toldthe bailiff, with an oath, he had done well toremove, as he would have been cut to mincemeatbefore they should have taken him — andwith that he gave a leap, heavily ironed as hewas, that frightened every body in the room.And then, just to show you the row the womenmade about him ; when he was lying in Newgate,they all came in a flock, some of the best of'em masked, that they might not be known*, toThe Author of Du Val's Memoirs (published 1G70) affectsto take the conduct of his countrywomen, upon this afflicting occasion,in high dudgeon. " A catalogue of their names," saithhe, " I have by me; nay, even of those who, when they visitedhim, durst not pull off their vizards, for fear of showing their eyesswoln, and their cheeks blubbered with tears ! When I first putpen to paper, I was in great indignation, and fully resolved, nay,and I think I swore, that I would print this muster-roll. But,l5226 ROOKWOOD.console him, and make intercession for his pardon ;and when that would not do, they followed himin mourning coaches to the Tyburn tree — where,having died, as he had lived, like a hero, after hehad hanged a convenient time, his body was cutdown, and conveyed to the Tangier Tavern,in St. Giles's, where it lay in state all night,the room hung with black cloth, as his memoirstell us ; and the hearse covered with scutcheons ;eight wax tapers burning, and as many tallgentlemen, with long black cloaks, attending.If that ain't gentlemanlike, IVe done"'It's noble," exclaimed Titus, " almost asgrand as Sir Piers's funeral, — and, talking of that,by the bye, I mustn't stay here much longer."It was a thousand pities," said Mr. Coates,upon second thoughts, and calmer considerations, I have alteredmy fierce resolution, partly because I would not do my nation sogreat a disgrace ; and, especially that part of it, to whom I amso entirely devoted. But principally, because I hoped a milderphysic might cure them of this French mania — of this inordinateappetite to mushrooms — of this dangerous doatingupon strangers."ROOKWOOD. S27with a sneer, " that so fine a gentleman shouldcome to so base an end""A thousand pities," returned Jack. " Theauthor of his Life exclaims, — ' Who is there worthyof the name of man, that would not prefersuch a death, before a mean, solitary, ingloriouslife?" His epitaph, which you may see in themiddle aisle of the church at Covent Garden,as well as the Du Val arms engraved on themarble flag, speaks volumes —Here lies Du Val — Reader, if male thou art,Look to thy purse — if female, to thy heart ;The second conqueror of the Norman race.Knights to his arms did yield, dames to his face ;Old Tyburn's glory — England's peerless thief —Du Val, the ladies' joy — Du Val, the ladies' grief!Pish*" sneered Coates.Very fine, indeed'" cried Titus ; " but yourEnglish robbers are nothing at all, comparedwith our Tories* and Rapparees — nothing at• The word Tory, as here applied, must not be confoundedwith the term of party distinction now in general use in thepolitical world. It simply means a thief on a grand scale,228 ROOKWOOD.all — they were the real gentlemen — they werethe boys to cut a throat asily.""Cut a throat! pshaw I""* said Jack, in disgust,the gentleman I speak of never maltreated anyone,except in self-defence."May be not'' replied Titus ; " I'll not disputethe pint — but these Rapparees were truebrothers of the blade, and gentlemen every inch.There was Redmond O'Hanlon, as great a manin his way as your famous outlaw Robin Hood,that we read of in the ballets — a generous robber,taking from the rich and giving to the poor,and that's the kind of thief that I like. I neverread of Robin and Little John, and ]\IaidOvarian, without my heart throbbing within mybosom, and the blood dancing in my veins, to bein the green-wood along with them. Just suchanother as bold Robin Hood was RedmondO'Hanlon. Och, many's the notable feat that hesomething more than "a snapper up of unconsidered trifles,"or petty larceny rascal. We have classical authority for this" Tory — an advocate for absolute monarchy, also an Irishvagabond, robber, or rapparee." — Rose's Dictionary.ROOKWOOD. 229performed. Ill just tell you one story that'swould about him, just to show the daring audacityof the fellow. But in the meanwhile don t let'sforget the bottle — talking's dry work — here'sour absent friends !"" Thinking at the somnolentSmall.Well, you must know," continued Titus,that Redmond had arrived at such an elevation,the Tories being in power then, and hishaving charge of the Administration, being asort of First Lord of the Treasury, that heelected himself Captain-general of all the Rap-pares,and would allow no one to take a purse,or make free with a pocket-book, without aspecial permission from himself, which shows helead instinctive sense of his political importance.One day, as the great Captain was riding quietlyalong the road between Newly and Armagh, hechanced to fall in with a pedlar, who was makingas much hullabaloo and lamentation, as if hedbeen knocked off the civil list. ' Hello, myman,' says Captain O'Hanlon, ' what ails you,230 ROOK WOOD.what makes you cry out in that way ?' — ' Oh**answers the pedlar, ' I'm kilt entirely. IVebeen robbed of above five pounds in kinnis,which was all I had, as I hope for salvation ;and that wouldn't satisfy the blackguard neither,for he took away my pack ; and because I stroveto hould it, he knocked me down, and kick'dme worse than a hound.' — ' And who was itrobed you ?' ask'd the Captain. ' That infernalrascal, and thief of the world, Redmond O^Han-hon,' answered the pedlar. * You dog,' criedRedmond, in a terrible passion, delivering him atthe same time a knock on the side of the headwith his whip-handle, ' how dare you tell me alie like that, to my face ? By the mother thatbore me, I've half a mind to shoot you on thespot, and but for settling this business I'd do it./ am Redmond O'Hanlon ; nobody shall usurpmy title with impunity. Show me which waythe fellow went, and I'll soon convince you whatit is to offend a Tory leader.' The pedlarpointed out the road, upon which he whistledROOK WOOD. 231the members of his cabinet, who were a little inthe rear, and they set off in pursuit. The fellowwas soon overtaken, with the pack on hisback, and Redmond immediately compelled arestitution of the property. ' And now, myfriend"' said he, to the terrified robber, ' as Idon't remember having given you any authorityto make use of my name, or indeed any licencefor exaction at all, I shall think it my duty tomake an example of you. You, pedlar, willsign an obligation to prosecute this fellow nextassizes, on pain of having both your earscropped off — a penalty which, if you neglect thebond, I will not fail to enforce. You, Sir, Ishall merely commit to gaol,' And he forthwithdrew up a mittimus from himself, RedmondO'Hanlon, in loco, one of His jNIajesty's Justicesof the Peace, as follows : — ' I herewith sendyou the body of Dennis O'Brien, who was thisday brought before me and examined, for robbingPatrick O'Driscol on the King's high road,requiring you to hold him in safe custody till232 ROOKWOOD.the next General Assize to be held for theCounty ; and for so doing this shall be yoursufficient warrant And this he signed with hisown hand, and sent him off with some of hisown troop to the gaol at Armagh''Bravissimo !'' cried Palmer, " and was thefellow tried ?''Yes, and convicted moreover'' replied Titus,and plenty of fun there was in court, as youmay suppose, amongst the big Whigs, at thisdaring proceeding of the great Tory."The Whigs were in power at last, I suspect?"said Coates. " Was the great Captain still moreexalted?"As high as Human," answered Titus ;more's the pity — I'm no enemy to the Tories,and regret the great Captain."So do I," said Jack, who had listened withgreat satisfaction to the exploit. " Suppose wetoast him — To the memory of Captain O'Han-hon" — filling his glass.I must take the liberty of refusing thatROOKWOOD. 233toasts said the Attorney ; " it shall never be saidthat I, a Clerk of the Peace ^^Tush, man'' said Jack, " sit down, and keepquiet; we know you're amongst the Opposition —drink what you like, and as you like, only let'shave another story, if Titus have any more totell. He tops the traveller in prime twig""Here's to the blessed memory of RedmondO'Hanlon,'' cried Titus, draining a bumper.And as to the story, did you ever hear mentionmade of one Captain Power. He was anotherbrave boy, and quite the gentleman, and asfond of the girls as ever was Du Val. Nicely heturned the tables on an ensign of musketeers,that came out from Cork to seize him. Youshall hear how it happened.This ensign had received intelligence thatPower had taken up his quarters at a small inn,on the road leading from Kenilworth, and beinganxious to finger the reward offered for hisapprehension, set out with a file of men. Itwas growing dusk when they reached the inn,9lB4t ROOKWOOD.and there, sure enough, was Power drinking, forthey saw him through a window, with his bottlebefore him, lighting his pipe, quite comfortable.Ha — ^ha' — thinks the Ensign, ' my boy, Ihave you safe enough, now; but knowing hisman, and expecting a devil of a resistance, if heattempted to lay hands on the Captain by force,he determined to resort to stratagem ; so enteringthe house, just as if he were on a recruiting party,he, the Ensign, calls loudly for whiskey for hismen, and a bottle of port for himself, andmarches into the room where Power was sitting,who got up to receive him very politely. Now,whether the Captain suspected his intentions ornot I can't say ; at all events, he didn't let theEnsign perceive it ; but took his wine as pleasantlyas we are doing now, with no suspicion ofany thing in our heads — and no thought of anymischief brewing""Exactly"" said Jack ; " I understand""Well, the bottle was drawing to a close, andPower rose up, to call for another, when theROOKWOOD. 235Ensign, thinking it time, starts to his feet, presentsa pistol to his head, and commands him tosurrender. ' With all the pleasure in life,' repliedthe Captain, ' that is, when you can takeme ; and knocking up the Ensign s arm, so thathe could not even pull his trigger, he threwhimself upon him, effectually preventing hiscrying out, by stuffing his coat-pocket into hismouth ; he then very coolly proceeded to divestthe Ensign of his grand uniform, and taking hispurse and sword, and military cloak, tied himhand and foot, and telling him he hoped he wassatisfied with his reward, walked out of the room,locking the door on the other side unconcernedlyafter him, and putting the key in his pocket.The men, who were busy with their whiskeytoddy, seeing their officer, as they thought, comeout and motion them to keep still, never stirreda peg — but suffered Power to get clear away,without so much as a question*"Capitals cried Jack.Ah"' said Titus, " many's the tale I could236 Root WOOD.tell, if I'd time, about these Rapparees. Therewas strong Jack Macpherson, who could pulla man off his horse single-handed, and BillyAcquire, Irish League, as he was called, andDick Half, and the devil knows how manyothers ; and there is Paul Giddy, whose name'squite up in the country now — a famous thief,horse-stealer, and horse-charmers'Horse-charmer !'' repeated Palmer, " whatsort of craft may that be P'"*I'll tell you," replied Titus ; " Cahir naCappul, one of the Rapparees^ is said to havereceived a potent charm from a witch, to enablehim to decoy and entrap any horse he thoughtproper ; and a right serviceable piece of enchantmenthe found it, though not quite so useful to aRapparee as that of Billy Delaney, who got thesame ould woman to rub his neck with anintent, so that no hemp could hang him, whichlast has proved true, sure enough ; for after he'dbeen tied up for a matter of an hour, and cutdown, he was brought to life again withoutROOKWOOD. 237difficulty*. But to return to Cahir na Capsulewas once myself an eye-witness to his tricks,although I wasn't aware it was he himself atthe time. One evening I'd been to see a friendin a distant part of the country, and wasreturning by some fields skirting a great boggypiece of ground that lies in those parts, whenwhat should I see but a man driving a packof horses into a corner of the field, which hemanaged so cleverly that I stopped to lookat him. Not a notion had I that he was aDelaney's own account somewhat differs from that in thetext ; he does not appear to attribute his preservation to anythinglike witchcraft. '• An acquaintance of mine," says he,who had been instructed in the art of surgery at Paris, cameto see me in gaol a few days before my trial at Nags ; he preparedsomething for me, which I was to keep in my mouthwhile I hung, if possible, and said it would be a means ofpreserving my life. This made me somewhat careless of preparingfor death, for I was intent upon observing his directions.I turned from the ladder as easily as I could, and forthe space of a minute or two was very sensible of pain, andcould feel something now and then under my feet, till immediatelyI thought all things before me were turned into a redflame, which presently seemed blue, till at last it vanishedquite." — History of the Rapparees.238 ROOKWOOD.Rapparee; in fact, I took him for the ownerof the field. As to the horses, they wereyoung unbroken things, as wild and as restiveas could be ; but somehow or other, by screamingand shouting, he got 'em all into a comer.Then singling out the finest and freshest (anda beauty it was to be sure), he seized him bythe near fore leg, and held him fast while hethrew a bit of rope round his neck, vaulting ontohis back as if he'd been a tame pony in acircus. Thinks I to myself, when I saw howthe could began to fling, — You'll not be sorry tochange your seat, my friend. No such ideaentered his head; for however much the couldkicked, and capered, and rare, there sat the man,and only laughed, and encouraged him. At lastthe horse rare boult upright, with his legs in theair ; but still there the rider stuck, glued to hisback, as if he'd been the man half of the Centaurin the sign at Ballynacrag. Finding resistanceuseless, and the position by no means agreeable,down came the covilt, and with that my gentlemanROOKWOOD. 239began to tickle his sides with lies fingers, andaway they set dashing and splashing over bogand quagmire — floundering and plunging — sothat I thought if the Headless Horseman himselfhad been the rider, he must have been hard putto it. I was wrong again, for they were soon outof sight; and I found, on inquiry, afterwards,that it was no other than Cahir na Cappul himself."Is that all the charm ?'' cried Jack. " Thesecret of that, Mr. Tyrconnel, lies in a nutshell —pluck — that's all that's required. I'll engage todothe same thing any day in the year, and askno witchcraft to aid me to keep my seat''Cahir can do other things beside ride," saidTitus, solicitous for the glory of his country.Not long since he'd a narrow escape of beingtaken on the banks of the Barrow, when he vaspursued by a large party of armed men onboth sides of the river. Down rushed Cahir tothe water side, and dash'd headlong into thestream, swimming away for his life. A gunS40 ROOK WOOD.was fired — down he dives, like a coot — up againanother — and then a volley, followed by along dive — so long, that every body thoughthe was done for entirely — when up pops a blackhead,far down the stream. He was now in aswift current, and put out all his strength,darting away like an arrow from a bow. Thewater in every direction was spotted by balls,but never a one seems to touch him ; and thoughevery soul of "em ran as fast as legs can carryhim, yet, aided by the swift stream, Cahir naCappul outstripped them all""Well'' said Coates, " were had enoughabout the Irish highwaymen, in all conscience ;but there's one on our own side of the channel,that makes quite as much noise."Who's that ?" asked Jack."Dick Turpin," replied the Attorney; "heseems to me quite as worthy of mention as anyof the Hinds, the Du Vals, or the Rapparees,you have either of you enumerated."I did not think of him," replied Palmer,ROOK WOOD. 241smiling ; " though if I had, he scarcely deservesto be ranked with those great men.""Turpin"" cried Titus; "they tell me hekeeps the best nag in the United Kingdom, andcan ride faster and farther in a day than anyother mane*'So I've heard," said Palmer ; " I should liketo try a run with him. I warrant me, I'd not befar behind him.''*I should like to get a peep at him," quothTitus.So should I," rejoined Coates.You may both of you be gratified, gentlemen,"said Palmer. " Talking of Dick Turpin,they say, is like talking of the devil, he's at yourelbow ere the word's out of your mouth. Hemay be within hearing, at this moment, for anythingwe know to the contrary."Faith, then," replied Titus, "he must lie,like a rat, in the wainscot, for I don't knowwhere else he could hide."Were he there," returned Jack, laughing,VOL. I. M24^ ROOKWOO0.you might grab him, like Du Val at theHole-in4he-Walir''I wish they could grab him, with all myheart'' said the Attorney ; " and they mightdo so, if they were to set the right way to work.IVe a plan for seizing lii, that could not fail ;I've a noose in embryo: only let me get aglimpse of him, thais all. You shall see howI'll dispose of him."'' Well, Sir, we shall see'' observed Palmer ;and, for your own sake, I wish you may neverbe nearer to him than you are at this moment.With his friends, they say Dick Turpin can beas gentle as a lamb ; with his foes, especiallywith a limb of the law like yourself, he's beenfound but an ugly customer. I once saw him atNewmarket, where he was collared by two constableculls, one on each side. Shaking off one,and dealing the other a blow in the face with hisheavy-handled whip, he stuck spurs into hishorse, and though the whole field gave chace, hedistanced them all, easily."Lockwood. 243*' And how came you not to try your pacewith him, if you were there, as you boasted justnow ?" asked Coates.So I did, and stuck closer to him than anyoneelse. We were neck and neck. I was theonly person who could have delivered him tothe hands of justice, if I'd felt inclined""I wish I'd a similar opportunity," saidCoates; " it should be neck or nothing. Eitherhe or I should reach the scragging post first.I'd take him, dead or alive."Vou take him !" cried Jack, with a sneer.I'd engage to do it," replied Coates. " I'llbet you a hundred guineas I take him, if I everhave the same chance."Done!" exclaimed Jack, rapping the tableat the same time, so that the glasses dancedupon it.That's right," cried Titus. " I'll go yourhalves."What's the matters" exclaimed Small,awakened from his doze.244 ROOK wool).Only a trifling bet, about a highwayman,"replied Titus.'' A highwayman 1**^ echoed Small. " Thereare none in the house, I hope*"I hope not," answered Coates. " But thesegentlemen seem to have a remarkable predilectionto discussing the lives of those depredators.They have sung the praises of all sorts ofrogues and rascals for the last half-hour. Allthe thieves of modern days have been broughtin review""Pshaw," returned Small, " what are thethieves of modern days to those of old ? Thievingis not a thing of yesterday. The very gods,of antiquity, themselves indulged in its practice.Lucian relates, in the dialogue of Apolloand Vulcan, that Mercury was the finest cutpursethat ever existed — the hammer of Vulcan,the girdle of Venus, the cattle of Admetus, thesceptre of Jupiter — nothing human or divineescaped him. Hence he was celebrated by Homer,in his hymn to that Deity, as the A^xov (piXinoi —ROOKWOOD. 245the prince of robbers. Autolycus, his son, inheritedhis father's art — his ingenuity was boundless,his skill infinite—Xascitur Autolycus furtum ingenious ad omne,Qui facere assert, patriae non deeper ai-tis,Candida de tigris, et de contentious aera.in vulgar parlance, he was ' up to every thing' —no one escaped his artifices — he tricked all men,before their own eyes'Further speech was cut short, by the suddenopening of the door, followed by the abruptentrance of a tall, slender young man, who hastilyadvanced towards the table, around which thecompany were seated. He excited the utmostastonishment in the whole group : curiosity wasexhibited in every countenance — the magnumremained poised midway in the hand of Palmer —Doctor Small scorched his thumb in the bowlof his pipe ; and Mr. Coates was almost choked,by swallowing an inordinate whifF of vapour.Young Sir Ranulph !'' ejaculated the latter,so soon as the syncope would permit lii.246 ROOKWOOI>.Sir Ranulph here ?" echoed Palmer.Good God !" exclaimed Small.The devil !" cried Titus, with a start ;this is more than I expected."Gentlemen," said Ranulph, " do not let myunexpected arrival here discompose you. DoctorSmall, you will excuse the manner of mygreeting; and you, Mr. Coates. One of theparty, I believe, was my father's medical attendant,a Mr. Tyrconnel."I, Sir, had that honour," replied Titus,bowing profoundly.When, and at what hour, did he die ?""demanded Ranulph.Your worthy father"" answered Titus, againbowing, " departed this life on Thursday last''The hour? — the precise minute'' askedRanulph, eagerly.Faith, Sir Ranulph, as nearly as I canrecollect, it might be a few minutes beforemidnight."The very hour !" exclaimed Ranulph,ROOK WOOD. S47Striding towards the window. His steps werearrested, as his eye fell upon the attire of hisfather, which, as we have before noticed, hungat that end of the room. A slight shudderpassed over his frame. There was a momentarypause, during which Ranulph continuedgazing intently at the apparel. " The verydress too r muttered he ; then, turning to theassembly, who were watching his movementswith surprise, he requested them to resumetheir seats. Palmer and the attorney compliedinstantly, but Doctor Small advanced towardhim, and with great kindness of manner,taking hold of Ranulph's hand, drew him into^ corner of the room.Your sudden return has indeed surprisedme — nor can I conceive how intelligence of yourfather's demise could possibly have reached youin time sufficient to have enabled you to arrivehere. Nevertheless, your presence will be mostwelcome to your parent (would I could say in248 ROOKWOOD.affliction) — as well as desirable on all other accounts.Your attendance at the funeral "^Which takes place to-nights""At the mid hour — a strange custom, SirRanulph rStrange, indeed !"" said Ranulph, musingly.Very strange !" reiterated Small, " and mightbe resisted. / should never dream of complyingwith such conditions*"Comply with what conditions ?"' exclaimedRanulph, starting. " Have I not done hisbidding?"Whose bidding, my good young friend .?""asked Small, surprised at the question.Nay, there is some mistake"' replied ralph,recovering his composure, and smilingfaintly. " I am jaded with my journey. Anhour's rest will enable me to go through thismelancholy ceremony. Where is my mother ?""Lady Rook wood is, I believe, in her owntoom"" replied Titus. " She desired she mightROOK WOOD, 249not be disturbed — and left the whole managementof the solemnity to me—of course notanticipating your return, Sir Ranulph — and Itrust the arrangements which I have made, willmeet with your satisfaction. I have endeavoured,to the best of my power, to maintain the respectabilityof the family, by doing the thing in themost liberal manner, and in such a way as Iknew it would best have pleased my respectedfriend had he been alive to witness it. Heavenrest him ! There is another thing, also, I mayaswell mention, and I hope the allusion toitwill not be distressing to your feelings. SirRanulph. According to Sir Piers's directions,his body has been embalmed under my ownimmediate superintendence ; and though I sayit, who should not say it, he looks, in consequence,as beautiful as the day he wasborn. The corpse is now lying in state, with theroom lighted up; but, at Lady Rosewood'sparticular request, I have ordered every soul inthe house to be shut out of the room until tenm5250 ROOKWOOD.o'clock, as her Ladyship has signified her desireto view the remains alone. An order, I assureyou, Sir Ranulph, I had some difficulty inenforcing, the tenantry being mighty anxiousto see the last of their master. Heaven resthim, I say."I will not disturb my mother, at present —returned the young man ; upon whom this pieceof information appeared to produce a very painfuleffect ; " nor would I have her know of myarrival. Doctor, I have something for yourprivate ear," addressing Small. " Gentlemen,will you spare us the room for a few minutes ?"By my conscience'' said Tyrconnel to JackPalmer, as they were going forth, " a mightyfine boy he is — and a chip of the ould block —he'll be as good a fellow as his father."No doubt," replied Palmer, shutting thedoor. " But what the devil brought him back,just at this moment?"CHAPTER IX.Fer. Yes, Francisco,He hath left his curse upon me.Fran. How ?Fer. His curse ! dost comprehend what that word carries,Shot from a father's angry breath ? UnlessI tear poor Felisarda from my heart,He hath pronounced me heir to all his curses.The Brothers. — Shirley.There is nothing, I trust, my dear youngfriend and quondam pupils said Dr. Small, asthe door was closed, " that weighs upon yourmind, beyond the sorrow naturally incident to anaffliction, severe as the present. Forgive myapprehensions, if I am wrong. You know theaffectionate interest I have ever felt for you —an interest which, I assure you, is no^nse diminished,and which will excuse my urging you to252 ROOK WOOD.unburden your mind to me ; assuring yourself,whatever may be your disclosure, of my sinceresympathy and commiseration. I may be betterable to advise with you, should counsel benecessary, than others, from my knowledge ofyour character and temperament. I wouldnot anticipate evil, and am perhaps, unnecessarilyapprehensive ; but I own, I am startledat the incoherence of your expressions, coupledwith your sudden, and almost mysteriousappearance at this distressing conjuncture. Answerme: has your return been the resultof mere accident ? is it to be considered oneof those singular circumstances which almostlooks like fate, and baffles our comprehension ?or were you nearer home than we expected,and received the news of your father's demisethrough any channel unknown by us ? Satisfymy curiosity, I pray you, upon this point ?'"'Your curiosity, my dear sir," repliedRanulph, gravely and sadly, " will not bedecreased, when I tell you, that my return hasLockwood.^5Sneither been the work of chance (for I came,fully anticipating the dread event, which I findrealised), nor has it been occasioned by anyintelligence derived from yourself, or elsewhere.It was only indeed at Rook wood that I receivedfull confirmation of my fears. I had another,a more terrible summons to returned"*What summons? — you perplex me'' —exclaimed Small.I am myself perplexed — sorely perplexed*'returned Ranulph. " I have much to tell — muchto relate ; but, I pray you, bear with me to theend. I have that on my mind which, likeguilt, must be revealed. It will outs"*Speak, then, fearlessly to me"" said Small,affectionately pressing Ranulph's hand. " I amall impatience for your relation, and will offerno further interruption to it""It will be necessary," began Ranulph, " topreface my narrative by some slight allusion tocertain painful events (and yet I know not whyI should call them painful, excepting in their254 ROOK WOOD.consequences), which influenced my conduct inmy final interview between my father andmyself — an interview which occasioned mydeparture for the continent — and which was ofa character so dreadful, that I would not evenrevert to it, where it not a necessary preliminaryto the circumstance which I am about to detail.You remember, no doubt, how hastily myjourney was resolved upon. My ostensiblemotive for undertaking it you may also haveheard ; not so, I am sure, the real one. Toyou, who knew my father so well, and wereaware of the tenor of his life, I need not particularisethe terms upon which we lived together;you could not have been ignorant ofthem. My affection for him was constant andconsistent. There was no corresponding sympathyon his part ; he never loved me as his son, or,if he did, his love for me was more fickle, morevariable, more capricious, than the lightestwoman's regards. Mortified and distressed athaving my affections so frequently thrown backROOKWOOD. ^55upon themselves, I contrived to regulate andcontroul my own feelings, by drawing out formyself a code of conduct, so nice and guarded,that no quarrel of consequence could arise betweenus ; and, by yielding implicitly in everythingto his wishes, I insensibly acquired anascendancy over him, which, without deviatingfrom the strict line of filial duty, was as advantageousin its effects to himself as to me. Butthis system could not hold good in every case,as you will perceive.When I left Oxford, I passed a few weeksalone, in London. A college friend, whom Iaccidentally met, introduced me, during a promenadein St. James's Park, to some acquaintancesof his own, who were taking an airingin the Mall at the same time ; — a family whosename was Mowbray, consisting of a 'endow-lady,her son, and daughter. This introduction wasmade in compliance with my own request. Ihad been struck by the singular beauty of theyounger lady, whose countenance had a peculiarS56 ROOKWOOD.and inexpressible charm to me, from its markedresemblance to the portrait of the lady EleanorRook wood, whose charms, and whose unhappyfate, I have so often dwelt upon, and deplored.The picture is there," pointing to it,and how like, how wonderfully like, it is.How often have I gazed at it with a fervourlike that of a devotee before some ' saintedsemblance,' little dreaming of those after-emotionsof which it should be the germ ! Look atit, and you have the fair creature I speak of,before you ; the colour of the hair — the tendernessof the eyes. No — the expression is not sosad, except when — but no matter ; I recognisedher features at once.It struck me, that upon the mention of myname, the party had betrayed some surprise,especially the elder lady. For my own part, Iwas so attracted by the beauty of the daughter,the effect of which upon me, seemed rather thefulfilment of a predestined event, originating inthe strange fascination which the family portraitROOKWOOl). ^57had wrought in my heart, than the operation ofwhat is called, ' love at first sight,' that I wasinsensible to the agitation of the mother. Invain I endeavoured to rally myself; my effortsat conversation were fruitless ; I could not talkall I could do, was silently to yield to thesoft witchery of those tender eyes, my admirationincreasing each instant that I gazed uponthem.I accompanied them home. Attracted as bysome irresistible spell, I could not tear myselfaway ; so that, although I fancied I could perceivesymptoms of displeasure in the looks ofboth the mother and the son, yet, regardlessof consequences, I ventured, uninvited, to enterthe house. In order to shake off the restraintwhich I felt my society imposed, I found it absolutelynecessary to divest myself of bashfulness,and to exert such conversational powersas I possessed. I succeeded so well, that thediscourse soon became lively and animated ;and what chiefly delighted me was, that sfte^ for258 ROOKWOOD.whose sweet sake I had committed my presentrudeness, became radiant with smiles. I hadbeen all eagerness, to seek for some explanation ofthe resemblance to which I have just alluded,and the fitting moment had, I conceived, arrived.I called attention to a peculiar expression in thefeatures of Miss Mowbray, and then instancedthe likeness that subsisted between her andmy ancestress. ' It is the more singular,' Isaid, turning to her mother, ' because therecould have been no affinity, that I am awareof, between them, and yet the likeness isreally surprising." — ' It is not so singular asyou imagine,' answered Mrs. Mowbray, ' thereis affinity ; that Lady Rosewood was my mother.Eleanor Mowbray does resemble her ill-fatedancestress"*Words cannot paint my astonishment. Igazed at Mrs. Mowbray, considering whetherI had not misconstrued her speech — whetherI had not so shaped the sounds, as to suit myown quick and passionate conceptions. But noROOKWOOU. 259I read in her calm, collected countenancethe downcast glance, and sudden sadness ofEleanor, as well as in the changed and haughtydemeanour of the brother, that I had heard herrightly. It was a truth. Eleanor Mowbraywas my cousin — was the descendant of thatsainted woman, whose image I had almostworshipped.Recovering from my surprise, I addressedMrs. Mowbray, endeavouring to excuse myignorance of our relationship, on the plea thatI had not been given to understand that suchhad been the name of the gentleman she hadespoused. ' Nor was it** answered she, ' thename he bore at Rosewood ; circumstances forbadit then. How should you have known ?From the hour I quitted that house until thismoment, excepting one interview with my — withSir Reginald Rosewood — I have seen none ofmy family — have held no communication withthem — my brothers have been strangers to methe very name of Rosewood has been unheard,260 ROOKWOOD.unknown; nor would you have been admittedhere, had not accident occasioned it.' I venturednow to interrupt her, and to express ahope that she would suffer an acquaintance to bekept up, which had so fortunately commenced,and which might most probably bring aboutan entire reconciliation between the families.I was so earnest in my expostulations, my wholesoul being in them, that she inclined a morefriendly ear to me. Eleanor, too, smiled encouragementupon me. Love lent me eloquence;and at length, as a token of my success, and herown relenting, Mrs. Mowbray held forth herhand; I clasped it eagerly. It was the happiestmoment of my life.' But, then, your father,' said Mrs. Mowbray,after a short space, ' what will he say tothis?'' I hope, nay, I am sure, he will rejoice atit,' I answered ; but my heart smote me with abitter presentiment, and I thought I saw a veryslight tremor in Eleanor's countenance, so slight,ROOKWOOD.indeed, as to be imperceptible to any other eyethan that of a lover. ' At all events,' said I,I am a free agent.'' No,' replied Mrs. Mowbray, ' unless he iswilling that the intimacy be renewed, and ^\^llhimself make the advances, I wall never acquiescein it;It was in vain I again urged all my formerarguments ; she was inflexible ; and the utmostI could obtain from her, was permission to visitat her house daily during my brief continuancein town. To this she unwillingly consented :but my solicitation was backed by her son,Captain Mowbray, who now came forward in.the most friendly manner, and urged his motherto accede to my wishes.^' You may suppose that I did not hesitate toavail myself of this permission. The next dayfound me there, and the next. I then learntthe history of the family. For many years theyhad dwelt in the South of France, where Mr.Mowbray had died. The son had visited262 Lockwood.england, entered the army, and risen to hispresent rank. Their fortune was slender, butsufficient. After having spent some years inactiveservice, Captain Mowbray returned tohis family, and brought them over with him tothis country. They had resided in Londonthen nearly two years.I will not trouble you with any lengtheneddescription of Eleanor Mowbray. I hope, atsome period or other, you may still be enabledto see her, and judge for yourself; for thoughadverse circumstances have hitherto conspired toseparate us, the time for a renewal of our acquaintanceis approaching, I trust, for I am notyet altogether without hope. But thus much,I must say, that her rare endowments of personwere only equalled by the graces of her mind.Educated abroad, she had all the vivacityof our livelier neighbours, combined with everysolid qualification, which we claim as more essentiallyour own. Her light and frolic mannerwas French, certainly ; but her gentle, sincereEOOKVVOOD. ^6Sheart was as surely English. The foreign accentthat dwelt upon her tongue, communicatedan inexpressible charm, even to the languagewhich she spoke.I will not dwell too long upon this theme.I feel ashamed of my own prolixity. And yet Iam sure you will pardon it. Ah ! those bright,brief days ! too quickly were they fled ! I couldexpatiate upon each minute — recal each word —revive each look. It may not be — I must hastenon. Darker themes await me.My love made rapid progress. I becameeach hour more enamoured of my new-foundcousin. My whole time was passed near her;indeed, I could scarcely exist, in absence fromher side. Short, however, was destined to bemy indulgence in this blissful state. One happyweek was its extent. I received a peremptorysummons from my father to return home.Immediately upon commencing this acquaintance,I had written to my father, explainingevery particular attending it. This I should264) ROOKWOOD.have done of my own free will, but I was urgedto it by Mrs. Mowbray. Unaccustomed to disguise,I had expatiated upon the beauty ofEleanor, and in such terms, I fear, that I excitedsome uneasiness in his breast. His letterwas laconic. He made no allusion to the subjectupon which I had expatiated when writing tohim. He commanded me to return.The bitter hour was at hand. I could nothesitate to comply. Without my father's sanction,I was assured Mrs. Mowbray would notpermit any continuance of my acquaintance. OfEleanor's inclinations I fancied I had some assurance;but without her mother's consent, towhose will she was devoted, I felt, had I evenbeen inclined to urge it, that my suit was hopeless.The letter which I had received from myfather made me more than doubt, whether Ishould not find him utterly adverse to mywishes. Agonized, therefore, with a thousandapprehensions, I presented myself on the mornof my departure. It was then I made theROOKWOOD. ^65declaration of my passion to Eleanor — it wasthen that every hope was confirmed, every apprehensionrealized. I received from her lipsa confirmation of my fondest wishes; yet werethose hopes blighted in the bud, when I heard,at the same time, that their consummation Alasdependant on the will of two others, whose assentingvoices, she feared, could never beobtained. From Mrs. Mowbray I received amore decided reply. All her haughtiness wasaroused. Her farewell words assured me, thatit was indifferent to her, whether we met againas relatives or as strangers. Then was it thatthe native tenderness of Eleanor displayed itself,in an outbreak of feeling peculiar to a heartkeenly sympathetic as her's. She saw my suffering— the reserve natural to her sex gave way —she flung herself into my arms — and so we parted.With a heavy foreboding, I returned toRosewood, and, oppressed with the gloomiest anticipations,I endeavoured to prepare myself forthe worst. I arrived. My reception was such asVOL. J. N266 PvOOKWOOD.I had calculated upon ; and, to increase my distress,my parents had been at variance. I tniUnot pain you and myself with any recital of theirdisagreement. My mother had espoused mycause, chiefly, I fear, with the view of thwartingmy poor father s inclinations. He was in a terriblemood, exasperated by the fiery stimulants hehad swallowed, which had not, indeed, drownedhis reason, but roused and inflamed every dormantemotion to violence. He was as one insane.It was evening when I arrived. I would willinglyhave postponed the interview till themorrow. It could not be. He insisted uponseeing me.My mother was present. You know the restraintshe usually had over my father, and howshe maintained it. On this occasion, she hadnone. He questioned me as to every particular ;probed my secret soul — dragged forth everylatent feeling, and then thundered out his owndetermination that Eleanor never should bebride of mine; nor would he receive, underROOKWOOD. 267his roof, her mother, the discountenanceddaughter of his father. I endeavoured to remonstratewith him. He was deaf to my entreaties.My mother added sharp and stinging-wordsto my expostulations. ' I had her consent,"she said ; what more was needed ? ' Thelands were entailed. I should at no distantperiod be their master, and might then pleasemyself." This I mention, in order to give youmy father's strange answer.' Have a care, madam," replied he, ' andbridle your tongue ; they are entailed, "tis true,but I need not ask his consent to cut off thatentail. Let him dare to disobey me in this particular,and I will so divert the channel of mywealth, that no drop shall touch him. I will —but why threaten ? — let him do it, and approvethe consequences."On the morrow I renewed my importunities,with no better success. We were alone.' Ranulph," said he, ' you waste time, inseeking to change my resolution ; it is unalteredROOKWOOD.able. 1 have many motives which influence me ;they are inexplicable, but imperative. EleanorMowbray never can be yours. Forget her asspeedily as may be, and I pledge myself, uponwhomsoever else your choice may fix, I will offerno obstacle"*' But why,^ exclaimed I, with vehemence,do you object to one Avhom you have neverbeheld ? At least, consent to see her"*' Never !' he replied. ' The tie is sundered,and cannot be reunited; my father bound meby an oath, never to meet in friendship withmy sister. I will not break my vow. I will notviolate its conditions, even in the second degree.We never can meet again. An idle prophecy,which I have heard, has said, " that when aRosewood shall marry a Rosewood, the end ofthe house draweth night'' That I regard not.It may have no meaning, or it may have much.To me it imports nothing further, than that ifyou wed Eleanor, every acre I possess shall departfrom you. And assure yourself this is noROOK WOOD. 269idle threat ; I can, and will do it. My curseshall be your sole inheritanceI could not avoid making some reply, representingto him how unjustifiable such a procedurewas to me, in a case where the happinessof my life was at stake ; and how inconsistent itwas with the charitable precepts of our faith, toallow feelings of resentment to influence his conduct.My remonstrances, as in the precedingmeeting, were ineffectual. The more I spoke,the more intemperate he grew ; I desisted, therefore; but not before he had ordered me to quitthe house. I did not leave the neighbourhood,but saw him again on the same evening.Our last interview took place in the garden.I then told him that I had determined to goabroad for two years, at the expiration of whichperiod I proposed returning to England; trustingthat his resolution might then be changed, andthat he would listen to my request, for thefulfilment of which I could never cease to hope.Time, I trusted, might befriend me. He ROOK WOOD.proved of my plan of travelling, requesting menot to see Eleanor before I set out ; adding, in a'melancholy tone, — ' We may never meet again,Ranulph, in this life ; in that case, farewell forever.Indulge no vain hopes. Eleanor nevercan be your's, but upon one condition, and tothat you would never consent !' — ' Name it !'I cried; ' there is no condition I could notaccede to.'^-' Rash boy !' he replied ; ' you knownot what you say ; that pledge you would neverfulfil, were I to propose it to you ; but no —should I survive till you return, you shall knowit then — and, now, farewell"* — ' Speak now, Ibeseech you !' I exclaimed ; ' any thing, everything— what you will !"* — ' Say no more,' repliedhe, walking towards the house; ' when youreturn, we will renew this subject ; farewell —perhaps for ever.' His words were prophetic —that parting was for ever. I remained in thegarden till nightfall. I saw my mother, but hecame not again. I quitted England, withoutbeholding Eleanor''ROOKWOOD. 271Did you not acquaint her, by letter, withwhat had occurred, and your consequent intentions?"inquired Small.I did"' replied Ranulph ; " but received noreply. My earliest inquiries will be directed toascertain whether the family are still in London.It will be a question for our consideration,whether I am not justified in departing frommy father's expressed wishes, or whether I shouldviolate his commands in so doing."We will discuss that point hereafter,"replied Small, adding, as he noticed the growingpaleness of his companion — " You are too exhaustedto proceed — you had better defer theremainder of your story to a future period."Sir," replied Ranulph, filling himself a glassof water, " I am exhausted, yet I cannot rest —my blood is in a fever, which nothing will allay.I shall feel more easy, when I have made thepresent communication. I am approaching thesequel of my narrative. You are now in possessionof the story of my loves-of the motive272 KOOKWOOD.of my departure. You shall learn what was themotive of my return,I had wandered from city to city during myterm of exile — consumed by hopeless passion —with little that could amuse me, though surroundedby a thousand objects of interest toothers, and only rendering life endurable byseverest study, or most active exertion. Mysteps conducted me to Bordeaux ; — there Imade a long halt, enchanted by the beauty ofthe neighbouring scenery. Inly fancy wassmitten by the situation of a villa on the banksof the Garonne, within a few leagues of thecity. It was an old chateau, with fine gardensbordering the blue waters of the river, andcommanding a multitude of enchanting prospects.The house, which had in part goneto decay, was inhabited by an aged couple,who had formerly been servants to an Englishfamily, the members of which had thus providedfor them on their return to their own country.I inquired the name. Conceive my astonish-rosewood.273ment, to find that this chateau had been theresidence of the Mowbray. This intelligencedecided me at once — I took up my abode inthe house; and a new and unexpected sourceof solace and delight was opened to me. Itraced the paths she had traced — occupied theroom she had occupied — tended the flowers shehad tended; and, on the golden sinner eveswould watch the rapid waters, tinged with allthe glorious hues of sunset, sweeping past myfeet, and think how she had watched them.Her presence so seemed to pervade the place.I was now comparatively happy, and, anxious toremain unmolested, I wrote home that I wasleaving Bordeaux for the Pyrenees, on myway to Spain"*That account arrived," said Small.One night"' continued Ranulph, " 'tis nowthe sixth since the occurrence I am about torelate, I was seated in a bower that overlookedthe river. It had been a lovely even — so lovely,that I lingered there, wrapt in the heavenlyn5274 ROOKWOOD.contemplation of its beauties. I watched eachrosy tint reflected upon the surface of the rapidstream — now fading into yellow — now shiningsilvery white. I noted the mystic mingling oftwilight with darkness — of night with day, tillthe bright current on a sudden became a blackmass of waters. I could scarce discern a leaf —all was darkness — when lo ! another change !The moon was up — a flood of light delugedall around — the stream was dancing again inreflected radiance, and I still lingering at itsbrink.I had been musing for some moments,with my head resting upon my hand, when,happening to raise my eyes, I beheld a figureimmediately before me. I was astonished atthe sight, for I had perceived no one approach• — shad heard no footstep advance towards me,and was satisfied that no one besides myselfcould be in the garden. The presence of thefigure inspired me with an undefinable awe;and, I can scarce tell why, but a thrilling pre-rosewood.sentiment convinced me that it was a supernaturalvisitant. Without motion — without lifewithout substance, it seemed ; yet still the outwardcharacter of life was there. I started tomy feet, God ! what did I behold ? The facewas turned to me— my father's face ! And whatan aspect — what a look ! Time can never effacethat terrible gesture; it is graven upon mymemory — I cannot describe it. It was notanger — it was not pain : it was as if an eternityof woe were stamped upon its features. It wastoo dreadful to behold. I would fain haveaverted my gaze — my eyes were fascinated —fixed — I could not withdraw them from theghastly countenance. I shrunk from it, yetstirred not — I could not move a limb. Noiselesslygliding towards me, the apparition approached— I could not retreat — it stood obstinatelybeside me. I became like one halfdead. The phantom shook its head with thedeepest despair ; and as the word * Return !'sounded hollowly in my ears, it gradually276 ROOKAVOOD.melted from my view. I cannot tell how Irecovered from the swoon into which I fell, butday-break saw me on my way to England. Iam here. On that night — at that same hour,my father died''"It was, after all, then, a supernatural summonsthat you received ?" said Small.Undoubtedly," replied Ranulph.Ah ! well, the coincidence, I own, is sufficientlycurious'' returned Small, musingly; " andit is difficult to offer any satisfactory explanationof the delusion."Delusion !" echoed Ranulph ; " there wasno delusion — the figure was as palpable as yourown. Can I doubt, when I behold this result ?Could any deceit have been practised upon meatthat distance? — the precise time, moreover,agreeing. Did not the phantom bid me return .?I have returned — he is dead. I have gazedupon a being of another world. To doubt wereimpious, after that look."Whatever my opinions may be, my dearLockwood. 277young friends said Small, " I will suspendthem for the present — you are still greatlyexcited ; let me advise you to seek some reposesI am easier'' replied Ranulph ; " but youare right, I will endeavour to snatch a littlerest. Something within tells me all is not yetaccomplished. What remains ? — I shudder tothink of it. I will rejoin you at midnight — Ishall myself attend this solemnity — Adieu rRanulph quitted the room. Small sighingshook his head, and having lighted his pipe, waspresently buried in a profundity of smoke andspeculation.CHAPTER X.Fran, de Med. Your unhappy husbandIs dead —Fit. Cor. Oh, he's a happy husband !Now he owes nature nothing.Mon. And look upon this creature as his wife.She comes not like a widow — she comes armedWith scorn and impudence. Is this a mourninghabit ?The White Devil.The progress of our narrative demands ourpresence in another apartment of the hall — alarge darksome chamber, situate in the easternwing of the house, which we have beforedescribed as the most ancient part of the building— the sombre appearance of which was greatlyincreased by the dingy, discoloured tapestry thatclothed its walls, the record of the patience andROOK WOOD. 279industry of a certain Dame Dorothy Rosewood,who flourished some centuries ago, and whoseskilful needle had illustrated the slaughter ofthe Innocents, wth a severity oi gusto, and sanguinaryminuteness of detail, truly surprising,in a lady so amiable as she was represented tohave been. Grim-visaged Herod glared fromthe ghostly Moos, with his shadowy legions, executingtheir murderous purposes, grouped likean infernal host around him. Mysterious twilight,admitted through the deep, dark, mullionswindows, revealed the antique furnitureof the room, which still boasted a sort ofdusky splendour, more imposing, perhaps, thanits original gaudy magnificence, and showed thelofty hangings, and tall, hearse-like canopy of abedstead, once a couch of state, but now destinedfor the repose of Lady Rosewood. Thestiff crimson hangings were embroidered in gold,with the emblazonment of Elizabeth, from whomthe apartment, having once been occupied by280 ROOK WOOD.that sovereign, obtained the name of theQueen's Room"'The sole tenant of this chamber was a female,in whose countenance, if time and strong emotionhad written strange defeatures, they hadnot obliterated its striking beauty, and classicalgrandeur of contour. Her's was a face majesticaland severe — an index of a soul, at once daringin conception, and resolute in action ; changelessin its purposes — unyielding — haughty. Pride,immeasurable pride, was stamped in all its lines ;and though each passion was, by turns, developed,it was evident that all were subordinateto that sin by which the angels fell. The outlineof her face was formed in the purest Grecianmould, and would have been a model for therepresentation of some vengeful deity ; so muchdid the gloomy grandeur of the brow, the severechiselling of the lip, the rounded beauty of thethroat, and the faultless symmetry of her fullform, accord with the beau ideal of antique per-ROOK WOOD. 281section. Shaded by smooth folds of raven hair,which still maintained its jetty dye, her loftyforehead would have been displayed to thegreatest advantage, had it not been at thismoment corrugated and deformed, by excess ofpassion, if that passion can be said to deform,which only calls forth strong and vehementexpression. Her figure, which wanted onlyheight to give it dignity, was arrayed in thegarb of widowhood ; and if she exhibited noneof the anguish and desolation of heart, whichsuch a bereavement might have been expectedto awaken, she was evidently a prey to feelingsscarcely less harrowing. At the particular timeof which we speak, this person was occupied inthe perusal of a pile of papers. Her gaze, atlength, became rivetted upon a letter, takenfrom a heap of others, which at once arrestedher attention. As she read, her whole soulbecame absorbed in its contents. Suddenly sheraised herself, and, crushing? the letter within282 ROOKWOOD.her hand, cast it from her, with a look of ineffablescorn.Fool ! fool !'' exclaimed she, aloud, " weak,wavering, and contemptible fool — this alone waswanting, to fulfil the measure of loathing forthee, and for thy memory. The very air Ibreathed with thee in life, seemed contaminatedwith thy presence. With thee near me, I hadever the consciousness of the hated ties whichbound us together, which I would have broken,could I thereby have accomplished my purposes;but now that I deemed I was for everridden of thee — thou despised worm — that thoushouldst have the power to injure me thus — toblight my fairest plans — to put a bar betweenme and my views^to inflict a wrong whichcould only have been cancelled by thy life,which should have been the forfeit, had Iknown this heretofore; to think that I can nolonger reach thee-that death has placed an impassablebarrier between us, which even revengeROOK WOOD. 283cannot leap. That thought galls me — stingsme to the quick ; and if curses can reachbeyond the grave, may mine meet thee there,and cling to thee; may heaven adjudge thee toan eternity of torture, agonizing as the hell ofheart I now endure ! And surely'' added she,after a pause, '"^ the flame of vengeance whichI felt to be part of the spirit that burns withinme, will not expire, when I throw off this fleshlyshroud — nor be incapable of executing its tremendouspurposes. Oh that my soul could nowpursue thee to thy viewless home ^During the utterance of this imprecation, thefeatures of Lady Rosewood, for she it was,had undergone a marked and fearful change.Her flaming eye, glistening with unnaturalbrightness, suddenly lost its lustre — lier quiveringlip, its agitated motion — her distended nostril— its tension — her upraised arm fell heavilyto her side — she stood like one entranced, asif transformed to stone. .A deep-drawn sigh proclaimed the return of284 ROOKWOOD.consciousness, and her first movement was slowlyto return to the escritoire, whence she had takenthe letter, which had caused her agitation.Examining the papers which it contained, withgreat deliberation, she threw each aside, as soonas she had satisfied herself of its purport, untilshe arrived at a little package, carefully tiedup with black ribbon, and sealed. This, LadyRosewood hastily broke open, and drew forth asmall miniature. It was that of a female, youngand beautiful, rudely, yet faithfully executed —faithfully, we say, for there was an air of sweetness,and simplicity — and, in short, a look ofreality and nature, about the picture (it isseldom, indeed, that we mistake a likeness, evenif ignorant of the original), which attested theartist's fidelity. The face was radiant withsmiles, as a bright day with sunbeams. Theportrait was set in gold, and behind it waslooped a lock of the darkest and finest hair.A slip of paper was also attached to it.Lady Rosewood scornfully scrutinized theROOKWOOD. 285features for a few moments, and then unfoldedthe paper, at the sight of which she started,and turned pale. " Thank God'' she cried,this is in my possession — while I hold this, wearesafe. Were it not better to destroy thisevidence at once? — No, no, not noir — it shallnot part from me. I will abide Ranulph'sreturn." Placing the marriage certificate, forsuch it was, within her breast, and laying theminiature upon the table, she next proceeded,deliberately, to arrange the disordered contentsof the box. She then stooped to pick up thecrumpled letter, and, after carefully adjustingits creases, returned, once more, to its perusal.All outward traces of emotion had, ere this,become so subdued, in Lady Rosewood, thatalthough she had, only a few moments previously,exhibited the extremity of passionateindignation, she now, apparently without effort,resumed entire composure, and might havebeen supposed to be engaged in a matter of littleinterest to herself. It was a dread calm, which286 ROOKWOOD.they who knew her would have trembled tobehold. " From this letter, I gather'' exclaimedshe, " that their wretched offspring knows notof his fortune. That is well — there is no channel,whence he can derive information, and myfirst care shall be to prevent his obtaining any clueto the secret of his birth. I am directed to providefor him — ha, ha ! I will provide — a grave.There will I bury him and his secret. Myson's security, and my own revenge, demand it.I must choose surer hands — the work must notbe half done, as heretofore. And now, I bethinkme, he is in the neighbourhood, connected witha gang of poachers — 'tis well" — even as shespoke, a knock at the chamber door broke uponher meditations. " Agnes, is it you .f^" demandedLady Rosewood.Thus summoned, the old attendant enteredthe room.Why are my orders disobeyed ?" asked thelady, in a severe tone of voice. " Did I not say,when you delivered me this package from Mr.ROOKWOOD. 287Coates, which he himself wished to present, Iwould be undisturbed."You did, my Lady, but — ''Well"" said Lady Rosewood, somewhatmore mildly, perceiving, from Agnes'* manner,that she had something of importance to communicate." What is it brings thee hither.nowpr.Sorry am I," exclaimed Agnes, " rightsorry, to disturb your Ladyship, but — but — ""But what rI could not help it, my Lady — he wouldhave me come ; he said he was resolved to seeyour Ladyship, whether I would or not."^' Would see me, ha ! — is it so ? I guess hiserrand, and its object; he has some suspicion.No, that cannot be — he would not dare to tamperwith these seals. I will not see him""But he swears, my Lady, that he will notleave the house, without seeing you — he wouldhave forced his way into your presence, if I hadnot consented to announce him"'288 ROOKWOOD.Insolent !"** exclaimed Lady Rosewood, witha glance of indignation; "force his way ! admithim. I promise you he shall not display anequal anxiety to repeat the visit. Tell Mr.Coates I will see him*"Mr. Coates ! — bless you, my Lady, it's nothe ; he'd never have intruded upon you, unask'd,depend upon it. No ; he knows, too well, whathe's about, to do such a thing. This is — "."Who.?"Luke Bradley — your Ladyship knows whoI mean."He here — now ? — ^"Yes, my Lady ; and, looking so fierce andstrange, I was quite frightened to see him. Helooked so like his — his — ^"His father, thou Avould'st say — speak out."No, my Lady, his grandfather — old SirReginald. He's the very image of him ; but hadnot your Ladyship better ring the alarm bell?and when he comes in, I'll run and fetch theservants — he's dangerous, I'm sure."ROOKWOOD. 289Dangerous — how ? I have no fears of him.He will see me, you say — ""*Ay, will exclaimed Luke, as he threw openthe door, and shut it forcibly after him, stridingtowards Lady Rosewood, " nor abide longerdelay;'It was an instant or two, ere Lady Rosewood,thus taken by surprise, could command speech.She fixed her eyes, with a look of keen andangry inquiry, upon the bold intruder, who,nothing daunted, confronted her gaze, with oneas stern and stedfast as her own. Luke waspale, even to ghastliness.Who are you, and what seek you .^'' exclaimedLady Rosewood, after a brief pause,and, in spite of herself, her voice sounded tremulously.'-' What would you have with me,that you venture to appear before me at thisseason, and in this fashion .^^I might have chosen a fitter opportunity"'returned Luke, " were it needed. My businesswill not brook delay — you must be pleased toVOL. I. oS90 ROOKWOOD.overlook this intrusion on your privacy, at aseason of sorrow, like the present. As to thefashion of my visit, you must be content toexcuse that — I cannot help myself — I may amendhereafter. Who I am, you are able, I doubtnot, to surmise. What I seek, you shall hear,when this old woman has left the room, unlessyou would have a witness, to a declaration thatconcerns you as nearly as myself''An indefinite feeling of apprehension had,from the first instant of Luke's entrance, crossedLady Rosewood's mind. She, however, answeredwith some calmness : —What you can have to say, is of smallmoment to me — nor does it signify who mayhear it. It shall not, however, be said, thatLady Rosewood feared to be alone, even thoughshe period her life."I am no assassin'' replied Luke, " nor havesought the destruction of my deadliest foe —though 'twere but retributive justice to havedone so."ROOKWOOD. . ^91Lady Rosewood started.You need not fear me,'^ replied Luke ; " univrevenge will be otherwise accomplished''Go"" said Lady Rosewood to Agnes — " vetstay Tvdthout, in the anti-chambers""My Lady,"^ said Agnes, scarcely able toarticulate, " shall I "''Hear me. Lady Rosewood," interruptedLuke, " before this woman departs. I intendyou no injury — meditate no harm to you, or toany one — my object here is solely to obtain aprivate conference with yourself. You can haveno reason for denying me this request. I willnot abuse your patience — mine is no idle mission.Say you refuse me, and I Avill at once depart.A word will suffice — I am gone. I will findother means of communicating with you — lessdirect, and therefore less desirable — make yourelection ; but we must be alone — undisturbed.Summon your household — let them lay handsupon me, and I will proclaim to all what youwould gladly hide, even from yourself'"292 ROOKWCOD.Leave us, Agnes' said Lady Rosewood —alarm no one. I have no fear. I can dealwith him myself, should I see occasions"*Agnes"" said Luke, in a stern, deep whisper,arresting the ancient hand-maiden as she passedhim, " Stir not from the door till I come forth.Have you forgotten your former mistress — mymother ? have you forgotten Barbara Lovel, andthat night ?''In heaven's name hush ! "" replied Agnes,with a shudder.Let that be fresh in your memory. Movenot a footstep, whatever you may hear," addedhe, in the same tone as before.I will not — I will not ; '' — and Agnes departed.Luke felt some wavering in his resolutionwhen he found himself alone with the lady,whose calm, collected, yet haughty demeanour,as she resumed her seat, prepared for his com-indication, could not fail to inspire him witha certain degree of awe. Not unconscious ofLockwood. 293her advantage, nor slow to profit by it, LadyRosewood remained perfectly silent, with hereyes steadily and scrutinisingly fixed upon hisface, while his embarrassment momentarily increased.Summoning, at length, courage sufficientto address her, and ashamed of his wantof nerve, he thus broke forth : —When I entered this room, you asked myname and object. As to the first, I answer tothe same designation as your Ladyship. I havelong borne my mother's name — I now claim myfather's. My object is, the restitution of myrights''So — it is as I suspected," thought LadyRosewood, involuntarily casting her large eyesdown — " Do I hear you rightly ?" exclaimed she,aloud — " your name is ^"Sir Luke Rosewood. As my father's elderbon ; by right of his right to that title."If a glance could have slain him, Luke hadfallen lifeless at the lady's feet. With a smileof ineffable disdain, she said, " I know not why294 ROOKWOOD.I tolerate this insolent assumption of my son'sdignity — even for an instant. This defamationof my husband's name from thy lips to me — "Defamation of him in my lips, and to you ! ""interrupted Luke, scornfully.Peace !" cried Lady Rook Wood. " I wouldlearn how far thy audacity will carry thee. Thename you bear is Bradley ?"In ignorance I did so," replied Luke. " Iam the son of her whose maiden name is Bradley.She was "'Tis false — I will not hear it — she was not,"cried Lady Rosewood; her vehemence gettingthe master of her prudence.Your Ladyship anticipates my meaning,"returned Luke. " This is a house of mourning.He who lies a breathless corpse within its walls,your husband, was my father."That may be true."My mother was his wife."Thou lies — she his wife."His wedded wife."ROOKWOOD. 9Q5His mistress — his minion, if thou wilt ;nought else. Thou frantic fool, who has juggledthee with a tale like this ? Wife ! A low bornjade, his wife : Sir Piers Rosewood's wife — ha,ha ! thy fellow hinds would jeer thee out of thispreposterous notion. Is it new to thee, that avillage wench, who lends herself to shame,should be beguiled by such pretences? Thatshe was so duped, I doubt not ; but it is toolate now to complain, and I would counsel theenot to repeat thine idle boast. It will serve noother purpose, trust me, than to blazon forththy own, thy mother's dishonour""Dishonour !'' furiously reiterated Luke.My mother's fame is as free from dishonouras your own. Injured she was — her reputation,which was without blemish and withoutspot, hath been tarnished and traduced ; butit shall, ere long, be made clear in the light ofday ; nor she, nor her offspring, be a bywordamongst men. Hear me. Lady Rosewood ; I296 ROOKWOOD.assert that Susan Bradley was the first Lady ofSir Piers — that I, her child, am first in the inheritance;nay, am sole heir to her husband'sestates and to his titles, to the exclusion of yourson. Ponder upon that intelligence — it is a truth*— a truth I can establish, for I have proofs — suchproofs as will confound you and your arts, werethey dark and subtle as witchcraft. I will burstyour spells. Men say they fear you, as a thingof ill. / fear you not — it is your turn toblanch. There have been days when the Rook-woodsheld their dames in subjection. Discernyou nought of that in me? Is there nothing ofthe Rosewood about me .'^^As Lady Rosewood gazed at him, her heartacknowledged the truth of his assertion. Passionprevented her speech. She looked a scornfulnegative, and motioned Luke to depart.No !"" exclaimed Luke ; " my errand is notcomplete; nor can I suffer your ladyship toquit the room, till you have heated me to an end."ROOKWOOD. 297*' Not suffer me'' answered Lady Rosewood,raising herself, and moving towards the door.How, ruffian, will you detain me ? ""By showing you the danger of departure"*said Luke. " By your leave. Lady, you mustobey me"" he added, taking her arm.Never !'"" exclaimed Lady Rosewood ; herhitherto scarce governable passion enraged beyondall bounds by this last act. " Obey thymandate ! Stay at tJiy bidding ! Release myhand, or by heaven I will stab thee on the spot."And as Luke quitted not his hold, she suddenlysnatched up a small penknife, the only weaponof offence at hand, which happened to be Livingopen upon the table, and struck it with allher force against his breast. Luke, however,sustained no injury. Encountering some hardsubstance, the slight blade snapped at the haft,without inflicting even a scratch, and Luke,grasping the hand that had aimed the blow,forcibly detained it, while a smile of fiercetriumph played upon his features.o5298 ROOKWOOD."What would you do'' exclaimed LadyRosewood.Falsify your calumnies : yourself have furnishedme with the means. Look here's"* Andclutching her hand, he drew from out thefolds of his waistcoat the skeleton hand of hismother, in the bones of which the broken bladewas sticking. " This dead hand, which has thisinstant, in all probability, preserved my life, wasmy mother's ! It has done this — it will domore — it will accomplish all the rest. See," addedhe, stretching forth the shrunken finger, andplacing it close by Lady Rosewood's own hand,who recoiled from contact with it, as from thetouch of a scorpion — " That ring was placedwhere you now see it before your own was proffered— that cold hand was prest to your husband's,at the altar, before his faith was plightedto you. His faith to her was broken, but thevows he broke, were marriage votes. The livinghand may part with its ring to another — thedead will retain possession, while matter shallROOKWOOD. 299endure. Compare them together The onethrough her brief life, was ever gentle, everkindly, ever yielding — the other grasping, severe,inexorable. That is instinct with vitality — withpower — this incapable of motion — dead. Yetshall this nerveless hand accomplish more thanthe living. Years have flown since this ring wasplaced upon the finger ; yet hath it not corrodednot relinquished its hold. Look at it, Lady ;consider it well — touch it — examine it — 'tis realactual — your own in shape — in substance —in design; for the same holy end procured —with the same solemn plight bestowed — all thesame — save that it was the first — ay, the firstlet that confound you — let that convince you.With what a voice this silent circlet speaks —how eloquent — how loud. I have no otherwitnesses — yet will this suffice. Of those towhom I owe my being, both are dead. Canneither answer to my call ? She sleeps withinthe tomb that now yawns to receive him : lie ison his way thither ; yet this remains to answer300 ROOKWOOD.for both — to cry out, as from the depths of thegrave, for justice to me. Look at it, I say ; canyou look, and longer doubt? You cannot —dare not — do not. I read conviction in yourquaking glance — in your averted countenance''Saying which, he relinquished his hold, andLady Rosewood withdrew her hand. Thereis an eloquence, inspired by intense emotion,so vivid, that it never fails to produce a convincingeffect, even upon an auditor the mostdeterminately incredulous. So was it withLady Rosewood. Aware, before-hand, of thetruth of Luke's statement, she would neverthelesshave admitted nothing; but her daringdetermination was overwhelmed by surprise atthe extent of his knowledge, and by the irresistiblevehemence of his manner. With littleof their characteristic caution, Luke seemed toinherit all the inborn, terrible impetuosity of hisancestry ; and Lady Rosewood's secret soul admitted,that one of the same order as the fiercerace, with whose remorseless annals she was tooROOKWOOD. 301well acquainted, was before her. Some flashes ofsuch a spirit she had heretofore observed in SirPiers ; but a violence like the present she hadnever before beheld. She heard his words, andher heart, while it swelled with rage, trembledwith fear, as yet unknown to her. Contendingemotions agitated her frame ; pride, shame, rage,and fear, strove for the mastery. With avertedhead, she seemed lost in thought, while Lukegazed darkly on. Suddenly she turned round,exclaiming, in a tone that startled lii, as muchas the unexpected admission which her wordscontained,I am convinced it is so. You are his son."^His heir ?""AyrYou admit it.^''Have I not said so.^''The title is my right ?''*' Granted''"The lands''Your night also."302 ROOKWOOD.You will yield possession?"When you have iron it ; but not till then.Fool ! do you take me for an idiot like yourselflike your father ? I do believe your story —there is no degradation of which I do not deemSir Piers to have been capable. All thou couldstinvent, of folly and insanity, would not equal myconceptions of his capacity to enact them. Ibelieve it all — fully — implicitly ; yet I defy thee.Let the thought, that I know thy rights, butwill never acknowledge them, rankle, like abarbed arrow, in thy side ; and that I also knowthy inability to maintain them. Thoic carCstnot prove it. Ha, ha ! Now where are thyboasted rights — thy vaunted titles — thy imaginaryhonours — thy air-built castles — thy unsubstantialvisions of greatness ? Dissipated bya breath. Listen to me. The marriage wassecret — it vas without a witness — / alone couldprove it. Now you have your answer. Tellwhat you have heard to the world — repeat mywords — who will believe you ? Try the law :HOOK WOOD. 303we are in possession— in power; you are poor,unfriended, unknown ; no, not unknown : yourcharacter is too well known — your name isrecognised as that of a desperado, familiarwith vice and crime — capable of any deed,however daring. Who will credit such a talefrom you? supported by such evidence as youcan bring, who are already amenable to thelaws of your country ? Your life is at thismoment forfeited, for a murderous assault committedlast night, upon the keeper of mypark. For this you, the elder born of Sir PiersRosewood — the heir apparent to his title — theinherited of his honourable name, shall sufferthe extreme penalty of the law ; for by the Godabove us, I will prosecute you — pursue you tothe death. Now, braggart, solicit my mercy —implore my clemency — sue for my terms. Youare my prisonersYour prisoner ! Lady Rookwood,'' returnedLuke, laughing scornfully. " Were your ROOKWOOD.serous intentions to be punished, you were mine.Thrice have you aimed at my life — twice erethis — fate has preserved me ; but information ofyour plots has reached me. You cannot crushme ; I rise again, to triumph. What hindersme, armed as I am, for I am armed, to compelyou, at the peril of your life, to subscribe adeclaration of your avowed conviction upon thespot ? What hinders me, I say, but a sense thatmy just cause will triumph ? I leave its agencyto her who hath done thus much. Heaven willdirect me — my mother will guide me''To the gibbet'' cried Lady lockwood —whence nought shall rescue thee. Like allfiends, the evil spirit that hath served thee, willfail thee at the last."I place my trust in tier," said Luke.At that moment his eye was riveted by theminiature, which it accidentally encountered.He stooped to raise it. It came like a confirmation,a beacon in the storm — a directing light —ROOKWOOD. 305he pressed it to his lips. " Did I not say so ?"exclaimed he ; " how else would this have falleninto my hands ?'"*'Tis accident*" said Lady Rosewood,amazed at the occurrence.Accident T cried Luke ; " 'tis fate — the fatethat presides over my doom. Alas it accident lastnight, when the grave yielded up its dead ? whenshe whose face and features are here pourtrayed,fresh and fair as the day whereon she breathed,were for the first time revealed to me ? No !injured, sainted spirit, the hour of expiation isat hand I, thy son, will be the minister ofthy retribution"' Kissing the picture, he placedit next his heart.Once or twice during this speech Lady Rook-wood'sglances had wandered towards the bell,as if about to summon aid, but the intentionwas abandoned almost as soon as formed, probablyfrom apprehension of the consequences ofany such attempt. She was not without alarm,as to the result of the interview, and was constROOK WOOD.ordering how she could bring it to a terminationWithout endangering herself; and, if possible,secure at the same time the person of Luke,when the latter, turning sharply round uponher, and drawing a pistol, exclaimed —Follow me !''Whither, and for what ?'' answered she, inastonishment.To the room where lies your husband !''Why there ? what would you do ? villain !I will not trust my life with you. I will notfollow you'"Hesitate not, as you value your life. Doaught to alarm the house, and I fire. Yoursafety depends upon yourself. I would see hisbody, ere it is laid in the grave. I will not leaveyou here's"*Go," said Lady Rosewood ; " if that be all,I pledge myself you shall not be interrupted""I will not take your pledge ; your presenceshall be my surety. By her unavenged memory,if you play me false, though all your satellitesROOKWOOD. 307stand around you, you die upon the spot. Obeyme, and you are safe. Our way leads to theroom by the private staircase — we shall pass unobserved— you see I know the road. The room,by your own command, is vacant — save of thedead. Allow me to compliment you upon yourcaution. We shall be alone. This done, I depart.You will then be free to act. Disobey me, andyour blood be upon your own head''Lead on*" said Lady Rosewood, pressingtowards the antechamber.The door I mean is there'" pointing toanother part of the room — " that panel '^Ha ! how know you that ?''"^No matter — follow."Luke touched a spring, and the panel flyingopen, disclosed a dim recess, into which Lukeentered; and, seizing Lady Rosewood's hand,dragged her after him.CHAPTER XI.Mischief, that may be help'd, is hard to know ;And danger, going on, still multiplies.Where harm hath many wings, care comes too late;Yet hasty attempts make chance precipitate.Lord Brooke. Alaham.The " Queen's Room*' formed one of a suiteof apartments traversing the entire eastern wingof the Hall, the upper gallery of which wasexclusively devoted, during the later years ofher husband's life, to Lady Rook wood's occupation.The antiquated grandeur, and magnificent,though tarnished equipage, of theseapartments, were, it may be supposed, more toher taste than the modern conveniences of otherrooms, and she domineered it within them, as theLockwood. S09bird of night broods amidst the ruins of somedesecrated fane, in silent, solitary state. None,save her ancient attendant, Agnes, was sufferedto approach her chamber, without an especialsummons; a prohibition which was much moresatisfactorily complied with than the occasionalattendance upon her Ladyship, which was also ofnecessity required. It has more than once beenincidentally remarked, that this wing claimedan earlier date than any other part of the house ;and the massive construction of its walls, aswell as its distance from quarters more inhabited,rendered it impervious to sound, or disturbanceof any kind, and, so far, a desirable retreat.But the same cause precluded the possibility ofprocuring aid, in case of any such dangerousemergency as the present. This latter consideration,however, weighed little with LadyRook wood. Fear was unknown to her, and sherequired little attendance, though at all timesimperatively insisting upon servile obedience.Independently of Lady Rosewood's prohibitsROOKWOOD.tion, there was another reason, in itself sufficient,to deter the timid of the household from venturingwithin the precincts of this gallery. Itwas reported to be haunted. Strange sightshad been seen — strange sounds heard — shrieksand groans had broken the hush of midnight.One story, in particular, of a headless lady, robedin white, who rushed along the passage eachnight, and disappeared at a certain spot, obtaineduniversal credence. This figure, was saidto be that of one of the unfortunate ladies ofRosewood, whose head was thrown into thedark cellars beneath this part of the building,while the decollated trunk was buried in solemnpomp in the family-vault, whence it was supposedto glide, at midnight, in search of itsmutilated remains.Thus ran the legend, which kept alive,and seemingly corroborated, the subsequentsuperstition. The rooms composing the hauntedwing, had for years been occupied as dormitories,by the heads of the house; withinROOKWOOD. 311their gloomy confines many a beautiful damehad slept — ay, slept her last. The lucklessSusan Bradley expired therein ; two of SirReginald's spouses had died in the same apartment,and many others before them. A dismalcatalogue of horrors were added. Somethingmysterious and dreadful was told of the fate ofall these ladies. Their injured shades were to " revisit the pale glimpses of the moon,making night hideous"" within these chambers;and several guests, who had been placed therein,were frightened out of their senses. In consequenceof this, the range of rooms had for sometimebeen closed up, and few of the householdwould venture thither alone after dusk, especiallythe maidens ; and, if compelled to do so, how didtheir hearts palpitate with fear, if the old stairscreaked beneath their footsteps, a door suddenlyflapped together at the end of the gallery, or abat darted by accident against the window !The recess upon which the panel opened,had been a small oratory, and though entirelyt>iX ROOK WOOD.disused, still retained its cushions and its crucifix.There were two other entrances to this place ofprayer; the one communicating with a furtherbed-chamber, the other leading to the gallery.Through the latter, after closing the aperture,without relinquishing his grasp, Luke passed.It was growing rapidly dark, and at thebrightest seasons this gloomy corridor was butimperfectly lighted from narrow windows thatlooked into the old, quadrangular court-yardbelow; and as they issued from the oratory adazzling flash of lightning (a storm having suddenlyarisen) momentarily illumined the wholelength of the passage, disclosing the retreatingfigure of a man at the other extremity of thegallery. Lady Rosewood uttered an outcry forassistance, but the man, whoever he might be,disappeared in the instantaneously succeedinggloom, leaving her in doubt whether or not hersituation had been perceived. Luke had seenthe figure at the same instant ; and, not withoutapprehensions lest his plans should be defeated, heROOK WOOD. 31Sgriped Lady Rosewood's arm still more strictly,and placing the muzzle of the pistol to herbreast, hurried her rapidly forwards. Descendinga spiral staircase, which led winding fromthe gallery to the lower story, the sound ofvoices, in conversation, were distinctly heardthrough the thin partition which separated themfrom the speakers.A word, and 'tis your last'" whispered Luke,pressing the pistol to her side.Nothing doubting, from the determined fiercenessof his manner, that he would make good hiswords, and trusting still to some fortuitousoccurrence for deliverance, Lady Rosewoodnow swithin call, though not within reach, ofassistance, was silent. A loud laugh proceededfrom the parties in the chamber, and with thatinstinctive quickness with which everybodyrecognises the familiar sound, she heard her ownname pronounced, coupled with an epithet whichsounded any thing but polite, as applied to alady. She had no difficulty in distinguishingVOL. I. p314 ROOK WOOD.the tones of the voice to be those of Mr. TitusTyrconnel.Luke lingered. The language of the speakersseemed such as to assure him of his security, andhe was not unwilling that Lady Rosewood shouldhear an unblessed opinion of herself and of herconduct.I wonder how long the ould Jezebel willkeep us out of the state room ?'' continued Titus,for it was he.'' Can't say, indeed," returned another voice,which Lady Rosewood knew at once to be Mr.Coates's ; " till midnight, most likely, unless heprevents it. For my part, I wonder what thedevil takes her there, unless, between ourselves,she wishes to be beforehand with the old gentleman— ha ! ha ! one would think shed neverhave gone there of her oAvn accord. However,as I said before, she's got somebody to manageher, now'' * *Ay ! ay !" answered Titus, " that youngsterwill see she does no mischief , he'll take her inROOKWOOD. 315hand now ; hell have all properly done, for hisfather's sake. By St. Patrick, only to think ofhis coming upon us so unawares. I've not halfrecovered my surprise yet.'"*What-still Lady Rosewood say, I v»-onder,when she sees liim,'' replied Coates; " she'd nonotion whatever of it; I'm sure it will comeupon her like a clap of thunder. I wonder howhe got his information — that puzzles me. Ithought he was too much out of the way tohave heard "That's what bothers me," replied Titus.How did he learn it ? But what matters that.Here he is — she's master now ; and if he takesmy advice, he'll soon make the house clane of herpresence. I'll give him a helping hand, with allthe pleasure in life""While on that subject"" returned the oilier,there's one thing more I've got to say — butyou'll be silent — I wouldn't have it reach herears for the world, at least, as coming from nie ;though, perhaps, it might be as well she did316 ROOKWOOD.learn a little that's said behind her back. Youmust know *"Pass on," interrupted Lady Rosewood ; " Iwill not stay to hear myself reviled ; or'' thoughtshe, " are these, also, in his confidence ? Theplot is deeper than I dream'd of."Equally surprised with herself at the conversationhe had overheard, which appeared torefer to his own situation, though he could innowise conceive how the speakers obtained theirinformation, unless from the incautious loquacityof Peter Bradley, Luke had listened insilent wonder. The coincidence was, indeed,curious, and affected both parties in differentdegrees. On the one hand, Luke, though perplexedand astounded, was inspired by confidence; while, on the other, Lady Rosewoodwas filled with dismay and indignation. Everdistrustful of all around her, she was satisfiedthat Coates had clandestinely possessed himselfof the secret of Luke's legitimacy, and of thefact of the marriage, by breaking the seal of theLockwood. 317package, and that he had subsequently betrayedit. It was difficult, indeed, to reconcile thisnotion with the delivery of the papers to her,together with the inclosure of the all-importantcertificate ; but of the existence of a confederacyagainst her she felt fully convinced. Thusdoubting, thus misgiving, her vindictive soulwas busied in framing schemes for the overthrowof their plans, and the execution of herown revengeful purposes. Whelming as theocean, came the full tide of her wrath ; andcould she at that moment have commanded thatraging element to arise and destroy, her furiousimpulse would have prompted her to confoundher supposed enemies and herself in one commonfate. With some such thought, determined,though she should seal her own doom, to defeattheir plans, did Lady Rook wood suffer herselfto be conducted.All was now in total obscurity — neither countenancecould be perceived, as they trod the darkpassage ; but Luke's unrelaxed grasp indicatedp3318 ROOKWOOD. ^no change in his purposes, nor did the slow, dignifiedmarch of the lady betray any apprehensionon her part. Their way lay beneath the entrancehall. It was a means of communication littleused, crossing from one side of the hall to theother, and received no light, but what wasafforded from above. Their tread soundedhollowly on the flagged floor — no other soundwas heard. Mounting a staircase, similar tothe one from which they had just descended,they arrived at another passage. A few pacesbrought them to a door. Luke turned thehandle, and they stood within the chamber ofthe dead.The reader is already aware of the customobserved by the Rosewood family, respectingthe solemnization of their funeral obsequies, atmidnight, and by torch light. It remains to informhim of another practice, not so rare, namely,the laying of the corpse in state, upon the nightof the burial. There was, however, a revoltingpeculiarity attending this observance. PlacedLockwood. 319within its shell, the body was never soldereddown, until after the grisly mass had been exposedto the gaze of the tenantry ; and, in consequenceof the horrible exhibitions of which he hadheard, and indeed seen, express directions wereleft by Sir Piers, that his remains should beembalmed, immediately after his demise. Inaddition to this, was the disposition of an unusualallowance of wine and wassail to the tenantry,it being Sir Piers's opinion, that human nature,even in grief, requires support ; and that, withevery glass he swallows, the regret of the mournerwaxes deeper, and more sympathetic, and hislaments louder and more long. And that hewas right, the event proved. No Lord ofRosewood had been half so liberal, or was halfso much regretted ; and if sighs could wafthim thither, the worthy Squire was alreadysafe in " Arthur s bosom — if ever man wentto Arthur's bosom." His instructions had beenmore than fulfilled by Titus Tyrconnel. Brim-mersof strong ale, goblets of choice wines, flasksKOOKWOOD.of more potent liquors, together with a goodlysupply of baked meats, and other viands, were atthe service of every comer; and now, havingeaten and drunken their fill, all were desirous oftaking a last farewell of him to whom they wereindebted for their entertainment ; nor, perhaps,at the same time, without desire to behold aspectacle, which had formed, for many days,the chief topic of conversation in the neighbourhood— the body lying in solemn state.For this purpose they had congregated in thehall, before a door that opened into the room inwhich the body was placed ; but all admissionhaving been refused, by the commands of LadyRosewood, until ten o'clock, as it wanted somequarter of an hour to that time, the mutes,who were stationed at the door, dared not, fortheir lives, permit any one to enter.The room which contained the remains ofpoor Sir Piers, was arrayed in all that mockery ofstate, which, vainly attempting to deride death, is,itself, a bitter derision of the living. It was theROOKWOOD. 321one devoted to the principal meals of the day —a strange choice, but convenience had dictatedits adoption by those with whom this part of theceremonial had originated, and long custom hadrendered its usage, for this purpose, almost prescriptive.This room, which was of some size,had originally formed part of the great hall,from which it was divided by a thick screenof dark lustrously varnished oak, enriched withfanciful figures, carved in bold relief. Thewalls were panelled with the same embroiledmaterial, and sustained sundry portraits of themembers of the family, in every style and fashionof investiture, from the steely trappings of SirRanulph, down to the courtly costume of SirReginald. Most of the race were ranged aroundthe room ; and, seen in the red light shedupon their features by the flaring wax flambeaux,they looked like an array of solemn silent witnesses,gazing upon their departed descendant.The sides of the chamber were hung with black.322 ROOKWOOD.from the sur-base to the floor, and upon abier in the middle of the room rested the body.A wide and ample pall of rich, sable velvet wasspread over the supporters of the yet unclosedcoffin. Broad escutcheons, decked out in glowingcolours, pompously set forth the heraldic honoursof the departed. Tall lights burnt at the headand feet, and fragrant perfumes diffused theirodours from silver censers. But that whichsuggested the most painful reflection of all, tothose who had known him, was the considerationthat, in this very room — nay, on the veryspot where he now rested an inanimate heap,surrounded with all the insignia of mortality,had Sir Piers caroused and made glad, withhealth and spirits, and friends to boot; wherehe was now, silent and laid low, had he shouted,till the rafters had rung again, with his boisterousmerriment. Another hour, and even thisroom should have lost all trace of him. It hadbeen the theatre of his revelry and rejoicing,ROOKWOOD. 323through the rough drama of his life ; it wasmeet, that the last scene of his earthly pilgrimageshould close there likewise.The entrance of Luke and his unwilling companionhad been abrupt. The transition fromdarkness to the glare of light, was almost blinding,and they had advanced far into the roomere Lady Rosewood perceived a man, whom shetook to be one of the mutes, leaning over thebier, before her. The coffin-lid was entirelyremoved, and the person, whose back wastowards them, appeared to be wrapt in mournfulcontemplation of the sad spectacle within.Suddenly bursting from Luke's hold. LadyRosewood rushed forwards with a scream, andtouched the man's shoulder. He started at thesummons, and disclosed the features of her son !Rapidly as her own act, Luke followed. Helevelled the pistol at her head, but his handdropped to his side, as he encountered the glanceof Ranulph. All three seemed paralysed bysurprise. Ranulph, in astonishment, extendedSM ROOKWOOD.his arm to his mother, who, placing one armover his shoulder, pointed with the other toLuke ; the latter stared sternly and inquiringlyat both — yet none spake.END OF VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED BY T. BRETTELL, RUPERT STREET, Haymakers