R O O K W O O DA ROMANCE.RosewoodA ROMANCE.I see how Ruin, with a palsied hand,Begins to shake our ancient house to dust.Yorkshire Tragedy.TN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.(successor to henry colour.)1884.LONDON :PRINTED BY T. BRETTELL, RUPERT STREET, HAYMARKET.I/. 0-Rosewood,BOOK I.CONTINUED.BOOK THE FIRST.CHAPTER XII.We're sorryHis violent act has e'en drawn blood of honour,And stained our honours ;Thrown ink upon the forehead of our fame,Which envious spirits will dip their pens intoAfter our death, and blot us in our tombs ;For that which would seem treason in our lives.Is laughter when we're dead. Who dares now whisper.That dares not then speak out : and even proclaim.With loud words, and broad pens, our closest shame ?The Revenger's Tragedy.Stern, indeed, must that bosom be — insensible,beyond even callous humanity, that wouldnot thrill with gladness at the sight of a longabsent child. As tenderly as it was in her ironnature to do, did Lady Rosewood love her son.Her love was the stronger, perchance, in thatif aught she loved, Was him, and him alone —2 Rosewood.all else she hated. In him all her affectionwas concentred — for him, no sacrifice was toogreat — for his worldly weal she would havebraved eternal perdition. And now, at anunlooked-for moment, when she deemed himabsent in a foreign land — when his return waswhat she wished for most — what she wouldhave prayed for, had she prayed for aught — hestood before her; in her hour of peril, anddistress, his succouring arm was upraised todefend her. Her son was with her; — herenemy — his enemy, within her grasp. Triumphflashed within her eye, and her heart exulted.For one instant she had gazed doubtfully uponhis face — her frame shaking with emotion.Spirits, she had heard, have wandered neartheir fleshly tabernacles at such hours as these,and the features seemed so like his father's, thatshe scarce knew what construction to put uponthe apparition she beheld. The doubt was ofmomentary duration. The next instant saw herin the attitude we have attempted to describe.ROOKWOOD. 3With that quickness of perception, which atonce supplies information on such an emergency,Luke instantly conjectured who was before him.Startled as he was, he yet retained his composure,abiding the result, with his arms foldedupon his breast.Seize him,'^ cried Lady Rosewood, so soonas she could command her speech.He rushes on his death — if he but stirsexclaimed Luke, pointing his pistol ; " and you,his mother, shall answer for his life. He isunarmed — he cannot cope with me*"Bethink you where you are, villain ?*" criedRanulph ; " you are entrapped in your owntoils. Submit yourself to our mercy — resistanceis vain, and will not secure your safety,while it will aggravate your offence. Surrenderyourself ^Never'' answered Luke : " know you whomyou ask to yield ?"How should I ?" answered Ranulph.4« ROOKWOOD.By that instinct which tells me who youare. Ask her — she can inform you, if shewill."A villain — an impostor"" returned LadyRosewood. " Parley not with him — seize him,at all hazards — his life is our life. He is arobber, a murderer, who has assailed my life""Beware," cried Luke to Ranulph, whowas preparing to obey his mother's commands —I am no impostor — no robber — no murderer —my soul is free from stain of guilt like that,though I have many offences to answer for.Do not thou make me a fratricide."Fratricide !" echoed Ranulph, recoiling.Ay, fratricide in our dead father's presence."Heed him not," ejaculated Lady Rook wood.It is false — lie dares not harm thee, for hissoul — I will call assistance."Hold, mother !" exclaimed Ranulph, detainingLady Rosewood ; " this man may beIt L•TJxr.^,^,.J,,J-^o riur .loh'i t'lacrone. S. S: Jaincss Si^uarc.ROOKWOOD. Owhat he represents himself. Before we proceedto extremities I would question him. I wouldnot have mentioned it in your hearing, could ithave been avoided, but my father had a son''Lady Rosewood frowned. She would havechecked him, but Luke rejoined —You have spoken the truth, " he had a son—I am he— I "Be silent, I command you,'"* vociferatedLady Rosewood.Silent !'' cried Luke, in a loud voice, " Whyshould I be silent at your bidding — at your's —who regard no laws, human or divine ; whopursue your own fell purposes, without fear ofGod or man. Waste not your frowns on me — Iheed them not. Death ! Do you think I am like atame hound, to be cowed to silence ? I ivill speak.Ranulph Rosewood, the name you bear is mine,and by a right as good as is your own. From hisloins, who lies a corpse before us, I sprang. Nobrand of shame is on my birth. I am his sonhis lawfully begotten — his first-bon — yourO ROOK WOOD.brother — your elder brother. To me pertainsall you now call your own. Nay, glance not atme so. Threaten me not. Hear me. I say notthis to taunt you. I assert no falsehood. I avouchthe truth. You bade me think within whosepresence I stood ; bring that thought home toyourself, for by that awful form, I swear — Iwould call the dead to witness the oath. Ha !do you heed me now,""* continued Luke, observingthe shuddering effect which this last appealproduced on Ranulph. " Yes," cried he, rushingtowards the bier, " here lies he, within hiscoffin, cold and dead, who through life desertedme. What if he could arise, and speak forme— what, if the light of life could animatethose senseless orbs ? I cannot look upon thosefeatures, still and stern, without fear and trembling.What if, even as they are, the spiritof existence should return, and he could speakfor me ? Then might the living tremble at thetale he could tell. Hear me ! By this body, myfather's body, I swear that I am his son — hisROOKWOOD.legitimate — his first-born ; and though to me hehath never been, what to a son a father shouldbe ; though I have never known his smile, neverfelt his caresses, never received his blessing, yetnow be all forgiven, all forgotten." And he casthimself, with frantic violence, upon the coffin !It is difficult to describe the feelings withwhich Ranulph heard the avowal conveyed byLuke's passionate words. Amazement and dreadpredominated. Coupling the fearful scene nowbefore his eyes, with the remembrance of thephantasm he imagined he had beheld, helistened to Luke's adjuration with a sensationthat made his flesh creep upon his bones. Hisworst fears seemed to be realized, and in amanner as appalling, and almost as preternatural,as the vision itself. Unable to move,he stood gazing on in silence. Not so LadyRosewood. The moment for action was arrived.Yet even she had some doubts aboutthe line of conduct most prudent to be pursued,Luke was in her power. Should she summon the8 ROOKWOOD.household — proclaim him a lunatic — a robber —an assailant — imprison him — or drive him fromthe house ? All, or any of these expedients, shemight have recourse to ; but none were unattendedby danger, or difficulty. She must dothis to secure him. Her retainers were stillfaithful to her : of that, Ranulplfs presenceassured her ; as she at once saw her mistake inattributing to Luke's situation the chance expressionsshe had overheard, and which had alarmedher so much at the moment, when they so evidentlyapplied to her son's unexpected return.On their fidelity she could therefore depend.With all these aids — with a certainty of securinghim — the task was nevertheless not withouthazard, and might endanger all, nay, advancethe cause she would fain defeat. This LadyRosewood felt. Luke was fearless — eloquent —desperate ; he might sell his life dearly ; but thatweighed little with her, if he were slain : on theother hand, he might escape — he might be takenwith life — this defence might be so gallant as toHOOK WOOD. 9produce a strong impression in his favour; hemight, she was sure he would, blazon forth hisstory; and that, at this season, when all the neighbourhood,and perchance his friends amongstthe number, were assembled, was a scandal shecould not brook. Her eye rolled inwardly, asthese thoughts swept darkly across her brain.Suddenly she became tranquil. There is a calmwithin the storm, more to be dreaded than thewhirl wild's self. Addressing her son, she said,in a hollow voiceYou have heard what he says ?^I have ;"" answered he, mournfully.And you believe him ?'"*I can scarce do otherwise. Compare hisassertions with what my father, himself, declaredto me, before my departure from England.You may remember it. You spoke of the en-ailmentof the lands of Rosewood, averringto be mine unalienably. Have you forgottenhis reply ?"No'' answered Lady Rosewood ; " I haveb510 ROOK WOOD.not forgotten it ; but I will baulk his designs.And now'' added she in a whisper, " thy prey iswithin thy power. Attack him ^Wherefore," answered Ranulph ; " if hebemy brother, shall I raise my hand againsthim?"Wherefore not ?" returned Lady Rook wood.'Twere an accursed deed," replied Ranulph.The mystery is solved. 'Twas for this thatI was summoned home."Ha ! what sayest thou ? — summoned ?"Who summoned thee ?"My father !"Thy father ?" echoed Lady Rosewood, ingreat surprise.Ay, my dead father ! He hath appeared tomesince his decease ; nay, on the moment whenhis spirit departed, to bid me return; why, Iknew not. The doubt is now made clear."Ranulph, you rave — you are distractedwith grief — with astonishment."No, mother ; he was in the right. The deadROOKWOOD. 11will witness for him. I will not struggle againstmy destiny.Destiny ! ha — craven — dastard — thou artnot my son; not the child of Maude Rook wood;no offspring of her's would utter such a word.Destiny ! ha — ha — thy destiny is Rosewood,its manors, its land, its rent-roll, and its title ;nor shalt thou yield it to a base-born churl likethis. Let him prove his rights. Let him obtainthem. Let the law adjudge them to him,and we will yield — will cease to struggle — butnot till then. But I tell thee he has not theright, nor can he maintain it. He is a deludeddreamer, who, having heard some idle tale of hisbirth, believes, because it chimes with his wishes,and now asserts it. He told it me. I treated itwith the scorn it deserved. I would have drivenhim from my presence, but he was armed, asthou seest, and forced me hither, perhaps tomurder me ; a deed he might have accomplished,had it not been for thy intervention. His lifeis already forfeit, for an attempt of the same sortlast night. Why else came he hither "^ for what12 ROOKWOOD.else did he drag me to this spot ? Let himanswer that !"I will answer it,'^ replied Luke, raisinghimself from the bier ; his face was of an ashypaleness, and ghastly as the corpse over whichhe leaned. " I had a deed to do, which I wishedyou to witness. It was a wild conception ; butthe means whereby I have acquired the informationof my rights, was wild — we are boththe slaves of inevitable necessity. Thou hastreceived thy summons hither — I have had mine.Thy father's ghost called thee ; my mother'sspectral hand beckoned me. Both are arrived.One thing more remains, and my mission iscompleted'' Saying which, he drew forth theskeleton hand ; and having first taken thewedding ring from the finger and secured it,he placed the withered limb upon the left breastof his father's body. " Rest there," he cried,for ever""'' Will you suffer that ?" said Lady Rook-wood,tauntingly, to her son.No," replied Ranulph ; " such profana-rosewood.13tion of the dead shall not be endured, werehe ten times my brother. Stand aside"" addedhe, advancing towards the bier, and motioningLuke away. " Withdraw your hand from myfather's body, and remove what you have placedupon it""I will neither remove it, nor suffer it to beremoved ;"' returned Luke. " 'Twas for thatpurpose I came hither. 'Twas to that hand inlife he was united, in death shall he not bedivided from it rHear him'" cried Lady Rosewood.Such irreverence shall not be ;'"* exclaimedRanulph, seizing Luke with one hand, andsnatching at the sere-clothes with the other.Remove it, or by heaven "Leave go your hold," said Luke, in a voiceof thunder ; " you strive in vain"" Ranulphineffectually attempted to push him backwards ;and shaking away the grasp that was fixed uponhis collar, seized his brother's wrist, so as toprevent the accomplishment of his purpose. In14 * ROOKWOOD.this unnatural and indecorous strife, the corpseof their father was reft of its covering, and thehand discovered lying upon the pallid breast.And as if the wanton impiety of their conductcalled forth an immediate rebuke, evenfrom the dead, a frown seemed to pass over theirfather's features, as their angry glances fell inthat direction. This appalling effect was solelyoccasioned by Lady Rosewood's approach, hershadow falling over the brow and visage ofthe deceased, produced the appearance we havenoticed. Simultaneously quitting each other,with a deep sense of shame, mingled with remorse,both remained, with eyes fixed upon the dead,whose repose they had violated.Folding the grave-clothes decently over thebody, Luke prepared to depart.Hold !"" cried Lady Rosewood ; " you gonot hence."Indeed"" replied Luke. " My brother,Ranulph, will not oppose my departure. Whoelse shall prevent it ?"ROOK WOOD. loThat will I,'' cried a voice behind him; and,ere he could turn to ascertain from whom theexclamation proceeded, Luke felt himself grappledby two nervous assailants, who, snatchingthe pistol from his hold, fast pinioned his arms.This was scarce the work of a moment, and hewas a prisoner, before he could offer any resistance.A strong smile of exultation evinced LadyRosewood's satisfaction.Bravo, my lads, bravo !'' cried Coates, steppingforward, for he it was under whose skilfulsuperintendence the seizure had been effected :famously managed ; the best Bow-street runnerscould t have done it better — capital — handme that pistol — loaded, I see — slugs, no doubt —oh, he's a precious rascal — search him — that'sright — turn his pockets inside out, while Ispeak to her Ladyship." Saying which, thelittle Attorney, enchanted with the feat he hadperformed, approached Lady Rosewood with aprofound bow, and an amazing smirk of self-satisfaction." Just in time to prevent mischief,"ROOKWOOD.said he ; " hope your Ladyship does not sufferany inconvenience from the alarm — beg pardon,annoyance I meant to say, which this daringoutrage must have occasioned ; excessively disagreeablethis sort of thing, to a lady, at anytime,but at a period like this more than usuallyprovoking. However, we have him safe enoughnow, at your Ladyship's disposal. Very lucky Ihappened to be in the way— smelt a rat in thehall. Perhaps your Ladyship would like toknow how I discovered — ''^Not now*" replied Lady Rosewood, checkingthe volubility of the man of law, " I thankyou most heartily, Mr. Coates, for the serviceyou have rendered me ; you will now add materiallyto the obligation already conferred uponme, by removing the prisoner with all convenientdispatched"*Certainly, if your Ladyship wishes it. ShallI detain him a close prisoner in the hall forto-night, or remove him, at once, to the roundhouse?''ROOKWOOD. 17Where you please, so you do it quickly,"replied Lady Rosewood, noticing, with greatuneasiness, the agitated manner of her son, andapprehensive, lest, in the presence of so manywitnesses, he might say or do something prejudicialto their cause. Nor were her fears groundless.As Coates was about to return to theprisoner, he was arrested by the voice ofRanulph, commanding him to stay.Mr. Coates," said he, " however appearancesmay be against this man, he is no robber — youmust, therefore, release him."Release him, Sir Ranulph ?"Yes, Sir ; I tell you he came here neitherto rob, nor to offer violence."That is false, Ranulph," replied Lady Rook-wood." I was dragged hither by him, at theperil of my life. He is Mr. Coates's prisoner,on another charge."Unquestionably, your Ladyship is perfectlyright ; I have a warrant against him, for assaultsROOKWOOD.ing Hugh Badger, the keeper, and for other misdemeanors""I will myself be responsible for his appearanceto that charge," replied Ranulph. " Now,Sir, at once, release him."At your peril," exclaimed Lady Rosewood.Well, really," muttered the perplexed Attorney," this is the most unaccountable proceedingI ever witnessed."Ranulph," said Lady Rosewood sternly toher son, " Beware how you thwart me."Yes, Sir Ranulph, let me venture to adviseyou, as a friend, not to thwart her Ladyship,"interposed the Attorney ; " indeed she is in theright '."^ but seeing his advice unheeded, he withdrewto a little distance.I will not see injustice done to my father'sson," replied Ranulph, in a low tone. " Whywould you detain him ?^'*Why ?" returned she : " our safety demandsit — our honour."ROOKWOOD. 19Our honour demands his instant liberation ;each moment that he remains in those bonds,tends to our dishonour — I will free him myselffrom his fetters."And brave my curse, foolish boy ? Youincurred your miserable father's anathema foralighter cause than this. Our honour — thyhonour — my honour, cries aloud for his destruction.Have I not been injured in the nicestpoint that a woman can be injured? Thickestthou I could have wedded Sir Piers Rosewood,had I known aught of this marriage ; still more,had I dreamed there had been offspring born ofit ? Have I not been duped ? Hast thou notbeen duped ? Shall I lend my name to mockeryand scorn, by base acknowledgment of suchdeceit, or wilt thou.^^ Where would be myhonour then ? Stripped of my fair estates — myson — myself — beggars — dependent on the bountyof him. Does honour ask thee to bear this ?It is a phantom sense of honour, unsubstantial20 ROOKWOOD.as thy father's shade, thou speaks of, thatwould prompt thee otherwise'Do not evoke his awful spirit, mother""cried Ranulph, with a shudder ; " do not arousehis wrath."Do not arouse my wrath," returned LadyRosewood. " I am the more to be feared.Think of Eleanor Mowbray — the bar betweenyour nuptials is removed. Would you raise upa greater impediment ?""Mother! mother!"Would you tamely suffer this new-sprungclaimant, whom you know not, nor have everseen, to wrest from you your inheritance, withouta struggle ? Without Rosewood, I tell you,Eleanor never will be your s — thus much I knowof Mrs. Mowbray. Even there he may supplantyou — nay, I speak not at random. Let him bein possession, and abide the consequences — he isnow in our power. He will rot in gaol, or bedriven from this country. Speak the word, willROOKWOOD. 21you raise up this giant in your path, or crushhim, yet unknown ? Elect — choose between himand me."« Mother—"Nay, hear me yet further. Our cause is arighteous one. I have been deceived — thou artdeceived. Great wrong hath been done to both.We are warranted by Holy Writ, in such acause, to have recourse to stratagem. LikeEsau, he hath lost his birthright ; and even asRachel did unto Jacob, so will I do to thee. Iwill make thee the elder — the ruler of thybrother, and of his house."But if he be my brother, and if this houselee his house, I should sin before heaven to withholdit from him — I will not do it. Your ownwords betray your conviction of his rights."My conviction ! Ranulph, thou purest myhead to hear thee talk thus. What to me isconviction or doubt ? The line of action isplain : let him prove his right, it will then betime enough to succumb. meanwhile, be heeJ2» ROOKWOOD.what he may, give him not this advantage — sheis now in our power. He hath committed anoffence against the laws of his country, whichwill place his liberty, if not his life, in jeopardy ;let him first disprove that. Once for all, I tellthee, were he thrice thy father's son, he cannotprove the fact of his mother's marriage. Andwell he cannot. Were it fitting that the sonof a low-born village wench should usurpthe titles of the offspring of her who hathborne the name of D'Aubeney — a name whichwas, methinks, degraded, in merging itself inthine own? Do as thou wilt — act as thoudeepest best — again a brother, if thou seest fitting,and lose thine all — and with thine all, thymother. Decide quickly — all eyes are directedupon us. The room is now filled with thehousehold — the tenantry — the guests. Proclaim,if you choose, before all, your own degradationyour nothingness, and his elevation — hisAnd here let us part for ever."Enough mother — more than enough — youROdKWOOD. 23have decided, though not convinced me. Detainhim within the house, if you will, until themorrow. In the mean time, I will consider overmy line of conduct""Is this, then, thy resolve ?""It is. Mr. Coates," said Ranulph, callingthe Attorney, who had been an inquisitive spectator,though, luckily, not an auditor of thisinterview. " Unbind the prisoner, and bringhim hither''Is it your Ladyship's pleasure ?'''' asked Mr.Coates, who regretted exceedingly that he couldnot please both parties.Lady Rosewood signified her assent by aslight bow.Your bidding shall be done, Sir Ranulph,"said Coates, departing.Sir Ranulph r echoed Lady Rosewood,with strong emphasis ; " mark'd you that ?"Well, well," muttered the Attorney — " thisis the most extraordinary family to be sure.Make way, gentlemen, if you please," added he.24 ROOKWOOD.pushing his way through the crowd, toward theprisoner.Having described what took place betweenLady Rosewood and her son in one part of theroom, we must now, briefly, narrate some incidentaloccurrences in the other. The alarm ofa robber having been taken, spread with greatrapidity through the house, and almost all itsinmates rushed into the room, including DoctorSmall, Titus Tyrconnel, and Jack Palmer.Are you there, honey ?'** said Titus, whodiscovered his ally, " the bird's caught, yousee."Caught be d — d," replied Jack, bluffly — " soI see — all his own fault ; infernal folly to comehere, at such a time as this. What's it all for,I'd like to know? cursed nonsense. However,it can't be helped now ; he must make the best ofit. And as to that sneaking, gimlet-eyed,parchment-skinned, quill-driver, if I don't servehim out for his officiousness, one of these days,my name's not Jack Palmer."ROOKWOOD. 25Och, cush lama cree, did I ever — why whatthe devils the boy to you, Jack ? fair play's ajewel, and surely Mr. Coates only did his duty.I'm sorry he's catched, for his relationship to SirPiers, because I think he'll be tucked up forhis pains ; and, moreover, I could forgive thepoaching ; but as to the breaking into a house, onsuch an occasion as this, och ! it's a plaguy badlook. I'm afraid he's worse than I expected."Bah !" returned Jack, shrugging his shoulders.« Is this Luke Bradley," asked Small, " theunfortunate son of Sir Piers ?"The same, Doctor," replied Titus ; " there'sno doubt of his genealogy, if you look at him."Unquestionably not," returned Small —old Sir Reginald Rosewood, who is lookingat us from out that picture, might well fatherthat fierce face."A group of the tenantry, many of them inastate of intoxication, had, in the meantime,formed themselves round the prisoner. What-vol.II. cROOK WOOD,ever might be the nature of his thoughts,no apprehension was visible in Luke's countenance.He stood erect, amidst the assemblage,his tall form towering above them all, andhis eyes fixed upon the movements of LadyRosewood and her son. He had perceived theanguish of the latter, and the vehemence of theformer, attributing both to their real causes.The taunts and jeers, threats, and insolent inquiries,from the hinds, that thronged aroundhim, passed unheeded ; yet one voice in his ear,sharp as the sting of a serpent, made him start.It was that of the Sexton.You have done well," said Peter, " have younot ? Your fetters are, I hope, to your liking.Well ! a wilful man must have his own way,and perhaps the next time, you will be content tofollow my advice. You must now free yourself,the best way you can, from these Moabites, and Ipromise you it will be no easy matter. Ha, ha !"Peter withdrew into the crowd; and Luke,vainly endeavouring to discover his retreatingROOK WOOD. 27figure, caught the eye of Jack Palmer fixedupon himself, with a peculiar and very significantexpression.At this moment Mr. Coates made his appearance.Bring along the prisoners*' said the man of lawto his two assistants ; and Luke was accordinglyhurried along, Mr. Coates using his best effortsto keep back the crowd. It was during thepressure that Luke heard a voice whisper in hisear, " Never fear, alPs right ;"" and turning hishead, became aware of the close vicinity of JackPalmer. The latter elevated his eyebrows witha gesture of silence, and Luke passed on, as ifnothing had occurred. He was presently confrontedwith Lady Rosewood and her son ; and,notwithstanding the efforts of Vir. Coates, secondedby some few others, the crowd grew densearound them.Remove his fetters," said Ranulph, and hismanacles were removed.28 ROOK WOOD.You will consent to remain here a prisoner,till tomorrow ?"I consent to nothing'' replied Luke; " Iam in your hands*"He does not deserve your clemency, SirRanulph," interposed Coates.Let him take his own course," said LadyRosewood ; " he will reap the benefit of itanon."Will you pledge yourself not to depart ?"asked Ranulph.Of course," cried the Attorney ; " to be surehe will. Ha,harI will pledge nothing," returned Luke.Detain me, at your proper peril."'^ Better and better," exclaimed the Attorney.This is the highest joke I ever heard of."I shall detain you then, in custody, untilproper inquiries can be made," said Ranulph.To your care, Mr. Coates, and to that of Mr.Tyrconnel, whom I must request to lend youROOK WOOD. 29his assistance, I commit the charge ; and I mustfurther request, that you will show him everyattention which his situation will permit. Removehim. We have a sacred duty to the deadto fulfil, to which, even justice to the living mustgive way. Disperse this crowd, and let instantpreparations be made for the completion of theceremonial. You understand me. Sir."Ranulph Rosewood," said Luke, sternly, ashedeparted, " thou hast another — a more sacredoffice, to perform. Fulfil thy duty to thy father'sson."Away with him," cried Lady Rosewood. " Iam out of all patience with this trifling. Followme to my chamber," added she to her son,passing towards the door. The concourse ofspectators, who had listened to this extraordinaryscene in astonishment, greatly admiring theclemency of Ranulph, made way for herinstantly, and she left the room, accompaniedby her son. The prisoner was led out by theother door.30 ROOKWOOD.Botheration !'' cried Titus, to Mr. Coates, asthey followed in the wake — " Why did he chooseout me ? Til lose the funeral, entirely, by hisarrangement."That you will," replied Palmer. " Shall Ibe your deputy ?"No, no," returned Coates. " I will have noother than Mr. Tyrconnel. It was Sir ralph'sexpress wish."That's the devil of it," returned Titus;and I, that was to have been chief mourner,and have made all the preparations, am to beleft out. I wish Sir Ranulph had stay'd tilltomorrow — what could bring him here, to spileall — it's cursedly provoking."Cursed provoking," echoed Jack.But then there's no help, so I must makethe best of it," returned the good-humouredIrishman.There's a spare room that I know of,"said the Attorney, " in the lower gallery of theeastern wing, with never a window, and a com-ROOK WOOD. 31portable anti-chamber. There we'll dispose of theprisoner, and keep watch in the front room ourselves; and what with a bowl of punch, and ayard or two of clay, we'll contrive to get throughthe night tidily, never fear. As to the keepinghim here, it's all nonsense ; but there's somethingin it all that I can't fathom. We shall seewhat tomorrow will bring forth."Ay," replied Jack, with a meaning smile,tomorrow "END OF BOOK THE FIRST.BOOK II,Cite Sexton*Duchess. — Thou art very plain.B^sola. — My trade is to flatter the dead, not the living —I am a tomb-maker.Webster.c5BOOK THE SECOND.CHAPTER I.Come, list, and hark ! the bell doth toleFor some but now departing sole !And was not that some ominous fowls ?The bat, the night crow, or screech owe ?To these I hear the wild wolfe hole,In this dark night that seems to scowls ; —All these my black-booke shall enrolled.For hark ! still hark ! the bell doth toleFor some but new-departed sole !Heywood — Rape of Llcrece.The night was wild and stormy. The dayhad been sultry, with a lurid, metallic-lookingsky, hanging, like a vast galvanic plate, over theface of nature. As evening drew on, every36 ROOK WOOD.thing betokened the coming tempest. Unerringindications of its approach were noted by theotherwise at the Hall. The swallow was seento skim the surface of the pool so closely, thathe ruffled its mirrored bosom as he passed;and then, sharply darting round and round,with twittering scream, he winged his rapidflight to his clay-built home, beneath the barn-eaves.The kine that had herded to the muddiedmargin of the water, and had sought,by splashing, to relieve themselves from thekeen persecution of their myriad insect tormentors,wended stall wards, driven, and deeplylowing. The deer, that at twilight had troopedthither also for refreshment, suddenly " withexpanded nostrils, snuffed the air"" and boundedoff to their coverts, amidst the sheltering fern-brake.The rooks, " obstreperous of wing, incrowds combined," cawed in a way that, asplainly as words could have done, bespoke theirapprehension: they were seen, some hoveringand beating the air with flapping pinion, othersHOOK WOOD. 37shooting upwards in mid space, as if to reconnoitrethe weather, while others, again, werecroaking to their mates, in loud discordant tone,from the highest branches of the lime trees ; all,seemingly, as anxious and as busy as marinersbefore a gale of wind.At sunset, the hazy vapours, which hadobscured the horizon throughout the day,rose up in spiral volumes, like smoke from aburning forest, and, becoming gradually condensed,assumed the form of huge, billowymasses, which, reflecting the sun light, changed,as the sinking orb declined, from purple toflame colour, and thence to ashy, angry grey.Night rushed onwards, like a sable steed. Therewas a dead calm. The stillness was undisturbed,save by an intermittent, sighing wind, which,hollow as a murmur from the grave, died asit arose. At once the clouds turned to aninky blackness. A single, sharp, intensely vividflash, shot from the bosom of the rack, sheerdownwards, and struck the earth with a report38 ROOKWOOD.like that of a piece of ordnance. In ten minutesit was densest night, and a rattling thunderstorm.A thunder-storm by night ! What spectacle isthere so magnificently beautiful — so awful — sosublime ? Is there aught we can look upon, thatcan awaken similar feelings of terror — of admiration? Dreadful by day — night is the fittingseason to behold it in all its grandeur — in allits terrible beauty. The face of heaven isshrouded, as with a pall. The darkness isalmost palpable — a breath can scarce be drawn ;suddenly the sight is stricken with a broad,dazzling sheet of flame, rending asunder thetenebrous shroud, and illumining the densecope of heaven. 'Tis gone ! Darkness relievesthe aching vision — darkness made more intenseby the contrast. Hark ! the skies resound withthe loud, reverberating roar of heaven's artillery,echoing from cloud to cloud, and seeming, likethe voice of the Eternal, to shake the firmamentto its foundation. Lo ! the vexed air is scathedROOK WOOD. Swithforked flashes, each succeeding the other,so fast that the eye is unable to follow theirthwart course. Again, wis night — again thethunder peals. Such a storm it was once ourfate to witness, belated amongst the EasternAppetites, on our way from Rome to Terni.Having descended the castellated heights ofNarni, we were speeding along a valley, thickwith chestnut trees, and hemmed in by mountainson either side, when night and the stormovertook us. We had perceived some symptomsof the coming elemental strife at Narni,but thought we might reach our destinationere its outbreak ; and with this hope we urgedour course onwards. We were deceived. Hewho thinks to fly before a storm, amidst thoseregions, will reckon without his host. We werein the thick of it. Night fell — the tempestarose. The thunder roared — the lightning blazedwe were involved in an atmosphere of flame.The lightning could be seen, even with eyesclosed. The tree-leaves rustled in the wind —40 ROOKWOOD.the mountain sides returned the thunder's bray.All around was blinding light, or pitchy gloom.Still we dashed on, through darkness, or throughfire. Our offers of a liberal huono-mano werenot unheeded by the postillion who drove us,and he kept his way in gallant style. Now werehe and his horses utterly lost in the black voidsnow we beheld him bolt upright in his stirrups,crossing himself, whirling his whip roundhis head, or screaming, at the top of his voice,to the drivers of the innumerable pains thatimpeded our progress. Despite all these, andother risks, we reached Terni in safety, by nomeans indisposed to exchange our well-windowedbritschka, which appeared, at that time, to havemore attraction for the electric fluid than forourselves, for the alberto, to which it had servedas conductor.Upon finishing this ride, we were convincedthat a thunder-storm is the finest of all possiblesights, when seen at a distance ; but to beactually exposed to its fury, is another question.ROOK WOOD. 41Grand it is, undoubtedly; but the sense ofinstant imminent danger, that will, in spite ofevery effort, suggest itself, and the force anddistinctness with which every fatal casualty ofthe kind, with all its circumstances, will intrudeitself upon the imagination, renders one painfullyalive to the submit cf the scene. Terrordestroys delight; and we could well barteradmiration for assurance of security.To return to our tale : The progress of thestorm was watched with infinite apprehension,by the crowd of tenantry assembled in the greathall ; and loud and frequent were the ejaculationsuttered, as each succeeding peal of thunderburst over their heads. There was, however,one amongst the assemblage, who seemed toenjoy the uproar ; a kindred excitement appearedto blaze in his glances, as he looked upon thestorm without. This was Peter Bradley. Hestood close by the window, and shaded not hiseyes, even before the fiercest flashes. A grin ofunnatural exhilaration played upon his features,42 ROOKWOOD.and he seemed to exult in, and to court, thetempestuous horrors, which affected the mosthardy amongst his companions with consternation,and made all shrink trembling into therecesses of the room. Peter's conduct was notunobserved, nor his reputation for unholy dealingunremembered. To some he was almostas much an object of dread as the storm itself.Did'st ever see the like o' that ?^' said FarmerBurtenshaw, whose round, honest face, good winehad recently empurpled, but fear had now mottledwhite, addressing his neighbour; " Didstever hear of any man that were a Christian,laughing in the very face o' a thunder-storm,with the lightning' fit to put out his eyes, andthe rattle above ready to break the drums o' hisears ? I always thought Peter Bradley was notexactly what he should be, and now I'm sureon it."For my part, I think, neighbour Burdensreturned the other, " that this great burstof weather's all of his raising, for in all myROOKWOOD. 43nafral life I never seed such a hourly-burly,and never hope to see such again. IVe heardmy grandfather tell of folk as could commandwind and rain ; and, belike, Peter may have thepower — we all do know he can do more norany other man''We all do know, at all events," repliedBurtenshaw, " that he do live like no otherman — that he do spend night after night byhimself in that dreary church-yard — that he dokeep no living thing, except an old terrier dog,in his crazy cottage; and that he never axesnobody into his house from one year's end toanother. IVe never crossed his threshold thesetwenty years. Bute"* continued he, mysteriously,I happened to pass the house one dark, dismalnight, and there what do'st think I seed throughthe window?"What— what did'st see r"Peter Bradley sitting with a great bookopen on his knees; it were a Bible, I think,and he crying like a child."44 ROOKWOOD.Crying' ! Art sure o' that ?''The tears were falling fast upon theleaves'' returned Burtenshaw ; " but when Iknocked at the door, Peter hastily shut upthe book, and ordered me, in a surly tone, tobe gone."I thought no tear had ever dropped fromhis eye'' said the other. " Why he laughedoutright when his poor wife died ; and when hisdaughter, Susan, went off at the Hall, folks saidhe received hush-money, to say nought about it.That were a bad business any how ; and nowthat his grandson, Luke, be taken in the fact ofhouse-breaking, he minds it no more, not he,than if nothing had happened."Don't be too sure of that," replied Burdens; "he may be scheming summit all thistime. Well, I've known Peter Bradley nowthese two and fifty years, and, excepting thatone night, I never saw any good about him,and never heard of nobody who could tell whohe be, or where he do come from."EOOKWOOD. 45One thing's certain, at least," replied theother farmer — " he were never bon at Rook wood.How he came here the devil only knows ; hark !what a crash ! — this storm be all of his raisingI tell Ve."He be — what he certainly will be,"^ interposedanother speaker, in a louder tone, and withless of apprehension in his manner than hiscomrade, probably from his nerves being betterfortified with strong liquor. " Dost thou think,Simul Plant, as how Providence would entrustthe like o** him with the command of the elements? No — no, it's rank blasphemy to supposesuch a thing, and IVe too much of the trueCatholic and Apostate Church about me, tostand by and hear that stated'May be, then, he gets his power fromSatan," replied Plant ; " no man else could goonas he does — only look at him. He seems tobe watching for the thunder-boat."I wish he may catch it, then," returned theother.ROOK WOOD,That s an evil wish, Simon Toft, and thoumayest repent it'Repent it ! not I,'' retorted Toft ; " it wouldbe a good clearance to th' neighbourhood, to getrid o"* th' old croaking curmudgeon .""'Whether or not Peter overheard the conversation,we pretend not to say, but at that momenta blaze of lightning showed him staringtowards the group.As I live, he's overheard you, Simon,"exclaimed Plant ; " I wouldn't be in your skinfor a trifle""Nor I," said Burtenshaw."Let him overhear'' answered Toft ; " whocares ? he shall hear summit worth listening to.I'm not afraid o' him or his arts, were they asblack as Lucifer's owen ; and to show you I'mnot, I'll go and have a crack with him on thespot."Thought a fool for thy pains, if thou dost,friend Toft," returned Plant, " that's all I cansay."Rosewood.Be advised by me, and stay here' secondedBurtenshaw.But Toft would not be advised —Kings may be blest, but he was glorious,O'er all the ills of life victorious."Staggering up to Peter, he laid a hard graspupon his shoulder, and thus forcibly solicitinghis attention, burst into a loud horse laugh.But Peter was, or affected to be, too muchoccupied to look at him.What dost see man, that thou stares so ?'^It comes, it comes — the rain — the rain —a torrent — a deluge — ha, ha ! Blessed is thecorpse the rain rains on. Sir Piers may bedrenched through his leaden covering, by sucha downfall as that — splash, splash — fire andwater and thunder — all together — is not thatfines — ^ha, ha ! The heavens will weep for him,though friends shed not a tear. When did agreat mans heir feel sympathy for his sire'sdeparture ? When did his widow mourn ? When48 ROOKWOOD.doth any man mourn for his fellow ? Never !He rejoiceth — he maketh glad in his inmostheart — she cannot help it — it is nature. We allpray for — we all delight in each other's destruction.We were created to do so; or, why elseshould we feel so ? I never wept for any man'sdeath, but I have often laughed. No wedding^no christening, ever did me good ; but a deathhath always brought grist to the mill — it keepsmy spade from rusting — ha, ha ! Natural sympathy! out on the phrase. The distant heavensthe senseless trees — the impenetrable stones,shall regret you more than man — shall weepyour loss with more sincerity — ay, 'tis well — trainon — splash, splash; it shall cool the hell-fever.Down, down — buckets and pails — ha, ha !"Screaming which, rather than giving it naturalutterance, Peter broke into one of his dreadfulchoking laughs, which, for some moments, paralyzedhim, and made even the hardy Toft standaghast.There was a pause, during which the Sexton,ROOKWOOD. 49almost exhausted by the frenzy in which he hadsuffered himself to be involved, seemed insensibleto all around him.^' I tell you what," said Burtenshaw to Plant,I have always thought there was more in PeterBradley nor appears on the outside : he is notwhat he seems to be, take my word on it. Lordbless you ! do you think a man such as he couldtalk in that sort of way? — about natural simpering— no such thing."When Peter recovered, his merriment brokeout afresh, having only acquired fury by thepause.Look out, look out," cried he ; " hark tothe thunder — ^Hst to the rain. Marked ye thatflash — marked ye the clock-house — and the birdupon the roof? 'tis the Rook — the great bird ofthe house, that hath borne away the soul of thedeparted. There, there — can you not see it ? Itsits and croaks through storm and rain, andnever heeds it all — and wherefore should it heed ?VOL. II. D50 ROOKWOOD.See it flaps its broad, black wings — it croaks —ha, ha ! It comes — it comes."And driven, we conclude, by. the terror of thestorm, from more secure quarters, the bird, atthis instant, was dashed against the window, andfell to the ground. " That's a call'" continuedPeter ; " it will be over soon, and we mustset out. The dead will not need to tarry.Look at that trail of fire along the avenue;dost see yon line of sparkles, like a rocket'stail ? That's, the path the corpse will take — St.Hermes' flickering fire — Robin Bedfellow'sdancing light, or the blue flame of the Corpse-candle,which I saw flitting to the church-yardlast week, was not so pretty a sight — ha, ha !""Corpse-candle !" echoed Toft, who had, in ameasure, regained his confidence, " thouVt atthy old tricks, I see. Like the lying gipsyqueens, thou It never be cured of fortune telling.Whose death dost think that candle did betokenrEOOKWOOD. 51Thy own,'*'* said Peter, sharply.Whose ?"« ThineMine — thou lying old cheat — mine — dostdare to say that to my face ? Why, I'm as haleand hearty as ever a man in the house. Dostthink there's no life and vigour in this arm, thoudrivelling old dotard''Upon which, Toft seized Peter by the throatwith an energy that, but for the timely interventionof the company, who rushed to hisassistance, the prophet might himself have anticipatedthe doom he prognosticated for the other.Released from the grasp of Toft, who was heldback by the by-sanders, Peter again broke forthinto his enrich laugh; and, staring right intothe face of his adversary, with eyes glisteningwith fury, and with hands uplifted, as if inthe act of calling down an imprecation onhis head, he screamed, in a shrill and discordantvoice, " So, you will not take my warning ?you revile me — you flout me ; 'tis well — your fate52 ROOKWOOD.shall prove a warning to all disbelievers — theyshall remember this night, though you will not ;fool, fool — your doom has long been sealed ;I saw your wraith choose out its last lodgmenton Hallows e'en ; I know the spot — your graveis dug already — ha, ha I**' and, with renewedlaughter, Peter rushed out of the room.Did I not caution thee not to provoke him,friend Toft'' said Plant; "it's ill playing withedged tools ; but don't let him fly off in thattantrum — one of ye go after him."That will I," replied Burtenshaw, and hedeparted in search of the sexton.I'd advise thee to make it up with Peter sosoon as thou can'st, neighbour," continued Plant ;he's a bad friend, but a worse enemy."Why, what harm can he do me ?" returnedToft, who, however, was not without some misgivings." If I must die, I can't help it — I shallgo none the sooner for him, even if he speak thetruth, which I don't think he do ; and if I must,I slant go unprepared — only I think as how, ifEOOKWOOD. 53it pleased Providence, I could have wished tokeep my old missis company some few yearslonger, and see those bits of lasses of mine growup into women, and respectably provided for ;but His will be done — I shan't leave 'em quitepenniless, and there's one eye, at least, that I'msure won't be dry at my departure." Here thestout heart of Toft gave way, and he shed somefew " natural tears ;" which, however, he speedilybrushed away. " I tell you what, neighbours,"continued he, " I think we may all as well bethinking of going to our own homes, for, tomy mind, we shall never reach the church-yardto-night."That you never will," exclaimed a voicebehind him ; and Toft, turning round, againmet the glance of Peter.Come, come. Master Peter," cried the good-naturedfarmer, " this be ugly jesting — ax pardonfor my share of it — sorry for what I did —so give us thy hand, man, and think no moreabout it."54 ROOKWOOD.Peter extended his claw, and the partieswere, apparently, once more upon terms offriendship.A supply of spirits was here introduced;lights were brought at the same time, and placedupon a long oak table. The party gatheringround this, ill-humour was speedily dissipated,and even the storm disregarded, in the copiouslibations that ensued. At this juncture, aloiterer appeared in the hall. His movementswere unnoticed by all excepting the Sexton, whowatched his proceedings with some curiosity.The person walked to the window, appearing,so far as could be discovered, to eye the stormwith great impatience. He then paced the hallrapidly backwards and forwards, and Peter fanciedhe could detect sounds of disappointment,in his muttered exclamations. Again he returnedto the window, as if to ascertain theprobable duration of the shower. It was a hopelessendeavour ; all was pitch-dark without — thelightning was now only seen at long intervals,ROOKWOOD. 55but the rain still audibly descended in torrents.Apparently, seeing the impossibility of controulingthe elements, the person approached thetable. The merriment of the party waxed loudand boisterous. Under the influence of a stiffglass of brandy and water. Toft forgot his fears,and laughed in a manner so wild and frantic,that his friends began to entertain a new sourceof apprehension, as they whispered to each other,'' that he was either fey, or his wits gone awool-gathering."'' What think you of the night, Mr. Palmer ?''asked the Sexton, of Jack, for he was the anxiousinvestigator of the weather.Don't know — can't say — set in I think —damned unlucky — for the funeral I mean — weshall be drowned if we go*"And drunk if we stay," rejoined the Sexton." But never fear — it will hold up, dependupon it, long before we can start. Why they'venot half ready yet ; the coffin's only just soldereddown, and there's I don't know what ofLockwood.the ceremony to be gone through with. Thegrace-cup to be handed round, and the funeraloration to be delivered by Doctor Small."You don't say there's any of that infernalstuff to come," returned Jack, pettishly.Why not ? If s no more to the Doctor'staste than to your own, but he can't helphimself. He must go through with it : it hasalways been the custom here, and customs aresacred things with the Rookwoods. Ha, ha !Where have they put the prisoner ?" askedPeter, with a sudden change of manner.I know the room, but can't describe it ; it'stwo or three doors down the lower corridor ofthe eastern gallery."Good. And who are on guard ?'^Titus Tyrconnel, and that swivel-eyed quill-driver,Coates."« Enough."Come, come, Master Peter," cried Toft, " let'shave a stave — a chaunt — I know you can sing —I've heard you — give us one of your odd snatches*"ROOKWOOD. 57A good move'" seconded Jack. " A songfrom you — capital."IVe nothing I can bring to mind, but aditty which I sung some years ago, at Sir Reginald'sfuneral. If such will serve you now, youshall have it, and welcome."By all means'' returned Jack.Preparing himself, like certain other accomplishedvocalists, with a few preliminary hemsand haws, the Sexton struck forth the followingballad, which we shall entitleTHE COFFIN.In a church-yard upon the sward a coffin there was laid,And leaning stood, beside the wood, a Sexton on his spade.A coffin old and black it was, and fashioned curiously,With quaint device of carved oak, in hideous fantasie.For here was wrought the sculptured thought of a tormented face,With serpents lithe that round it writhe, in folded strictembrace.Grim visages of grinning fiends were at each corner set,And emblematic scrolls, mort-heads, and bones, together met,Ah, well-a-day ! " that Sexton gray unto himself did cry,Beneath that lid much lieth hid — much awful mysteries.d558 ROOKWOOD.It is an ancient coffin from the abbey that stood here;Perchance it holds an abbot's bones, perchance those of afreer.In digging deep, where monks do sleep, beneath yon cloistershrine,That coffin old, within the mould, it was my chance to find;The costly carvings of the lid I scraped full carefully,In hope to get at name or date, yet nothing could I see.With pick and spade I've plied my trade, for sixty years andmore,Yet never found, beneath the ground, shell strange as thatbefore ;Full many coffins have I seen — have seen them deep or flat,Fantastical in fashion — none fantastical as that."And saying so, with heavy blow the lid he shattered wide.And pale with fright, a ghastly sight that Sexton gray espied,A miserable sight it was, that loathsome corpse to see.The last, last, dreary, darksome stage of fallen humanity.Though all was gone save reeky bone, a green and grisly heap,With scarce a trace of fleshly face, strange posture did it keep.The hands were clench'd, the teeth were wrench' d, as if thewretch had risen,E'en after death had ta'en his breath, to strive and burst hisprison.The neck was bent, the nails were rent, no limb or joint wasstraight ;Together glued, with blood imbued, black and coagulate.And as the Sexton stooped him down, to lift the coffin plank.His fingers were defiled all o'er with slimy substance dank.EOOKWOOD. 59Ah, well-a-day 1" that Sexton gray unto himself did cry,Full well I see how Fate's decree foredoomed this wretchto die ;A living man, a breathing man, within the cofl&n thrust,Alack ! alack ! the agony ere he returned to dust."A vision drear did then appear unto that Sexton's eyes ;Like that poor wight before him straight he in a coffin liesHe lieth in a trance within that coffin close and fast ;Yet though he sleeper now, he feels he shall awake at lastThe coffin then, by reverend men, is borne with footstep slow,Where tapers shine before the shrine — where breathes therequiem low,And for the dead the prayer is said, for the soul that is netflown.Then all is drown'd in hollow sound, the earth is o'er hornthrown.He draweth breath — he wakes from death to life more horrible,To agony I such agony ! no living tongue may tell.Die ! die ! he must, that wretched one ! he struggles, strivesin vain ;No more heaven's light, nor sunshine bright, shall he beholdagain.Gramercy, Lord ! " the Sexton roar'd, awakening suddenly,"If this be dream, yet doth it seem most dreadful so to die.Oh, cast my body in the sea ! or hurl it on the shore IBut nail me not in coffin fast — no grave will I dig more."It was not difficult to discover the effect producedley this song, in the lengthened faces of60 Lockwood.the greater part of the audience. Jack Palmer,however, laughed loud and long.Bravo, bravo !" cried he, " that suits myhumour exactly ; I can't abide the thoughts ofbeing put under-ground — no coffin for me."A gibbet might, perhaps, serve your turn aswell'' thought the sexton ; adding aloud, " I amnow entitled to call upon you ; — a song — a song''Ay, a song — a song," vociferated the hinds.Well, well," replied Jack, " I'll give you anold song, composed upon one Monsieur Du Val,a celebrated highwayman in his day. It's thebest I have;" and he commenced in the truenasal whine, the followingLAMENT OF DU VAL.*Ye bold, undaunted souls, attendTo me, who did the laws offend !For now I come to let you knowWhat proved my fatal overthrow,And brought my glory to decay ;It was my gang, for whom 1 hang.Well-a-day ! well-a-day !• This is a song written about the time of the hero whomit celebrates. It has been extracted from an old black-letterplacard, now in the library of the British Museum.EOOKWOOD. 61Unto a duke I was a page,And nurtured in my tender age ;Until the devil did me entice,To leave off virtue and follow vice ;No sooner was I led astray,But wickedness did me possess.Well-a-day ! well-a-day !If I to mind my crimes should call,And lay them down before you all ;They would amount to such a sumThat there is none in ChristendomSo many merry pranks did play ;But now, too late, I know my fate.Well-a-day ! well-a-day !Upon the road I do declare,I caused some lords and ladies fairTo quit their coach, and dance with us ;This being done, the case was thus,They for their music needs must pay ;But now, at last, those jokes are pastWell-a-day! well-a-day!When I was mounted on my steed,I thought myself a man indeed ;With pistol cock'd, and glittering sword,Stand and deliver," was the word ;Which makes me now lament and say,Pity the fall of Claude Du Val !Well-a-day ! well-a-day !62 ROOKWOOD.I did belong unto a crewOf swaggering blades as ever drew ;Stout Witherington, and Douglas both*,We were all three engaged by oath,Upon the road to take our way ;But now Du Val must pay for all.Well-a-day ! well-a-day !Because I was a Frenchman born,Some persons treated me with scorn ;But being of a daring soul,Although my deeds were something foul ;My gaudy plumes I did display ;But now my pride is laid aside.Well-a-day ! well-a-day !I reign' d with an undaunted mindSeven years, but now at last I findThe pitcher that so often goesUnto the well, as proverb shows,Comes broken home at last we say,For now I see my destiny.Well-a-day ! well-a-day !Then being brought to Justice Hall,Tried, and condemned before them ail ;Where many noble lords did come,And ladies for to hear my doom ;Then sentence past, without delay,The halter first, and Tyburn last.In one day, in one day.John Witherington, and Sawney Douglas, two notorioushighwaymen of the day.ROOK WOOD. 63Uproarious applause followed Jack's song, whenthe joviality of the mourners was interruptedby a summons to attend in the state room.Silence was at once completely restored ; and, inthe best order they could assume, they followedtheir leader, Peter Bradley. Jack Palmer wasamongst the last to enter, and looked a not incuriousspectator of a by no means common scene.Preparations had been made to give due solemnityto the ceremonial. The leaden coffinwas fastened down, and enclosed in an outercase of oak, upon the lid of which stood a richly-chased,massive silver flaggon, filled with burntclaret, called the grace-cup. All the lights wereremoved, save two lofty wax flambeaux, whichwere placed to the back, and threw a lurid glareupon the group immediately about the body ;this group consisted of Ranulph Rosewood, andsome other friends of the deceased. DoctorSmall stood in front of the bier ; and, under thedirections of Peter Bradley, the tenantry andhousehold were formed into a wide half-moonacross the chamber. There was a hush of64 ROOKWOOD.expectation, as Doctor Small looked gravelyaround ; find even Jack Palmer, who was as littlelikely as any man to yield to an impression ofthe kind, felt himself moved by the scene.The very orthodox Small, as is well knownto our readers, held every thing savouring of thesuperstitions of the Scarlet Woman in supremeabomination ; and, entertaining such opinions,it can scarcely be supposed that a funeral orationwould find much favour in his eyes, accompanied,as it was, with the accessories of censer — ofcandle — of cup — all evidently derived from thatperiod when, under the three-crowned Pontiff'ssway, the shaven priest pronounced his benedictiono'er the dead, and released the penitent'ssoul from purgatorial flames, while he heavilymulcted the price of his redemption from thepossessions of his successor. Small resented theidea of treading in such steps, as an insult tohimself and to his cloth. Was he, the intolerantof papistry, to tolerate this ? Was he, who couldnot endure the odour of Catholicism, to have hisnostrils thus polluted — this garments thus defiledROOKWOOD. 65^by actual contact with it ? It was not to bethoughtof: and he had formally signified hisdeclination to Mr. Coates, when a little conversationwith that gentleman, and certain weightyconsiderations therein held forth (the advowsonof the church of Rosewood residing with thefamily), and represented by him, as well as theplacing in juxta-position of penalties to be incurredby refusal, that the scruples of Smallgave way; and, with the best grace he couldmuster, very reluctantly promised compliance.With these feelings, it will be readily conceivedthat the Doctor was not in the best possible frameof mind for the delivery of his exhortation.His temper had been ruffled by a variety ofpetty annoyances, amongst the greatest of whichwas the condition whereunto the good cheer hadreduced his clerk, Zachariah Trundletext, whosereeling eye, pendulous position, and open mouth,proclaimed him absolutely incapable of office.Zachariah was, in consequence, dismissed, andSmall commenced his discourse unsupported.ROOKWOOD.But as our resorting it would not probably contributeto the amusement of our readers, whateverit might to their edification, we shall passit over with very brief mention. Suffice it tosay, that the oration was so thickly interstrewnwith lengthy quotations from the Fathers —Chrysostom, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Bailies,Bernard, and the rest, with whose recondite latinity,notwithstanding the clashing of their opinionswith his o^vn, the Doctor was intimatelyacquainted, and which he moreover delighted toquote, that his auditors were absolutely mystifiedand perplexed, and probably not without design.Countenances of such amazement were turnedtowards him, that Small, who had a keen senseof the ludicrous, could scarce forbear smiling,as be proceeded ; and if we could suspect sograve a personage of waggery, we should almostthink that, by way of retaliation, he had palmedsome abstruse monkish funeral discourse upon hisastounded auditors. A strong impression was,however, produced upon his hearers, more byROOKWOOD. 67his manner than by the incomprehensible languagein which his admonitions were conveyed.After an eloquent and intelligible eulogiumupon his deceased friend, which excited muchsympathy in the circle, he thus concluded hisaddress, turning towards the bier : — " Yet,wherefore should we lament him ? Why shouldour tears continue to flow ? ' Forms tibicines etturbo tumultuous lesson ill canons' He isnot dead, but sleeper. He hath seen out his daynight hath set in, and he is at rest. Let usreflect, that it is appointed unto all men once todie — let us reflect from how many miseries thestroke of death freeth us — let us reflect also,before we regret the departed, that he hathexchanged this brief life for eternity — let usreflect, also, that but the worser part is dead; thatthe soul survive the body ; and finally, thatwhither he is gone, we soon shall follow. AVhosoknoweth not, whatsoever be his station, withhow many calamities life is beset ? We sojournamidst a Vale of Tears. Whence St. Jerome in68 ROOKWOOD.his Epistle to Tyrasius, maintained that Jesuswept not for Lazarus dead, but for Lazarusthat should be raised from the dead. ' Planeinquit Lazarus mortuum Dominus Jlevit, sednon tuas lacrymal fuit. Doluit Lazarusnon tormented, sed potius resurgentem, etfiebat, quern cogehatur propter salvador aliosad vitam revocare. Hand vitam dans Dominusingemiscebat, quam tu doles esse sublatam!'With St. Jerome agreed St. Ambrose, who, inhis Oration on the Resurrection in Faith, thus^mteth : — ' Quae non jjrocellas tempestatesquelatimer in hac vita 9 Cujus parcetur merits fAnd, lastly, St. Chrysostom, in his sixty-ninthhomily, thus sayeth : — ' Si defuncti diligencesgander oportet atque Icetari, quod ex pretentiousesse absolute. Quid enim ampliusest qucBso ? quid verd peregrine et novem ?Nonne per singular dies eadem, cernimusretorqueri f Dies et loco, noon et dies ; hemset cBstas, cestus et hems, et amplius nihil : ethcBC quidem semper eadem, mala verd peregrineROOKWOOD. 69et reception. Hcbc igitur ipsum sustinereper singular dies, et hie manere volens etCBgrotare, Jlere, fonnidare, et contrimiscere, ethas quidem pati molesting, hm verd negotiatortimbered'' What remaineth for us, is to offer onecommon prayer for his repose, and from thebottom of our hearts, as a last farewell, toexclaim — Requiescat in paceAmen !" cried the Sexton.The oration being concluded, biscuits andconfectionery were, according to old observance,handed to such of the tenantry as chose to partakeof them. The serving of the grace-cup,which ought to have formed part of the duties ofZachariah, had he been capable of office, fell tothe share of the Sexton. The bowl was kissed,first by Ranulph, with lips that trembled withemotion, and afterwards by his surroundingfriends ; but no drop was tasted, a circumstancewhich did not escape Peter's observation. Proceedingto the tenantry, the first in order happenedto be farmer Toft. Peter presented the cup,70 ROOKWOOD.and as Toft was about to draw a deep draughtof the wine, Peter whispered in his ear, " Takemy advice, for once, friend Toft, and don't let abubble of the liquid pass your lips. For everydrop of the wine you swallow. Sir Piers will haveone sin the less, and you a load the greateron your conscience. Would you pawn yoursoul for a mouthful of sweet drink, which shallbe pleasant in the mouth, but bitter in the belly ?The grapes from which that wine was pressed,were grapes of gall. Did'st never hear of Sin-swallowing?For what else was this customadopted? See'st thou not the cup's brim hathnot yet been moistened ? Well, as you will —ha, ha !'' and the Sexton passed onwards.His work being nearly completed, he lookedaround for Jack Palmer, whom he had remarkedduring the discourse, but could no where discoverhim. Peter was about to place the flaggon,now almost di-gained of its contents, upon itsformer resting place, when Small took it fromhis hands.ROOKWOOD. aIn populi funds residing non relifiqiie,admonished Pythagoras'' said he. " Let therebe no dreg left in the cup — thy task is complete'Saying which, he returned it to the Sexton.My task here is ended"' muttered theSexton, " but not elsewhere. Foul weather orfine — thunder or calm, I must to the church."Bequeathing his final instructions to certain ofthe household, who were to form part of theprocession, in case the procession set out, heopened the hall door, and, the pelting showerdashing heavily in his face, took his Away up theavenue. " Now this is what I like'' thought he,when my skin is heated with drink, to be soakedthrough and through — to hear the heavy rain,pattering amongst the leaves of the 'trees. Itwill soon be over," added he, holding out hishand ; " thus is it ever — your storm — your delugingshower, pours down, and is done ; butyour mizzling, muddling mist drags out theday. Give nne the storm — ha, ha !"CHAPTER II.Com. This road is but uneven. How is this ? —Guide. This is the burial-ground, my Lord. — These hillsare graves.Com. Then do we trespass, but the dead ne'er heed us.Guide. Our feetThey heed not, and they hear not ; but some tellHow a light word's recorded, till the dayWhen they shall burst their graves.Com. Pray God, it mend the road !Isaac Commences.Lights streamed through the chancel windowas the Sexton entered the church-yard, darklydefining all the ramified tracery of the nobleGothic arch, and illumining the gorgeous dyesof its richly-stained glass, profusely decoratedwith the armorial bearings of the founder of thefane, and the many alliances of his descendants.The sheen of their blazonry gleamed bright inROOKWOOD. 73the darkness, as if to herald to his last homeanother of the line whose achievements it displayed.Glowing colourings, chequered likerainbow tints, were shed upon the broken leavesof the adjoining yew-trees, and upon the roundedgrassy tombs.Opening the gate, as he looked in that direction,Peter became aware of a dark figure, envelopedin a large black cloak, and, what appearedto be a plumed hat, standing at somedistance, between the window and the tree, andso intervening as to receive the full influence ofthe stream of radiance, which served to dilate itsalready almost superhuman stature. The Sextonstopped. The figure remained stationary.There was something singular, both in the costumeand situation of the person. Peter, beingnaturally of an inquisitive turn, his curiosity wasspeedily aroused, and, familiar with every inch ofthe churchyard, he determined to take the nearestcut, and to ascertain to whom the mysteriouscloak and hat belonged. Making his way overVOL. II. E74 Lockwood.the undulating graves, and instinctively roundingthe headstones that intercepted his path, hespeedily drew near the object of his inquiry.From the moveless posture which it maintained,the figure appeared to be unconscious of Peter sapproach. To his eyes, it seemed to expand asheadvanced. He was now almost close upon it,when missing his footing, owing to the uncertainstate of the ground, rendered slippery by therain, he stumbled forwards; and although hearose upon the instant, the figure had vanished.Peter stared in amazement.What can this mean?" exclaimed he.Who, or what have I beheld ? — this was theexact spot upon which it stood — this flag —Randolph Crewe's grave. The stone clanksfirmly beneath my feet. It could never be poorRandolph's ghost. He could scarce afford a coatto cover his back during his lifetime, muchless a cloak and cap) that might become a baron.And the devil is too wise to trust him. AVhatif it be old Sii* Ranulph, that I have seen ?ROOK WOOD. 75that feather looked like the sculptured plumeupon his marble helm. I have heard he walkson nights like these. And then the voice Iheard last night. Tut, it cannot be. Had Inot slipped over yon unlucky hillock, it would nothave escaped me, had it been human. But Imust not tarry here, for ghost or goblin — thefuneral train will tread upon my kibes else."Peter hastened to the church porch, and aftershaking the wet from off his clothes, as a water-dogmight shake the moisture from his curlyhide, and wringing his broad felt hat, he enteredthe holy edifice. The interior seemed one blazeof light to the Sexton, in lies sudden transitionfrom outer darkness. Some few persons wereassembled, probably such as were engaged inthe preparations, but there was one small groupwhich immediately attracted his attention.Near the communion-table were three persons,habited in deep mourning, apparently occupiedin examining the various monumental sculpturethat enriched the walls. Peter's office led him76 EOOKWOOD.to that part of the church. About to descendinto the vaults, to make the last preparationsfor the reception of the dead, with lantern inhand, keys, and a crowbar, he approached theparty. Little attention was paid to the Sexton'sproceedings, till the harsh grating of the lockattracted their notice.Peter started, as he beheld the face of one ofthe three, and relaxing his hold upon the key,the strong bolt shot back in the lock. Therewas a whisper amongst the party. A light stepwas heard advancing towards him, and ere theSexton could sufficiently recover his surprise,to force open the door, a female figure stoodby his side.The keen, inquiring stare which Peter bestowedupon the countenance of the young lady,so abashed her, that she hesitated in her purposeof addressing him, and hastily retired. It wasnot admiration of the exquisite grace and beautyof the person who had approached him, thatattracted the Sexton's regard, for Peter was noROOKWOOD. 77idolater of feminine loveliness — it was not thewitchery of the dark blue eyes, into whosedepths he gazed, that drew enraptured worshipfrom his steely soul — it was not to peruse theenchanting outline of that face, or to mark herfree and fawn-like step — it was with nothing ofpleasurable emotion, but with a mixed feeling ofwonder and curiosity, that he gazed upon her.Reinforced by her companions, an elderlylady and a tall handsome man, whose bearingand deportment bespoke him to be a soldier, thefair stranger again ventured towards Peter.You are the Sexton," said she, addressinghim in a voice sweet and musical.I am C returned Peter — it was harmony,succeeded by dissonance.You perhaps can tell us then"" said theelderly lady, " whether the funeral is likely totake place to-night ? we thought it possible thatthe storm might altogether prevent it."*'The storm is over, as nearly as may be''78 EOOKWOOD.replied Peter. " The body will soon be on itsway ; I am but now arrived from the Hall."Indeed !" exclaimed the lady. " None ofthe family will be present, I suppose ; who isthe chief mourner ?""Who but young Ranulph?" answered theSexton. " There may be more of the familythan were" expected""Is he returned ?'^ asked the young lady,with great agitation of manner. " I thought hewas abroad — that he was not expected ; are yousure you are rightly informed ?""Rightly informed !*" echoed Peter ; " I partedwith him at the Hall not ten minutes since.He returned to-night, most unexpectedly''Oh, mother !"" exclaimed the younger Lady,that this should be — that I should meet himhere. Why did we come ? — let us depart''<« It is impossible," replied her mother ; " thestorm forbids it. It is so strange, I scarce cancredit it. Are you sure of this ?" addressing Peter.ROOKWOOD. 79I have told you so. Other things, asstrange, have happened at the Hall"" mutteredhe.What mean you ^"^ asked the gentleman,noticing this remark.You had not needed to ask the question ofme, had you been there, amongst the otherguests'' retorted Peter. " Odd things havebeen done there this night, and strange thingsmay occur before the morning."You are insolent, sirrah ; I comprehend younot''Enough ! I can comprehend you repliedPeter, doggedly ; " I know the count of themourners invited to the ceremonial. Methinksthere are three too many."Know you this saucy knave, mother ?"I cannot call him to mind, though I fancyI have seen him before."My recollection serves me better, lady,"interposed Peter. " I remember one, who wasonce the proud heiress of Rosewood — ay, proud80 EOOKWOOD.and beautiful — then the house was filled withher gallant suitors. Swords were crossed for her.Hearts bled for her. Yet she favoured none,until one hapless hour. Sir Reginald Rosewoodhad Si daughter ; Sir Reginald lost a. daughter.Ha — I see I am right. Well, he is dead andburied; and Reginald, his son, is dead likewise;and Sir Piers is on his road hither ; and you arethe last, as in the course of Nature, you mighthave been the first. And, now that they are allgone, you do rightly to bury your grievances withthem. All that perplexes me, is to see you here ;and yet not altogether that, for young RanulphRosewood is now lord of the ascendant, and mayhap— ^ha, I see —But of right, and of rule, to the ancient nest,The rook that with rook mates, shall hold him possest.'Are you familiar with that old saying, of yourhouse ?"Silence, sirrah,"*"* exclaimed the gentleman,or I will beat your brains out with your ownspade""ROOKWOOD. 81No ; let him speak — he has awakenedthoughts of other days"" said the lady, withan expression of anguish.I have donee"* said Peter, " and must towork ; will you descend with me. Madam, intothe sepulchre of your ancestry ? All your familylie within — ay, and the Lady Eleanor amongstthe number ."^Not for worlds," replied Mrs. Mowbray,for it was she who spoke."If my brother would bear me company, Iwould almost venture to enter the vault'' saidthe younger lady.Eleanor, it is a wild wish !"And perhaps a wrong one'' returned she ;but I know not how it is, an impulse, which Ican scarce define, prompts me to visit that tomb.Will you go with me, mother ?''It is a dismal place ; but if you wishto go, I ^\'ill not oppose your inclination — myson will attend us." And they approached thedoor.e582 ROOK WOOD.The sexton held the lantern, so as to throw-itslight upon the steps as they descendedtowards the gloomy receptacle of the departed.Our readers are already acquainted with itsappearance. Eleanor half repented having venturedwithin its dreary limits ; so much did theappearance of the yawning cells, surcharged withmortality, and, above all, the ghostly figure ofthe grim knight, affect her with di-eat, as shelooked wistfully around. She required all thesupport her brother s arm could afford her ; norwas Mrs. Mowbray altogether unmoved.Whom does that marble effigy represent ?'"asked Eleanor.The first Sir Ranulph,'' returned the Sexton,with a grin.Peter walked slowly on, holding the lightto the mouth of each recess, as he passed.Coffin upon coflSn was discovered. He paused.There lies Sir Reginald"" quoth he — " andthere, crushed in her coffin, even as she wascrushed in her brief existence, the Lady Elea-rosewood.OOnor. Ay ! look upon it-there lies your mother''addressing Mrs. Mowbray ; " your ancestress,young lady'' turning to Eleanor. " Beauty,after all, is but a frail flower. It soon withers.She was once as beautiful as you are, andscarce had numbered more years to her life, whenshe was brought hither. Alas ! that I shouldhave to tell it. You, who have so much loveliness,would do well sometimes to think of this,when your heart beats high with conquest ; forthe moth's thousand glorious dyes are not moreeasily effaced, than beauty's flaunting attractions.Your comeliness is not more surely dust, thanthat gaudy insect's winged splendour, whichthe slightest touch ^vill efface."This place is not more frightful than thatman," whispered Eleanor to her brother.And all the family are here interred, yousay ?" inquired Mrs. Mowbray.All," replied the Sexton.Where, then, lies Sir Reginald's youngerbrother ?"84 ROOKWOOD.Who ?'^ exclaimed Peter, starting.Alan Rookwood.'"'What of him ?^Nothing of moment ; but I thought youcould perhaps inform me. He died young""He did'' replied Peter, in an altered tone,very young ; but not before he had lived toan old age of wretchedness. Do . you know hisstory. Madame'"- " I have heard it''From your father's lips .?"From Sir Reginald Rosewood's — never.Call him not my father, sirrah ; even here I willnot have him named so to me."Your pardon, Madam," returned the Sexton.Great cruelty was shown to the Lady Eleanor,and may well call forth implacable resentmentin her child ; yet methinks the wrong he did hisbrother Alan, was the foulest stain with whichSir Reginald's black soul was dyed."The wrong he did my mother was the fouler,"said Mrs. Mowbray, furiously. " How can aROOKWOOD. 85churl like sten ; the sounds reach her ears, but nottheir import — one thought alone absorbs her.Many a woeful look, besides, was directed to102 EOOKWOOD.the principal figure in this ceremonial — toRanulph Rook wood. He was a prey to unutterableanguish of soul ; his heart bled inwardly,for the father he had lost. Mechanically followingthe body down the aisle — he had taken hisstation near it, gazing with confused vision,upon the by-sanders — shad listened, with a sadcomposure to the expressive delivery of Small,until he read — 'for man walketh in a vainshadow, and disquieted himself in vain ; heheareth up riches, and cannot tell who shallgather themVerily ! "" exclaimed a deep voice ; andRanulph looking round, met the eyes of PeterBradley fixed full upon him ; but it wasevidently not the Sexton who had spoken.Ranulph withdrew his glance ; but, in spite ofhis anxiety to forget it, that look haunted him.Small continued the service. He arrived at thisverse: — " Thou hast set our misdeeds beforethee ; and our secret sins in the light of thycountenancedEOOKWOOD. 103Even so !"" exclaimed the voice ; but Ranulphlooked not again. His heart melted within him ;and leaning his face upon his hand, he wept aloud.In the fulness of his grief, he took little note ofpassing things: he was absorbed in affliction.Scheme and speculation, for future conduct, wereall swept away, by the strong tide of woe — wereall banished, by the reflections of the emptinessand un substantiality of human existence. Deathswallowed all. Ranulph became, as it were,entranced. A hand was laid upon his shoulder —it was that of Doctor Small.Command yourself, I entreat of you, mydear Sir Ranulph,'' said the Doctor, " and sufferthis melancholy ceremonial to be completed''Saying which, he gently withdrew Ranulphfrom his support, and the coffin was lowered intothe vault.Ranulph remained for some time in the extremityof sorrow. When he in part recovered,the crowd had dispersed, and few persons wereremaining within the church ; yet near him stood104 ROOK WOOD.three apparent loiterers. They advanced towardshim. An exclamation of surprise andjoy burst from his lips.Eleanor T*' Ranulph !^Is it possible ? Do I indeed behold you,Eleanor?"No other word was spoken. They rushedinto each other's arms. Oh! sad — sad is thelover's parting — no pang so keen ; but if lifehath a joy more exquisite than others — if felicityhath one drop more racy than the rest in herhonied cup, it is the gust of happiness which thelover enjoys in such a union as the present. Tosay that he was as one raised from the depthsof misery, by some angel comforter, were afeeble comparison of the transport of Ranulph.To paint the thrilling delight of Eleanor-thetrembling tenderness — the fond abandonment,which vanquished all her maiden scruples,would be impossible. Reluctantly yielding —fearing, yet complying, her lips were sealed inROOKWOOD. 105one long, loving, holy kiss, the sanctifying pledgeof their tried affection.Eleanor — dear Eleanor," exclaimed Ranulph" though I hold you within my arms — thougheach nerve within my frame, assures me of yourpresence — though I look into those eyes, whichseem fraught with greater endearment than everI have known them wear — yet, though I seeand feel, and know all this, so sudden, so unlookedfor is the happiness, that I could almostdoubt its reality. Why — why am I so blest ?Forgive me, Eleanor, if so many dark oppressionsweigh upon my brain, that what I fainwould wish the most, I most discredit; andthough I hold thee to my bosom, and feel tomy heart's inmost core that thou art nigh me,yet do I fear that the fate which hath broughtthee hither, may tear thee from me. Speak —speak, dear Eleanor, and say to what blessedcircumstance I am indebted for this unlooked-forhappiness""I am here — we are here, dear Ranulpli ; butF 5106 ROOKWOOD.the melancholy occasion of our meeting is onewhich represses even my joy at seeing you. Wearestaying not far hence, with friends ; andmy mother, hearing of her brother's death, andwishing to bury all animosity with him, resolvedto be present at the sad ceremony. We weretold you could not be heres"*And would my presence have preventedyour attendance, Eleanor ?"Not that, dear Ranulph ; but ''But what ?''I feared to meet you""Why fear, dear Eleanor ?''She turned aside without answering.At that moment, a recollection of hismother's warning words, and of the change thatmight take place in his fortunes, crossed ralph'smind as the baleful shadow of a fiendflitting over a Paradise ; and he shuddered.We are but secondary in your regards,Sir Kanulph,'' said Mrs. Mowbray, advancing.Sir Ranulph !" mentally echoed the youngROOKWOOD. 107man — " What will she think, when she knowsthat that title is not mine ? — I dread to tell her'He then added aloud, with a melancholy smile —I crave your pardon, ]Vitam, but the delightof a meeting so unexpected with your daughtermust plead my apology""None is wanting. Sir Ranulph,"" saidMajor Mowbray. " I, who have known whatseparation from my sister is, can readily excuseyour feelings. But you look ill""I have, indeed, experienced much mentalanxiety'' said Ranulph, looking at Eleanor;but that is now past, and I would fain hopethat a brighter day is dawning'' His heartanswered, 'twas but a hope.You were unlooked for here to-night, ralph,"said Mrs. Mowbray — " by us at least :we were told that you were abroad — that youcould not be here."You were rightly informed, Madam," repliedRanulph. " I was unlooked for, not by you108 ROOKWOOD.alone, but by all. I only arrived this eveningfrom Bordeaux""From Bordeaux !"" exclaimed Eleanor.From Chateau La River, on the Garonne*"replied Ranulph.Chateau La River !^ echoed Eleanor, insurprise. " And so you visited the dear oldhouse? Were you aware who had been itsinhabitants ?"I was, dear Eleanor"" replied Ranulph ;I have resided there during the last twomonths"*Indeed !" said Mrs. Mowbray. *' AndMadame Neville and her husband "^Were well, when I departed""I am delighted to hear it. And how didoyou contrive to find out the house ? — you musttell me all about it, dear Ranulph.'"*Not now, Eleanor"" interrupted Mrs. Mowbray— " you forgets"*I did, indeed, forget," said Eleanor, saddening.ROOK WOOD. 109We must depart'' said Mrs. Mowbray,addressing Ranulph. " We are staying withthe Davenhams, at Braybrook, and shall remainthere. Adieu."My days of mourning will be broken bypainful yet necessary duties, which will notadmit delay," returned Ranulph ; " I will ridethere tomorrow. There is much on which Iwould consult you all. I would have ventured torequest the favour of your company at the Hall,had the occasion been other than the present""And I would gladly have accepted yourinvitation, had the season been more suitable.Sir Ranulph," returned Mrs. Mowbray ; " Iwould gladly see that house again. Duringyour father's lifetime I could not approach it ;now you are owner of the mansion, it will delightme much to behold it once more. 'Tis a fineold house ! — You are lord of broad lands. SirRanulph — a goodly inheritance."« Madam !"110 ♦ ROOKWOOD.And a proud title, which you will gracewell, I doubt not. The first, the noblest of ourhouse, was he from whom you derive yourname. You are the third Sir Ranulph ; thefirst founded the house of Rosewood ; the nextadvanced it — ^'tis for you to raise its glory to itsacme""Alas ! Madam, I have no such thought''And wherefore not ? — you are young — youare wealthy — you are powerful. With suchdemesnes as those of Rosewood — with such atitle as its lord can claim, nought is too highto aspire to."I aspire to nothing, Madam, but yourdaughter's hand ; and even that I will notventure to solicit until you are acquaintedwith "" and he hesitated.With what ?" asked Mrs. Mowbray.Dear Ranulph — for mercy's sake — not nowspeak not of it now — ^" interrupted Eleanor.A singular, and to me most perplexingROOKWOOD. Illevent hath occurred to-nights'' replied Ranulph,which may materially affect my future fortunes''Your fortunes !" echoed Mrs. Mowbray,Doth it relate to your mother .''"No, Madam, not to her, to another !"Ha ! what other ?"Do not — pray do not press this matter furthernow, dear mother," said Eleanor, " you distresshim."You shall know all tomorrow," saidRanulph.Ay, tomorrow, dear Ranulph," said Eleanor;and whatever that morrow may bring forth, itwill bring happiness to me, so you are bearer ofthe tidings."Dear Eleanor !"I shall expect your coming with impatience,"said Mrs. Mowbray.And I," said Major Mowbray, ^vho hadlistened thus far in silence, " would offer you myservices fully, in any way you think they would112 ROOKWOOD.be useful to you. Command me as you thinkfitting;'I thank you heartily"" returned Ranulph.To-morrow you shall learn all. Meanwhile itwill be my business to investigate the truth orfalsehood of the statement I have heard, ere Ireport it to you""Till then farewell !'' said Eleanor.Farewell !'' replied Ranulph.As they issued from the church it was greydawn. Mrs. Mowbray's carriage was at thedoor. The party entered it ; and, accompaniedby Doctor Small, whom he found within in thevestry, Ranulph walked towards the Hall, wherea fresh surprise awaited him.CHAPTER IV.Black Will. Which is the place where we're to be concealed ?Green. This inner room.Black Will. 'Tis well. The word is, " Now I take you."ArDEN of FeVERSHAxVI.Leaving Ranulph Rosewood on his way tothe Hall, we shall now revert to the captive.Guarded by the two young farmers, who haddisplayed so much address in seizing him, Lukewas conveyed in safety to the small chamber inthe eastern wing, destined, by Mr. Coates, to belies place of confinement for the night. Theroom, or rather closet, opening from anotherroom, was extremely well adapted for the ROOKWOOD.pose for which it was chosen, having no perceptibleoutlet ; being defended, on either side, bythick partition walls of the hardest oak, andat the extremity, by the solid masonry of themansion. It was, in fact, a remnant of thebuilding anterior even to the first Sir Ranulph'sday ; and the narrow limits of Luke's cell hadbeen erected long before the date of his earliestprogenitor. Having seen their prisoner safelybestowed, the room was carefully examined —every board sounded — every crevice and cornerpeered into by the needle eye of the littlelawyer, and nothing being found insecure, thelight was removed — the door locked — the rusticconstables dismissed, and a brace of pistolsloaded, and laid on the table, Mr. Coates pronouncedhimself thoroughly satisfied, and quitecomfortable.Comfortable !" Titus heaved a sigh, as heechoed the word — it found no echo in his heart.He felt any thing but comfortable. His heartROOKWOOO. 115was with the body all the while. He thoughtof the splendour of the funeral — the torches —the illumined church — this ovm dignified marchdown the aisle, and the effect he expected toproduce amongst the bewildered rustics. Hethought of all these things, and cursed Lukeby his Gods. The sight of the musty old apartment,hung round with faded arras, which, ashesaid, " smelt of nothing but rats and ghosts,and such like varmint,'"* did not serve to inspirithim ; and the proper equilibrium of his temperwas not completely restored until the entranceof the butler into the room, with all the requisitesfor the manufacture of punch, afforded himsome prospective solace.And what are they all about now, Tim ?"asked Titus.They are all carousing'' answered the domestic; " Doctor Small is just about to pronouncethe funeral 'ration."Devil take it," replied Titus, " there's116 ROOKWOOD.another miss — Couldn't I just slip out, and seethat''By no means'' said Coates. " Consider, SirRanulph is there."Well, Avell," said Titus, heaving a deepsigh, and squeezing a lemon — " are you surethis is boiling water, Tim ? You know I'mmighty particular."Certain, Sir."Ah, Tim, do you recollect the way I usedto brew for the ould Squire, with a bit of fruitat the bottom of the glass ? And then to thinkthat, after all, I should be left out of his funeralit's the very height of barbarity. Tim, thisrum of your's is poor stuff — there's no punchworth the trouble of drinking, but whiskey — aglass of right potheen, straw-colour, peat-flavour,ten degrees over proof, would be the only thingto drown my cares. Any such thing in thecellar ? There used to be an odd bottle or so,Tim rROOKWOOU. 117I've a notion there be,''"' returned Timothy.I'll try the old bin, and if I can lay handsupon one, your honour shall have it, you maydepend."The butler departed, and Titus, emulatingMr. Coates, who had already enveloped himself,like Juno, in a cloud, proceeded to light hispipe.Luke, meanwhile, had been left alone, withoutlight. He paced about his narrow prison ; afew steps was all its space afforded; until, weariedwith the fruitless exertion, he at length satdown. He had much to meditate upon, andwith nought to check the current of his thoughts,nought to distract his attention, in silence, insolitude, and in darkness, he pondered deeplyupon his past, his present situation, and hisfuture prospects. The future was gloomyenough — the present fraught with danger. Andnow that the fever of excitement was passed, heseverely reproached himself for his precipitancy.Had I acted with common prudence'" ROOK WOOD.cured he, " I might have been sure of success —of an easy triumph — I might have burst uponthem, with proofs such as they could not haveresisted ; but for the paltry gratification of aweak revenge upon that scornful woman, I haveendangered all — perchance destroyed all. I aminher toils, and I doubt not she will make goodher threats ; there is but one chance. I have afriend, I see, within the house. I thought Iknew his face, when his eye was first fixed uponme. What doth he here ? He hath promised meaid, and may find means for my liberation ; thatis all I need. Once free, the rest were easy ; andyet to be freed by him — to be again brought intocontact with that desperate band — I, the undoubted,the acknowledged, for even she acknowledgesme the heir to Rosewood, ought not to connectmyself, as I shall inevitably be connected, withthem, in the event of this attempt succeeding.Of necessity I shall be again involved withthem. I will not take even liberty from them.Each way I turn, new difficulties assail me. IROOKWOOD. 119will abide the worst. Let them prosecute me —the assault upon Hugh Badger was committedin self-defence. I fear not that — and yet shesaid well, how can I legally exculpate myself ?There were poachers within the park at thesame time — a buck was slain ere I was pursued.I shall go distracted. I have been altogetherimprudent. What if I temporise? what if Ihave recourse to wily stratagem ? No, my soulrejects such means. I will pursue a straightforwardcourse, and trust, for success, to a goodcause and honest endeavours. I will think nomore of this — perplex myself no longer. Towhat end is it ? Events arise that I cannot foresee,or, if I foresaw, could not avert. It is evidentthat some great end is to be accomplished,and what that end may be, rests in the hand ofDestiny, of which we are the puppets — why elseshould we be drawn hither ? Ranulph, by avoice from out the grave — I, by a call as dread.Again we are confronted, before the body ofour father — it may be accident, but accident120 Lockwood.that takes the aspect of fatality ; and if fatalityit be, why struggle — why not resign myself tothe dark headlong stream, and let it bear me tothe golden strand, or overwhelm me in its tide ?why not do this ? Because, though fate may havedecreed, restless human nature will ever striveto exercise its own free-will — and though itsefforts are impotent, yet are they incessant.Amid all this darkness — this despair — thisdoubt — there is one star that smiles from theheaven of love upon me, it is thine, sweet Sybilwho, if all else forsake me, will not forsakeme. Amidst my inquietude thy image has oftpresented itself, and now comes, like a soothingspirit, to minister peace to my lone heart''Thus did Luke commune with himself, untilhis mind, by degrees, assumed a more tranquilstate; and, exhausted with his great previousfatigue, he threw himself upon the floor of hisprison-house, and addressed himself to slumber.The noise he made induced Coates to enter theroom, which he did with a pistol in each hand,ROOKWOOD. 121followed by Titus, with a pipe and candle ; butfinding all safe, the sentinels retired.One may see, with half an eye, that you'venot used to a feather bed, my friend'" said Titus,as the door was locked. " By the powers buthe's a tall chap, any how — why his feet almosttouches the door. I should say that room wasa matter of six feet long, Mr. Coates.'^Exactly ."^Well, that's a good guess. Curse that uglyrascal, Tim ; he's never brought the whiskeyyet; but 111 be even with him tomorrow.Couldn't you just see to the prisoner for tenminutes, Mr. Coates ?"Not ten seconds. I shall report you, if youstir from your post."Here the door was opened, and Tim enteredwith the whiskey.Ah, by my soul, Tim, and here you comeat last-uncork it man, and give us a thimble-full— blob — there goes the stopper — here's aglass"" — smacking his lips — " whist Tim, anotherVOL. IT. G122 ROOKWOODdrop — stuff like this will never hurt a body.Mr. Coates, try it — no — I thought you'd be aman of more taste''I must limit you to a certain quantity,"replied Coates, " or you will not be fit to keepguard — another glass must be the extent of yourallowance."Another glass ! and do you think 111submit to any such iniquitous proposition ?"Beg pardon, gentlemen," said Tim ; " buther ladyship desires me to tell you both, thatshe trusted you would keep the strictest watchupon the prisoner. I have the same messagealso from Sir Ranulph."Do you hear that ?" cried Coates.And what are they all about now, Tim ?"asked Titus.Just starting, Sir — they're all getting ready,"returned Tim ; " and, indeed, I must not losemy time gossipping here, for I be wanted now.You must be pleased to take care of yourselves,gentlemen, for an hour or so, for there will beROOKWOOD. 123only a few women-kind left in the house. Thestorm's just over, and the men are all lightingtheir torches. Oh, its a grand sight r And offsetTim.Bad luck to myself, any how"" ejaculatedTitus ; " this is more than I can bear — I\'e hadenough of this watch and ward business — ^if theprisoners tis, shoot him, if you think proper —I'll be back in an hour."I tell you what, Mr. Tyrconnel,'' said Coates,coolly, taking up the pistol from the table, " I'ma man of few words, but those few are, I hope,to the purpose, and I'd have you to know thatif you stir from that chair, or attempt to leavethe room, dammed if I don't send a brace ofbullets after you. I'm serious, I assure you ;"saying which, he cocked the pistol.Titus attempted no further reply; but deliberatelyfilled himself a glass of whiskey andwater.That's your last glass," said the inexorableCoates.124 ROOKWOOD.To return once more to Luke. He sleptuneasily for some short space, and was awakenedby a sound which reached his dreaming ears,and connected itself with the visions that slumberwas weaving around him. He imagined that hewas again within the vault of his ancestors, aloneno, not alone, for he was presently joined by apallid figure, flitting towards him, which he knewto be the shade of his mother. It arose fromout the obscurity of the tomb, and was whiter inits aspect even than he saw it in its shroud;but the attire was the same — the long blackdishevelled hair — the sere-clothes — all but theeyes, which were open — which seemed to live —to beam with unearthly lustre — those eyes werefixed upon him v/ith melancholy fondness. Alurid light appeared to permeate the chamber,emanating from a small globe of bluish flame,that burnt on the summit of the warriors marblecasque. By this light, Luke could perceive ahuge coffin, and near it a throng of shadows.His mother extended her arm — with desperateROOKWOOD. 125courage he was about to take it, when he perceivedit was without a hand — he withdrew hisown, shuddering. The figure stretched out itsright hand — he took it — the chill went to hisheart. Together they advanced to the coffin —the shadows retired. Inscribed upon the lid heread his father's name. He felt the cold handclasp him — he stiffened with the icy embrace.Near him gleamed the phantoms of his ancestry.A stern race they had been called ; but visagesso inexorably fierce he had never beheld — thesmile of demons could not be more withering.His mother hovered around him, and theypaused — infernal fury was depicted in the featuresof each. A crackling, rumbling soundwas now heard within his father's coffin — theleaden cover heaved and rose, and in the agonyof horrible expectancy, Luke awoke.It was some moments before he could shakeoff the effect produced by this dream — before hecould remember where he was. He would notventure to sleep again, though he felt impelled126 EOOKWOOD.by drowsiness — there was a fixed pain at hisheart, as if circulation were suspended. Changinghis posture, he raised himself upon onearm — she then became aware of a scratchingnoise, somewhat similar to the sound he hadheard in his dream, and perceived, what he hadnot before noticed, a light gleaming through acrevice in the oaken partition. His attentionwas immediately arrested, and placing his eyeclose to the chink, which had probably beenoriginally occasioned by the warping of thewood, could distinctly perceive a dark lanternburning; and, by its light, a man filing someimplement of housebreaking. The light fellbefore the hard features of the man, with whosecountenance Luke was familiar; and althoughonly one person came within the scope of hisview, Luke could make out, from a mutteredconversation that was carried on, that he had acompanion. The parties were near to him, andthough speaking in a low tone, Luke's quick earcaught the following : —ROOK WOOD. ' 127D — n the darkens"" said he of the file — " Icaii''t see the teeth of this here handsaw, andsharp they must be, or I shall never cut throughthe plate-chest in time — where's the jemmy f,and the kate ? — Softly, softly, thought never larnjudgment, Dick Wilder — Don t I tell thee thatthat curs'd law-lurcher is keeping watch in thenext room, and it won't do to disturb "rem justnow? We must ramshackle the house first,before we think of tackling him."Well, for may part"" replied Wilder, " Ican't see no use in meddling with that business ;but, however, Jack Palmer will have it so, andhe's in a manner our Captain, and we must obeyhim. That youngster's not like one of us —he's one of your upright men — one of yourRomany patterns §, and not one of the regularspice-cloak lay || ; for my part, I should leavehim to the care of his old lockers sawed granada; but, as I said before , Jack's will is law —Dark lantern. f Iron crow. J Pick-lock.§ Gipsy. II Highwaymen.128 ROOKWOOD.besides, we owe him a good turn — we shall havea prize to-night — thanks to his management —IVe already got my share of the hurries* — andyou've pocketed a few — eh. Bob ?'"*Ay, but nothing to what we shall have —there's a mint o' money, and a power of plate,besides jewels, beyond all price, in the old lady'sroom. She do keep all lock'd up in her strongbox — as Jack have found out. I stole theremyself, to have a look at the place aforehand,and were just creeping towards her chamber,when I seed the old Lady and this here LukeBradley make their appearance. I heard herscreeching; but, as you may suppose, I didn'tstay for much questioning, but hop'd the twigin a twinkling."You might have saved us all this trouble,if you had remained,"^ returned Wilder.Ay, but it wouldn't fadge then — but whatkeeps Jack ?" We're all ready for the pavementBooty.ROOK WOOD. 129pops primed — and I tell you what, Rob Rust,IVe made my sixpenny* as sharp as a razor, anddamme if that 'ere old woman gives me muchof her jaw, or offers any resistance, if I don'tspoil her talking in future, never blame me""Suppressed laughter, from Rust, followed thisspeech. That laugh made Luke's blood run coldwithin his veins.Harkee, Dick, you're a regular out and outeryou stops at nothing — and may I be d — d ifrd think any more of it than yourself, Dick ;but Jack's as squeamish of bloodshed as youngmiss, that cries at her cut finger. It's the saferplan. Say what thou wilt, nothing but that willstop a woman's tongue."I shall make short work with her to-night.Hist ! here Jack comes."A footstep was heard in the room, and, presentlyafterwards, exclamations of surprise, andsmothered laughter, were heard from the partiesClasp-knife.g5130 ROOKWOOD.Bravo, Jack — famous. That disguise woulddeceive the devil himself."And now, my lads," said the new-comer, " isallboL?"Right and tight."Nothing forgotten ?'« Nothing."The sack ?""Here."The rook* ?"Here."The crape .?"In our kelps-doneto the nines. Now off with yourstamps J, and on with your list slippers — not aword. Follow me, and, for your lives, don'tmove a step, but as I direct you. The word mustbe, ' Sir Piers Rosewood calls.' Well overhaulthe swag here, when the speak § is spoken over.This cracky may make us all for life; and ifCrow-bar. + Hats. X Shoes, § Burglar'. || Ditto.ROOKWOOD. 131you'll follow my directions implicitly, well dothe trick in style. This slum must be our rendezvous,when airs over; for hark ye, my lads, I'llnot budge an inch till Luke Bradley be set free.He's an old friend, and I always stick by oldfriends. I'd do the same for one of you, sodamn you, no flinching ; besides, I owe thatspider-thanked, snivelling, split-cause Coates,who stands sentinel, a grudge, and I'll pay himoff, as Paul did the Ephesians. You may crophis ears, or slit his tongue, as you would a magpie's,or any other chattering varmint; makehim sign his own testament, or treat him with atouch of your Habeas Corpus Act, if you thinkproper, or give him a taste of blue plumb*.One thing only I stipulate, that you don't hurtthat fat, mutton-headed Broganeer, whateverhe may say or do ; he's a devilish good fellow.And now to business.Saying which, they noiselessly departed ; but,Ball.132 ROOK WOOD.carefully as they closed the door, Luke's eai*could detect the sound. They were gone — whatwas he to do ? — the house would be robbed. Theimmediate attack would be directed to LadyRooks good ; in case of resistance, she would bemurdered; and that this was no idle supposition,the character of the men too well assured him.And then, with hands, perhaps, dripping withher blood, they would return, to release him fromprison ; in reality, the master of the house, afterthey had despoiled it. His blood now chilled withhorror — snow boiled with indignation. An entirerevulsion had been produced in his feelings,within the last four-and-twenty hours. Everythingwas seen through a different medium ;and that which the outcast, Luke Bradley, wouldhave viewed with almost indifference, was regardedwith horror by Sir Luke Rook wood. Aspirit, new dawning, was at work within ; thespark was lighted, which new events helped tofan to flame. And yet, how was he to act — howconvey information — how render assistance ? HeROOKWOOD. 133was in confinement. A^'ould those who werewatching over him hasten to Lady Rosewood,in case he urged it ? It was clear they wouldnot; they would not credit his affirmation —would treat it with derision — as an idle story, togive himself a chance of escape. He stampedthe ground, chafing like the enraged lion, andfeeling, as all must have felt, who have been sosituated, with the will, but not the power, toassist another — a sensation almost approachingto torture. At this moment a distant screamburst upon his ears — another — he hesitated nolonger. With all his force he thundered at thedoor.What do you want, rascal ?'' cried Coates,from without.There are robbers in the house*"Thank you for the information. There isone I know of alreadyFool, they are in Lady Rook wood's room —run to her assistance''A likely story, and leave you here's1 34 ROOKWOOD.Do you hear that scream ?''Eh, what — what's that ? — I do hear something."Here Luke dashed with all his force againstthe door. It was burst open, and he stoodbefore the astonished Attorney.Advance a footstep, villain," said Coates,presenting both his pistols, " and I lodge abrace of balls in your head."Listen to me," said Luke; " there are robbersin the house — they are in Lady Rosewood'schamber — they will plunder the place of everything— perhaps murder her. Fly to her assistance,I ^vill accompany you — assist you — it isyour only chance."My only chance — your only chance ; do youtake me for a green-horn ? This is a poor subterfuge; could you not have vamped up somethingbetter ? But back to your own room, orI shall make no more of shooting you, than Iwould of snuffing that candle."*' Be advised, Sir — I warn you — Lady Rook-rookWOOD. 135wood herself will throw all the blame on you.There are three of them — give me a pistol, andfear nothing."Give you a pistol ! Ha, ha — to be itsmark myself. You are an amusing rascal, Iwill say."Sir, I tell you not a moment is to be lost.Is life nothing ? she may be murdered."I tell you, once for all, it won't do ; go backto your room, or take the consequence."But it shall do, any how," exclaimed Titus,flinging himself upon the Attorney, and holdingboth his arms ; " you've bullied me longenough — I'm sure the lad's in the right."Luke snatched the pistols from the hands ofCoates.Very well, Mr. Tyrconnel ; very well. Sir ;"cried the Attorney, boiling with wrath, andspluttering out his words — " Extremely well.Sir ; you are not perhaps aware. Sir, what youhave done ; but you will repent this. Sir — repent,I say — repent was my word, Mr. Tyrconnel."136 ROOKWOOD.Repent be d d,'' replied Titus.Follow me'' cried Luke ; " settle your disputeshereafter. Quick, or we shall be toolate''Coates bustled after him, and Titus, puttingthe neck of the forbidden whiskey bottle to hislips, and gulping down a hasty mouthful,snatched up a rusty poker, and followed theparty with more alacrity than might have beenexpected from a personage so portly.CHAPTER V.Gibbet. Well, gentlemen, 'tis a fine night for our enterprise.Hounslow. Dark as hell.Bagshot. And blows like the devil.Boniface. You'll have no creature to deal with but the ladies.Gibbet. And I can assure you, friend, there's a great dealof address, and good manners, in robbing a lady. I am themost of a gentleman, that way, that ever travelled the road.Beaux Stratagem.Accompanied by her son, Lady Rosewood,on quitting the chamber of the dead, returnedto her o^\Ti room. They were alone. She renewedall her arguments — had recourse to passionatesupplications — to violent threats; allwere ineffectual. Ranulph maintained profoundsilence. He listened with melancholy attention,but replied not. Passion, as it often doth,defeated its own ends; and Lady Rosewood,seeing the ill effect her anger would probably138 ROOKWOOD.produce, gradually softened the asperity of hermanner, and suffered Ranulph to depart.Left to herself, and to the communing ofher own troubled spirit, her fortitude, in ameasure, forsook her, under the pressure of thedifficulties that seemed to press on all sides.There was no plan she could devise — no schemeadopt, unattended with extremest peril. Shemust act alone — with promptitude, with decision,with secrecy : to win her son over was herchief desire, and that, at all hazards, she wasresolved to do. But how ? — She knew but of onepoint upon which he was vulnerable — one weakpart on which the citadel of his firm soul wasaccessible — one link by which she could enchainhim. His love for Eleanor Mowbray was thatlink. By raising doubts in his mind, andshowing fresh difficulties, she would compel himto acquiesce in her machinations, as a necessarymeans of accomplishing his own object. Thisshe wished to effect, but still she doubted ; therewas a depth of resolution in the placid streamROOK WOOD. 139of Ranulph's character, which she had alreadyoften fathomed. She knew his firmness, andshe dreaded that his sense of justice shouldbe stronger than his passion, ardent though sheknew the latter to be. But the trial should bemade. If unsuccessful, she had yet anotherplan, not to be resorted to until the last extremity,and that so di-dreadful, that we scarce ventureto hint at it.Her thoughts were next directed to Luke.He was now within her grasp. Her hand couldreach him — could crush him. Nothing but hisblood could appease her thirst of vengeance — heshould die; but the means must be subtle — tobe secure, must be slow ; her eager hand wouldwillingly have dealt the blow at once — wouldhave ministered the deadly draught ere the morrow'sdawn, had nought stood between her andher enemy. This tortuous course she deemedbest to pursue ; yet even though imminent perilforbade her, though she felt assured of arrivingat the same dark end by a more circuitous route,though her schemes were such as her victim140 ROOKWOOD.could not elude, her first impulse was to giveway to instant vengeance. She checked thatthought, ere it was fully formed — she pursuedevery maze — she traversed every path that wasto lead to the ultimate object — revenge ; sheexamined the security of every link of the net shehad throw n around her prey — she exulted in theanticipation of her ultimate triumph over him.He should perish by the hangman's hands, or,'scaping that, should fall by her own. She couldreach him, she knew well, even in the dungeon'sdepths.As she wove these webs of darkness, fear,hitherto unknown, took possession of her soul.She listened to the howling of the wind — to thevibration of the rafters — to the thunder's roar,and to the hissing rain ; till she, who nevertrembled at the thought of danger, became filledwith apprehension and vague uneasiness. Thereare moments of irresolution which must be experienced,even by those whose nerves are strung aswith steel. Though the spirit would fain maintainits supremacy o'er the body's weakness, thatROOK WOOD. 141mysterious and inexplicable sympathy, whichsubsists between them, affects both in a likedegree, and we feel that, although endowed withimmortal essences, we are still creatures of clay,and subject to physical infirmity. Such, at thismoment, was the condition of Lady Rosewood :her soul was strong, stedfast, unyielding, but herframe, exhausted from over anxiety, and theviolent excitement of the recent occurrences, inwhich she herself had been a principal actress,had the effect of debilitating her mental energy,and rendered her a prey to a thousand namelessterrors. She summoned her attendant, Agnes.The old handmaiden remarked the perturbedmanner of her mistress, but made no comment.Lights were ordered ; and when Agnes returned,Lady Rosewood fixed a look so wistful uponher, that she ventured to address her. Agnestrembled as she spoke —Bless you, my Lady, but you look verypale, and no wonder. I feel sick at heart, too.It's all over, and he is gone to his account — poor142 ROOK WOOD.master ! he who feared so much to die — andthen such a night as it is for his funeral ! Oh,my Lady, I shall be glad when they returnfrom the church, and happier still when themorning dawns — I can't sleep a wink — can'tclose my eyes, but I think of him."Of him rOf Sir Piers, my Lady ; for though he'sdead, I don't think he's gone.""How?"Why, my Lady, the corruptible part of him'sgone, sure enough; but the incorruptible, asDoctor Small calls it — the spirit, my Lady —it might be my fancy, your Ladyship; but asI'm standing here, when I went back into theroom just now for the lights, as I hope to live, Ithought I saw Sir Piers in the room.You are crazed, Agnes."No, my Lady, I'm not crazed — it was merefancy, no doubt; but I thought I saw him.Oh, it's a blessed thing to live with an easy conscience— a thrice blessed thins to die with anROOK WOOD. 143easy one, and that's what I never shall, I'mafeard. Poor Sir Piers ! I'd mumble a prayerfor him, if I durst."Hence — leave me," said Lady Rosewood.Agnes left the room.What, if the dead can return ?" thoughtLady Rosewood. " All men doubt it, yet allmen believe it. / would not believe it, werethere not a creeping horror that overmastersme, when I think of the state beyond thegrave — that intermediate state, for such it mustbe, betwixt heaven or hell, when the bodylieth mouldering in the ground, and the soulsurvives, to wander, unconfined, until the hourof doom. And doth the soul survive when disenthralled?Is it a dependent of the body?Doth it not perish with the body ? These aredoubts which I cannot resolve ; but did I deemthat there were no weal eternal, nor eternal woe,this hand should at once liberate me from myown weaknesses — my fears — my life. There isbut one path to acquire that knowledge, whichtaken, can never be retraced. I am content to144 ROOKWOOD.live — while living, to be feared; it may be,hated — when dead, to be contemned — yet stillremembered. Ha — what sound was that ? — astifled scream ! — Agnes ! — without there ! — shehears me not — she is full of fears — I am notfree from them myself, but I will shake themoff. This will divert their channels"' drawingfrom out her bosom the marriage certificate.This will arouse the torpid current of myblood — ' Piers Rosewood to Susan Bradley —And by whom solemnized ? The name is checked— Richard Checked — ha, I bethink me — apapist priest — a recusant — who was for sometimeconcealed in the house. I have heard ofthis man — he was afterwards imprisoned, butescaped — he is either dead, or in a foreign land.No witnesses — ^"tis well ! Methinks Sir PiersRosewood did well to preserve this — it shalllight his funeral pyre — would he could nowbehold me, as I consume it''She held the paper in the direction of thecandle ; but, ere it could touch the flame, itdropped from her hand. As if her horribleROOKWOOD. 145wish had been granted, before her stood thefigure of her husband ! Lady Rosewood startednot. No sign of trepidation or alarm, save thesudden stiffening of her form, was betrayed. Herbosom ceased to palpitate — her respiration eyes were fixed upon the apparition.The figure moved not, but regarded hersternly. It was at some little distance, withinthe shade cast by the lofty bedstead. Stillshe could distinctly discern it ; it was no oculardeception ; it moved — it was attired in the costumeSir Piers was wont to wear — his huntingdress. All that her son had told her, rushed toher recollection. The phantom advanced; itscountenance was pale, and wore a gloomy frown.What would you destroy ?'''' asked the apparition,in a hollow tone.The evidence of *""What?"Your marriage."With yourself, accursed woman ?^« With Susan BradleyVOL. II. H146 EOOKWOOD.With her ?'' shouted the figure, in an alteredtone — " With her — married to her ! then Lukeis legitimate, and heir to this estate !" Utteringwhich, the apparition rushed to the table, andsecured the document. " A marriage certificate !''it ejaculated — " here's a piece of luck ! Bythe triple tree of St. Gregory, but this is aprize worth drawing — it ain't often in our lotterylife we pick out a ticket like this. One wayor the other, this must turn up a few coolthousands''Restore that paper, villain," exclaimed LadyRosewood, recovering all the audacity naturalto her character, the instant she discovered thatthe intruder was mortal — " restore it, or, byheaven, you shall rue the hour in which youdared "Softly, softly," replied the pseudo-phantom,with one hand pushing back the lady, while theother conveyed the precious document to thecustody of his nether man, giving the buckskinpocket a slap — " two words to that, my Lady.ROOKWOOD. 147I know its value as well as yourself, and mustmake my market. The highest offer has me,your Ladyship ; he's but a poor auctioneer, thatknocks down his ware to the first bidder. LukeBradley may come down more handsomely withthe stumpy''Who are you, ruffian, that take the guiseof Sir Piers Rosewood ? To what end is thismasquerade assumed? If for the purpose ofterrifying me into compliance with the schemesof that madman, Luke Bradley, whom I presumeto be your confederate, your labour is mis-spentyour stolen disguise has no more weight withme than his forged claims."Forged claims. Damme, he must be aprime maker*, to have forged that. But yourLadyship is in error — Luke Bradley is no confederateof mine."Both are robbers. You steal from the fatherhe from the son."Forger.148 ROOKWOOD.Come, my Lady, these are hard words — Ihave no time to bandy talk. What money haveyou in the house ? — ^be alive""You are a robber, then ?""Robber ! — Not I — I'm a tax-gatherer — acollector of Rich-Rates — Ha, ha ! But come.What plate have you got ? Nay, don't bealarmed — take it quietly — these tidings can't behelped — better make up your mind to it withoutmore ado — much the best plan — no screaming —it may injure your lungs, and can alarm nobody.Your maids have done as much before — it'sbeneath your dignity to make so much noise.So, you will not heed me ? As you will." Sayingwhich, he deliberately cut the bell cord, anddrew out a brace of pistols at the same time.Agnes !" shrieked Lady Rook wood, nowseriously alarmed.I must caution your Ladyship to be silent,"said the robber, who, as our readers will no doubthave already conjectured, was no other thanROOKWOOD. 149the redoubled Jack Palmer. Cocking a pistol,Agnes is already disposed of'' said he. " Howeverlike your deceased ' Lord and master' I mayappear, you will find you have got a very differentspirit from that of Sir Piers to deal with. 1am, naturally, the politest man breathing — havebeen accounted the best bred man on the road,by every lady whom I have had the honour ofaddressing ; and I should be sorry to sully mywell-earned reputation by any thing like rudeness.But I know the consequence of my character,and must, at all hazards, support it. Imust use a little force, of the gentlest kind.Perhaps you will permit me to hand you to achair — bless me, what a wrist your ladyship hasgot. Excuse me if I hurt you ; but you are sodevilish strong. Curse me if I ever thought tobe mastered by a woman. What, ho ! * SirPiers Rook wood calls' "Ready'' cried a voice.That's the word," echoed another ; " Read v.'150 ROOKWOOD.And, immediately, two men, their featuresentirely hidden by a shroud of black crape —accoutred in rough attire, and each armed withpistols, rushed into the room.Lend a hand'' said Jack.Even in this perilous extremity. Lady Rook-wood'scourage did not desert her. Anticipatingtheir purpose, ere her assailants could reach her,she extricated herself from Palmer's grasp, andrushed upon the foremost so unexpectedly, thatbefore the man could seize her, which he endeavouredto do, she snatched a pistol from hishand, and presented it at his head with a fiercenessof aspect, like that of a tigress at bay —her eye wandering from one to the other of thegroup, as if selecting a mark.There was a pause of some few seconds, inwhich the men looked at the lady, and then attheir leader. Jack looked blank.Hem !" said he, coolly — " This is somethingnew — disarmed — defied by a petticoat. Hark ye.EOOKWOOD. 151Rob Rust ; the disgrace rests with you. Clearyour character, by securing her at once. What !afraid of a woman .'*"'• A woman !'' repeated Rust, in a surly tone ;devilish like a woman indeed. Few men coulddo what she have done. Give the word, and Ifire ; but as to seizing her, that's more than111 engage to do.Then damn you for a coward'' said Jack.Seize her I will — I will steer clear of blood —if I can help it. Come, Madam, surrender, likethe more sensible part of your sex, at discretion.You will find resistance of no avail ;" and hestepped boldly towards her.Lady Rosewood drew the trigger. The pistolflashed in the pan. She flung away the uselessweapon, without a word.Ha, ha ^ said Jack, as he leisurely stoopedto pick up the pistol, and approached her Ladyship— " the bullet is not yet cast, that is tobe my billet. Here," added he, dealing Rusta heavy thump upon the shoulder with the butt152 ROOKWOOD.end of the piece — " take back your snapper,and look you prick the touch-hole, or yourbarking iron will never bite for you. Andnow. Madam, I must take the liberty of againhanding you to a seat. Dick Wilder, the cord —quick. It distresses me to proceed to suchlengths with your Ladyship — but safe bind, safefind, as Mr. Coates would say."You will not bind me, ruffian''Indeed, but your Ladyship is very muchmistaken — I have no alternative — your Ladyship'swrist is far too dexterous to be at liberty.I must furthermore request of your Ladyshipto be less vociferous — you interrupt business,Madam, which should be transacted with silenceand deliberation."Lady Rook wood's rage and vexation at thisindignity were beyond all bounds. Resistance,however, was useless, and she submitted, insilence. The cord was passed tightly roundher arms, when it flashed upon her recollectionsfor the first time, that Coates and Tyrconnel,EOOKWOOD. 153who were in charge of her captive in thelower corridor, might be summoned to herassistance. This idea had no sooner crossed hermind than she uttered a loud and protractedscream.Damnation !'^ cried Jack — " civility is wastedhere. Give me the gag, Rob ?''Better slit her squeaking pipe, at once''replied Rust, drawing his clasp knife — " shellthwart every thing."The gag, I say — not that"'I can't find the gag'" exclaimed Wilder,savagely. " Leave Rob Rust to manage her —hell silence her, I warrant you, while^you and Irummage the room."Ay, leave her to me," said the other miscreant." Go about the room, and take no heedher hands are fast — she tail scratch — 111 doitwith a single gash — send her to join herLord, whom she loved so well, before he's underground.They'll have something to see, alienh5154} ROOKWOOD.they come home from the master's funeral — theirmistress cut and dry for another. — Ho, ho !''Mercy, mercy I's shrieked Lady Rosewood.Ay, ay, FU be merciful," said Rust,brandishing his knife before her eyes. " I'll notbe long about it. Leave her to me — 111 giveher a taste of Sir Sydney."No, no. Rust — ^by God, you shan't do that,"said Jack, authoritatively — " 111 find some otherway to gag the jade."At this moment a noise of rapid footsteps washeard within the passage.Assistance comes," screamed Lady Rook-wood." Help ! help !"To the door," cried Jack. The words werescarcely out of his mouth, before Luke dashedinto the room, followed by Coates and Tyrconnel.Palmer and his companions levelled theirpistols at the intruders, and the latter wouldhave fired, but Jack's keen eye having discernedClasp knife.ROOKWOOD. 155Luke amongst the foremost, checked furtherhostilities for the present. Lady Rosewood,meanwhile, finding herself free from restraint,had rushed towards her deliverers, and crouchedbeneath Luke's protecting arms, which wereextended, pistol in hand, over her head. Behindthem stood Titus Tyrconnel flourishingthe poker, and Mr. Coates, who, upon the sightof so much warlike preparation, began somewhatto repent having rushed so precipitately into thelion's den.Luke Bradley !" exclaimed Palmer, steppingforward.Luke Bradley !'' echoed Lady Rosewood,recoiling, and staring into his face.Fear nothing, Madam," cried Luke. " Iam here to assist you — I will defend you withmy life."You defend me" exclaimed Lady Rook-wood,as in doubt.Even /," cried Luke ; " strange as it maysound."156 ROOKWOOD. ,Holy powers protect me r ejaculated Titus.As I live, it is Sir Piers himself''Sir Piers !'' echoed Coates, catching theinfection of terror, as he perceived Palmer moredistinctly. " What ! is the dead come to lifeagain ? — a ghost — a ghost !''A ghost !'' echoed Titus. " By my soul, it'sthe first ghost I ever heard of, that committed aburglary on its own house, and the night of thebody's burial too. But what the devil are thesewith it ? may be they're ghosts likewise."They are," said Palmer, in a hollow tone,mimicking the voice of Sir Piers, " attendantspirits. We are come for this woman — her timeis out — so no more palavering, Titus, but lend ahand to take her to the church-yard, and bed— d to you."Upon my conscience, Mr. Coates," criedTitus, " it's either the devil, or Sir Piers. We'llbe only in the way here. He's only just settlinghis old scores with his Lady. I thought itwould come to this, long ago."ROOKWOOD. 157Jack took advantage of the momentary confusion,created by this incidental alarm at hisdisguise, to direct Rust towards the door bywhich the new comers had entered; and, thisbeing accomplished, he burst into a loudlaugh.What ! not know me"" cried he — " notknow your old friend with a new face, Luke?nor you, Titus ? nor you, who can see througha millstone, Lawyer Coates, don t you recognise"' 'Jack Palmer, as I'm a sinner'' cried Titus.By the powers, and so it is. Why, Jack,honey, what does this mane? Is it yourself Isee in such company ? You're not robbing inearnest ?"Indeed but I am, friend Titus," exclaimedJack ; " and it is my own self you see. I justtook the liberty of borrowing Sir Piers's oldhunting coat from the justice room. You saidmy toggery wouldn't do for the funeral. I'm noother than plain Jack Palmer, after all."158 ROOK WOOD.With half a dozen aliases at your back,I dare say," cried Coates. " / suspected youall along — all your praise of highwaymen wasnot lost upon me. No, no — / can see into amillstone, be it ever so thick."Well ;" replied Jack — " I'm sorry to seeyou here, friend Titus; but keep quiet, and youshall come to no harm. As to you, Luke Bradley,you have anticipated my intention by halfan hour; I meant to set you free. For you,Mr. Coates, you may commit all future care ofyour affairs to your executors, administrators,and assigns. You will have no further need totrouble yourself with worldly concerns," levellinga pistol at the Attorney, who, however,shielded himself, in an ecstacy of apprehension,behind Luke's person. " Stand aside, Luke,"said Jack.I stir not," replied Luke. " I thank youfor your good intention, and will not injureyou — that is, if you force me not to do so. Iam here to defend her Ladyship."ROOK WOOD. 159What s that you say ?"' returned Jack, insurprise — " defend her Ladyship P^'With my life'' replied Luke. " Let mecounsel you to depart."Are you mad ? Defend her — Lady Rook-woods— your enemy — who would hang you ?Tut, tut ! Stand aside, I say, Luke Bradley, orlook well to yourself""You had better consider well, ere you proceeds''said Luke. " You know me of old — Ihave taken odds as great, and not come off thevanquished."The odds are even," cried Titus, " if Mr.Coates will but show fight — 111 stand by you tothe last, my dear joy — you're the right son ofyour father, though on the wrong side. Och !Jack Palmer, my jewel, no wonder you drankto the memory of Redmond O'Hanlon."You hear this .^" cried Luke.Hot-headed fool !" muttered Jack.Why don't you shoot the mad cull on thespot, and be d d to him ?" said Dick Wilder.160 ROOK WOOD.And mar my own chance ?'"* thought Jack ;no, that will never do — his life is not to bethrown away. Be quiet'' said he, in a whisper,to Wilder ; " IVe another card to play, whichshall serve us better than all the plunder here.No harm must come to that youngster — his lifeis worth thousands to us." Then turning toLuke, he continued, " I'm loth to hurt you,but what can I do ? — you must have the worstof it if we come to a pitched battle. I thereforeadvise you, as a friend, to draw off yourforces. We are three to three ; but two of yourparty are unarmed."Unarmed !" interrupted Titus, " Devil burnme, but this iron shillelah shall convinceyou to the contrary. Jack, or any of yourfriends."Make ready then, my lads," cried Jack.Stop a minute," exclaimed Coates ; " thisgets serious — this will end in homicide — in murder— we shall all have our throats cut, to acertainty ; and though they ^vill as surely beROOKWOOD. 161hanged for it, that will be but poor satisfactionto the sufferers. Had we not better compromisethis matter ?"Be silent !" said Luke.I'm for fighting it out," said Titus, whiskingthe poker round his head, like a flail inaction: " my blood's up. Come on, Jack Palmer,I'm for you''I should vote for retreating," chattered theAttorney, " if that cursed fellow had not placeda ne exeat at the door."Give the word, captain," cried Rust, impatiently.Ay — ay," echoed Wilder.A skilful general always parleys," said Jack.A word in your ear, Luke, ere that be donewhich cannot be undone."You mean me no treachery ?" returnedLuke.Treachery !" exclaimed Jack, disdainfully,unlocking his pistols, and putting them into hispocket.162 ROOKWOOD.Shoot him as he advances," whisperedCoates ; " he is in your power now."Scoundrel!" replied Luke, " do you thinkme as base as yourself?"Hush, hush ! for God's sake don't exposeme," said Coates.Curse me if I know what all this means,"muttered Wilder ; " but if he don't finish thematter quickly, I'm d d if I don't take thesettling of it into my own hands."Lady Rosewood had apparently listened tothis singular conference with sullen composure,though in reality she was racked with anxietyas to its results ; and, now apprehending thatPalmer was about to make an immediate disclosureto Luke, she accosted him as he passed her.Unbind me !" cried she, " and what you wishshall be your's — money — jewels "Ha ! may I depend ?"I pledge my word."Palmer untied the cord, and Lady Rook-wood,approaching a table whereon stood theROOKWOOD.escritoire, touched a spring, and a secret drawerflew open.Do you this of your owen free will ?"" askedLuke. " Speak, if it be otherwise"'I do," returned the Lady, hastily.Palmer's eyes glistened at the treasures exposedto his view.They are jewels, of countless price. Takethem — and rid me," she added, in a whisper,of him:'Luke Bradley ?"Ay."Give them to me."They are thine, freely, on those terms."You hear that, Luke," cried he aloud ;you hear it, Titus — this is no robbery. Mr.Coates — ' Know all men by these presents — Icall you to witness, Lady Rosewood gives methese pretty things."I do," returned she ; adding, in a whisper,on the terms which I proposed."Must it be done at once ?"ROOKWOOD.Without an instant's delay."Before your own eyes P""*I fear not to look on — each moment isprecious — you need but draw the trigger — he isoff his guard now — you do it, you know, inself-defence."And you ?"For the same cause."Yet he came here to aid you ?"What of that."He would have risked his life for your's ?"I cannot pay back the obligation. Hemust die !"The document?"Will be useless then."Will not that suffice ? — why aim at life ?"You trifle with me. You fear to do it."Fear /"About it, then — you shall have more gold."I will about it," cried Jack, throwing thecasket to Wilder, and seizing both Lady Rook-wood'shands. — "I am no Italian bravo,ROOK WOOD. 165Madam — no assassin — no remorseless cut-throat.What are you — devil or woman, that ask meto do this ? Luke Bradley, I say."Would you betray me ?'' cried Lady Rook-wood.You have betrayed yourself, Madam. — Nay,nay, Luke, hands off. See, Lady Rosewood,how you would treat a friend. This strangefellow, here, would blow out my brains for layinga finger upon your ladyships"*I will suffer no injury to be done to her""said Luke ; " release her."Your Ladyship hears him," said Jack.And you, Luke, shall learn the value setupon your generosity. You will not have herinjured. This instant she hath proposed, nay,paid, for your assassination."How ?" exclaimed Luke, recoiling.A lie as black as hell," cried Lady Rosewood.A truth as clear as heaven," returned Jack :I will speedily convince you of the fact." —Then turning to Lady Rosewood, he whispered" Shall I give him the marriage document i*'*166 ROOKWOOD.Beware !'' said Lady Rosewood.Do I avouch the truth, then ?""She was silent.I am answered," said Luke.Then leave her to her fate'' cried Jack.No," replied Luke ; " she is still a woman,and I will not abandon her to ruffianly violence.Set her free."You are a fool," said Jack.Hurrah, hurrah !" cried Coates, who hadrushed to the window — " Rescue, rescue ! — theyare returning from the church — I see the torchlight in the avenue — we are saved !"Hell and the devil !" cried Jack, " Not aninstant is to be lost. Alive, lads — bring off allthe plunder you can — be handy !"Lady Rosewood, I bid you farewell," saidLuke, in a tone in which scorn and sorrow wereblended. " We shall meet again."AVe have not parted yet," returned she ;will you let this man pass.? A thousandpounds for his life'sUpon the nail .?" asked Rust.ROOKWOOD.16:By the living God, if any of you attemptto touch him, I will blow his brains out uponthe spot, be he friend or foe'" cried Jack.Luke Bradley, we shall meet again. Youshall hear from me."^Lady Rookwood,"" said Luke, as he departed," I shall not forget this night''Is all ready ?^^ asked Palmer, of his comrades.All."Then budge."Stay," said Lady Rosewood, in a whisperto him. " What will purchase that document ?""Hem."A thousand pounds .^"Double it."It shall be doubled."I will turn it over."Resolve me now."You shall hear from me.""In what manner .^"I will find speedy means."Your name is Palmer .^"168 ROOKWOOD.Palmer is the name he goes by, your Ladyship,"replied Coates ; " but it is a fashion withthese rascals to have an alias""Ha — ^ha,'' said Jack, thrusting the ramrodinto his pistol barrel, as if to ascertain therewas a ball within it ; '' are you there, Mr. Coates ?Pay your wager. Sir""What wager ?''The hundred we bet, that you would takeme, if ever you had the chance."Take you — it was Dick Turpin I betted totake."/ am Dick Turpin — that's my alias, repliedJack""Dick Turpin ! then I'll have a snap at you,at all hazards," cried Coates, springing suddenlytowards him.And I at you " said Turpin, discharging hispistol right in the face of the rash Attorney —there's a quittance in full."END OF BOOK THE SECOND.BOOK III.CJe iSrip0p.Lay a garland on my hearse,Of the dismal yew ;Maidens, willow branches bear, —Say I died true.My love was false, but I was firmFrom my hour of birth ;Upon my buried body lieLightly, gentle earth !Beaumont and Fletcher.VOL. II.BOOK THE THIRD.CHAPTER I.I had a sister, who among the raceOf gipsies was the fairest. Fair she wasIn gentle blood, and gesture to her beauty.Brome.There is a freshness in the first breath ofnew-awakened day (what timethe dapple-grey coursers of the dawnBeat up the light with their bright, silver hoofs,And chase it through the sky,)SO inspiriting and life-giving, that even severestfatigue will yield to its invigorating influence.Braced by the keen, thin air, then in its greatestpurity, and refreshed, almost as if by slumber,the toil-worn frame suddenly shakes off its172 Lockwood.languor, and prepares for renewed exertion;while the sympathetic spirit, heretofore depressedin its energies, recovers, at once, itselasticity, and, like the lark, soars upwards,attuning itself to gladness. So was it withLuke, as (after his escape from the Hall)he inhaled the breath of the autumnal morning,and felt himself inspired with new vigourand animation. For the last two days andnights, his had been a life of vast bodilyexertion and intense mental disquietude; and,with the exception of a few hours of repose,stolen at the cottage of Peter Bradley (where hehad passed the day after his adventure with thekeeper), and the disturbed slumber snatchedduring his confinement at the Hall, he hadknoAvn no rest. His strength, in consequence,was fast giving way, when the fresh matin breeze,like the elixir of youth, poured a new currentinto his veins.On quitting Lady Rosewood's chamber,Luke speeded along the gloomy corridor, descendedthe spiral stairs, and, swiftly traversingROOKWOOD. 173sundry other dark passages, issued from adoor at the back of the house. Day was justbeginning to break. His first object had beento furnish himself with means to expedite hisflight ; and, perceiving no one in the yard, hedirected his hasty steps towards the stable. The"door of the building was fortunately unfastened ;and, entering, he found a strong roan-colouredhorse, which he knew, from description, had beenhis father's favourite hunter, and to the use ofwhich he now considered himself fully entitled.The animal roused himself as he approached,shook his glossy coat, and neighed as if herecognised the footsteps and the voice thataddressed him.Thou art mistaken, old fellows*' said Luke ;*' I am not he thou thickest ; nevertheless I amglad thy instinct would have it so. If thoudearest my father's son as thou hast borne myfather, o'er many a field for many a day, heneed not fear the best mounted of his pursuers.So ho ! come hither. Rook."The noble steed turned at the call. Luke174 nooKwooD.hastily equipped him, vaulted upon his back,and, disregarding every impediment in the shapeof fence or ditch, that he might avoid encounteringany one returning from the church,shaped his course across the fields towards theSexton's cottage, which he reached just as itsowner was in the act of unlocking his door.Peter testified his delight and surprise at theescape of his grandson, by a greeting of libwonted chuckling laughter.Ha, ha ! — free — escaped !'*'' exclaimed he. —*' Who hath delivered thee from the hands of theMoabites? — Who hath holpen thee from thehammer of Jael ? — Hadst thou not reason, likeHolofernes, to fear the sword of Judith ? Ha,ha ! But why do I ask ? Who could have donethis, but he who calleth himself Palmer? Iwas plotting some scheme of tardy deliverance,and lo ! he hath done it at once''My own hands have set me free," returnedLuke. " I am indebted to no man for myliberty — still less to him. But I cannot tan-yhere; each moment is precious. I came hither,ROOKWOOD. 175to request of you to bear me company to thegipsy encampment. Your presence is needful —will be most useful. In a word, ^Wll you go, ornot?"And mount behind thee P'' replied Peter ;I like not the conveyancesFarewell, then ;" and Luke turned to depart.Stay : that is Sir Piers's horse, old Rook ;I care not if I ride him."Quick then — mount."I will not delay thee ten seconds," rejoinedthe Sexton, opening his door, and throwing hisimplements into the cottage. " Back Mole —back. Sir," cried he, as the dog rushed out togreet him. " Bring your steed nigh this stone,grandson Luke — there — a little nearer — alasright," and away they galloped.The Sexton's first inquiries were directed toascertain how Luke had accomplished his escape :and, having satisfied himself in this particular,he was content to remain silent; musing, itmight be, on the incidents which had beendetailed to him.ROOKWOOD.The road Luke chose, was a rough unfrequentedlane, which skirted, for nearly a mile,the moss-grown palings and thick plantations ofthe park. It then diverged to the right, andseemed to bear towards a range of hills rising inthe distance. High hedges impeded the view oneither hand; but there were occasional gaps,affording glimpses here and there of the tract ofcountry through which he was riding. Meadowswere seen steaming with heavy dews, intersectedby a deep channelled stream, whose course wasmarked by a hanging cloud of vapour, as wellas by certain low, melancholy, pollard willows,that stood like stripped, shivering urchins bythe river side. Other fields succeeded, yellowwith golden grain, or bright with floweringclover (the autumnal crop), coloured with everyshade, from the light green of the turnip to thedarker verdure of the bean, the various productsof the teeming land. The whole was backed byround drowsy masses of trees.Luke spake not, nor abated his furious course,till the road began to climb a steep ascent. HeROOKWOOD. 177then drew in the rein, and from the heights ofthe acclivity stayed to survey the plain overwhich he had passed.It was a rich agricultural district, with littleof the picturesque, but having much of trueEnglish endearing beauty and loveliness to recommendit. Such a quiet, pleasing landscape, inshort, as one views, at such a season of the year,from every eminence in every midland county ofour merry Isle. The picture was made up chieflyof a tract of land, as we have just described,filled with corn ripe for the sickle, or studdedwith sheaves of the same golden produce, enlivenedwith green meadows, so deeply luxuriantas to claim the scythe for the second time ; eachdivided from the other by thick hedge-rows, theuniformity of which were broken ever and anonby some towering elm, or wide branching oak.Many old farm houses, with their broad barnsand crowd of haystacks (forming little villages inthemselves), ornamented the landscape at differentpoints, and by their substantial look, gaveevidence of the fertility of the soil, and of theI 5178 ROOKWOOD.thriving condition of its inhabitants. Somethree miles distant might be seen the scatteredhamlet of Rosewood ; the dark russet thatchof its houses scarce perceptible amongst theembroiled foliage of the surrounding timber.The site of the village was, however, pointedout by the square tower of the antique church,which crested the summit of the adjoining hill ;and although the Hall was entirely hidden fromview, Luke readily traced out its locality, amidstthe depths of the dark grove in which it wasembedded.This goodly prospect had other claims toattention in Luke's eyes besides its agriculturalor pictorial merit. It was, or he deemed it was,his own ; for far as his eye ranged, yea, evenbeyond the Ene of vision, the estates of Rook-woodextended.Dost see yon house below us, in the valley ?'^asked Peter, of his companion.I do'' replied Luke ; " a snug old house — -a model of a farm — every thing looks comfortableand well to do about it — there are a dozenROOKWOOD. 179lusty haystacks, or thereabouts; and the greatbarn, with its roof yellowed like gold, looks builtfor a granary; and there are stables and kine-houses,and orchards, and dove-cots, and fishponds,and an old circular garden, with wallfruit in abundance. He should be a happyman, and a wealthy one, who dwells therein."^He dwells therein no longer' returnedPeter — " he died last night""He died last night !" echoed Luke. " Howknowest thou that ? None are stirring in thehouse, as yet."The owner of that house, Simon Toft,"^replied Peter, " was last night struck by a thunderbolt.He was one of the coffin-bearers at thyfather's funeral. They are sleeping within thehouse, thou mayest. 'Tis well. Let them sleepon — they will awaken too soon, wake when theymay — ha, ha !'"*Peace"" cried Luke ; " thou slightest everything— even this smiling landscape thou wouldstturn to gloom. Doth not this morn awaken ahappier train of thoughts within thy mind ?180 ROOKWOOD.With me it maketh amends for want of sleepeffaced resentment, and banished every blackmisgiving. 'Tis a joyous thing, thus to scourthe country at earliest dawn — to catch all thespirit and freshness of the morning — to beabroad before the lazy world is half awake —to make the most of brief existence — and tohave spent a day of keen enjoyment, almostbefore the day begins with some; of such enjoymentas he can never know who, chained bythe fetters of sleep, only issues forth when thesun is high in heaven. I like to anticipate therising of the glorious luminary — to watch everyline of light changing, as at this moment, fromshuddering grey to fervent blushing rose !See how the heavens are dyed ! Who wouldexchange yon gorgeous spectacle'' continuedLuke, pointing towards the East, and againurging his horse to full speed down the hill,endangering the Sexton's seat, and threateningto impale him upon the crupper of the saddle,who would exchange that sight, and theexhilarating feeling of this fresh morn, for aROOKWOOD. slouchof eider down, and a head-ache inreversion""I for ones"* returned the Sexton, sharply,would willingly exchange it for that or anyother couch, provided it rid me of this accursedcrupper, which calleth me sorely. Moderatethy pace, grandson Luke, or I must throwmyself off the horse, in self-defence*"Luke slackened his charger's pace, in compliancewith the Sexton's wish.Ah — well'' continued Peter, restored in ameasure to comfort ; " now I can contemplatethe sunrise, which thou loudest, somewhat atmine ease. 'Tis a fine sight, I doubt not, to theeyes of youth ; and, to the sanguine soul of himupon whom life itself is dawning, is, I dare say,inspiriting : but when the hey-day of existenceis past — when the blood flows sluggishly inthe veins — when one has known the desolatingstorms which the brightest sunrise has preceded,the seared heart refuses to trust its falseglitter ; and, like the experienced sailor, sees oftin the brightest skies a forecast of the tempest.182 ROOKWOOD.To such a one, there can be no new dawn of theheart — no sun can gild its cold and cheerlesshorizon — no breeze revive pulses that have longsince ceased to throb with any chance emotion.Even such am I. — I am too old to feel freshnessin this nipping air ; it chills me more than thedamps of night, to which I am accustomed.Night — midnight, is my season of delight. Natureis instinct then with secrets dark and dread;there is a language which he who sleeper not,but will wake, and watch, may haply learn.Strange organs of speech hath the InvisibleWorld — strange language doth it talk — strangecommunion doth it hold with him who wouldpry into its mysteries. It talks by bat andowl — by the grave-worm, and by each crawlingthing — by the dust of graves, as well as by thosethat rot therein — but ever doth it discourse bynight, and 'specially when the moon is at the full.Tis the lore that I have then learnt, that makesthat season dear to me. Like your cat, mineeye expands in darkness — I blink at the sunshine,like your owl"'ROOKWOOD. 188Cease this forbidding strain"" returnedLuke ; "it sounds as harshly as thy ownscreech-owes cry. Let thy thoughts take amore sprightly turn, more in unison with myown and with the fair aspect of nature."Shall I direct them to the gipsies' camp,then ?^ said Peter, with a sneer. " Do thineown thoughts tend thither ?''Thou art not altogether in the wrongsreplied Luke; " I teas thinking of the gipsies'camp, and of one who dwells amongst its tents."I knew it'' replied Peter. " Didst thouthink to deceive me, by attributing all thyjoyousness of heart to the dawn ? Thy thoughtshave been wandering all this while upon onewho hath, I will engage, a pair of sloe-blackeyes, an olive skin, and yet withal a clear one —black, yet comely, ' as the tents of Cedar, as thecurtains of Solomon' — a mesh of jetty hair, thathath entangled thee in its net-work — ripe lips,and a cunning tongue — one of the plagues ofEgypt.— Ha, ha !"Thou hast guessed shrewdly," replied Luke ;184 EOOKWOOD.I care not to own to thee that my thoughtswere so occupied""I was assured of it," replied the Sexton.And what may be the name of her towardswhom thy imagination was straying ?""She is one of the tribe of Lovel, on themother's side"'Of the tribe of Lovel ?'' echoed Peter.Grandchild of that Barbara Lovel, whomthou say est performed the rites of embalmmenton my mother's remains."Her grandchild ! — How is she called ?"" Sibila Perez," replied Luke. " Her fatherwas a Spanish Gitano. She is known amongsther people by her mother's name of Lovel."Beautiful, no doubt ?"She is beautiful," replied Luke ; " howbeautiful thou shalt judge presently."I will take your word for it," returned theSexton ; " and you love her, doubtlessly ?""Passionately."You have loved her long ?"Years."sooKwooD. 185** You are not married ?'' asked Peter, hastily,Not as yet"" replied Luke ; " but my faithis plighted. I will raise her to my state'sTo your state !'"* echoed the Sexton, in atone of deep scorn. " Ha, ha ! — AVhat wouldthen be your state? Marry in madness, asyour father did before you, and then cutthrough the knot you cannot otherwise untie.You are a Rosewood, and I say to you ' beware.'— Again I tell you, you must abandonthis wench''And break her heart .^"Women's hearts are not so readily broken :the stuff is suppler than thou deepest. Butgrant it should be so, it were better for thee sheshould perish now than hereafter "For what dost thou take me?-** What evilthing art thou.'^" cried Luke, reining in hissteed, and regarding him with a look of horrorand disgust, not unmixed with apprehension.Thy grandsire — thy counsellor — thy friend""returned Peter, with a sinister smile. " Thouart, I have already said, a Rosewood, and as186 ROOKWOOD.such I offer thee advice grounded on experience,which thou wilt do well not to reject. Thyfather I knew; thy father's father, and othersof thy family ; and with the annals of all thyrace am I acquainted. Thy father's son I alsoknow, and I tell thee, Luke, there are seeds ofpride in thy composition, which will grow up inas short a space as grains of mustard to toweringtrees. Once Sir Luke Rosewood in possession,and mark the change ! Impulses thatnow but feebly sway thy character, may thendeterminately affect it, and pride amongst theforemost. — Even now, methinks, I discernsome difference in thee, of which thou thyselfcan scarce be unconscious. Be advisedby me in this matter : approve thyself first, erethou art fully committed. 'Tis for her sake Ispeak."For her sake !'' echoed Luke, disdainfully.Ay, for her sake. Better she be the jiltedmistress than the despised wife; for thou wouldsthate her then in the proportion that thou lowesther noir. She would be a bar to thy honourableROOKWOOD. 187advancement in the world — a blot in thy splen- /dour abroad — a bane to thy happiness at home.Thou art a Rosewood — thou art yet untried —thou hast not passed through the fiery furnace —through the terrible ordeal of matrimony — thouknowest not the fuel that lies ready to bekindled at thy heart. With thee to marrySybil will be to repent — to repent, to loathe —to loathe, to "Peace," thundered Luke, " or by heavenI will throw thee beneath my horse's hoofs"'And destroy one who boldly speaks whatanother would hesitate to avouch? 'Tis thuswell-meant advice is ever treated. Had I counselledthee to wed her, thou wouldst haveaccounted me thy friend; but because I jointout the only course thou couldst with honouror with safety pursue, thou wouldst trample mebeneath thine horse's heels. Why should I besilent, when I may work great good by openspeech? Am I not more nearly interested inthy welfare than any other? Am I influencedby any sordid feeling ? Am I not entitled, ai188 ROOK WOOD.a sufferer by an alliance equally disproportionateand wretched, as thou knowest, to exclaimagainst this ? Pursue it, I tell thee, and thouwilt repent it. — Hast thou no other liking ?''None''Didst thou never love another ?""Mine is no wandering heart. Where itlieth, it abideth."By what troth were ye betrothed together P''By the true troth of hearts that beforeheaven pledge themselves each to the other''Be it so then, and may the heaven thathath registered your vow, bless your nuptials."Is that thy wish ?"If it must be so. I would have thee wedded,though not to Sybil."And whom wouldst thou select ?"One before whom her beauty would pale asstars at day's approach."There lives not such a one."Trust me there does — Eleanor IVIowbray islovely beyond parallel. But I was merely speculatingupon a possibility, when I wished herEOOKWOOD. 189thine — it is scarce likely she would cast her eyesupon thee"*I shall not heed her neglect. Yet, gracedwith my title, I doubt not, were it my pleasureto seek a bride amongst those of gentle blood, Ishould not find all indifferent to my suit."Possibly not. But what might weigh withothers, would not weigh with her. There arequalities thou blackest, which she has discoveredin another."In whom ?"In Ranulph Rosewood."Is he her suitor ?"I know not ; but I have found out thesecret of her heart."And thou wouldst have me abandon myown betrothed love, to beguile from my brotherhis destined bride ?"The Sexton answered not, and Luke fanciedhe could perceive a quivering in the hands thatgrasped his body for support. There was a briefpause in their conversation.And who is Eleanor Mowbray ?" askedLuke, breaking the silence.190 ROOKWOOD.Thy cousin. On the mother's side a Rook-wood.'Tis therefore I would urge thy unionwith her. There is a prophecy relating to thyhouse, which seems as though it would be fulfilledin thy person and in her's.When the stray Rook shall perch on the topmost bough,There shall be screeching and screaming I trow ;But of right, and of rule, of the ancient nest,The Rook that with Rook mates shall hold him possest.The stray Rook is thyself — that I need not tell.The Rook that with Rook shall mate, may beRanulph. He may wed Eleanor Mowbray, andthe estates shall pass away from thy hands."I place no faith in such fantasies"" repliedLuke; " and yet the lines bear strangely upon mypresent situation."Their application to thyself," returned theSexton, " and to her is unquestionable andprecise."It would seem so, indeed," rejoined Luke,and he sank into abstraction, from which theSexton, for some space, did not care to arousehim.Peter had judged his grandson truly. AEOOKWOOD. 191change was at work within him, some intimationsof which Luke had himself experienced,but he knew not its extent, until probed bythe Sexton's reckless hand. He became suddenlyalive to the painful conviction, and startedat the sight of the precipice to which he washastening with headlong speed. He felt he couldnot retreat; and yet that leap, once taken, hefeared his peace of mind was gone. He had notdared to think of Sybil, except in moments ofextreme peril, when hope for a while was clouded.Then it was that her image cheered him. Nowthat his prospects were again fair, she stood likean obstacle in his path. He reproached himselffor this dereliction — he sought in vain to arousehis better feelings. His passion was ardent asever; but he was not engrossed, as heretofore,by that passion. Pride struggled for masterywith love, and in the end might, he feared,obtain the victory. When a suspicion of hismistress's inferiority once enters the lover's mind,his passion, we may rest assured, is on the wane.Love, like death, is a leveller of all distinctions :192 Lockwood.it will admit of none — will perceive none ; andwhen affection and worldly degree are put incomparison by the lover himself, it is not difficultto foretell by which the scales will be turned.Love's kingdom is foundedUpon a parity ; lord and subject,Master and servant, are names banished thence.They wear one fetter all, or all one freedom*.Annoyed with himself, and angry at theunexpected insight into his own heart, whichhad been afforded him, Luke began to regretthat he had ever sought out his grandsire as acompanion of his journey, and wished him safelyback at his own cottage. He was in no moodtranquilly to endure the further persecutionwhich the Sexton intended him.One question more, and I have done?" exclaimedPeter, abruptly renewing the conversation.What wouldst thou ask .'' To whom relatesthy question ?''To Sybil,"♦ Cartwright.EOOKWOOD. 193Name her not — thou dost it but to tortureme;'Yet answer me"" persisted Peter. " Thouhast loved her long, thou mayest. With theeto love must be to love madly, desperately.With her, being of gipsy blood, commingledwith the fiery current which she derived fromher Spanish parentage, love can be no tameregard""Tame regard !'" echoed Luke. " She is thedaughter of a wild race, who love nth an ardourwhich those who dwell in cities can never equal.Love with them is an intense passion""And, like the prophets rod, swallowed upall lesser emotions — as pride, revenge, remorse.That is not thy case, Luke. No matter; sheloved thee passionately — you have wanderedtogether for years. Could hearts so framed foreach other, endure the torture of unrequited lovefor such a period ? With inclination to promptopportunity to grant — it were unreasonableto suppose otherwise! She is not of a chillyrace, thou mayest ,^""VOL. II. K194 ROOKWOOD.What mean you to insinuate ?"Nay, I make all allowances""Allowances !'*''Youth, blood, passion, all conspiring, it isnot to be marvelled at."Barest thou to hint "^That she is thy mistress — wherefore not?Things more improbable have come to pass. Ihold the offence too lightly, to blame thee for it*"'' I warn thee to be silent''« Canst thou deny it ?"'My hand is upon thy throats*' exclaimedLuke, furiously seizing his grandsire by thecollar.To answer my question, were better thanto use violence," returned Peter.Listen to me then," replied Luke, withdrawinghis hold, and with difficulty restraininghis indignation ; " thou who softest at woman'slove, and boldest her chastity in derision, andlearn that, placed by circumstances in a situationof doubt and peril — surrounded by wildand lawless companions — loving with an ardourROOK WOOD. 195and devotion passionate and fervent as everagitated the bosom of woman — the fame ofSybil is as pure as mountain snow. Sinceboyhood have I known her — since boyhoodloved her. Ah ! well do I remember when Isaw her first; well do I recall the memory ofthat moment. She stands before me as she stooda child. A fairy creature, cast in beauty ""smould, with glowing cheeks, radiant withwarmth and bloom — that rich bloom that paintsthe cheek of the brunette — eyes large, and dark,and full of fire and tenderness — lips vivid ascarnation ; and even then, with rich tresses thatfell to her little rounded ancles ! I know nothow soon my love burst into raging flame, butthe spark was kindled then. Thou knowest thatI, an infant, was committed to the care of BarbaraLovel. She brought me up as one of herown children. While I was yet a boy, Sybilreturned with her dying mother from Toledo.Her father had been a gipsy contrabandist ;he was shot by the carabineers in the sierrasin the neighbourhood of that city. Her mother196 ROOKWOOD.had suffered a martyrdom at the Inquisition,chiefly for her daughter's sake. She died soonafter her return to this country. The care ofSybil consequently devolved on Barbara. She,as thou art aware, rules the gipsy people astheir queen. Her power and influence extendedto Sybil and myself. We lived apart from theothers, yet I was not altogether estranged.Many a wild adventure have I engaged in withthe company — many a merry feat performed !But let that pass. As Sybil grew in years, shegrew in beauty. Her eyes caught new fire fromthe sun ; her cheeks a warmer glow ; her locksa letter dye; her lips a richer carnation. Mylove grew in proportion. Heavens ! and whata love was mine-r-was — ah ! — thott smiles and/ sigh — accursed be that smile — and yet I knownot why I sigh. It is not as it was wont to be.There is more of sadness than of ecstasy in thushurriedly retracing those bright and happy hours.Surely I am not, cannot be, .the monster thouwouldst have me think myself. That vision ofbliss rises before me like a Paradise, from whichRosewood. 197I am self-exiled. Renounce Sybil ! never, never.Away with thy accursed advice"'The Sexton answered not for some space;when he did, it was in a tone of cold irony.Advice'' said he, " is always disagreeable ;I never take it ; seldom give it. If I esteemedyou as lightly as I esteem all else; or rather,if I hated you as I hate all else, I wouldurge you to this match — I would bid youbrave all customs — set all laws of society atnought, and despise them as they ought to bedespised ; (not that you could despise them, foryour proud man, let him think what he will,breathes but the breath of others — is a shackledslave to other's opinions — and thou art already,or will be, a proud man, and then thou wilt nolonger see with thine own eyes, or judge withthine own judgment) ; I would bid you do this,I tell you, frankly, because it would be to makeyou miserable ; and think not hence, that Idelight in misery, or am jealous of happiness.It is not so. But when I see folly lifting itshand against itself, or driving its mad chariot at198 ROOK WOOD.headlong speed, my hand shall never stay theblow, or put a spoke in the wheel. In such casemy counsel would be, that thou shouldst wedSybil. She is young — she is beautiful, I shouldsay, and fair, I doubt not in thine eyes, thoughdark as an Ethiop in those of others. She willgrace thy board. She will adorn thy name. Thegipsy bride of Sir Luke Rosewood — there isromance in the title — and what neatest thou tocare, if high dames should say, that she lacksaccomplishment, or breeding, education, all thatis supposed to refine their sex ? What if they,titled as she would be, were to shun her ? thouneatest not care for that. Avoid the society ofwomen, and seek that of men : there are many,I doubt not, who would see no mote in thywife's bright black eyes — no stain in her sunburntcheek''What fiend could have prompted me tolink myself with a companion so pestilent ?"muttered Luke ; " but, thank heaven, 'tis onlyfor a short space""True," replied the Sexton, " and thouEOOKWOOD. 199mayest profit by thy present affliction, if thouwilt, and turn this necessary evil to excellentaccount. Even I, you see, can moralize. Yourpresent situation applied forcibly to your futurecondition. Unwittingly you have saddled yourselfwith a troublesome companion, who ticketto you like a burr, and whom you cannotshake off. There is, however, one drop ofcomfort in the cup — the journey, luckily, isshort. Marry — and you will have a companionthrough the journey of life, equally, it maybe,wearisome, undoubtedly as difficult to bedisposed of."Infuriated, as his own steed might have beenby the sting of a summer hornet, and yet unableto free himself from his inexorable tormentor,Luke, as the animal would probably have done,sought refuge in flight, forcing his horse into itsswiftest gallop ; and though he still carried thegalling cause of his disquietude along with him,he, by this means, effectually disarmed his pertinacity; as, in fact, Peter's sole attention was200 ROOKWOOD.now directed to the maintenance of his seat,which every instant, owing to the nature of theroad, became more precarious.The aspect of the country had materiallychanged since their descent of the hill. In placeof the richly-cultivated district which lay on theother side, a broad brown tract of waste landwas spread out before them, covered withscattered patches of gorse, stunted fern, and lowbrushwood, presenting an unvaried surface ofunbaked turf, whose shallow coat of sod wasmanifested by the stones that clattered underthe horse's hoofs as he rapidly traversed its aridbreast, clearing with ease to himself, but notwithout creating alarm to the Sexton — everygravelly trench, natural chasm, or other inequalityof ground that occurred in his course.Clinging to his grandson with the tenacity of abird of prey fixing its talons in the sides of itsquarry, Peter for some time kept his station insecurity; but, unluckily, at one dyke ratherwider than the rest, the horse, owing possiblyROOKWOOD. 201to the mismanagement, intentional or otherwise,of its rider, swerved, and the Sexton, dislodgedfrom his " high estate'" fell at the edge of thetrench, and rolled incontinently to the bottom.Luke drew up, to inquire if any bones werebroken, and Peter presently upreared his dustyperson from the abyss into which he hadfallen. Without condescending any reply, yetmuttering curses, " not loud, but deep'' Peteraccepted his grandson's proffered hand, andremounted.While thus occupied, Luke fancied he hearda distant shout, and noting whence the soundproceeded — the same quarter by which he hadapproached the heath — he beheld a singlehorseman, spurring in their direction, at thetop of his speed ; and to judge from therate at which he advanced, it was evidenthe was any thing but indifferently mounted.Apprehensive of pursuit, Luke expeditedthe Sexton's ascent; and that accomplished,without bestowing further regard upon theK 5ROOKWOOD.object of his solicitude, he resumed hisheadlong flight. He now, however, thoughtit necessary to bestow more attention to hischoice of road, and, perfectly acquainted withthe heath, avoided all unnecessarily hazardouspasses; but in spite of his knowledge of theground, and the excellence of his horse, thestranger sensibly gained upon him. The latter'ssteed carried no double burthen, and was nolagging hack; fleet as the wind it seemed,swift as an Arab of the desert. The danger,however, was no longer imminent.We are safe," cried Luke ; " the limits ofHardchase are past. In a few seconds we shallenter Davenham Wood. I will turn the horseloose, and we will betake ourselves to flightamongst the trees. I will show thee a place ofconcealment. He cannot follow us on horseback,and on foot I defy him. He is but one man, 'tistrue ; but I would willingly avoid any encounternow, which, most probably, would terminatefatally."EOOKWOOD. SOSStay," cried the Sexton. " He is not inpursuit — she takes another course— he wheels tothe right. By heaven ! it is the Devil himselfupon a black horse, come for bow-legged Ben,See, he is there already."The horseman had turned, as the Sextonstated, careering towards a revolting object, atsome little distance on the right-hand. It was agibbet, with its horrible burthen. He rodeswiftly towards it, and reining in his horse,took off his hat, bowing profoundly to thecarcase that swung in the morning breeze.Just at that moment a gust of air catching thefleshless skeleton, its arm seemed to be waved inreply to the salutation. A solitary crow wheeledover the horseman's head as he paused. Aftera moment's halt, he turned round, and againshouted to Luke, waving his hat.As I live," said the latter, " it is JackPalmer."Dick Turpin, you mean," rejoined theSexton. " He has been paying his respects to a204 ROOKWOOD.brother blade. Ha, ha ! Dick will never havethe honour of a gibbet ; he is too tender of theknife. Did you mark the crow ? — But here hecomes."And in another instant Turpin was by theirside.CHAPTER II.1 see a column of slow-rising smokeOvertop the lofty wood, that skirts the wild.CowpER. The Task.The top of the morning to you, gentlemen''said Turpin (for so we must in future designateour friend, Jack Palmer), as he rode up, atan easy canter. " Did you not hear myhalloo ? I caught a glimpse of you on thehill yonder, — I knew you both, two milesoff; and so, having a word or two to say to you,Luke Bradley, before I leave this part of thecountry, I put Bess to it, and she soon broughtme within hail. Bless her black skin," addedhe, affectionately patting his horse's neck,there's not her match in these parts, no, norin any other; she wants no coaxing, to do her206 ROOKWOOD.work — no bleeders for her. Often and oftenshs'^s saved her master's colquarron* from beingtwisted ! Black Bess is my best friend, myfirst favourite, and dearer to me than anyJudy of them all, though I've no particulardislike to the women. But what bio wenwould do for me what she has done? No,no, — Black Bess before the world. I shouldhave been up with you before this, had I nottaken a cross cut, to look at poor Ben""The martyr !" ejaculated Peter.True, the martyr," echoed Jack, laughing:many a man of less merit has met withcanonization. Ben was a brave boy in his day.I like to see how long a man will last, underthese circumstances. There was Will Davies,the Golden Farmer, who rattled merrily inhis irons at Bagshot, for many a long year,IVe heard say ; and Holloway, who was gibbetedat Holloway, on the Highgate Road ; andJack Hawkins ; and Ben Child (he who wasNeck.ROOKWOOD. 207tucked up for the Bristol mail job) ; their bonesare bleaching still; and Will the Waterman,who was hung in irons at the Isle of Dogs,he stood it out for years — I remember him,I've seen some dozens in my day. Curse thosecrows — I hate the sight of them. Dammed, if Idon't shake my chains at 'em, if ever it's mylot to hang, like fruit, from the tree, and todance a long volta to the music of the fourwhistling winds. No one shall pluck me withimpunity. — Ha, ha ! And now may I ask,whither are you bound, comrades ?"Comrades !" whispered Peter to Luke,"You see he does not so easily forget his oldfriends."I have business which will not admit ofdelay," observed Luke ; " and, to speak plainly — '"^You want not my society," returned Turpin; " I guessed as much. Natural enough !You have got an inkling of your good fortune.You have found out that you are a rich man'sheir, not a poor wench's bastard. No offence.I'm a plain spoken man, as you will find, if you208 ROOKWOOD.know it not already. I have, no objection to yourplaying these fine tricks on others, though itwon't answer your turn to do so with me."Sir'' exclaimed Luke, sharply.Sir, to you," replied Turpin. " Sir Luke —as I suppose you would now like to be addressed.I am aware of all. A nod is as good as a winkto me. Last night I learnt the fact of Sir Piers'smarriage from Lady Rook wood : — Ay, from herLadyship. You stare, — and old Peter, there,opens his ogles now. But it was so — she let itall out by mistake; and I am in possession ofwhat can alone substantiate your father's firstmarriage, and establish your claims."The devil!" cried the Sexton, adding, in awhisper to Luke, " You had better not bequite so precipitate in dropping so obliging anacquaintance."You are jesting," said Luke to Turpin."It is ill jesting before breakfast," returnedDick ; " I am seldom in the mood for a jokeso early. What, if a certain marriage certificatehad fallen into my hand ?"ROOK WOOD. 209A marriage certificate !"" echoed Luke andothe Sexton simultaneously.The only existing proof of the union of SirPiers Rook wood with Susan Bradley," continuedTurpin. " What if I had stumbled upon sucha document — nay more, if I knew where todirect you to it?"Had you not better condescend to renewyour former intimacy ?"" whispered Peter.Peace," cried Luke, to his tormentor ; andthen addressing Turpin, " if what you say betrue," said he, " my quest is at an end. All thatI need, you appear to possess. Other proofs arebut secondary to this. I know with whom Ihave to deal. What do you demand?"I demand nothing," said Turpin. " Wewill talk about the matter after breakfast. I wishto treat with you as friend and friend. Meet meon those terms, and I am your man ; reject myoffer, and I will turn my mare's head, and rideback to Rosewood. With me now rests all yourhopes. I have dealt fairly with you, and Iexpect to be fairly dealt with, in return. It were210 ROOKWOOD.idle to say that now I have an opportunityI should not turn this luck to my advantage.I were a fool to do so. You cannot expect it.And then I have Rust and Wilder to settlewith. I have left them behind, but theyknow my destination. We have been oldassociates. I like your spirit — I care not foryour haughtiness : — but I will not help youup the ladder, to be kicked down afterwards.Now you understand me. Whither are youbound''To Davenham Priory, the gipsy camp."The gipsies are your friends ?"« They are."I am alone."You are safe."You pledge your word that all shall be onthe square. You will not mention to one ofthat canting crew what I have told you ?"I cannot pledge myself to that — to onealone."To whom .?"A woman."ROOKWOOD. 211** Bad ! Never trust a petticoat""I will answer for her with my hfe.'^And for your grand dad there ?"He will answer for himself," said Peter.You need not fear treachery in me. Honouramong thieves, you know."Or where else should you seek it?" returnedTurpin, " for it has left all other classes ofsociety. Your highwayman is your only manof honour. I will trust you both ; and you shallfind you may trust me. After breakfast, as Isaid before, we will bring the matter to a conclusion.Tip us your saddle, Sir Luke, andI am satisfied. You shall rule in Rosewood,ril engage, ere a week be flown — and then — butso much parleying is dull work : — let's make thebest of our way to breakfast."And away they cantered.A narrow bridle road conducted them singlythrough the defiles of a thick wood. Their routelay in the shade, and the air felt chilly amidstthe trees, the sun not having attained sufficientaltitude to penetrate its depths, while over-head212 ROOKWOOD.all appeared warmth and light. Quivering onthe tops of the timber, the horizontal sunbeamscreated, in their refraction, brilliant prismaticcolourings, and filled the air with motes likegolden dust. Our horsemen heeded not the sunshinenor the shade; occupied each with hisown train of thought, they silently rode on.Davenham Avoid, through which they urgedtheir course, had, in the olden time, beena forest of some extent. It was then an appendageto the domains of Rosewood, buthad passed from the hands of that family tothose of a wealthy adjoining land-owner andlawyer, Sir Edward Davenham, in the keepingof whose descendants it had ever after continued.A noble wood it was, and numbered manypatriarchal trees. Ancient oaks, whose broadgnarled limbs the storms of five hundred yearshad vainly striven to uproot, and which werenow sternly decaying, — gigantic beech-trees,whose silvery stems shot smoothly upwards,sustaining branches of such size, that each,ROOKWOOD. 215dissevered, would in itself have formed atree, populous with leaves, and variegatedwith rich autumnal tints — the sprightly sycamore— the dark chestnut — the weird wych-elm— the majestic elm itself, festooned withivy — every variety of wood, dark, dense, andclosely inter strewn, composed the forest throughwhich they rode. So multitudinous was thetimber, so closely planted, so entirely filledup with a thick matted vegetation, whichhad been allowed to collect beneath, that littleview was afforded, had any been desired bythe present parties, into the labyrinth of thegrove. Tree after tree, clad in the glowing liveryof the season, was passed, and was as rapidlysucceeded by others. Occasionally a boughprojected over their path, compelling the ridersto incline their, heads, as they passed ; but,heedless of such difficulties, Luke pressed on.Now the road grew lighter, and they became atonce sensible of the genial influence of the sun.The transition was as agreeable as instantaneous.They had opened upon an extensive plantation214 ROOKWOOD.of full-grown pines, whose tall, branchless stemsgrew up like a forest of masts, and freelyadmitted the pleasant sun-shine. Beneath thosetrees, the soil was sandy, and destitute of allundergrowth, though covered with brown hair-likefibres and dry cones, shed by the pines.The agile squirrel, that freest denizen of thegrove, starting from the ground, as the horsemengalloped on, sprang up the nearest tree,and might be seen angrily gazing at the disturbersof his haunts, beating the branches withhis fore-feet, in expression of displeasure; therabbit darted across their path ; the jays flewscreaming amongst the foliage ; the blue cushat,scared at the clatter of the horses' hoofs, spedon swift wing into quarters secure from theirapproach; while the party-coloured pies, likecurious village gossips, congregated to peer atthe strangers, expressing their astonishment byloud and continuous chattering.Though so gentle of ascent as to be almostimperceptible, it was still evident that the paththey were following gradually mounted a hillROOKWOOD. 215side ; and when, at length, they reached an opening,the view thence showed the eminence they hadinsensibly won. Pausing for a moment uponthe brow of the hill, Luke pointed to a streamthat wound through the valley, and, tracing itscourse, indicated a particular* spot amongst sometrees. There was no indication of a dwelling-house— no cottage roof, no white canvas shed, topoint out the tents of the wandering tribe whoseabode they were seeking ; and the only circumstancewhich showed that it had once been thehaunt of man, were a few gray monastic ruins,scarce distinguishable from the stony barrier bywhich they were surrounded; and the onlyevidence that it was still frequented by humanbeings, was a thin column of pale blue smoke,which arose in curling wreaths from out thebrake; the light coloured vapour beautifullycontrasting with the green umbrage from whichit issued.Our destination is yonder," exclaimed Luke,pointing in the direction of the vapour.I am glad to hear it'' cried Turpin, " asROOKWOOD.well as to perceive there is some one awake.That smoke holds out a prospect of breakfast.No smoke without fire, as the old Lady Scandalsaid, and 111 wager that that fire was not lightedfor the faster fellows* to count their fingers by.We shall find three sticks, and a black pot witha kid seething in it. 111 engage. These gipsyfellows have picked out a prettyish spot toquarter in — quite picturesque, as one may sayand but for that bit of smoke, which looksfor all the world like a Dutch Skipper blowinghis morning cloud, and which might tell anawkwardness tale to any one but a friend, noone need know of their vicinity. A prettyplace, upon my soul''The spot, in sooth, merited Turpin's eulogium.It was, as he observed, " quite picturesque''The gem of the scene was a little secludedvalley, in the midst of wooded hills, so secludedindeed, that not a single habitation appeared inview, nor was there any further indication ofFortune-tellers.JIOOKWOOD. 217their proximity than what we have described.Clothed with timber to the very summits,excepting upon the side whereon the partystood, which verged upon the declivity, thesemountainous ridges presented a broken outlineof foliage, variegated with masses of colour, ofbright orange, umber, and deepest green. Fourhills hemmed in the valley. Here and there agray slab of rock might be discerned amongstthe wood, and a mountain ash figured conspicuouslyupon a jutting crag immediatelybelow them.Deep sunken in the ravine, beneath wherethe horsemen had halted, concealed in partfrom their view by the wild herbage and dwarfshrubs, ran a range of precipitous rocks, severed,it would seem, by some diluvial convulsion,from the opposite mountain side, as a correspondingrift was there visible, in which thesame dip of strata might be observed, togetherwith certain ribbed cavities, matching hugebolts of rocks which had once locked thesestony walls together. Washing this cliff,VOL. II. L218 ROOKWOOD.swept a clear stream, well known and wellregarded, as it waxed in width, by the honestbrethren of the angle, who seldom, however,had tracked it to its rise amongst these hills.This stream found its way into the valleythrough a chasm far to the left, and rushedthundering down the mountain side, in a headlongcascade. The valley was approached inthis direction from Rosewood by an unfrequentedcarriage road, which Luke had, fromprudential reasons, avoided.All seemed consecrated to silence — to solitudeto the hush of nature: yet was this quietscene the chosen retreat of lawless depredators,and had erstwhile been the theatre of feudaloppression and priestly persecution. We havesaid that no habitation was visible ; that nodwelling, tenanted by man, could be seen;but, following the spur of the most distanthill, some traces of a stone wall might be discovered; and, upon a natural platform of rock,stood a stern square tower, which had once beenthe donjon of the castle, the Lords of whichROOK WOOD. 219had called the four hills their own. A watchtowerthen had crowned each mountain crest,every vestige of which had, however, longsince disappeared. Sequestered in the vale belowhad also stood the Priory before alluded to(a Monastery of gray friars, of the Order ofSt. Francis), some part of whose venerable wallswere still remaining; and if they had notreverted to the bat and owl, as is wont to be thefate of such fanes, their cloistered shrines weredevoted to beings whose natures partook, insome measure, of the instincts of those creaturesof the night — a people whose deeds were ofdarkness, and whose eyes shunned the light.Here the gipsies had pitched their tent; andthough the place was often, in part, desertedby the vagrant horde, yet certain of the tribe,who had grown into years (over whom BarbaraLovel held queenly sway), made it their haunt,and were suffered, by the authorities of theneighbourhood, to remain there unmolested —a lenient piece of policy, which, in our infiniteregard for the weal of the tawny tribe, we220 ROOKWOOD-recommend to the adoption of other justices,and knights of the shire.Bidding his grandsire have regard to hisseat, Luke leaped a high bank; and, followedby Turpin, began to descend the hill.Peter, however, took care to provide for himself.The descent was so perilous, and the footingso insecure, that he chose rather to trust tosuch conveyance as nature had furnished himwithal, than to hazard the breaking of his neckby any false step of the horse. He contrived,therefore, to slide off from behind, shaping hisown course in a more secure direction. As hewatched his companions in their bold descentdown the hill along the ledge of rocks, hecould not help admiring their daring courage.He who has wandered amidst the Alps, musthave often had occasion to witness the wonderfulsure-goodness of that mountain pilot,the mule. He must have remarked how,M'ith tenacious hoof, he will claw the rock,and drag himself from one impending fragmentto another, with perfect security to hisROOKWOOD. 221rider — how he will breast the roaring current?of air, and stand shrinking at the verge ofalmost unfathomable ravines. But it is not sowith the horse : fleet on the plain, careful overrugged ground, he is timid and uncertain onthe hill side, and the risk which was incurredby Luke and Turpin, in their descent of thealmost perpendicular sides of the cliff, wastremendous. Peter watched them in their passagewith some admiration, and with muchcontempt.He will break his neck, of a surety,'^ saidhe ; " but what matters it ? as well now ashereafter"*So saying, he approached the verge of the precipice,where he could see them more minutely.The passage along which Luke rode hadnever before been traversed by horse's hoof.Cut in the rock, it presented a steep zigzagdescent amongst the cliffs, without any defencefor the foot traveller, except such as was affordedby a casual clinging shrub, and no protectionwhatever existed for a horseman ; the possibility222 ROOKWOOD.of any such attempting the passage not having,in all probability, entered into the calculationof those who framed it. Add to this, the stepswere of such unequal heights, and withal sonarrow, that little space was afforded to thepassenger aforesaid to place the sole of his foot,and the danger to the rider was proportionatelyincreased.The devil !" cried Turpin, staring downwards;" is this the best road you have got'"You will find one more easy,'"" replied Luke,if you ride for a quarter of a mile do^vn thewood, and then return by the brook side. Youwill find me at the Priory."No, dammed ! " answered the Highwayman,if you go, I go too. It shall never be said thatDick Turpin was afraid to follow, where anotherwould lead. Go on''Luke gave his horse his head, and the animalslowly and steadily commenced the descent,fixing his fore-legs upon the steps, and drawinghis hinder limbs carefully after him. Here itwas that the lightness and steadiness of Turpin'sROOKWOOD. 223mare was completely shown. No Alpine mulecould have borne its rider with more apparentease and safety. Turpin encouraged her byhand and word; but she needed it not. TheSexton saw them : and, tracking their giddydescent, he became more interested than heanticipated. His attention was suddenly drawntowards Luke.He is gone," cried Peter. " He falls — hesinks — my plans are all defeated — the last link issnapped. Nose"* added he, recovering his wontedcomposure, " his end is not so fated''Rook had missed his footing. He rolledstumbling down the precipice a few yards.His rider's fate seemed inevitable. His feetwere entangled in the stirrup; he could notfree himself. A birch tree, growing in a chinkof the precipice, arrested his further fall. Butfor this timely aid all had been over. HereLuke was enabled to extricate himself from thestirrup, and to regain his feet ; seizing the bridle,he dragged his faulty steed back again to theroad.You have had a narrow escape, by Jove''224 ROOKWOOD.said Turpin, who had been thunderstruck withthe whole proceeding. " Those d d bigcattle are always clumsy ; devilish lucky it's noworse."*^This difficulty was passed, only to be succeededby another. It was now comparativelysmooth travelling; but they had not as yetarrived in the valley, and it seemed to beLuke's object to take somewhat of a circuitouspath. This, although he was unacquaintedwith the way, was so evident, that his companioncould not help commenting upon it.Luke evaded the question. " The crag issteep there," said he ; " besides, to tell you thetruth, I want to surprise them''Ho, ho !" laughed Dick. " Surprise them,eh ? What a pity the birch tree was in the way ;you would have done it properly then. Egad,here's another surprise''Dick's last exclamation was caused by hishaving suddenly come upon a gully in the rock,through which dashed the cascade before alludedto. The road was good on either side ; but theonly bridge across the stream was a narrowROOKWOOD. 2^5plank, along which it was impossible for horseto pass.You must have been mad, to come thisroad'' cried Turpin, gazing down into the roaringdepths in ^yhich the waterfall raged, and measuringthe distance of the pass with his eye.So, so, Bess. — Ay, look at it, wench. Til bedd, lad, if I think your horse will do it, andtherefore turn him loose."But Dick might as well have bidden the cataractto flow backwards. Luke struck his heelsinto his horse's sides. The steed galloped to thebrink, snorted, and refused the leap.I told you so — lie can't do it," said Turpin.Well, if you are obstinate, a wilful man musthave his way. — Stand aside, while I try it foryou." Patting Bess, he put her to a gallop.She cleared the gulf bravely, landing her ridersafely upon the opposite rock.Now then," cried Turpin, " for the oilierside of the chasm."Luke again urged his steed. Encouragedl5226 ROOKWOOD.by what he had seen, this time the horse sprangacross without hesitation. The next instant theywere in the valley.For some time they rode along the banks of thestream in silence. A sound at length caught thequick ears of the Highwayman.Hist !"" cried he, " some one sings. Do youhear it?"I do," replied Luke, his blood rushing to hischeeks.And could give a guess at the singer, nodoubt," said Turpin, with a knowing look.Was it to hear yon woodlark that you nearlybroke your own neck, and put mine in jeopardy?"Prithee be silent," whispered Luke.I am dumb," replied Turpin ; " I like asweet voice, as well as another."Clear as the song of a bird, yet melancholyas the distant dole of a vesper bell, arose thesound of that sweet voice from the wood. Afragment of a Spanish Gipsy song it warbled :Luke knew it well. Thus ran the romance : —ROOKWOOD. 227LA GIT AXILLA.By the Guadalquivir,Ere the sun be flown,By that glorious riverSits a maid alone.Like the sun-set splendourOf that current bright,Shone her dark eyes, tenderAs its witching light ;Like the ripple flowing,Tinged with purple sheen,Darkly, richly, glowing,Is her warm cheek seen.'Tis the Gitanilla,By the stream doth linger,In the hope that eveWill her lover bring her.See, the sun is sinking !All grows dim, and dies ;See, the waves are drinkingGlories of the skies.Day's last lustre playedOn that current dark ;Yet no speck betrayedHis long looked-for bark.'Tis the hour of meeting !Nay, — the hour is past.Swift the time is fleeting !Fleetest Hope as fast.Still the GitanillaBy the stream doth linger,In the hope that nightWill her lover bring her.^^8 ROOKWOOD.The tender trembling of a guitar was heard inaccompaniment of the ravishing methodist.The song ceased.Where is the bird'' asked Turpin.Move on in silence, and you shall see*' saidLuke ; and , keeping upon the turf, so thatlies horse's tread became inaudible, he presentlyarrived at a spot where, through the boughs, theobject of his investigation could plainly be distinguished,though they themselves were concealedfrom view.Upon a platform of rock, which rose to theheight of the trees, nearly perpendicularly fromthe river's bed, appeared the figure of the GipsyMaid. Her footstep rested on the extreme edgeof the abrupt cliff, at whose base the waterboiled in a deep whirlpool, and the boundingchamois could not have been more lightlypoised. One small hand rested upon her guitar,the other pressed her brow. Braided hair,of the prettiest die and sleekest texture, wastwined around her brow, in endless twistedfolds.ROOKWOOD. 229Rolled it was in many a curious fret,Much like a rich and curious coronet,Upon whose arches twenty Cupids lay,And wei'e as tied, or loath to fly away*.And so exuberant was this rarest feminine ornament,that., after encompassing her brow, itwas passed behind, and hung down in long thickplaits, almost to her feet. Sparkling as the sunbeamswhich played upon her dark yet radiantfeatures, were the large, black, oriental eyes of themaiden, and shaded with lashes long and silken.Her s was a Moorish countenance, in which themagnificence of the eyes eclipses the face, be itever so beautiful (an effect which may be observedin many of the paintings of Murillo),and the lovely contour is scarce noticed inthe gaze which those large, languid, luminousorbs attract. Such was Sybil. Her features wereexquisite, yet you looked only at her eyes — theywere the load-stars of lier countenance. Hercostume was singular, and partook, like herself,of other climes. Like the Andalusian dame, herBrown's Pastorale.230 ROOKWOOD.choice of colour inclined towards black, as thematerial of most of her dress was of that sombreshade. A bodice of dark broidered velvet restrainedher delicate bosom's swell; a rich girdle,from which depended a silver chain, sustaininga short poignard, bound her waist; around herslender throat was twined a costly kerchief;and the rest of her dress was calculated todisplay her petite, yet faultless, figure to thefullest advantage.• The attitude she at present assumed was apensive one ; unconscious that she was the objectof regard. Raising her guitar, she essayed totouch the chords ; she struck a few notes ; sheresumed her romance : —*-*Swift that stream flows on,Swift the night is wearing, —Yet she is not gone,Though with heart despairing.Her song died away — her hand was neededto brush off the tears, that were gatheringin her large, dark eyes. At once her attitudewas changed. The hare could not have startedROOKWOOD. 231more suddenly from her form. She heardaccents, well known, chaunting part of herunfinished melody : —Dips an oar, plash — hark I —Gently on the river;'Tis her lover's bark,On the Guadalquivir.Hark I a song she hears !Every note she snatches ;As the singer nears,Her own name she catches.Now the GitanillaStays not by the water —For the midnight hourHath her lover brought her.It was her lover's voice. She caught the soundat once, and, starting as the roe would arouseherself at the hunter's approach, bounded downthe crag, and ere he had finished the refrainwas by his side.Flinging the bridle to Turpin, Luke sprangto her, and caught her in his arms. Disengagingherself from his ardent embrace, Sybildrew back, abashed at the sight of the Highwayman.232 Lockwood.Heed him not,"*^ said Luke, " it is a friend.'He is welcome here then," replied Sybil.But where have you tarried so long, dearLuke ?'" continued she, as they walked to a littledistance from the Highwayman. " What hathdetained you? Wearily, wearily, have passedthe hours since you departed. — You bring goodnews rGood news — my girl ; so good that I faltereven in the telling of it. You shall know allanon. But see, our friend yonder grows impatient.Are there any stirring.? We mustbestow a meal upon him, and that forthwith:he is one of those that brook not muchdelay''I came not to spoil a love meeting'' saidTurpin, who had good-humouredly witnessedthe scene ; " but, in sober seriousness, if thereis a stray capon to be met with in the tentsof the Egyptians, I shall be glad to make hisacquaintance. Methinks I scent a stew afar off''Follow me," said Sybil ; " your wants shallbe supplied."ROOKWOOD. 233Stay' said Luke ; " there is one other ofour party, whose coming we must abides''He is here," said Sybil, observing the Sextont a distance. " Who is that old man ?'^My grandsire, Peter Bradley'"Is that Peter Bradley ?"' asked Sybil.Ay, you may well ask the question," saidTurpin, " whether that old dried up otomy,who ought to grin in a glass case for folks tostare at, be kith and kin of such a bang-up coveas your fancy man, Luke. But in faith it is."Though he be thy grandsire, Luke," saidSybil, " I like him not. His glance resemblesthat of the Evil Eye."And, in fact, the look which Peter fixedupon her was such as the rattle-snake casts uponits victim, and Sybil felt as the poor flutteringbird may feel. She could not remove her eyesfrom his, though she trembled as she gazed.This species of fascination was one that Peterloved to practise. AVe have said his eyes wereHke those of the toad. Age had not dimmedtheir brilliancy. In his harsh features you234 ROOKWOOD.could only read bitter scorn, or withering hate ;but in his eyes resided a magnetic influenceof attraction or repulsion. Sybil underwentthe former feeling in a disagreeable degree.She was drawn to him as by the motion of awhirlpool, and involuntarily clang to Luke.It is — it is the Evil Eye, dear Luke."Tut, tut, dear Sybil ; I tell thee it is mygrandsiresThe girl says rightly, however," rejoinedTurpin, " Peter has a damned ugly look aboutthe ogles, and stares enough to put a modestwench out of countenance. Come, come, myold earth-worm, crawl along, we have waitedfor thee long enough. Is this the first timethou hast seen a pretty lass, eh ?"It is the first time I have seen one sobeautiful," said Peter ; " and I crave her pardon,if my freedom hath offended her. Iwonder not at thy enchantment, grandsonI^uke, now I behold the object of it. Butthere is one piece of counsel I would give tothis fair maid. The next time she trusts theeROOK WOOD. 235from her sight, I would advise her to awaitthee at the hill top, otherwise the chances areshrewdly against thy reaching the ground withneck unbroken."There was something, notwithstanding thesatirical manner in which Peter delivered thisspeech, calculated to make a more favourableimpression upon Sybil than his previous conducthad inspired her with ; and, having ascertainedfrom Luke to what his speech referred,she extended her hand to him, yet not withouta shudder, as his skinny fingers clasped herown. It was like the hand of Venus in thegrasp of a skeleton.It is a little hand'' said Peter, " and Ihave some skill myself in palmistry. Shall Iperuse its lines .^''Not now, in the devil's name," said Turpin,stamping impatiently. " We shall have theRuffian* himself amongst us presently, if PeterBradley grows gallant."Leading their horses, the party took theirDevil.236 ROOK WOOD.way through the trees. A few minutes' walkingbrought them in sight of the encampment, thespot selected for which might be termed theEden of the valley. A Paradise it seemed. Artand Nature had conspired to render it charming.Nature had encircled a small green plain, smoothas well shorn lawn, kept ever verdant (exceptingin such places as the frequent fires of the gipsieshad scorched its surface), by the flowing streamthat rushed past it, with an amphitheatre ofwooded hills, and so disposed the timber thatflourished thereupon, that, in the language of thepainter, each tree protruding from the crag mightbe said to " tell ;''' while Art had strewn thevelvet carpet with the canvas tent and its patchesof varied colouring, the rude fashioned hut, ofprimitive construction, such as might be erectedby a wandering Tartar horde — the kettle slungBetween two poles, upon a stick transverse :"with the tethered beasts of burthen, and themouldering ruins of the Priory of St. Francis,which latter finished the picture with a nobleback-ground.ROOKWOOD. 237Glimmering through the trees, at the extremityof the plain, might be seen the ivy-mantledwalls of this once celebrated pile. Thoughmuch had gone to decay, enough remainedto show what had been the pristine state ofthis once majestic edifice ; and the long, thoughbroken line of the Saxon arches, that stillmarked the cloister wall — the piers that yetsupported the dormitory — the enormous horseshoearch which still spanned the court — and,above all, the great, glorious, marigold or circularwindow, which had terminated the chapel,and which, though now despoiled of its paintedhonours, retained, like the skeleton leaf, itsfibrous intricacies entire, all eloquently spakeof the glories of the past, while they awakenedreverence and admiration for the still enduringbeauty of the present.We do love these ancient ruins ;We never tread upon them but we setOur foot upon some reverend history ;And, questionless, here in this open court,Which now lies naked tother injuriesOf stormy weather, some may lie interred,238 ROOKWOOD.Loved the church so well, and gave so largely to it,They thought it should have canopied their honesTill doomsday : but all things have their end ;Churches and cities, which have diseases like to men,Must have like death that we have*.Towards these ruins Sybil conducted theparty.Do you dwell therein ?'"* asked Peter, pointingtowards the Priory.That is my dwellings' said Sybil.It is one I should covet," returned theSexton, " more than a modern mansion ?''I love those old walls better than any housethat was ever fashioned'" said Sybil.As they entered upon the Prior's Close, as itwas called, several swarthy figures made theirappearance from the tents. Many a greetingwas bestowed upon Luke, in the Avild jargon ofthe tribe. At length, an uncouth dwarfishfigure, with a shock head of black hair, hoppedtowards them : he seemed to acknowledge Lukeas his master.Webster's Duchess of Malay.ROOKWOOD. 239What ho, Grasshoppers' said Luke ; " here,take the horses, and hark ye, see that they lackneither dressing, nor provender, or I may makeyou skip higher than you have ever yet done"*And hark ye, Grasshopper*" said Turpin; " I give you a special charge about thismare. Neither dress her nor feed her till I seeboth done myself. Just walk her for tenminutes, and if you have a glass of ale in theplace, let her sip it''Your bidding shall be done," chirped thehuman insect ; and he fluttered away with hischarges.A motley assemblage of tawny-skinned varlet,dark-eyed women and children, whose duskylimbs betrayed their lineage, in strange costume,and of wild deportment, checked the path,pronouncing welcome upon welcome into theear of Luke as lie passed. As it was evidenthe was not in the mood for converse, Sybil, whoappeared to be one who had authority amongstthem, with a word dispersed them, and thetroop herded back to their respective habitations.240 ROOKWOOD.A low door admitted them into what had oncebeen the garden, in which some old moss-encrustedtrees were still standing, bearing a lookof antiquity almost as venerable as that of theadjoining fabric. Another open door gave thementrance to a spacious chamber, which wasformerly the eating room, or refectory of theHoly Brotherhood; and a goodly but gloomyroom it had been, though now its slenderlanceolate windows were stuffed with hay, tokeep out the piercing air. Large holes toldwhere huge oaken rafters had once crossed theroof ; and a yawning aperture pointed out theplace where a cheering fire had formerly blazed.As regarded this latter spot, the good old customwas not even now totally abrogated. An ironplate, covered with crackling wood, sustained aponderous black cauldron, the rich steam fromwhich gratefully affected the olfactory organs ofthe Highwayman.That augurs well'' said he, rubbing hishands.Still hungering after the flesh pots ofLockwood. 241Egypt' said the Sexton, with a ghastlysmile.We will see what that kettle contains*" saidLuke.Handassah, Grace," exclaimed Sybil, calling.Her summons was answered by two maidens,habited, not unbecomingly, in gipsy gear.Bring the best our larder can furnish," saidSybil, " and use dispatch ; you have appetitesto provide for, sharpened by a long ride in theopen air."And by a night's fasting," added Luke;and solitary confinement to boot."And a night of business** rejoined Turpin,.and plaguing, perplexing business into thebargain."And the night of a funeral too," doled Peter,and that the funeral of a father. Let us havebreakfast speedily, by all means. We have rareappetites."An old oaken table, it might have beenthe self-same upon which the holy friarshad broken their morning fast, stood in theVOL. II. M242 ROOKWOOD.middle of the room. The ample board soongroaned beneath the weight of the savoury cauldron; the unctuous contents of which proved tobe a couple of dismembered pheasants, an equalproportion of poultry, great goats of ham, mushrooms,onions, and other piquant condiments,so satisfactory to Dick Turpin, that, upon tastinga mouthful, he absolutely shed tears of delight.The dish was indeed the triumph of gipsycookery, and its execution worthy of the genius ofthe immortal Ude, to whom we recommend especiallythe study of a Potage a la Bohemian,assuring him, that if, like Richard Turpin, heshould ever meet with such fare after a night ofseverely fatiguing business, in his attendanceupon his club, he will find no more salutarybreakfast than that of which the Highwaymanpartook. So sedulously did Dick apply himselfo his mess, and so complete was his abstraction,that he perceived not that he was left alone ; itwas only when about to wash down the lastdrum-stick of the last fowl with a can of excellentale, that he made this discovery.ROOKWOOD. 243What, all gone — and Peter Bradley, too —what the devil does this mean ?^ said he. " Imust not muddle my brain with any morePharaoh*, though I have feasted like a Kingof Egypt. That will never do. Caution —Dick — caution. Suppose I shift yon brick outof the wall, and place this precious documentbeneath it. Pshaw, Luke would never play mefalse. And now for Bess — bless her black skin —shell wonder where IVe been so long. Ifs notmy way to leave her to shift for herself, thoughshe can do that on a pinchesSoliloquizing, thus, he arose, and walked towardsthe door.Strong drink.CHAPTER III.The wiving vine, that round the friendly elmTwines her soft limbs, and weaves a leafy mantleFor her supporting lover, dares not ventureTo mix her humble boughs with the embracesOf the more lofty cedar.Hawthorne. Albertus Wallenstein.Beneath a mouldering wall, whither theyhad strayed, to be free from interruption, satSybil and her lover, upon a carpet of moss.With eager curiosity she listened to his tale.He recounted all that had befallen him sincehis departure. He told her of the awful revelationsof the tomb — of the ring that, like atalisman, had conjured up a thousand brilliantprospects in the gloom — of his subsequent perilsf his escapes — of his rencontre with LadyROOKWOOD. 245Rosewood — of his visit to his father s body — ^and of his meeting with his brother. All thisshe heard with a cheek now flushed With expectation,now grown pale with apprehension — withpalpitating bosom, and with suppressed breath.But, when taking a softer tone, love, affection,happiness, inspired the theme, and he sought topaint the bliss that should be their's in his newestate — when he would throw his fortune intoher lap — his titles at her feet, and bid herwear them with him — when, with ennobled handand unchanged heart, he would fulfil the trothplighted by him, the outcast, the despised — inlieu of tender, grateful acquiescence, the featuresof Sybil became overcast — the soft smilefaded away, and even as spring sunshine is succeededby the sudden shower, the light thatdwelt in her sunny orbs grew dim v/ith tears.Luke gazed at her in amazement, and withdispleasure. He had not expected this receptionof his suit ; on the contrary, he deemed thatthe anticipation of aggrandisement, which heheld out, would have been rapturously welcomed.246 EOOKWOOD.That it was not so, was clear. A painful strugglewas evidently taking place in Sybil's bosom. Perplexedand mortified, Luke neither spoke norstirred-We have said that a new train of feelingwas awakened within him — that pride wasusurping the sacred seat of love — and that hisaffection for Sybil had received a severe shock.In all probability, had his proposition beenmet in the manner he expected by Sybil — hadshe eagerly acquiesced with his expressed wishes,and unhesitatingly and gratefully complied withhis offers, he might then have felt that he hadrashly committed himself (for Peter Bradley'sstinging words still rankled in his recollectionlike barbed shafts) — and crippled his free purposeson the threshold of his career. But he hadfound it otherwise; and when, with hesitationin his heart, though passion upon his lips,he had offered all to her — her hand was withdrawn— her face averted — her eyes filled withtears. " Capricious, inconsistent, heartless, insensible! Shall I yield to her humours ? ShallI stoop to her ?'' were his thoughts. " Stoop toROOKWOOD. 247Sybil !*" echoed his conscience ; and as he lookedat her, he felt that his thoughts had belied hisheart.And what were Sybil's emotions ? Was she,in reality, the capricious, inconsistent being,Luke had suddenly imagined her to be ? Couldshe not sympathise with his success? Shecould — she could. There was no thought of herlover's which she could not divine, with whichher own wishes were not identified. Hers wasa devotion passing the love of woman ; in that itwas absolute devotion. Nought was suffered tostand between her and her lover. No other sentimentpossessed her. She had no kindred, saveBarbara, to claim her duty — her affections. Shewas not distracted with worldly dreams — withthoughts of pleasures or of vanities. She livethfor her lover, and for him alone. Beneath hergentle exterior burnt a flame that was to allothers a scorching fire: to her lover, innocent asthe tongue of flame that licked the prophet's feet.Adoring him thus, can it for an instant besupposed that she was indifferent to lier lover'sS48 ROOKWOOD.advancement — that she gloried not in his rise —or that she was meanly jealous of his success ?No one could suspect it ; and Luke, althoughhe might give vent to impatience, did not, formore than an instant, indulge the thought. Atlength she raised her eyes, and in them beamedsuch mournful tenderness, that whatever sternresolves Luke had formed, they disappeared atonce before it.Why — why is this, dear Sybil ?'' cried he.To what am I to attribute these tears ? Youdo not, sure, regret my good fortune ?''"'Not on your own account, dear Luke,'"'returned she, sadly ; " the tears I shed were formyself. — The first, the only tears that I haveever shed for such cause, and'' added she,raising her head like a flower surcharged withmoisture, " they shall be the last."This is inexplicable, dear Sybil. Whyshould you lament for yourself — if not for me ?Doth not the sunshine of prosperity, that nowshines upon me, gild you with the same beam ?Did I not, even now, affirm, that the day thatROOKWOOD. 249saw me enter my Father's halls, should dawnupon our espousals ?"True, but the sun that shines upon you,to me wears a threatening aspect — the day oithose espousals will never dawn. You cannotmake me the Lady of Rosewood."What do I hear?" exclaimed Luke, astonishedat this avowal of his mistress, sadly anddeliberately delivered, which smote upon his earlike a knell. " You cannot mean what youaver; some witchcraft hath been practised — Iam possessed by it myself. Hath Peter Bradley —hath that fiend poisoned thy ears likewise ? Hathhe wrought upon thee, as he fain would havewrought upon me ? But I resisted the tempter —I trampled him beneath me ; I shook him off, asthou must cast him from thee. Not wed me ! —And wherefore not ? Is it the rank that I haveacquired, or hope to acquire, that displeasedthee ? Declare it, if it be so, that I may at onceabandon all further quest of fortune's favours,which would be dearly paid for, if purchased withloss of thee. Speak, that I may waste no further:m 5250 ROOKWOOD.time in thus pursuing the shadows of happiness,while the reality fleets from me"'And are they shadows — and is this thereality, dear Luke ? It may be that thou say esttruly ; but wilt thou continue to think so ?Nay, dost thou think so now ? Question thysecret soul, and thou wilt find it otherwise.Thou couldst not forego thy triumph ; it isnot likely ; thou hast dwelt too much uponthe proud title which will be thine, to yield itto another, when it may be won so easily.And above all, when thy mother's reputation,and thy own stained name, may be clearedby one word, breathed aloud, wouldst thou failto utter it ? No, dear Luke, I read thy heart —thou wouldst not""And if I could not forego this, whereforeis it that thou refuses to be a sharer in mytriumph? Why wilt thou render my honoursvalueless, when I have acquired them? Thoulowest me not."Not love thee, Luke ?""Approve it, then''ROOKWOOD. 251I do approve it. Bear witness the sacrificeI am about to make of all my hopes, at theshrine of my idolatry to thee. Bear witness, theagony of this hour. Bear witness, the horrorof the avowal, that I never can be yoiu-'s. A^Luke Bradley I would, joyfully — oh, how joyfully,have been your bride. As Sir LukeRosewood" — and she shuddered, as she pronouncedthe name, " I never can be so''Then, by heaven! Luke Bradley will Iremain. But wherefore — wherefore not as SirLuke Rook wood f'""Because'' replied Sybil, with reluctance,because I am no longer thy equal. Thegipsy's low-born daughter is no mate for SirLuke Rook wood. Love cannot blind me, dearLuke. It cannot make me other than I am —it cannot exalt me in mine own esteem, nor inthat of the world, with which, thou, alas ! toosoon wilt mingle, and which will regard even meas— no matter what — it shall not scorn me asthy bride. I will not bring shame and reproachon thee. Oh if, for me, dear Luke, the proud ones252 ROOKWOOD.of the earth were to treat thee with contumely,this heart would break with agony. For myself,I have pride sufficient — perchance too much ;perchance 'tis pride that actuates me now. Iknow not. But for thee, I am all weakness.As thou wert heretofore, I would have been tothee the tenderest and truest wife that everbreathed ; as thou art now ''Hear me, Sybil."Hear me out, dear Luke. One other motivethere is, that determines my present conduct,which, were all else surmounted, would in itselfsuffice. Ask me not what that is : I cannotexplain it. For your own sake, I implore you,be satisfied with my refusal''What a destiny is mine !" exclaimed Lute,striking his forehead with his clenched hand.** No choice is left me. Either way I destroy myown happiness. On the one hand standeth Loveon the other. Fame ; yet neither will conjoin."Pursue then fame," said Sybil, energetically,if thou canst hesitate. Forget that I haveever existed — forget thou hast ever loved —ROOKWOOD. 253forget that such a passion dwells within thehuman heart, and thou mayst still be happy,though thou art great."And do you deem"" replied Luke, withfrantic impatience, " that I cadi accomplish thisthat I can forget that I have loved you — thatI can forget you ? Cost what it will, the effortshall be made. Yet by our former love, I chargethee tell me what hath wrought this change inthee? Why dost thou now refuse me?"^I have said you are Sir Luke Rookwood,'"returned Sybil, with painful emotion. " Doththat name import nothing''Imports it aught of ill?"To me, every thing of ill. It is a fatedhouse. Its line are all predestined."To what ?'' demanded Luke."To murder r replied Sybil, with solemnemphasis. " To the murder of their wives.Forgive me, Luke, if I have dared to utter this.Yourself compelled me to it."Amazement, horror, wrath, kept Luke silentfor a few moments. Starting to his feet, hecried —254 . ROOKWOOD.And can you suspect me of a crime so foul ?Think you, because I shall assume the name,that I shall put on the nature likewise of therace? Do you believe that I am capable ofaught so horrible ?'"*Oh no — No, I believe it not. I am sureyou would not do it. Your soul would reject,with horror, such a deed; but if Fate shouldguide your hand — if the avenging spirit of yourmurdered ancestress should point the steel, youcould not shun it then."My murdered ancestress ! to what do youallude?"To a tradition of your house. tis said,that the first of the race from which you nowclaim descent. Sir Ranulph Rosewood, slew hisdame, in jealous indignation for imaginary wrong.Her prayers, her tears, her adjurations of innocence— and she was innocent — all her agony,could not move him. He stabbed her thrice.He smote the bleeding corse, and as life wasebbing fast away, with her fleeting breath shepronounced a curse upon her murderer, andupon his race. She had invoked all powersROOKAVOOD. ^55of mercy, and of goodness, to aid her. A deafear had been turned unto her agonized entreaties.With her dying lips she summonedthose of hell. She surrendered her soul to thedark Spirit of Evil, for revenge ; and revengewas accorded her. She died — but her cursesurvived. That fatal malediction attached toher Lord, and to all his line. No penancecould expiate the offence — no tears wash out thebloody stain — all have been hurried into thecommission of the same crime. Yet as it hathbeen a fate, a ministration of the Spirit of Evil,none have suffered the punishment of theirguilt. Where their affection hath been fixed,hath their dagger struck. Was it not so withthy father — with Sir Reginald — Sir Ralph —Sir Ranulph ? And when I tell thee this, dearLuke — when I find thee bear the name of thisaccursed race, canst thou wonder, if I shudderat adding to the dismal list of the victims ofthat ruthless spirit : and that I tremble for thee ?I would die for thee, willingly — but not by thyhand. I would not that my blood, which I^56 ROOKWOOD.would now pour out for thee as freely as water,should rise up in judgment against thee. Formyself I have no fears — for thee, a thousand.My mother, upon her death-bed, told me I shouldnever be thine. I believed her not, for I washappy then. She said that we never should beunited ; or, if united "What, in heaven's name ?^^That thou wouldst be my destroyer ; that thylove should turn to hatred — and thou wouldstslay me. How could I credit her words then ?How can I doubt them now, when I find thouart a Rook wood ? And think not, dear Luke, thatI am ruled by selfish fears in this resolve. Torenounce thee may cost me my life ; but the deedwill be my own. Thou mayst call me superstitious,credulous : I have been nurtured incredulity.It is the faith of my fathers. Thereare those, methinks, who have an insight intofuturity; and such boding words have beenspoken, that, be they true or false, I will not risktheir fulfilment in my person. I may be credulous— I may be weak — I may be erring — but IEOOKWOOD. 257am steadfast in this. Bid me perish at your feet,and I will do it. But I will not be your Fate.I will not be the wretched instrument of yourperdition. I will love, I will worship — I willwatch, serve — perish for you — but I will notwed you.^'Exhausted with the vehemence of her emotion,she would have sunk upon the ground, hadnot Luke caught her in his arms. Pressing herto his bosom, he renewed his passionate protestations.Every argument was unavailing — Sybilappeared inflexible.You love me as you have ever loved me ?""said she, at length.A thousand fold more fervently," repliedLuke. " Put it to the test."How ? If I dared to do so. Consider wellI may ask too much."Name it. If it be not to surrender thee, bymy mother's body I will obey thee."I would propose an oath."An oath?"A solemn binding oath, that, if thou EOOKWOOD.test me not, thou wilt not wed another. Ha !dost thou start ? Have I appalled thee ?''I start ? I will take it. Hear me — by ''Hold !" exclaimed a voice behind them —do not forswear thyself ;' ' and immediatelyafterwards the Sexton made his appearance.There was a malignant scowl upon his countenance.The lovers started at the ominousinterruption.Begone'' cried Luke.Take not that oath'' said Peter, " and 1leave you. Remember the counsel which I gaveyou on our way hither."What counsel did he give thee, Luke ?"inquired Sybil, eagerly of her lover.We spoke of thee, fond girl," replied Peter.I cautioned him against the match. I knew notthy sentiments, or I had spared myself thetrouble. Thou hast judged wisely. Were heto wed thee, ill must come of it : but he nnistwed another."Must!" 'cried Sybil, her eyes absolutelyemitting sparkles of indignation from theirE00K.W0OD. 259night-like depths; and, unsheathing, as shespoke, the short poignard which she wore at hergirdle, she rushed towards Peter, raising herhand to strike. " Must wed another ! anddearest thou counsel this ?^Put up thy dagger, fair maiden'' said Peter,calmly. " Had I been younger, thine eyesmight have had more terrors for me than thyweapon; as it is, I am proof against both.Thou wouldst not strike an old man like myself,and of thy lover's kin?"Sybil's uplifted hand fell to her side.'Tis true," continued the Sexton, " I dared togive him this advice ; and when thou hast heardme out, thou wilt not, I am persuaded, think meso unreasonable as, at first, I may appear to be.I have been an unseen listener to your conversenot that I desire to pry into your secrets —far from it ; but I overheard you by accident.I applaud your resolution : but if you are inclinedto sacrifice all for your lover's weal, donot let the work be incomplete. Bind him notby oaths, which he will regard as spider's webs,ROOKWOOD.to be burst through at pleasure. Thou seest, aswell as I, that he is bent on being Lord of Rook-wood; and, in truth, to an aspiring youth, sucha desire is natural — is praiseworthy. It will bepleasant, as well as honourable, to efface thestain that has been cast upon his birth. It willbe an act of filial duty in him, to restore hismother's good name; and I, her father, laudhis anxiety on that score; though, to speaktruth, fair maid, I am not so rigid as your nicemoralists in my view of human nature, and canallow a latitude to love, which their nicer scrupleswill not admit. It will be a proud thing totriumph over his implacable foe; and this hemay accomplish '"*Without marriage," interrupted Sybil, angrily.Truest'' returned Peter — " yet not maintainit. May win it, but not wear it. Thou hast saidtruly, the house of Rook wood is a fated house ;and it hath been said, likewise, that if he wed notone of his own kindred — that if Rook mate notwith Rook, his possessions shall pass away fromROOKWOOD.his hands, as thou shalt hear." And Peterrepeated the prophetic quatrain, with which thereader is already acquainted. " Thou hearestwhat this quaint rhyme saith. Luke is, doubtless,the stray Rook, and there is a fledgling,that I wot not of, flown hither from a distantcountry. He must take her to his mate, orrelinquish her and the ' ancient nest' to hisbrother. For my own part, I disregard suchsayings. I have little faith in prophecy anddivination. I see not why it should be so. Iknow not what Eleanor Mowbray, for so she iscalled, can have to do with the tenure of theestates of Rook wood. It may be so, or it maynot be so. But if Luke Rosewood, after hehath lorded it for awhile in splendour, be castforth again in his rags and wretchedness, lethim not blame his grandsire for his own want ofcaution''Luke, I implore thee, tell me," said Sybil,who had listened, horror-stricken, to the Sexton,shuddering, as it were, beneath the chilly influenceof his malevolent look — " is this true?S62 ROOK WOOD.Doth thy fate depend upon Eleanor Mowbray ?Who is she ? What hath she to do with Rook-wood? Hast thou seen her ? Dost thou loveherrI have never seen her' replied Luke.Thank God for that'' cried Sybil. " Thenthou lowest her not."How were that possible ?*" returned Luke.Do I not say I have not seen her ?""Who is she, then .?"This old man tells me she is my cousin.She is betrothed to my brother, Ranulph."How ?" ejaculated Sybil. " To thy brother,Ranulph ! And wouldst thou snatch his betrothedfrom his arms? Wouldst thou breakher heart, as, if she love him, thou must do ?Wouldst thou do him this grievous strong ?Bethink thee, dear Luke. Is it not enoughthat thou must west from him that which hehath long deemed his own? And if he hathfalsely deemed it so, it will not make lies lossthe less bitter. In what thou doest now thouart justified. Thou hast a right to what is thineROOKWOOD. 263own — the estates of Rosewood are thine own —but she is not thine own. But why do Ithus affright myself? If she love thy brother,Eleanor Mowbray will die, sooner than giveto thee the hand which she pledged to him. Iknow not how those who have been moregently nurtured than myself feel, but I hadrather been torn in piece-meal by wild horses —had rather fling myself into the roaring torrent,that dashes from yon rock, than forfeit so myfealty. If thou thus wrongest thy brother,do not look for happiness — do not look forrespect, for neither will be thy portion. Eventhis stony-hearted old man shrinks aghast atsuch a deed — his snakelike eyes are buried onthe ground. See, I have moved even himAnd in truth Peter did appear, for an instant,strangely moved.'Tis nothing'' returned he, mastering hisemotion by strong effort. " What is all thisto me? I never had a brother — I neverhad aught — wife, child, or relative, that loved264 ROOKWOOD.me. And I love not the world, nor thethings of the world, nor those that inhabit theworld — but I know what sways the world, andits inhabitants, and that is — self — and self-interest! Let Luke reflect on this. The keyto Rosewood is Eleanor Mowbray. The handthat grasps her's, grasps those lands — thus saiththe prophecy''It is a lying prophecy."It was uttered by one of thy race""By whom .?"By Barbara Lovel," said Peter, with a sneerof triumph.Ha !"Heed him not," exclaimed Luke, as Sybilrecoiled at this intelligence. " I am thine."Not mine — not mine," shrieked she; " butoh, not heresyWhither goes thou .?" cried Luke, as Sybil,half bewildered, tore herself from him.To Barbara Lovel."I will go with thee,"ROOKWOOD. ^65No ; let me go alone — I have much to askher; yet tarry not-vvith this old man, dearLuke — or close thine ears, like the deaf adder,to his crafty talk. Avoid him. Oh, I amsick at heart. Follow me not — I implore thee,follow me not."And with distracted air she darted amongstthe mouldering cloisters, leaving Luke stupefiedwith anguish and surprise. The Sexton maintaineda stern and stoical composure.She is but woman, after all," muttered he ;all her high flown resolves melt like snow inthe sunshine, at the thought of a rival. I congratulatethee, grandson Luke — thou art freefrom thy fetters."Free !" echoed Luke. " Quit my sight — Iloathe to look upon thee. Thou hast broken thetruest heart that ever beat in woman's bosom."Tut, tut," returned Peter ; " it is not brokenyet. Wait till we hear what old Barbara hasgot to say; and, meanwhile, we must arrangewith Dick Turpin the price of that certificate.VOL. II. N266 ROOKWOOD.The knave knows its value well. Come, be aman. This is worse than womanish."And, at length, he succeeded, half by forceand half by persuasion, in dragging Luke awaywith him.CHAPTER IV.Los Gitanos son encantadores, divines, magis, chromaticque dice por las rays de las man's lo Futuro, queelles llaman Buenaventura, y general mente son dados atota superstition.Doctor Sancho de Montana.Discourse sore Expulsion de los Gitanos.Like a dove, escaped from the talons of thefalcon, Sybil fled from the clutches of theSexton. Her brain was in a whirl, her bloodon fire; she had no distinct perception of externalobjects — no definite notion of what she,herself, was about to do, and glided more likea flitting spirit than a living woman, along theruined ambulatory. Her hair had fallen indisorder over her face— she stayed not to adjustit, but tossed aside the blinding locks withfrantic impatience. She felt as one may feel26'8 llOOKWOOD.who tries to strain his nerves, shattered byillness, to the endurance of some dreadful, yetnecessary pain.Racked by a thousand fears, lest she shouldaccelerate her fate, and involve her lover inmore peril, Sybil wished to make one final effortto re-establish or utterly overthrow her ownpeace of mind. What she hoped to gain by theinterview she was about to seek with her agedrelative, she scarce knew. Her main object was toconfirm to herself (for drowning love will cling tostraws) the truth of Luke's assertions ; not thatshe doubted his veracity, but she still trusted thathe might be in error, even as to the extent of hisclaims to the title and to the estates of Rook-wood.This, at once she could ascertain, byappealing to Barbara, who had seen the bodyof his mother — who had embalmed it — whomust have perceived the ring (that startlingevidence of the marriage of the departed), hadthere been ring upon the finger — whose skill insimples, in medical craft, and knowledge of thehuman frame, would at once have told her ifROOKWOOD. 269the dead had come to her end fairly; and whocould at once verify the Sexton's statement respectingthe prophecy. This she could learn atonce. Were there a doubt, or a shadow of adoubt, she might yet be happy. But what ifBarbara confirmed it all ? If she had seen thering ? She dared not think on that.Sybil loved her relative, old Barbara ; but itwas with a love tempered by fear. Barbara wasnot a person to inspire esteem, or to claimaffection. She was regarded, by the wild tribe,which she ruled, as their Queen elect, with somesuch feeling of inexplicable awe as is entertainedby the African slave for the Obeah Woman.They acknowledged her power, unhesitatinglyobeyed her commands, and shrank "with terrorfrom her anathema, which was indeed seldompronounced ; but when uttered, was consideredas doom. Her tribe she looked upon as herflock, and stretched her maternal hand over all,ready alike to cherish or chastise; and havingalready survived a generation, that which succeeded,— having from infancy imbibed a ROOKWOOD.stations veneration for the " cunning woman,"as she was called, the sentiment could never bewholly eradicated; but continued in such forcein after-life, as to make the fiercest of that fiercerace implicitly to comply with her mandates, andbow in submission to her edicts.One circumstance, indeed, might have somecontroul over the band. From whatever sourcederived, she had obtained a hoard of gold, andthis she distributed freely. She could reward aswell as punish, and was withal, wise enough tomaintain good order, and promote concord. Bymeans of her strangely acquired wealth, she had,it was said, frequently diverted the course ofjustice, and effected the liberation of severalof the wildest of her gang from gaol ; or, atleast, had afforded them comforts during theirconfinement. These favours were never forgotten,and Barbara had acquired an absolute ascendancyover every individual composing her formidabletribe — an ascendancy which increasedas she advanced in years (for store of years issupposed, by this savage people, to bring withEOOKWOOI). 271it store of wisdom), so that at the period ofour tale, when she had already numberer-morethan eighty winters, the will of Barbara,once expressed, was law. Add to all this, theknowledge which she possessed of the powerand virtue of all healing plants and roots ; theskill which she displayed in their application ;the frequent cures she had performed; thestrange instruments, the drugs, the oils, theinstalments, the spicy woods, which she possessed,and the mystery she observed in theart she practised (for Barbara knew full wellthe advantage of concealment) ; these, and ahundred other reasons, made her appear toher people as the High Priestess of theirmystic rites, endowed, from some dark source,with magic power. Some, indeed, entertainedthe belief, that she had obtained her power,her gold, and her length of life, by the barterof her soul to the evil one; but, as the prevailingopinion amongst the gipsy peoplehappened to be, that man has no soul to disposeof, this hypothesis was treated with the contempt^72 ROOK WOOD.it deserved, by the majority. All, however, concurredin thinking her a remarkable woman ;and in whatever speculation they might privatelyindulge, none dared openly to disobey her.Sybil partook, in a measure, of these sentiments.How could it be otherwise ? She wasborn in another land — under a warmer sun —amongst a more fiery people ; yet amongst apeople who followed the same pursuits, modifiedby the customs of the land in which they dwelt,and directed towards the same end. Her youth,her maturer years, if her years could even as yetbe called mature, had been spent under the surveillanceof Barbara. Her father — a contrabandist— a mountain smuggler — iliad perishedby the carbines of the soldiery. His widow wastaken — imprisoned — tortured — condemned as anheretic, to perish at the Auto-da^Fe.Here it was that Barbara's power was shownto its utmost extent. By that wonderful freemasonrywhich exists amongst this singularrace, and enables them to communicate witheach other in different places, and in differentROOK WOOD. >d/»countries, Barbara, with a celerity almost inconceivable,had received intelligence of herdaughter's imprisonment. She set out. CrossingFrance — she scaled the Pyrenees — shetraversed Spain — she passed through Madridshe arrived at Toledo, in which town herunfortunate child was confined. There she lostall trace of her : her agents could supply herwith no further information. She was not inthe public prison ; and, trembling with horror,anxiety, and apprehension, the mother wasobliged to await the day of execution for aglimpse of her child, and to postpone theexecution of her plans until that period, andso double the danger and hazard of a rescue,if she dared to attempt a rescue at all. Butwhat will not a mother attempt, and a motherto whom fear is unknown ?meantime, the wretched prisoner knew not ofall this. She had experienced all the torturesof the Question. The rack could extort nothingfrom her. There was nothing to be extorted.She was no magician ; — she was no idolatress ; —n5S74 HOOK WOOD.but she was a Gratia — " Testa sin religionalguna^'' as the learned Doctor Montana, whowrote upon the expulsion of this race fromSpain, hath it — and worse than the " Arrianos^Mores, Judios y olios henemigos de la Silesia.No susan de des dispensations ni sacramentsalgunos, imagines, rosaries, bulas^ ni openmisa, ni qficios divines, james entrap lasIglesias — *" and this was sufficient, withoutproof of sorcery — and, to her misfortune, shewas a mother. Sybil, her child, an infant then,was the companion of her prison. Amidst allthis horror, the child was affrighted, till shesaw her mother, pale, lacerated, bleeding, freshfrom the teeth of the rack, brought back to thedungeon. The mother murmured not ; shetried to smile ; but the child recoiled from herbleeding touch. A refinement of cruelty suggesteditself to the minds of these humanleeches — the child should witness her mother'storture : it should stand beside her. Reversing• Discourse.ROOKWOOD. 275the Levitical Law, they purposed to " seethethe kid in the milk of its mother'' The ideawas too horrible. So soon as she understoodtheir meaning, she confessed a falsehood — sheproclaimed her heresies-she condemned herselfto the stake.Attired in all the tragical masquerade of thatimpious festival, bare-footed, with the candle inher hand, clad in the garments of the HolyOffice, crowned with the flame-coloured cap,leading her child by the hand, walked thewretched woman, in expectation of her fate ;the bells rang, the people shouted, the lightheartedlaughed, the bigots exulted. Some admiredher dark eyes and her small feet, for shewas a beautiful woman ; some pitied the forlornlittle child, whose bewildered gaze was turnedhalf in fear, half in admiration, upon the assembledmultitude; some few wept at themother's anguish ; but more rejoiced at the deathof the heretic and the heathen. All at once,there was a rush made amongst the crowd. Anumber of masked inquisitors, for such they276 ROOK WOOD.seemed, enveloped in long sable cloaks, accompaniedby their familiars, by the Alguacils, theCorregidor masked likewise, and by severalcowled priests, started forward. Without aword, without a blow, they seized upon thevictim, and upon her child — they bore themoff; and, before an attempt could be made atrescue, had disappeared. This bold deed hadbeen so suddenly executed, and by such aformidable cavalcade, that no one had dared tointerfere ; and though all the city was searched,every house ransacked, every gate closed, everysuspicious person examined, every pass scrupulouslynoted, no trace of the lost victim, of herchild, or of the perpetrators, was discovered.The Holy Brotherhood was panic-stricken. TheLadrone, Refines, the Cigars, and the wholehorde of vagabonds who infested a certain portionof the city *, were suspected, but it could neverbe brought home to them ; and in due seasonthe affair was hushed up, or forgotten.• En la Ciudad de ToledoDone flor de Bayle son.Romance de Germania.ROOKWOOD. 277Barbara escaped, and furthermore succeededin bringing her daughter and her grandchild toEngland. Sybil's mother did not long survive.She had suffered too much by the rack, thethumbscrew, and other horrible treatment inthe abominable dungeon in which she hadbeen thrust ; but she died not at the stake, andthat was enough. She had been her mother'syoungest child — the child of her old age — theonly daughter — and as such, the beloved — thefavourite. Barbara nursed her — tended her;but she could not restore the suppleness of thebroken joints — she could not heal those gaspinglungs, burst by the weight imposed upon herbreast. She died, and bequeathed her daughterto her mother's care, and Sybil had been to heras a child, yet not as her own child.This achievement was a subject of unmingledtriumph to Barbara. She often boasted of it,and with reason. To have torn his prey fromthe jaws of the tiger in his own lair, werean easy task, compared with the wresting ofa victim from the fangs of the Inquisition ;^78 ROOKWOOD.yet she had accomplished it, with the assistanceof the Gitanos, who were disguised in themanner described ; but not, as she shrewdlyremarked in describing the event, without anawful waste of gold, which she poured out likewater. " Buts"' added Barbara, " you all knowthat when I want gold I need only to dig for it.This staff"' showing her bifurcate hazel rod,without which she never stirred, " will alwaysshow me where it lies''While on the subject of the Divining Rod, wemay mention that, addicted to the practice ofdivination, Barbara did not, as is the case withmost of her tribe, confine herself to the pursuit ofa single branch of that abstruse science, as chiromancy,but followed it through its remotestbranches, seeking to obtain knowledge of goodand ill, and to foresee the future fate and fortuneof those who consulted her, like the augurs of old,by what Gaule, in his Mag-astro-mancer, describesas " Antinopomancy, by the entrailsof men, women, and children ; Theriomancy,by beasts; Ornithomancy, by birds; Ickthyo-ROOKWOOD. 279nancy, by fishes; Hydromancy, by water;Botanomancy, by herbs; Clemency, by lots;Catoxtromancy, by looking-glasses.'^ Thoughwe cannot avouch that she extended her inspectionsso far in her Typomancy, or thecoagulation of cheese, or to that farthest flightof art, '• Cephaleonomancy, or consultation bythe brawling of an ass's head'' There werefew things, however, for which she did not drawconclusions, and her whole soul seemed absorbedin pondering upon past events, and mutteringprophetic speculations for the future.To return. Evincing her way, she knew nothow, through roofless halls, over disjointed fragmentsof fallen pillars, Sybil reached a flight ofsteps. A door, studded with iron nails, stayed herprogress ; it was an old strong oaken door, surmountedby a gothic arch, in the key-stone ofwhich was one of those grotesque demoniacal faceswith Which the Fathers of the Church delightedto adorn their shrines. Sybil looked up — herglance encountered the leering gaze of the fantasticalvisage. It recalled the features of the SexesROOK WOOD.ton, and seemed to mock her — to revile her. Herfortitude at once deserted her — her fingers wereupon the handle of the door. She hesitated :she even drew back, with the intention ofdeparting, for she felt then that she dared notface Barbara. It was too late — she had movedthe handle. A deep voice from within, calledto her by her name. She dared not disobeythat call : she entered.The room in which Sybil found herself wasthe only entire apartment now existing in thePriory. It had survived the ravages of time,it had escaped the devastation of man, whoseravages outstrip those of time. Octagonal, lofty,yet narrow, you saw at once that it formed theinterior of a turret. It was lighted by a smalloriel window, commanding a lovely view ofthe scenery around, and panelled with oak,richly wrought in ribs and groins; and fromoverhead depended a moulded ceiling of honeycombplaster-work. This room had something,even now, in the days of its desecration, of monasticbeauty about it. Where the odour ofROOKWOOD. 281sanctity had breathed forth, the fumes of idolatryprevailed ; but imagination, ever on thewing, flew back to that period (and a traditionto that effect warranted the supposition), when,perchance, it had been the sanctuary and theprivacy of the Prior's self.Wrapped in a cloak, composed of the skins ofvarious animals, upon a low pallet, covered withstained scarlet cloth, sat Barbara. Around herhead was copied, in folds, like those of an Asiaticturban, a rich, though faded shawl, and herwaist was encircled with the magic ZodiacalZone — proper to the sorceress — the Ago Cineoof the Cigar (whence the name, accordingto ]\Ioncada), which Barbara had broughtfrom Spain. From her ears depended longgolden drops, of curious antique fashioning ;and upon her withered fingers, which werelike a coil of lizards, were hooped a multitudeof silver rings, of the purest, but simplest,manufacture. They seemed almost of massiveinwrought metal. Her skin was yellow as thebody of a toad ; corrugated as its back. She282 ROOKWOOD.might have been steeped in saffron from herfinger tips, the nails of which were of the samehue, to such portions of her neck as were visible,and which was puckered up like the throat of atortoise. To look at her, one might have thoughtthe embalmer had experimented her art uponherself. So dead — so bloodless — so blackened,seemed the flesh, where flesh remained, leathercould scarce be tougher than her skin. Sheseemed like an animated mummy. Such aframe, so prepared, appeared calculated to endurefor ages; and, perhaps, might have done so;but, alas ! the soul cannot be embalmed ; nooil can illume that precious lamp ; and thatBarbara's vital spark was fast waning, was evident,from her heavy, bloodshot eyes, once ofa swimming black, and lengthy as a witch's,which were now sinister, and sunken.The atmosphere of the room was as stronglyimpregnated as a museum, with volatile odours,emitted from the stores of drugs with which theshelves were loaded, as well as from various stuffedspecimens of birds and wild animals. Barbara'sROOK WOOD, 283only living companion was a monstrous owl,which, perched over the old gipsy's head, hisseda token of recognition, as Sybil advanced. Froma hook, which had been placed in the plasterroof, was suspended a globe of crystal glass,about the size and shape of a large gourd, filled^vith a pure pellucid liquid, in which a smallsnake, the Egyptian aspic, described perpetualgyrations.Dim were the eyes of Barbara, yet not altogethersightless. The troubled demeanour ofher grandchild struck her as she entered. Shefelt the hot drops upon her hand as Sybil stoopedto kiss it : she heard her vainly stifled sobs."What ails thee, child?" said Barbara, in avoice that rattled in her throat, and hollow asthe articulation of a phantom. " Hast thouheard tidings of Luke Bradley ? Hath any illbefallen him ? I told thee thou wouldst eitherhear of him or see him this morning. He is notreturned, I see. What hast thou heard*"He is returned'" replied Sybil, faintly; " andno ill hath happened to him 'f"^284 ROOKWOOD.He is returned, and thou heres' echoedBarbara. " No ill hath happened to him thoumayest — am I to understand there is ill to thee 9""Sybil answered not. She could not answer.I see, I sees"* said Barbara, more gently, herhead and hand shaking with paralytic affection —a quarrel, a lover s quarrel. Old as I am, Ihave not forgotten my feelings as a girl. Whatwoman ever does, if she be woman ? and thou,like thy poor mother, art a true hearted wench.She loved her husband, as a husband shouldbe loved, Sybil ; and though she loved mewell, she loved him better, as was right. Ah !it was a bitter day when she left me and herown land ; for though, to one of our wanderingrace, all countries are alike, yet the soil of ourbirth is dear to us, and the presence of ourkindred dearer. Well, well, I will not think ofthat. She is gone. Nay, take it not so to heart,wench. Luke hath a hasty temper. 'Tis notthe first time I have told thee so. He will notbear rebuke, and thou hast questioned him tooshrewdly, touching his absence. Is it not so ?ROOK WOOD. 285Heed it not. Trust me thou wilt have him seekthy forgiveness ere the shadows shorten 'neaththe noontide sun""Alas! alas !" said Sybil, sadly, " this is nolover's quarrel, which may, at once, be forgottenand forgiven — would it were so'"What is it thence" asked Barbara; andwithout waiting Sybil's answer, she continued,with vehemence — " Hath he stoned thee ?Tell me, girl, in what way ? Speak, that I mayavenge thee, if it be that thy wrong requiresrevenge. Art thou blood of mine, and thickestI will not do this for thee, girl ! None of theblood of Barbara Lovel was ever unrevenged.I will catch him, though he run — I will triphim, though he leap — I will reach him, thoughhe flee afar — I will drag him hither by the hairof his head'' added she, with a livid smile, andclenching her hands, as in the act of draggingsome one towards her. " He shall wed theewithin the hour, if thou wilt have it ; or, if thyhonour need that it should be so. My power isnot departed from me. My people are yet atROOKWOOD.my command. I am still their Queen, and woeto him that offended me or thee"'Mother ! Mother !'' cried Sybil, affrightedat the storm she had unwittingly aroused ; " hehath not injured me. 'Tis I alone who am toblame, not Luke ; he cannot help it"'Help what !'' asked Barbara ; " you speakin mysteries"*'' Sir Piers Rook wood is dead''Dead ! " echoed Barbara, trembling withsurprise. " Sir Piers dead "« And Luke Bradley ""HarIs his successor "Who told thee that ? " asked Barbara, withincreased astonishment.Luke himself. I know all — all is disclosed."And Sybil hastily recounted Luke's adventures.He is now Sir Luke Rosewood."This is news, in truth, said Barbara; yetnot news to weep for. Thou shouldst rejoicefor, not lament it. AVell, well; I saw it — Iknew it. I shall live to see all accomplished —ROOK WOOD. 287to see my Agatha's child ennobled — to see herwedded ; ay, to see her well wedded'Dearest mother !"I can endow thee, and I will do it. Thoushalt bring to thy husband not alone thy beautythou shalt bring him wealth"''' But, mother "My Agatha's daughter shall be Lady Rook-wood."'' Never ! It cannot be."What cannot be TThe match you now propose."Not be. What mean you, silly wench ? Notbe — it must — sit shall — why should it not be.^ Ha,ha ! I perceive the meaning of those tears — thetruth flashes upon me — he hath discarded thee."No, by the heaven of heavens, he is still thesame — unaltered in affection."If so, thy tears are out of place — thy sorrowout of season."Not so."I tell thee yea — ha ! — that look — thou288 ROOKWOOD.wouldst not give me to understand that it isthou who art the jilt ?'"'Mother, it is not fitting that I, a gipsy born,should wed with him.'"'Not fitting ! ha ! and thou my child — notfitting ! Get up, or I will spurn thee — notfitting ! Dry thine eyes, or I will stab thee —not fitting ! This from thee to me ! I tell theeit is fitting — thou shalt have a dower as ampleas that of any lady in the land — not fitting ! Isit so thou mayest, because thou thickest that hederives himself from a proud and ancient line —ancient and proud — ^ha ! ha ! I tell thee, girl,that for his one ancestor I can number twenty —for the years in which his lineage hath flourishedmy race can boast centuries, and was a people —a kingdom, ere the land in which he dwells wasknown. What ! if by the curse of Heaven wewere driven forth, the curse of Hell rests uponhis house."I know it," said Sybil; " a dreadful curse,which, if I wed him, will alight on me."ROOKWOOD. 289No ; not on thee — thou shalt avoid thatcurse !*'Avoid it rI know a means to satisfy the avenger.Leave that to me""'' I dare not, as it never can be ; yet tell me —you saw the body of Luke's ill-fated mother —was she poisoned ? Nay, you may speak ; SirPiers's death releases you from your oath. Howdied she ?'"By strangulation'' said the old gipsy, raisingher palsied hand to her throat.Oh," cried Sybil, gasping with horror.Was there a ring upon her finger ?"A ring — a wedding ring. The finger wascrooked."Then there is no doubt that she was wedded,and that he is Sir Luke Rosewood ? "Doubt ! I would have told Luke all, long,long ago, had not my oath sealed fast my lips.Listen to me, girl. When I was left alone, to domineoffice with the corpse of Susan, I sawVOL. II. o290 ROOKWOOD.indubitable proofs upon the body, of her fatalend. She was smothered sleeping, and the ringupon her finger told me, by her husband. Ithought that none but those accursed Spanishbutchers, who call themselves holy, that maimedmy darling, my Agatha, could have heartssavage enough to perpetrate a deed so horrible ;for she looked so beautiful, so innocent, sosmiling, even in death, that, little used to weeping,as I was, mine eyes would scarce permit meto complete mine office. She was not unlike thymother, girl, except that her complexion wasmore delicate, and lacked thy mother's rich andsunburnt warmth. Well, I came forth — hermurderer stood before me — Sir Piers. He trembledin each joint, as I looked at him; — he sawthat I knew his guilt — he saw that he was inmy power. Peter Bradley was with him likewise.The Sexton watched my looks — lie seemed toread the secret in my countenance, and, as helooked from the one to the other, he smiled. Ishall never forget that smile — it was a father sROOKWOOD. 291smile upon his daughter's murderer, carrying aconsciousness of the crime along with it. Iasked to be alone with Sir Piers; he fearedto comply, yet dared not refuse. We werealone — thou wonder est how I ventured to trustmyself with him. I was armed, and then fewmen could cope with Barbara. I would have stabbedhim, if he had stirred — I could have stabbedhim for a lighter offence. ' You have seen her,'said he. ' I have'' I answered. He dared notcontinue the conversation. I spoke boldly, forI hated him. ' You were her assassin"* I said.He started. ' Deny it not,' I continued — ' yourlife is forfeit, if I but speak.' — ' But you will notspeak.? If gold will not purchase your silence,fear shall.' — ' I deride your threats,' I returned ;and if you repeat them, I will denounce you.There is a ring upon her finger' Again hestarted. ' She was your wife?' — ' Alas !' repliedhe, ' she was.' — ' What demon prompted you tokill her?' I added. ' Pride, pride,' shrieked he;and the curse that is attached to our house, the292 ROOK WOOD.insatiate spirit, which will have its victim. Sheis gone — she is gone — would I were also dead.Denounce me — give me up to justice — I deserveit all.' His remorseful agony, in a measure,overcame my anger, and, looking steadily uponhis face, I saw that he was under the influenceof Fate. I even pitied him, such was the extremityof affliction to which he was reduced. Aftera while, he partially recovered : he brought outgold — a hoard of gold — ' it was mine"* he said ;I should have more, if I would take the oath notto divulge the dreadful secret in his lifetime"' Herenewed his entreaties — I took the oath. He thenled me into another chamber, where an infant wassleeping — it was a beautiful boy — it was Luke.Take this child,' said he ; ' the sight of it willonly recall her — its presence is dangerous. Takethe child, and with it what gold thou wilt.Appoint what place thou thickest proper, andmore shall be sent thee ; but hence, away ; thesight of that child maddens — it is like an accusingangel.' I took the child — I took his gold — IEOOKWOOD. 293did not remonstrate with him on the barbarousand unnatural act he was committing. Thechild I thought would thrive as well with me,and it did thrive, as thou knowest, Sybil, undermy care. Amongst the bravest, the boldest, andthe handsomest of our tribe, ranked Luke Bradley.His was the education of a man. Thickestthou, Sybil, I have forgotten the day when thoureturned with thy luckless mother ? Thou wertan infant then — a very pretty dark-eyed child,and he a boy some years in advance of thee ;yet even then, children as ye were, ye seemed tolove each other, and then first the thought flashedacross me of your union. I have watched youever since — I have witnessed the growth, theprogress of your affection — I have affianced you.The period of reward is arrived — he is Sir Lukehe is your husband''Hold, mother — do not deceive yourself*' saidSybil, with a fearful earnestness. " He is notyet Sir Luke Rosewood — would he had noclaim to be so. The fortune that hath hitherto294 ROOKWOOD.been so propitious, may yet desert him. Bethinkyou of a prophecy you uttered"*A prophecy ? Ha ! ''And with slow enunciation Sybil pronouncedthe mystic words which she had heard repeatedby the Sexton.As she spake, a gloom, like that of a thundercloud,began to gather over the brow of theold gipsy. The orbs of her sunken eyes expanded,and wrath supplied her frame withvigour. She arose.Who told thee that ?" cried Barbara.« Peter Bradley."Peter Bradley, the Sexton of Rosewood P"^screamed the infuriate woman. " Ha ! Howlearnt he it ? It was to one who hath long beenin his grave I told it — so long ago, it had passed-frommy memory. 'Tis strange — Reginaldhath a brother, I know ; but there is no other ofthe house''There is a cousin — Eleanor Mowbray."'• Eleanor Mowbray ! Ha ! I see, a daughterROOKWOOD. 295of that Eleanor Rosewood, who fled from herfather's roof. Fool, fool; am I caught in myown toils? Those words were words of truthand power, and compel the future and ' the willbe,' as with chains of brass. They must befulfilled, but not by Ranulph. He shall neverwed Eleanor''Whom then shall she wed ?"Sir Luke Rosewood."Mother !" shrieked Sybil. '• Dost thou sayso ? Oh ! recall thy speech."I may not ; it is spoken. He shall wed her."Oh God, support me !" exclaimed Sybil.Silly wench, be firm — it must be as I say.He shall wed her ; yet shall he wed her not —the altar and the grave are but a step apart —the nuptial torch shall be quenched as soon aslighted — the curse of the avenger shall fall — yetnot on thee "Mother, I comprehend you not," cried Sybil— " I would not comprehend you. If sinmust fall upon some innocent head, let it beROOKWOOD.hurled on mine — not upon her's. I love him —I could gladly die for him. She is young — sheis unoffending — perhaps happy. Oh, do not lether perish '''Peace, I say ! '' cried Barbara.There lives another, his brother, — think ofthat, dear mother ! "It is in vain*"Oh, for my sake — for my martyred mother'ssake," cried Sybil.Touch not that chord, girl'' said Barbara ;trifle not with thy mother's name thus lightly.I owe it to her memory to look to thy advancement.""Advancement!" echoed Sybil, her voicestifled with sobs. " It will advance me to mygrave. Oh, mother, lend not thine hand to sin."To sin !" repeated Barbara ; " to Fate. Thisis thy birth-day, Sybil. Eighteen summers haveflown over thy young head — eighty wintershave sown their snows on mine. Thou hast yetto learn. Years have brought wrinkles — theyROOKWOOD. 297have brought wisdom likewise. To strugglewith Fate, I tell thee, is to wrestle with Omnipotence.We may foresee, but not avert ourdestiny — what will be, shall be. This is thyeighteenth birth-day, Sybil ; it is a day of fateto thee ; in it occurs thy planetary hour — an hourof good or ill, according to thine actions. Ihave cast thy horoscope; I have watched thynatal star; it is under the baneful influenceof Scorpion, and fiery Saturn sheds his luridglance upon it Let me see thy hand — theline of life is drawn out distinct and clear —it runs — ha ! — what means that intersection ?Have a care — beware, my Sybil, of thyself. Actas I tell thee, and thou art safe. I will makeanother trial, by the crystal bowl. Attend"'Muttering some strange words, which soundedlike a spell, Barbara, with her divining rod, describeda circle upon the floor; within the circleshe drew other lines, from angle to angle, formingseven triangles, the bases of which constitutedthe seven sides of a equilateral figure. Thiso5298 ROOKWOOD.figure she studied intently for a few moments ;she then raised her wand, and touched the owlwith it. The bird unfolded its wings, andarose in flight — then slowly circled round thependulous globe. Each time it drew nearer,until at length it touched the glassy bowl withits flapping pinions.Enough'" ejaculated Barbara.The bird stayed its flight, and returned to itsperch.Barbara arose. She struck the globe with herstaff. The pure lymph became instantly tingedwith crimson, as if blood had been commingledwith it. The little serpent could be seen within,coiled up and knotted, as in the struggles ofdeath.Again, I say, beware," ejaculated Barbarasolemnly. " This is ominous of ill''Sybil had sunk, from faintness, on the pallet.A. knock was heard at the door.^* AVho is without ?''' cried Barbara.'Tis I, Balthazar C replied a voice.IfcS^^^i^?!i^#!.-|mROOKWOOD. 299Thou may St enter," answered Barbara ; andan old man with a long beard, white as snoAv,and a costume which might be said to resemblethe ephod of a Jewish High Priest, made hisappearance.I come to tell you that there are strangewomen within the Priory," said the Patrick,gravely, " I have searched for you in vain,"continued he, addressing Sybil ; " the youngerof them seems to need your assistance."Women !" exclaimed Barbara. " Whencecome they ?"They have ridden, I understand, fromRosewood," answered the Patrico. " Theywere on their way to Davenham, Ashen they wereprevented."From Rosewood ?" echoed Sybil — " theirnames — did you hear their names ?"Mowbray is the name of both ; — they areamother and a daughter — the younger iscalled "Eleanor .^" asked Sybil, with an acute forebodingof calamity.ROOK WOOD.Eleanor is the name, assuredly," replied thePatrico, somewhat surprised.Gracious God ! She here'' exclaimed Sybil.Here — Eleanor Mowbray here'' cried Barbara." Within my power — not a moment is tobe lost. Balthazar, hasten thee round the tents —not a man must leave his place — above all,Luke Bradley. See that these ]\Iowbrays aredetained within the Abbey. Let the bell besounded. Quick, quick — leave this wench tome— she is not well. I have much to do. Awaywith thee, man, and let me know when thouhast done it." And as Balthazar departed onhis mission, with a glance of triumph in hereyes, Barbara exclaimed, " Soh, no sooner haththe thought possessed me, than the means ofaccomplishment appear. It shall be done atonce — I will tie the knot — I will untie, andthen retie it. This weak wench must be nervedto the task," added she, regarding the senselessform of Sybil. " Here is that will stimulateher," opening a cupboard, and taking a smallphial — " this will fortify her; and this," con-rosewood.301tinned she, with a ghastly smile, laying herhand upon another vessel, " this philter shallremove her rival when all is fulfilled — thisliquid shall constrain her lover to be hertitled, landed husband. Ha .' ha !"CHAPTER V.Beggar. Concert, Sir ! we have musicians, too, among us.True, merry beggars, indeed, that, being within the reach ofthe lash for singing libellous songs at London, were fain tothy into one covey, and here they sing all our poets' ditties.They can sing anything, most tuneably. Sir, but psalms. Whatthey may do hereafter, under a triple tree, is much expected ;but they live very civilly and genteelly among us.Spring. But, what is here — that solemn old fellow, thatneither speaks of himself, or any for him ?Beggar. O, Sir, the rarest man of all : he is a prophet. Seehow he holds up his prognosticating nose. He is diviningnow.Spring. How, a prophet ?Beggar. Yes, Sir ; a cunning man, and a fortune teller ; avery ancient stroller all the world over, and has travelled withgipsies : and is a Patrico.The Merry Beggars.In consequence of some few words which theSexton let fall, in the presence of the attendants,during breakfast, more perhaps by design thanaccident, it was speedily rumoured throughoutthe camp, that the redoubled Richard TurpinROOKWOOD. 303was for the time its inmate. This intelligenceproduced some such sensation as is experiencedby the inhabitants of some petty town, on thesudden arrival of a prince of the blood, acommander-in-cliief, or other illustrious anddistinguished personage, whose fame has beenvaunted abroad amongst his fellow men byRumour, " and her thousand tongues ; '' andwho, like our Highwayman, has renderedhimself sufficiently notorious to be an objectof admiration and emulation amongst his contemporaries.All started up at the news. The UprightMan, the chief of the crew, arose from hischair, donned his gown of state, a very ancientbrocade dressing gown, filched, most probably,from the wardrobe of some strolling player,grasped his baton of office, a stout oakentruncheon, and sallied forth. The Ruffler, whofound his representative in a very magnificentlyequipped, and by no means ill-favoured knave,whose chin was decorated with a beard aslengthy and as black as Sultan Mahmoocrs,304 ROOKWOOD.together with the dexterous Hooker, issuedforth from the hovel which they termed theirboozing ken, eager to catch a glimpse of thePrince of the High Toby Cloaks. The limping;Galliard tore the bandages from off hismock wounds, shouldered his crutch, andtrudged hastily after them. The Whip Jackunbuckled his strap, threw away his timberleg, and " leapt exulting, like the boundingroe*" — " With such a sail in sight"" he said,he must heave to, like the rest"' The dumbDummerar, whose tongue had been cut outbythe Algerine, suddenly found the use ofit, and made the welkin ring with his shouts.Wonderful were the miracles Dick's adventwrought. The lame became suddenly active,the blind saw, and the dumb spake ; nay, iftruth must be told, absolutely gave utterance tomost vernacular execrations"* Morts, autemmorts, walking morts, dells, doxies, pinchingmorts, and their does, with all the shades andgrades of the Canting Crew, were assembled.There were, to use the words of Brome —ROOKWOOD. 305Stark, errant, downright beggars. Ay,Without equivocation, statute beggars,Couchant and passant, guardant, rampant beggars ;Current and vagrant, stockade, flippant beggars * !Each sun-burnt varlet started fi'om his shedeach dusky dame, with her brown, half-nakedurchins, followed at his heels — each " ripe,young maiden, with the glossy eye'' lingeredbut to sleek her raven tresses, and to arrange herstraw bonnet, and then overtook the others —each wrinkled beldame hobbled as quickly afteras her stiffened joints would permit; while theancient Patrico, the priest of the Crew (whojoined the couples together by the hedge-side,with the nice custom of dead horse between-f-,"")brought up the rear — all bent on one grandIe Merry Beggars.+ The parties to be wedded find out a dead horse, or anyother beast, and standing one on the one side, and the other onthe other, the Patrico bids them live together till death dothem part ; and so shaking hands, the wedding dinner is keptat the next alehouse they stumble into, where the union isnothing but knocking of Cannes, and the sauce, none butdrunken brawls.Dekkar.306 Lockwood.object — that of having a peep at the " foremostman of all this rigging world."Dick Turpin, at the period of which wetreat, was in the zenith of his reputation. Hisdeeds were full blown; his exploits were in everyman's mouth ; and a heavy price was set uponhis head. That he should show himself thusopenly, where he might be so easily betrayed,excited no little surprise amongst the craftiestof the crew, and augured an excess of temerityon his part. Rash daring was the main featureof Turpin s character. Like our great Nelson,he knew fear only by name ; and when he thustrusted himself into the hands of strangers, confidentin himself and in his own resources, hefelt perfectly easy as to the result. He reliedalso in the continuance of his good fortune,which had as yet never deserted him. Possessedof the belief, that his hour was not yet come, hecared little or nothing for any risk he mightrun ; and though he might undoubtedly havesome presentiment of the probable terminationof his career, he never suffered it to militateROOKWOOD. 307against his present enjoyment, which proved thathe was no despicable philosopher.Dick Turpin was the Ultima Romanum,the last of a race which (we were almost aboutto say we regret) is now altogether extinct.Several successors he had, it is true, but no nameworthy to be recorded after his own. With him,expired the chivalrous spirit which animatedsuccessively the bosoms of so many Knights ofthe Road ; with him, died away that passionatelove of enterprise, that high spirit of devotionto the fair sex, which was first breathed upon thehighway by the gay, gallant Chevalier Du Val,the Bayard of the road — Le Filou sans peur etsans reproche — but which was extinguished atlast by the cord which tied the heroic Turpinto the remorseless tree. It were a subject wellworthy of inquiry, to trace this decline and fallof the empire of the Tobymen, to its remotercauses — to ascertain the why and the wherefore,that with so many half-pay captains ; so manypoor curates ; so many lieutenants, of ]both services,without hopes of promotion ; so many308 ROOKWOOD.penny-ar-liners, and fashionable novelists; somany damned dramatists, and damning critics;so jnany Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviewers ;so many detrimental brothers, and younger sons ;when there are horses to be hired, pistols to beborrowed, purses to be taken, and mails are asplentiful as partridges; — it were worth seriousinvestigation, we repeat, to ascertain why, withthe best material imaginable for a new race ofhighwaymen, we have none, not so much as anamateur. Why do not some of these choicespirits quit the salons of Pall-small, and taketo the road ; the air of the heath is more bracingand wholesome, we should conceive, than that ofany " hell"' whatever, and the chances of successincomparably greater ? We throw out this hint,without a doubt of seeing it followed up. Probablythe solution of our inquiry, may be, thatthe supply is greater than the demand ; that, inthe present state of things, embryo highwaymenmay be more abundant than purses ; and then,have we not the horse patrol ? With such anadmirably-organized system of conservation, it isROOK WOOD. 309vain to anticipate a change. The highwaymen,we fear, like their Irish brothers, the Rapparees,went out with the Tories. They were averseto Reform, and eschewed Emancipation.Lest any one should think we have overratedthe pleasures of the highwayman's existence,they shall hear what " the right villainousJack Hall, a celebrated solyman of his day,has got to say on the subject. " His life (thehighwayman's) has, generally, the most mirthand the least care in it of anv man's breathing,and all he deals for is clear profit: he has thatpoint of good conscience, that he always sells ashebuys, a good pennyworth, which is somethingrare, since he trades with so small a stock. TheFence* and he are like the devil and the doctor,they live by one another ; and, like traitors, 'tisbest to keep each other's counsel. He has thispoint of honesty, that he never robs the househe frequents;" (Turpin had the same scruplesrespecting the Hall of Rosewood in Sir Piers'sReceiver.310 ROOKWOOD.life-time ;) " and perhaps pays his debts betterthan some others, for he holds it below the dignityof his employment to commit so ungenteela crime as insolvency, and loves to pay nobly.He has another quality, not much amiss, thathe takes no more than he has occasion for""(Jack, we think, was a little mistaken here),which he verifies this way ; he craves no morewhile that lasts. He is a less nuisance in aCommonwealth than a miser, because themoney he engrosses, all circulates again, whichthe other hoards as though 'twere only to befound again at the Day of Judgment. He isthe tithe-pig of his family, which the gallows,instead of the parson, claims as its due. He hasreason enough to be bold in his undertakings,for though all the world threaten him, he standsin fear of but one man in it, and that's the hangman; and with him too he is generally in Fee :however, I cannot affirm he is so valiant that hedares look any man in the face, for in that pointhe is now and then a little modest. Newgatemay be said to be his country-house, where heROOKWOOD. 311frequently lives so many months in the year,and he is not so much concerned to be carriedthither for a small matter, if 'twere only for thebenefit of renewing his acquaintance there. Heholds a petit larceny as light as a Nun doesauricular confession, though the priest has amore compassionate character than the hangman.Every man in this community is esteemed accordingto his particular quality, of which thereare several degrees, though it is contrary oftento public government ; for here a man shall bevalued purely for his merit, and rise by it too,though it be but to a halter, in which there is agreat deal of glory in dying like a hero, andmaking a decent figure in the cart to the twolast staves of the fifty-first Psalm *.^This, we repeat, is the plain statement of apractical man, and again we throw out the hintfor adoption. All that we regret is, that we arenow degenerated from the grand solyman to theMemoirs of the Right Villainous John Hall, the famousand notorious robber, penned from his mouth some time beforehis death, 1708.312 ROOKWOOD.cracksman and the sneak*, about whom thereare no redeeming features. How much lowerthe next generation of thieves will dive, it bootsnot to conjecture: —aetas Tarentum pejor avis tulip,Nos requires ; mox natures,Progeniem vitiosiorem.Cervantes laughed Spain's chivalry away,"sang Byron; and if Gay did not extinguishthe failing flame of our Night Errantry, (unlikethe Robbers of Schiller, which is said to haveinflamed the Saxon youth with an irrepressiblemania for brigandage,) the Beggars' Operahelped not to fan the dying fire. That laughwas fatal, as laughs generally are. Macbethgave the highwayman his coup de grace.The last of this race (for we must persist inmaintaining that he was the last), Turpin, likethe setting sun, threw up some parting rays ofglory, and tinged the far highways with alustre which may yet be traced like a cloud ofHousebreakers.ROOKWOOD. 313dust raised by bis horse's retreating heels. Unequalledin the command of bis steed, the mostsingular feat that the whole race of the annalsof horsemanship bas to record, and of wbicb wemay bave more to say hereafter, was achievedby bim. So perfect was bis jockey ship, so cleverbis management of the animal be mounted, sointimately acquainted was be with every crossroadin the neighbourhood of the metropolis (abook of wbicb be constructed, and carried constantlyabout bis person), as well as with manyother parts of England, particularly the countiesof Chester, York, and Lancaster, that be outstrippedevery pursuer, and baffled all attemptsat capture. His reckless daring, bis restless rapidity(for so suddenly did be change bis ground,and renew bis attacks in other quarters, thatbe seemed to be endowed with ubiquity), ibisbravery, bis resolution, and, above all, ibisgenerosity, won for bim a big reputationamongst bis compatriots, and even elicited applausefrom those upon whom be levied ibiscontributions.VOL. ir. p314 ROOKWOOD.Beyond dispute he ruled as master of theroad. His hands were, as yet, unstained withblood ; he was ever prompt to check the dispositionto outrage, and to prevent, as muchas lay in his power, the commission of violenceby his associates. Of late, since he had possessedhimself of his favourite mare, blackBess, his robberies had been perpetrated witha suddenness of succession, and at distancesso apparently impracticable, that the idea ofall having been executed by one man, wasrejected as an impossibility ; and the only wayof reconciling the description of the horse andrider, which tallied in each instance, was thesupposition that these attacks were performedby confederates similarly mounted, and similarlyaccoutered.There was, in all this, as much of the ^'famcEsacra fames, ^'' as of the " o7^ri ;'' of the hungeringafter distinction, as well as of the appetiteof gain. Enamoured of his vocation, Turpindelighted to hear himself designated as theflying Highwayman; and it was with rapturousWOOD. 315vous triumph that he found his single-handedfeats attributed to a band of marauders. Butthis state of things could not long endure ; hissecret was blown; the vigilance of the policewas aroused ; he was tracked to his haunts ;and after a number of hair-breadth 'scapes,which he only effected by miracle, or by theaid of his wonder-working mare, he reluctantlyquitted the heathy hills of Bagshot, the Pampasplains of Hounslow (over which, like an archetypeof the galloping Captain Head, he had sooften scoured), the gorsy commons of Highgate,Hampstead, and Finchley, the marshy fields ofBattersea, almost all of which he had beenknown to visit in a single night, and, leavingthese beaten tracks to the occupation of youngerand less practised hands, he bequeathed tothem at the same time his own reversionaryinterest in the gibbets thereupon erected, andbetook himself to the country.After a journey of more or less success, ouradventurer found himself at Rosewood, whitherhe had been invited after a grand field-day, by316 HOOK WOOD.its hospitable and by no means inquisitive owner.Breach of faith and good fellowship formedno part of Turpin's character ; he had his lightsas well as his shades ; and so long as Sir Pierslived, his purse and coffers would have been freefrom molestation, except " so far,"*' Dick said,as a cog or two of dice went. My dice, youknow, are longs for odd and even, a bale of bar dcinque deuces'' a pattern of which he alwayscarried with him : beyond this, excepting atake-in at a steeple chase, Rosewood churchbeing the mark, a " do"' at a leap, or somesuch trifle, to which the most scrupulous couldnot raise an objection, Dick was all fair andabove board. But when poor Sir Piers hadput on his wooden surtout,'' to use Dick'sown expressive metaphor, his conscientious feelingsevaporated into thin air. Lady Rosewoodwas nothing to him ; there was excellent bootyto be '' appropriated" : —The wise convey it call."He began to look about for hands ; and havingROOKWOOD. 317accidentally encountered his old comrades,Rust and Wilder, they were let into thebusiness, which was imperfectly accomplishedin the manner heretofore described.To return from this digression. WhenTurpin presented himself at the threshold ofthe door, on his way to inquire after his mare,to his astonishment he found it closely invested.A cheering shout from the tawny throng, succeededby a general clapping of hands, andattended by a buzzing usurpation of applause,such as welcomes the entrance of a jx^pularactor upon the stage, greeted the appearance ofthe Highwayman. At the first sight of thecrowd, he was a little startled, and involuntarilysought for his pistols ; but the demonstrationsof admiration were too unequal local tobe for a moment mistaken ; his hand wasdrawn from his pocket, to raise his hat fromhis brows.Thunders of applause.Turpin's external man, we have before said,was singularly prepossessing. It was especially318 ROOK WOOD.SO in the eyes of the sex (fair we certainly cannotsay upon the present occasion), amongst whomnot a single dissentient voice was to be heard.All concurred in thinking him a fine fellow ;could plainly read his high courage in his bearing; his good breeding in his debonair deportment; and his manly beauty in his extravagantred whiskers. Dick saw the effect that he produced.He was at home in a moment. Yourtrue highwayman has ever a passion for effect.This does not desert him at the gallows ; itrises superior to death itself; and has beenknown to influence the manner of his danglingfrom the gibbet ! To hear some one cry,There goes a proper handsome man*" saithour previously quoted authority, Jack Hall,somewhat ameliorates the terrible thoughts ofthe meagre tyrant death ; and to go in a dirtyshirt, were enough to save the hangman alabour, and make a man die with grief andshame of being in that deplorable condition*"AVith a gracious smile of condescension, likea popular orator — with a look of blarney likeROOKWOOD. 319that of O'Connell, and of assurance like thatof Hunt, he surveyed the male portion of thespectators, tipped a knowing wink at theprettiest brunettes he could select, and finallycut a sort of flinof with his well-booted leers,which brought down another peal of rapturousapplause.A rank scamp* !'' cried the Upright Man;and this exclamation, however equivocal it maysound, was intended, on his part, to be highlycomplimentary.I believe ye"" returned the Ruffler, strokinghis chin, — " one may see that he's no halfswell, by the care with which he cultivates thebest gifts of nature, his whiskers. He's a ranknibf."Togged out to the ruffian, no doubt," saidthe Galliard, who was incomparably the shabbiestrascal in the corps. " Though a needymiller myself, I likes to see a cove wot's veldressed. List twig his swell kickseys andA famous highvvayiTian. f A real gentleman.320 ROOKWOOD.pipes * ; if they ain't the thing, I'm done.Lame Harry can't dance better nor he — no,nor Jerry Juniper neither""I'm dumb founded," roared the Dummerar,if he can't patter Romany-f- as vel as thebest on us ! He looks like a rum 'un."And a rum 'un he be, take my word forit," returned the AVhip Jack, or sham sailorLook at his rigging — see how he flashes hissticks J — those are the tools to rake a three-decker.He's as clever a craft as I've seen thismany a day, or I'm no judge."The women were equally enchanted — equallyeloquent in the expression of their admiration.What ogles !" cried a mort.What pins !" said an autem mort, or, marriedwoman.Sharp as needles," said a dark-eyed dell,who had encountered one of the free and frolicksomeglances which our Highwayman distributedso liberally amongst the petticoats.Breeches and boots. | Gipsy flash.X How he exposes his pistols.ROOKWOOD. 321It was at this crisis Dick took off his hat.Caesar betrayed his baldness.A thousand pities !'' cried the men, compassionatehis thinly covered scull, and twistingtheir own ringlets, glossy and luxuriant, thoughunconscious of Macassar. " A thousand pitiesthat so fine a fellow should have a sconce like acocoa nut !"But then his red whiskers," rejoined thewomen, tired of the uniformity of thick blackheadsof hair ; " what a warmth of colouringthey impart to his face, and then only lookhow flush they are ! — how beautifully bushythey make his cheeks appear rLady Baussiere and the Court of the Queenof Navarre, were not more smitten with theirresistible whiskers of the Sieur de Croix.The hawk's eye of Turpin ranged over thewhole assemblage. Amidst that throng of darkfaces, there was not one familiar to him.Before him stood the Upright Man, Zoroaster(so was he called), a sturdy, stalwart rogue,p5322 Lockwood.whose superior strength and stature (as has notunfrequently been the case in the infancy ofgovernments that have risen to more importancethan is likely to be the case with that of LesserEgypt) had been the means of his elevationto his present dignified position. Zoroasterliterally fought his way upwards, and had atfirst to maintain his situation by the strongarm ; but he now was enabled to repose uponhis hard-won laurels, to smoke " the calumetof peace'' and quaff his tipple with impunity.For one of gipsy blood, he presented an unusuallyjovial, liquor-loving countenance — hiseye was mirthful — his lip moist, as if fromoft potations — his cheek mellow as an Orleansplum, which fruit, in colour and texture, itmightily resembled. Strange to say, also, forone of that lithe race, his person was heavyand hebetudinous ; the consequence, no doubt,of habitual intemperance. Like Cribs, he waxedobese upon the championship. There was akind of mock state in his carriage, as he placedROOKWOOD. 323himself before Turpin, and with his left handtwisted up the tail of his dressing gown, whilethe right thrust his truncheon into his hip, whichwas infinitely diverting to the Highwayman.Turpin's attention, however, was chiefly directedtowards his neighbour, the Ruffler, inwhom he recognised a well-known impostor ofthe day, with whose history he was sufficientlywell acquainted to be able at once to identifythe individual. We have before stated, that amagnificent coal-black beard decorated the chinof this singular character ; but this was not all —his costume was in perfect keeping with hisbeard, and consisted of a very theatrical-lookingtunic, upon the breast of which was embroidered,in golden wire, the maltese cross ; while over hisshoulders were thrown the ample folds of a cloakof Tyrian hue. To his side was girt a long anddoughty sword, which he called, in his knightlyphrase, Excalibur; and upon his profuse hair,rested a hat as broad in the brim as a Spanishsombrero.Exaggerated as this description may appear,324 ROOKWOOD.we can assure our readers, that it is not overdrawn;and that a counterpart of the sketchwe have given of the Ruffler, certainly " struttedhis hour"' upon the stage of human life, andthat the very ancient and discriminating Cityof Canterbury (to which be all honour) washis theatre of action. His history is so farcurious, that it exemplifies more strongly thanathousand discourses could do, how prone we *are to be governed by appearances, and howeasily we may be made the dupes of a plausibleimpostor. Be it remembered, however,that we treat of the eighteenth century, beforethe march of intellect had commenced ; we aremuch too knowing to be similarly practisedupon in these enlightened times. But we willlet the Knight of Malta, for such was the titleassumed by the Ruffler, tell his own story inhis own way hereafter ; contenting ourselveswith the moral precepts we have alreadydeduced from it.Next to the Knight of Malta, stood theWhip Jack, habited in his sailor gear — stripedROOKWOOD. 325shirt and dirty canvas trousers; and adjoininghim was the Galliard, a loathsome ,his dress one heap of rags, and hisdiscoloured skin one mass of artificial leprosyand impostures.As Turpin's eye shifted from one to anotheroT these figures, he chanced upon an individualwho had been honos endeavouring; to arrest hisattention. This personage was completely inthe back-ground. All that Dick could discernof him, was a brown curly head of hair,carelessly arranged in the modern mode; ahandsome, impudent, sun-freckled face, withone eye closed, and the other occupied bya broken bottle neck, through which, as asubstitute for a lorgnette, the individual reconnoitredhim. A cocked hat was placed in avery degree manner under his arm, and heheld a black ebony cane in his hand, very muchin the style of a " fassionahle^^ as the Frenchhave it, of the year 1833. This glimpse wassufficient to satisfy Turpin. He recognisedin this whimsical personage an acquaintance.'i^^6 ROOKWOOD.Jerry Juniper was what the classical Rosewould designate a " gentleman with three outs;"and although he was not entirely without wit,nor, his associates avouched, without money,nor, certainly, in his own opinion, had thatbeen asked, without manners; yet was he assuredlywithout shoes, without stockings, withoutshirt. This latter deficiency was made upby a voluminous cravat, tied with proportionatelylarge bows. A jaunty pair of yellowinexpressible, somewhat faded; a waistcoat ofsilver brocade, richly embroidered, somewhattarnished and lack-lustre ; a murrey-colouredvelvet coat, somewhat chafed, completed thecostume of this Beggar Brummell, this mendicantmaccaroni !Jerry Juniper was a character well known atthe time, as a constant frequenter of all races,fairs, regattas, ship-launches, bull-baits, andprize-fights, all of which he attended, and towhich he transported himself with an expeditionlittle less remarkable than that of Turpin. Youmet him at Epsom, at Ascot, at Newmarket,ROOK WOOD. 327at Doncaster, at the Rooted of Chester, at theCurrant oaf Kildare. The most remote as well asthe most adjacent meeting attracted him. Thecock-pit was his constant haunt, and in moresenses than one was he a leg. No opera dancercould be more agile, more nimble; scarcely,indeed, more graceful, than was Jerry, with hishopeless and stockingless feet; and the mannerin which he executed a pirouette or a pas, beforea line of carriages, seldom failed to procure himgolden opinions from all sorts of dames"" Withthe ladies, it must be owned, Jerry was ratherupon too easy terms; but then, perhaps, theladies were upon too easy terms with Jerry ; andif a bright-eyed fair one condescended to jest withhim, what marvel if he should sometimes slightlytransgress the laws of decorum. These aberrations,however, were trifling : altogether he wasso well known, and knew every body else sowell, that he seldom committed himself; andsingular to say, could on occasions even beserious. In addition to his other faculties, noone cut a sly joke, no one trolled a merry ditty,328 ROOKWOOD.better than Jerry. His peculiarities, in short,were on the pleasant side, and he wai a generalfavourite in consequence.No sooner did Jerry perceive that he wasrecognised, than, after kissing his hand withthe air of a petit-maitre to the Highwayman, hestrove to edge his way through the crowd. Allhis efforts were fruitless ; and, tired of a situationin the rear rank, so inconsistent, he conceived,with his own importance, he had recourseto an expedient often practised with success inharlequinades, and not unfrequently in real life,where a flying leap is occasionally taken over ourheads. He ran back a few yards, to give himselfan impetus, returned, and, placing his handsupon the shoulders of a stalwart vagabond nearto him, threw a somerset upon the broad capof a galliard, who was so jammed in the midstthat he could not have stirred to avoid theshock; thence, without pausing, he vaultedforwards, and dropped lightly upon the groundin front of Zoroaster, and immediately beforethe Highwayman.ROOKWOOD. 329Dick laughed immoderately at Jerry's manoeuvre.He shook his old chum cordially bythe hand, saying, in a whisper, " What the devilbrings you here, Jerry ?"'' I might retort, and ask you that question.Captain Turpin"' replied Jerry, sotto voce. " Itis odd to see me here, certainly — quite out of myelement — quite lost amongst this canaille — thiscanting crew — all the fault of a pair of gipsyeyes, bright as a diamond, dark as a sloe. Youcomprehend — a little affair, ha ! Liable to thesethings. Bring your ear closer, my boy^je uponyour guard — keep a sharp look out — there's adevil of a reward upon your head — I won'tanswer for all these rascals."Thank you for the hint, Jerry," repliedDick, in the same tone. " I calculated mychances pretty nicely when I came here. Butif I should perceive any symptoms of foul play, —any attempt to snitch or nose, amongst this packof pedlars, I have a friend or two at hand, whowon't be silent upon the occasion. Rest assuredI shall have my eye upon the gnarling scoundrels— 1 won't be sold for nothing."330 ROOKWOOD.Trust you for that'' returned Juniper, witha wink. " Stay," added he, " a thought strikesme — I have a scheme in petty, which may perhapsafford you some fun, and will at all eventsensure you safety during your stay''What is it?" asked Dick.Just amuse yourself with a flirtation for amoment or two with that pretty damsel, whohas been casting her ogles at you for the lastfive minutes without success, while I effect amaster stroke."And, as Turpin, nothing loth, followed hisadvice, Jerry addressed himself to Zoroaster.After a little conference, accompanied by thatworthy and the Knight of Malta, the trio steppedforward from the line, and approached Dick,when Juniper, assuming some such attitude asthe admirable Jones, the comedian, is wont todisplay, delivered himself, with as much proprietyof intonation as if he had been instructedin his speech by that unrivalled master of elocution,of the following address. Turpin listenedwith the gravity of one of the distinguished personsalluded to, at the commencement of theROOK WOOD. 331present chapter, upon their receiving the freedomof a city at the hands of a Mayor andCorporation. Thus spoke Jerry : —Highest of High Tobymen ! Rummest ofrum Ladders, and most scampish of Scamps-men! We, in the name of Barbara, our mostTawny Queen, — in the name of Zoroaster, ourUpright Man, Timber Amber, or OUi Cam-poll,by all which titles his Excellency is distinguished— in our own respective najnes, asHigh Pads and Low Pads, Rum Gills andQueer Gills, Patrick, Halliards, Printers, WhipJacks, and Workmen, from the Arch Rogue tothe Needy Miller, fully sensible of the honouryou have conferred upon us in gracing Stop-HoleAbbey with your presence ; and conceiving thatwe can in no way evince our sense of your condescensionso entirely as by offering you thefreedom of our crew, together with the privilegesof an Upright Man*, which you may be awareare considerable, and by creating you an honorarymember of the Vagrant Club, which we haveFor an account of these, see Rose. They are much toorose to be set down here.332 llOOKWOOD.recently established ; and in so doing, we wouldfain express the sentiments of gratification andpride which we experience in enrolling amongour members the name of one who has extendedthe glory of roguery so widely over the land, andwho has kicked up a dust upon the highways ofEngland, with which he most effectually blindedthe natives — a name which is itself a legion —of highwaymen ! Awaiting, with respectful deference,the acquiescence of Captain Turpin,we beg to tender him the freedom of our crew'Really, gentlemen'' said Turpin, who didnot exactly see the drift of this harangue, " youdo me a vast deal of honour. I am quite ata loss to conceive how I possibly have meritedso much attention at your hands ; and, indeed,I feel myself so unworthy — " here Dick receivedan expressive wink from Juniper, and thereforethought it prudent to alter his expression.Could I conceive myself at all deserving ofso much distinction," continued the modestspeaker, " I should at once accept your veryobliging offer — but '''ROOKWOOD. 333None so worthy'' said the Upright ]tian.Can't hear of a refusal'' said the Knight ofMalta.Refusal — impossible ! " reiterated Juniper.No, no refusal," exclaimed a chorus ofvoices. " Dick Turpin must be one of us.He shall be our Timber Amber."Well, gentlemen, since you are so pressing''replied Turpin, '' even so be it. I ivill be yourTimber Amber." ':Bravo ! bravo," cried the mob, not " ofgentlemen."About it. Palls, at once," said the Knightof Malta, flourishing Excalibur. "By St.Thomas a Becket, we'll have as fine a sceneas I myself ever furnished to the Canterburylieges."About what ?" asked Dick.Your matriculation," replied Jerry. " Thereare certain forms to be gone through, with anoath to be taken, merely a trifle — We'll have ajolly boose, when all's over. Come bing avast,my merry Palls — to the green — to the green — aTurpin ! — a Turpin ! — a new brother !"334 ROOK WOOD.*' A Turpin ! — a Turpin ! a new brother !''echoed the crew.IVe brought you throughout said Jerry,taking advantage of the uproar that ensued, towhisper to his chum — " none of them will dareto lift a finger against you now — they are allyour friends for life."Nevertheless," returned Turpin, " I shouldbe glad to know what has become of Bess."If it's your prancer you are wanting," chirpeda fluttering creature, whom Turpin recognised asLuke's groom. Grasshopper, " I gave her a freshloaf and a stoup of stingo, as you bade me, andthere she be, under yon tree, as quiet as a lamb."I see her," replied Turpin; "just tightenher girths. Grasshopper, and bring her after me,and thou shalt have wherewithal to chirp overthy cups at supper."Away bounded the elfin dwarf, to execute hisbehest.A loud shout now rent the skies, and presentlyafterwards was heard the vile scraping ofa fiddle, accompanied by the tattoo of a drum.Approaching Turpin, a host of gipsies elevatedROOK WOOD. 335the Highwayman upon their shoulders. In thisway he was carried to the centre of the green,where the long oaken table, which had onceserved the Franciscans for refection, was nowdestined for the stage of the pageant.Upon this table three drums were placed ; andTurpin was requested to seat himself on the centralone. A solemn prelude, more unearthly thanthe incantation in the Freyschiitz, was playedby the orchestra of the band, conducted by thePaganini of the place, who elicited the most marvellousnotes from his shell. A couple of shams *emitted sepulchral sounds, while the hollowrolling of the drum, broke ever and anon u|X)nthe ear. The effect was prodigiously grand.During this overture, the Patrico and the UprightiMan had ascended the rostrum, each takingtheir places, the former on the right hand ofTurpin, the latter upon his left. Below themstood the Knight of ]\Ialta,with Excalibur drawn• *' The shall, or sham, was a wind instrument, like apipe, with a swelling protuberance in the middle."Earl of Northumberland's Household Book,SS6 ROOKWOOD.in his hand, and gleaming in the sunshine. Onthe whole, Dick was amused with what he saw,and with the novel situation in which he foundhimself placed. Around the table were congregateda compact mass of heads ; so compact indeed,that they looked like one creature — anArgus, with each eye up-turned upon the Highwayman.The idea struck Turpin, that the restlessmass of parti coloured shreds and patches,of vivid hues and varied tin tings, singularly,though accidentally, disposed to produce such aneffect, resembled an immense tiger-moth, or itmight be a turkey carpet, spread out upon thegrass !The scene was a joyous one. It was abrilliant sunshiny morning. The air, freshenedand purified by the storm of the preceding night,breathed a balm upon the nerves and senses ofthe robber. The wooded hills were glittering inlight — the brook was flowing swiftly past theedge of the verdant slope, glancing like a wreathedsnake in the sunshine — its " quiet song'' lost inthe rude harmony of the mummers, as were theROOKWOOD. 837thousand twittering of the rejoicing birds — therocks bared their bosoms to the sun, or wereburied in deep-cast gloom — the shadows of thepillars and arches of the old walls of the priorywere projected afar, while the rose-like ramificationsof the magnificent marigold window weretraced, as if by a pencil, upon the verdant tabletof the sod.The overture was finished. With the appearanceof the principal figures in this strangepicture, the reader is already familiar. It remainsonly to give him some idea of the Patrico.Imagine, then, an old superannuated goat, rearedupon its hind legs, and clad in a white sheet,disposed in folds like those of an ephod aboutits limbs, and you will have some idea of Balthazar,the Patrico. This resemblance to theanimal before mentioned, was rendered the morestriking, by his huge, hanging goat-like underlip,his lengthy white beard, and a sort ofcap, covering his head, which was ornamentedwith a pair of horns, such as are to be seen inMichael Angelo's tremendous statue of Moses.VOL. II. Q,338 Lockwood.Balthazar, besides being the Patrico of the tribe,was its principal professor of divination, and hadbeen the long-tried and faithful minister ofBarbara Lovel, from whose secret instructionshe was supposed to have derived much of hismagical skill.Placing a pair of spectacles upon his " prognosticatingnose," and unrolling a vellum skin,upon which strange characters were written,Balthazar, turning to Turpin, thus commenced,in a solemn voice : —Thou who wouldst our brother he,Say how shall we enter thee ?Name the name that thou wilt bear,Ere our livery thou wear?I see no reason why I should alter my designations""replied the noviciate ; " but as Popeschange their titles on their creation, there canbe no objection to a Scampsman following soexcellent an example. Let me be known as theNight Hawk."The Night Hawk — good," returned thehierophant, proceeding to register the namebeery ^ GTuJ-k-iKotAvW!/^ROOKWOOD. 339upon the parchment. " Kneel down," continuedhe.After some hesitation, Turpin complied.You must repeat the ' Salamon,' or oath ofour creed, after my dictation," said the Patrico ;and Turpin, signifying his assent by a nod,Balthazar propounded the following adjuration: —OATH OF THE CANTING CREW.I, Crank-coffin, swear to beTrue to this fraternity —That I will in all obeyRule and order of the Lay.Never blow the gab, or squeak;Never snitch to bum or beak ;But religiously maintainAuthority of those who reignOver Stop Hole Abbey green,Be they Tawny King or Queen.In their cause alone will fight ;Think what they think, wrong or right ;Serve them truly, and no other,And be faithful to my brother ;Suffer none, from far or near,With their rights to interfere ;No strange Abram, Ruffler crack —Hooker of another pack —Rogue or rascal, frater, murderer,Irish Boyle, or other wanderer ;Slip Lockwood.No timber amber, angler, dancer,Prig of cackle, prig of prancer ;No stigma, saddler, clapper dudgeon ;Cadge-cloak, curtal, or curmudgeon ;No whip-jack, galliard, patrick ;No workman, be he high or low;No dumraerar, or romany ;No member of " the family ;"No ballad-basket, bouncing buffer,Nor any other, will I suffer ;But stall-off now and for ever,All outliers whatsoever ;And as I keep to the fore-gone,So may help me, Salamon* !Perhaps the most whimsical laws that were ever prescribedto a gang of thieves, were those framed by William Holliday,one of the rigging community, who was hanged in 1695 : —Art. I. directs — That none of his company should presumeto wear shirts, upon pain of being cashiered.II. — That none should lie in any other places than stables,empty houses, or other bulks.III. — That they should eat nothing but what they begged,and that they should give away all the money they got bycleaning boots among one another, for the good of thefraternity.IV. — That they should neither learn to read nor write, thathe may have them the better under command.V. — That they should appear every morning by nine, on theparade, to receive necessary orders.VI. — That none should presume to follow the scent butsuch as he ordered on that party.VII. — That if any one gave them shoes or stockings, heshould convert them into money to play.ROOKWOOD. 341So help me, Salamon," repeated Turpin,with emphasis.Zoroaster'' said the Patrico to the UprightMan, " do thy part of this ceremonial''Zoroaster obeyed ; and, taking Excaliburfrom the Knight of Malta, bestowed a heartythwack with the blade upon the shoulders ofthe kneeling Highwayman, assisting him afterwardsto arise.The inauguration was complete.Well," exclaimed Dick, " I'm glad it's allover.My leg feels a little stiffish — I'm not muchgiven to kneeling — I must dance it off;" sayingwhich, he began to shuffle upon the boards. " Itell you what," continued he, " most ReverendPatrico, that same ' Salmon' of your's has acursed long tail — I could scarce swallow it all,VIII. — That they should steal nothing they could not comeat, for fear of bringing a scandal upon the company.IX. — That they should not endeavour to clear themselves ofvermin, by killing or eating them.X. — That they should cant better than the Newgate birds,pick pockets without bungling, outline a Quaker, outswear aLord at a gaming table, and brazen out all their villainiesbeyond an Irishman.342 ROOKWOOD.and it's strange if it don't give me an indigestion.As to you, sage Zory, from the dexterity withwhich you flourish your sword, I should sayyou had practised at Court ; His Majesty couldscarce do the thing better, when, slapping somefat Alderman upon the shoulder, he bids himrise Sir Richard. And now, palls," added he,glancing round, " as I am one of you, let's havea boose together ere I depart, for I don't thinkmy stay will be long in the land of Egypt."This suggestion of Turpin was so entirelyconsonant to the wishes of the assemblage, thatit met with universal approbation, and upona sign from Zoroaster, some of his followersdeparted in search of supplies for the carousal.Zoroaster leaped from the table, and his examplewas followed by Turpin, and more leisurely bythe Patrico.It was rather early in the day for a drinkingbout; but the canting crew were not remarkablyparticular. The chairs were removed,and the jingling of glasses announced thearrival of the preliminaries of the mattingROOKWOOD. 343symposium. Poles, canvas, and cords, were nextbrought ; and in almost as short space of time asone scene is substituted for another in a theatricalrepresentation, was a tent erected. Benches,stools, and chairs, appeared with equal celerity,and the interior soon presented an appearancelike that of a booth at a fair. A keg of brandywas broached, and the health of the newbrother quaffed in trimmers.- Our Highwayman returned thanks. Zoroasterwas in the chair, the Knight of ]Vfaltaacting as croupier, A second toast was proposed— the Tawny Queen. This was drunkwith a like enthusiasm, and with a like allowanceof the potent spirit ; but as bumpers ofbrandy are not to be repeated with impunity,it became evident to the President of the boardthat he must not repeat his toasts quite soexpeditiously. To create a temporary diversion,therefore, he called for a song.The dulcet notes of the fiddle now brokethrough the clamour, and in answer to the call,Jerry Juniper volunteered the following : —344 ROOKWOOD.JERRY JUNIPERS CHAUNT.In a box (i) of the Stone Jug (2) I was born,Of a hempen widow (^j the kid forlorn.Fake away.And my either, as I've heard say,Fake away,Was a merchant of capers (4) gay,Who cut his last fling with great applause,(5) Nix my doll palls, fake away.Who cut his last fling with great applause (6),To the tune of a " hearty choke with caper sauce."Fake away.The knucks in quod (7) did my schoolmen play,Fake away,And put me up to the time of day ;Until at last there was none so knowing.Nix my doll palls, fake away.Until at last there was none so knowing,No such sneaksman (8) or buzgloak (9) going,Fake away.(1) Cell. (2) Newgate. (3) A woman whose husband hasbeen hanged. (4) A dancing master. (5) " Nothing, comrades,on on," supposed to be addressed by a thief to his confederates.(6) Thus Victor Hugo, in Le Dernier Jour d'un Coiidamne,makes an imprisoned felon singLi ferai danser une danseOil il n'y a pas de plancher.(7) Thieves in prison. (^) Shoplifter. (^) Pickpocket,ROOK WOOD. 345Fogies (10) and fancies (i^) soon went their way,Fake away,To the spout (12) with the sneers (13) in grand array,No dummy hunter (1-1) had forks (15) so fly ;Nix my doll palls, fake away.No dummy hunter had forks so fly,No knuckle (16) so deftly could fake a cly (17),Fake away.No soured hotter (18) my snipes (19) could stay,Fake away.None knap a reader (20) like me in the Lay.Soon then I mounted in swell-street high.Nix my doll palls, fake away.Soon then I mounted in swell-street highAnd sported my flashes toggery, (21)Fake away.Firmly resolved I would make my hay.Fake away,While Mercury's star shed a single ray.And ne'er was there seen such a dashing prig (22),Nix my doll palls, fake away,And ne'er wa'S there seen such a dashing prig,With my strumpet faked in the newest twig (23).Fake away.(10) Handkerchiefs. (H) Rings. (12) To the pawnbroker.(1.3) Snuffbox. (14) Pickpocket. (15) The two fore-fingersused in picking a pocket. (16) Pickpocket (17) Pick apocket. (18) No inside coat pocket, buttoned up. (19) Scissors.(20) Steal a pocket book, (21) Best-made clothes. (22) Thief.(23) With my hair dressed in the first fashion.a5346 ROOKWOOD.With my fawned farms (24), and my onions gay (25)^Fake away ;My thimble of ridge (26), and my drip kemesa (27) ;All my togs were so dislike (28) and splash,Nix my doll palls, fake away.All my togs were so dislike and splash,Readily the queer screens I then could smash (29) :Fake away,But my wittiest blown (30), one fine day,Fake away,To the beaks (31) did her fancy man betray,And thus was I bowled out at last (32).Nix my doll palls, fake away.And thus was I bowled out at last.And into the Jug for a lag was cast (33) ;Fake away.But I slipped my darbies (34) one morn in May,Fake away,And gave to the dunstan (35) a holiday.And here I am palls, merry and free,A regular rollicking Romany (36).Nix my doll palls, fake away.Much laughter and applause rewarded Jerry ""sattempt to please; and though the meaning of(24) With several rings on my hands. (25) Seals. (26) Goldwatch. (27) Laced shirt. (28) Gentlemanlike. (29) Easilythen forged notes could I pass. (30) Favourite mistress. (31)Police. (32) Taken at length. (33) Cast for transportation.(34) Fetters. (35) Turnkey. (36) Gipsy.ROOKWOOD. 347his chaunt, even with the aid and abetment ofthe numerous notes which we have appended toit,may not be quite obvious to our readers, wecan assure them that it was perfectly intelligibleto the Canting Crew. Jerry was now entitledto a call; and happening, at the moment, tomeet the fine dark eyes of a sentimental gipsy,one of that better class of mendicants who wanderedabout the country with a guitar at hisback, his election fell upon him. The youth,without prelude, struck up aGIPSY SERENADE*.Merry maid, rnerry maid, wilt thou wander with me ?We will roam through the forest, the meadow, and lea;We will haunt the sunny bowers, and when day begins to flee,Our couch shall be the ferny brake, our canopy the tree.Merry maid, merry maid, come and wander with me?No life like the gipsy's, so joyous and free !Merry maid, merry maid, though a roving life be our's,We will laugh away the laughing and quickly fleeting hours;Our hearts are free, as is the free and open sky above,And we know what tamer souls know not, how lovers oughtto love.Merry maid, merry maid, come and wander with me ?No life like the gipsy's, so joyous and free !The words of this song have been published, accompaniedwith music, by Mr. Alexander Roche.348 ROOKWOOD.Zoroaster now removed the pipe from his uprightlips to intimate his intention of proposinga toast.An universal knocking of knuckles by theknuckles*, was followed by profound silence.The sage spoke : —The City of Canterbury, palls'' said he;and may it never want a Knight of Malta''The toast was pledged with much laughter,and in many bumpers.The Knight, upon whom all eyes were turned,rose "with stately bearing and majestic motion,"to return thanks.I return you an infinitude of thanks, brotherpalls," said he, glancing round the assemblage ;and bowing to the president, " and to you, mostUpright Zory, for the honour you have doneme in associating my name with that City.Believe me, I sincerely appreciate the compliment,and echo the sentiment from the bottomof my soul. I trust it never will want a KnightPickpockets.ROOKWOOD. 349of Malta. In return for your consideration, butapoor one you will say, you shall have a chatty,which I composed upon the occasion of my pilgrimageto that city, and which I have thoughtproper to name after myself"" —THE KNIGHT OF MALTA,A Canterbury Tale.Come list to me, and you shall have, without a hem or haw, sirs,A Canterbury pilgrimage, much better than old Chaucer's.'Tis of a hoax I once played off, upon that city clever,The memory of which, I hope, will stick to it for ever.With my coal black beard, and purple cloak,jack-boots, and broad-brimmed castor,Hey ho for the Knight of Malta !To execute my purpose, in the first place you must know, sirs.My locks I let hang down my neck — my beard and whiskersgrow, sirs;A purple cloak I next clapped on, a sword tagged to my side, sirs.And mounted on a charger black, I to the town did ride, sirs.With my coal-black beard, &c.Two pages were there by my side, upon two little ponies.Decked out in scarlet uniform, as spruce as maccaronies ;Caparisoned my charger was, as grandly as his master,And o'er my long and curly locks I wore a broad-brimmedcastor.With my coal-black beard, &c.350 ROOKWOOD.The people all flocked forth, amazed to see a man so hairy,Oh ! such a sight had ne'er before been seen in Canterbury !My flowing robe, my flowing beard, my horse with flowingmane, sirs !They stared — the days of chivalry, they thought, were comeagain, sirs!With my coal-black beard, &c.I told them a long rigmarole romance, that did not halt aJot, that they beheld in me a real Knight of Malta !Tom a Becket had I sworn I was, that saint and martyrhallowed,I doubt not just as readily the bait they would have swallowed.With my coal-black beard, &c.I rode about, and speechified, and everybody gulled.The tavern keepers diddled, and the magistracy bullied :Like puppets were the townsfolk led in that show they alla raree ;The Gotham sages were a joke to those of Canterbury.With my coal-black beard, &c.The theatre I next engaged ,where I addressed the crowd, sirs,And on retrenchment, and reform, I spouted long, and loud, sirs,On tithes, and on taxation, I enlarged with skill and zeal, sirs,Who so able as a Malta Knight, the malt tax to repeal, sirs.With my coal-black beard, &c.As a candidate I then stepped forth to represent their city.And my non election to that place was certainly a pity ;For surely I the fittest was, and very proper very.To represent the wisdom and the wit of Canterbury.With my coal-black beard, &c.ROOKWOOD. 351At the trial of some smugglers next, one thing I rather queer did,And the justices upon the bench I literally bearded ;For I swore that I some casks did see, though proved as clearas day, sirs.That I happened at the time to be some fifty miles away, sirs,With my coal-black beard, &c.This last assertion, I must own, was somewhat of a blunder,And for perjury indicted they compelled me to knock under ;To my prosperous career this slight error put a stop, sirs.And thus crossed the Knight of Malta was at length obligedto hop, sirs.With his coal-black beard, and purple cloak,jack-boots, and broad-brimmed castor,Good bye to the Knight of Malta!The Knight sat down amidst the generalplaudits of the company.The party, meanwhile, had been increased, bythe arrival of Luke and the Sexton. The former,who was in no mood for revelry, refusedto comply with his grandsire's solicitation toenter, and remained sullenly at the door, withhis arms folded, and his eyes fixed upon Turpin,whose movements he commanded through thecanvas aperture. The Sexton walked up toDick, who was seated at the post of honour, andclapping him upon the shoulder, congratulated352 ROOK WOOD.him upon the comfortable position in which hefound him.Ha ! ha ! Are you there, my old Death'sHead on a Mop Stick?" said Turpin, with alaugh. " Ain't we merry mummers, eh ? Keepingit up in style. Sit down, old Noah — makeyourself comfortable, Jerusalem."What say you to a drop of as fine old Nantesas you ever tasted in your life, old cove ?^^ saidZoroaster.'' Say," returned Peter, " that I have nosort of objection to it, provided you will allpledge my toast."That I will, were it old RufRn himself,shouted Turpin."Here's to the three leg'd mare," cried Peter.To the tree that bears fruit all the year round,and that yet has neither bark nor branch. Youwon't refuse that toast, Captain Turpin ?"Not I," answered Dick ; " I owe the gallowsno grudge. If, as Jerry's song says, I must havea hearty choke and caper sauce for my breakfastone of these fine mornings, it shall never be saidROOKWOOD. S5&that I fell to my meal without appetite, or neglectedsaying grace before it. Gentlemen, here'sPeter Bradley's toast. The Scragging Post. Thethree leg'd mare, with three times threesAppropriate as this sentiment was, it didnot appear to be so inviting to the party asmight have been anticipated, and the shoutssoon died away.They like not the thoughts of the gallows"'said Turpin to Peter. " i\Iore fools they. Amere bugbear to frighten children, believe me,and never yet alarmed a brave man. The gallows,pshaw ! One can but die once, and whatsignifies it how, so that it be over quickly. Ithink no more of the last leap into eternity thanof clearing a five-barred gate. A rope's-end forit ! So let us be merry, and make the most of ourtime, and that's true philosophy. I know youcan throw off a rum chaunt,'^ added he, turning toPeter. " I heard you sing last night, at the Hall.Troll us a stave, my antediluvian file, and in themean time tip me a gage of focus*, Jerry ;A pipe of tobacco.354 ROOKWOOD.and if that's a bowl of huckle-m y-butt * youare brewing, Sir Williams"' added he, addressingthe Knight of Malta, " you may send meajorum thereof at your convenience"'Jerry handed the highwayman a pipe, togetherwith a tumbler of the beverage which theKnight had prepared, which he pronouncedexcellent ; and while the huge bowl was passedround to the company, a prelude of shamsannounced that Peter was ready to break intosong.Accordingly, after the symphony was ended,accompanied at intervals by a single instrument,Peter began his melody, in a key so high, thatthe utmost exertion of the shawm-blowe)- failedto approach its altitudes. The burthen of hisminstrelsy was —THE MANDRAKE f.The Mandrake grows 'neath the gallows-tree,And rank and green are its leaves to see ;A drink composed t>f beer, eggs, and brandy,f The imaginary malignant and fatal influence of thisplant is frequently alluded to by our elder dramatists ; andROOK WOOD. 355Green and rank, as the grass that wavesOver the unctuous earth of graves,And though all around it be bleak and bare,Freely the Mandrake flourished there.Maranatha — Anathema !Dread is the curse of Mandragora !Euthanasy I —At the foot of the gibbet the Mandrake springs.Just where the creaking carcass swings ;with one of the greatest of them, Webster (as might beexpected from a charnel Muse, that revels like a ghoul ingraves and sepulchres, and rakes up hideous and revoltinglore), it is an especial favourite for illustration. But nonehave plunged so deeply into the disquisition of the suppositiousvirtues of the Mandrake, as the learned and profoundSir Thomas Browne. He tears up the fable root and branch.Concerning the danger ensuing from eradication of the Mandrake,he thus write : — " The last assertion is, that there followsa hazard of life to them that pull it up, that some evil fate pursuesthem, and that they live not very long hereafter. Thereforethe attempt hereof among the ancients was not in ordinaryway ; but, as Pliny informed, when they intended to takeup the root of this plant, they took the wind thereof, and witha sword describing three circles about it, they digged it up,looking toward the West. A conceit not only injurious untotruth and constable by daily experience, but somewhat derogatoryunto the Providence of God; that is, not only to imposeso destructive a quality on any plant, but to conceive a vegetablewhose parts are so useful unto many, should, in the onlytaking up, prove mortal unto any. This were to introduce asecond forbidden fruit, and enhance the first malediction,making it not only mortal for Adam to taste the one, butcapital for his posterity to eradicate, or dig up the other." —Vulvar Errors, Book ii., c. vi.356 ROOK WOOD.Some have thought it engenderedFrom the fat that drops from the bones of the dead ;Some have thought it a human thing ;But this is a vain imagining.Maranatha — Anathema !Dread is the curse of Mandragora !Euthanasy !A charnel leaf doth the Mandrake wear,A charnel fruit doth the Mandrake bear ;Yet none like the Mandrake hath such great power,Such virtue resides not in herb or flower ;Aconite, hemlock, or moonshine, I ween,None hath a poison so subtle and keen.Maranatha — Anathema !Dread is the curse of Mandragora !Euthanasy !And whether the Mandrake be createFlesh with the flower incorporate,I know not; yet, if from the earth 'tis rent,Shrieks and groans from the root are sent ;Shrieks and groans, and a sweat like goreOozes, and drops from the clammy core.amaranth — Anathema !Dread is the curse of Mandragora !Euthanasy !Whoso gathered the Mandrake, shall surely die ;Blood for blood is his destiny.Some who have plucked it have died with groans,Like to the Mandrake's expiring moans ;Some have died raving, and some beside —With penitent prayers — but all have died.Jesu ! save us, by night and day!From the terrible death of Mandragora !Euthanasy !ROOKWOOD. 357A queer client that' said Zoroaster,coughing loudly, in token of his disapprobation.Not much to my taste'" quoth the Knightof Malta. '' We like something more sprightlyin Canterbury'''• Nor to mine," added Jerry ; " don't thinkit's likely to have an encore. 'Pon my soul,Dick, you must give us something yourself,or we shall never cry Euthanasy at the TripleTree."With all my heart," replied Turpin, " youshall have — but what do I see, my friend SirLuke ? *devil take my tongue, Luke Bradley Imean. What, ho ! Luke — nay, nay, man, noshrinking — stand forward — I've a word or twoto say to you. We must have a hob-a-nob glasstogether, for old acquaintance sake. Nay, noairs, man ; dammed you're not a lord yet, nor abaronet either, though I do hold your title in mypocket ; never look glum at me. It won't pay.I'm one of the canting crew now — no man maysneer at me with impunity, eh, Zory ? Ha ! ha !here's a glass of Nantes ; we'll have a bottle358 ROOKWOOD.of bene carlo* when you are master of your own.Make ready there, you gut scrapers, you shamshavers. 111 put your lungs in play for you,presently. In the meantime — charge, palls,charge — a toast, a toast — health and prosperityto Sir Luke Rook wood. I see you are surprised— this, gentlemen, is Sir Luke Rosewood,some-while Luke Bradley, heir to the house ofthat name, not ten miles distant from this. Say,shall we not di'ink a bumper to his health .^'"Astonishment prevailed amongst the crew.Luke himself had been taken by surprise.When Turpin had discovered lii at the doorof the tent, and summoned him to appear, hehad most reluctantly complied with the request ;but when, in a half bantering vein, Dick hadbegun to rally him upon his pretensions, hewould most gladly have retreated, had it beenin his power. It was then too late. Hefelt he must stand the ordeal. The disclosurewas now made. Every eye was fixed upon himwith a look of inquiry.Port.ROOKWOOD. 359Zoroaster took his everlasting pipe from hismouth.This ain t true, surely ?'" asked the perplexedsage.He has said it'' replied Luke ; " I may notdeny it''This was sufficient. There was a wild hubbubof delight amongst the crew, for Luke wasa favourite with all.Sir Luke Rosewood !" cried Jerry Juniper,who liked a title as much as Tommy Moore issaid to doat upon a lord, " L^pon my soul Isincerely congratulate you ; devilish fortunatefellow. Always cursed unlucky myself. I couldnever find out my own father, unless it were oneMonsieur des Caprices, a French dancing master,and he never left anything behind him, thatI could hear of, except a broken kit, and ahempen widow. Sir Luke Rosewood, we shalldo ourselves the pleasure of drinking your healthand prosperity."Fresh bumpers, and immense cheering.Silence being in a measure restored, Zoroasterclaimed Turpin's promise of a song.360 ROOKWOOD.True, true'' replied Dick, " I have notforgotten it. Stand to your bows, my hearties'THE GAME OF HIGH TOBY.Now Oliver (l) puts his black nightcap on,And every star its glim (2) is hiding,And forth to the heath is the Scampsman (3) gone,His matchless cherry-black C*) prancer riding ;Merrily over the common he flies,Fast and free as the rush of rocket,His crape-covered vizard drawn over his eyes,His tol (^) by his side, and his pops (^) in his pocket.CHORUS.Then who can nameSo merry a game.As the game of all games — High Toby (7) ?The traveller hears him, away ! away !Over the wide wide heath he scurries ;He heeds not the thunderbolt summons to stay,But ever the faster and faster he hurries.But what daisy-cutter can match that black tit ?He is caught — he must " stand and deliver ;"Then out with the dummy (^), and off with the bit (9),Oh ! the game of High Toby for ever !Then who can nameSo merry a game,As the game of all games — High Toby ?(1) The moon. (^) Light. (3) Highwayman. (4) " Cherry-coloured— black ; there being black cherries as well as red."Rose. (^) Sword. (6) Pistols. (7) Highway robbery.(8) Pocket book. (9) Money.ROOKWOOD. 361Believe me there is not a game my brave boys,To compare with the game of High Toby ;No rapture can equal the Solyman's joys,To blue devils blue plumbs (10) give the go-bye ;And what if, at length, boys, he come to the Crap (H),Even rack punch has some bitter in it.For the Mare-with-three-legs (12), boys, I care not a rap,'Twill be over in less than a minute !GRAND CHORUS.Then hip, hurrah!Fling care away !Hurrah for the game of High Toby !And now, gentlemen," said Dick, whobegan to feel the influence of these morningcups, " I vote that we adjourn. Believe me, Ishall always bear in mind that I am a brotherof your band ; Sir Luke and I must have alittle chat together, ere I take my leave.Adieu."And taking Luke by the arm, he walked outof the tent; Peter Bradley rose, and followedthem.At the door they found the dwarfish Grasshopper,with Black Bess. Rewarding the urchin(10) Bullets. (11) The gallows. (I2) Ditto.VOL. II. R362 Rosewood.for his trouble, and slipping the bridle of hismare over his hand, Turpin continued hiswalk over the green. For a few minutes heseemed to be lost in rumination.I tell you what, Sir Luke'' said he, " Ishould like to do a generous thing, and makeyou a present of this bit of paper. But oneought not to throw away one's luck, you know —there is a tide in the affairs of thieves, as theplayer coves say, which must be taken at theflood, or else but no matter. Your old dad.Sir Piers (God help him !), had the gingerbread,that I know ; he was, as we say, a regular rhino-clericalcull. You wont feel a few thousands,especially at starting ; and besides there are twoothers. Rust and Wilder, who row in the sameboat with me, and must therefore come in fortheir share of the regulars. All this considered,you can't complain, I think, if I ask five thousandfor it. That old harridan. Lady Rook-wood,offered me nearly as much."■rI will not talk to you of fairness," said Luke ;I will not say that document belongs of rightROOK WOOD. 363to me. It fell by accident into your hands.Having possessed yourself of it, I blame you notthat you dispose of it to the best advantage. Imust, perforce, agree to your terms"*Oh no'' replied Dick, " it's quite optional ;Lady Rosewood will give as much, and makeno mouths about it. So ho, lass ! AVhat makesBess prick her earsin that fashion — Ha — Carriagewheels in the distance ! that jade knows the soundas well as I do. I'll just see what it's like! —you will have ten minutes for reflection. Whoknows if I may not have come in for a goodthing here ? "At that instant a carriage passed the angle ofa rock some three hundred yards distant, andwas seen slowly ascending the hill side. Eageras a hawk after his quarry, Turpin dashedafter it.In vain the Sexton, whom he nearly overthrewin his career, called after him to halt. He spedlike a bolt from the bow.May the devil break his neck," cried Peter,as he saw him dash through the brook, " couldhe not let them alone?"364 ROOKWOOD.This must not bess*' said Luke ; " know youwhose carriage it is ?'^It is a shrine that holds the jewel thatshould be dearest in thine eyes"" returnedPeter ; " haste, and arrest the spoiler's hand'•' Whom dost thou mean ?'' asked Luke.Eleanor Mowbray'' replied Peter. " Sheis there — to the rescue — away."Eleanor Mowbray !" echoed Luke — andSybilAt this instant a pistol-shot was heard.Wilt thou let murder be done, and upon thycousin .^" cried Peter, with a bitter look. " Thouart not what I took thee for."Luke answered not, but swift as a hound fromthe leash, darted in the direction of the carriage.END OF VOL. II.LONDON:PRINTED BY T. BRETTELL, RUPERT STREET, Haymakers