RosewoodA ROMANCE.R O O K W O O D :A ROMANCE.I see how Ruin, with a palsied hand.Begins to shake our ancient house to dust.Yorkshire Tragedy.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. III.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.(successor to henry colour.)1834.LONDON :PRINTED BY T. BRETTELL, RUPERT STREET, HAYMaRKET.v,3Rosewood.BOOK III.CONTINUED.VOL. Ill,BOOK THE THIRD.CHAPTER VI.MischiefsAre like the visits of Franciscan Friars,They never come to prey upon us single.Devil's Law Case.Return we now to Eleanor Mowbray. Aftershe had parted from Ranulph Rosewood, andhad watched him till he disappeared beneaththe arches of the church porch, her heart sank,and, drawing herself back within the carriage,she became a prey to the most poignant affliction.In vain she endeavoured to shake oWthis feeling of desolation, by picturing to herselfthe meeting with her lover in a few hours,in happiness. It would not be. Despair hadtaken possession of her — the magic fabric ofdelight melted away, or only gleamed to tantalize,at unreachable distance. A presentiment4 Rosewood.that Ranulph would never be her's, had takenroot in her imagination, and overshadowed allthe rest. In vain she strove to turn tothoughts more cheering and consolatory. pressedas by a nightmare, her bosom refusedto be relieved of its load.While Eleanor was thus plunged in affliction,Mrs. Mowbray's speculations, and, in a lessdegree, those of her son, were directed towardsthe same object, Ranulph Rook wood. Busiedin revolving the singular though as yet unintelligibleavow al he had made of a possible changein his fortunes, she exerted all her force ofmind to discover some clue to the mystery. Achange in his fortunes ? This change had noreference to Lady Rook wood. That idea he hadhimself refuted ; and, indeed, she was aware ofthe unalienable nature of her brother's property.Could it relate to herself.'^ It had been in thepower of her father, Sir Reginald Rosewood,who had created the entail, to have disposed ofhis lands as he saw fitting ; but he had disposed ofthem, so she had heard, and the issue male of hisROOK WOOD. 5sons were named in the succession ; and she,herself, in her last dread interview with herfather (the recollection of which was graven likethe cicatrice of a wound upon her memory — awound that had its seasons of throes and shootingtortures), had heard his declaration, that sheherself should be for ever excluded* from hispossessions — from participation in his wealth —that she should be a stranger to his name — tohis house — to his blood. After sifting everysuggestion carefully, she became satisfied that ifa new claimant had sprung up to Rosewood, itwas in the same character that Ranulph himselfderived his title ; and the more closely she canvassedher brother's early life, the more fullyassured she became of the correctness of herconjectures.From whatever source derived, Mrs. Mowbraywas intimately acquainted with Sir Piers's unfortunateattachment to Susan Bradley ; andaware also that there had been offspring bornto them, she could not dwell upon the detailthat had been given of her brother's devoted6 Rosewood.love, and the descriptions of Susan's matchlessbeauty, without arriving at the conclusion that,in the ardour of passion, he had yielded to theentreaties and blandishments of this lovely andseductive girl, and secretly espoused her; but,from the circumstance of her lowly origin,had hesitated to avow his union, when hersudden death prevented the necessity of disclosure.This hypothesis did not, it is true,account for her brother's subsequent desertionof his child; but when Mrs. Mowbray setthe weakness of Sir Piers's character in thebalance with the resolute qualities of hiswife, she perceived which was likely to preponderate,and that if he had ever conceivedthe intention of avowing his marriage, hisapprehensions of the consequences (as was inreality the fact) would have deterred him fromopen acknowledgment. This suspicion, onceawakened in Mrs. Mowbray's mind, receivedabundant confirmation in her opinion, fromRanulph's half-expressed hints, and his suddenand mysterious appearance at the funeral.ROOKWOOD. 7And who was he who should now be heir toRosewood? This was a question she had nomeans of answering. She knew nothing, andcould conceive nothing ; but her curiosity,nevertheless, was strongly excited on this head ;the more so, inasmuch as she was unable, in theslightest degree, to gratify it. Another consideration,from which she shrank with a sense ofextreme uneasiness (for cold and haughty asshe was, Mrs. Mowbray was not utterly devoidof sensibility), was, whether in case RanulphRosewood should be supplanted in his inheritance,she would decHne his suit of Eleanor.She would fain, at this moment, have shunnedthis self investigation; the response she feltwould be too prompt. She could not accepthim for her son.Mrs. Mowbray, it must be remembered, wasthe elder born of Sir Reginald Rosewood. Shewas also the daughter of his gentle bride, theLady Eleanor ; but she partook more of thecalculating pride and vindictive sternness whichdistinguished her father, than of her mother's8 Lockwood.softer attributes. The legacy of vengeance,bequeathed by her dying parent, which shetacitly accepted, even as a child, and resolvedupon executing, could not have been delegatedto a hand more capable of its ministration.Nothing but her own degradation (and toher a mesalliance, such as she formed, was thegreatest degradation that could have befallenher, both in her own esteem and in that of SirReginald) could inflict the blow she wished tostrike. She at once determined to immolateherself.The story has been already told. Plightedto an earl — she fled with a paper. No overwhelmingsentiment of love influenced her inthis unworthy choice— no thought, save that ofheaping the bitterest mortification upon herfather's head, induced its commission ; but shehad studied Sir Reginald's character, and in hisonly assailable point she stabbed him. Theblow went home, but revenge is a two-edgedsword ; the blade smote either way.United to one whom she neither respectedROOK WOOD.nor regarded — unsupported, in her fallen state,by love, which alone could have buoyed herup amid the stormy sea into which she hadplunged — consumed by secret pride, which, likethe Spartan youth, who sustained, unflinching,the fiery coal that fell off the altar, she borewithout complaining — tortured by all the horrorsof poverty (and to the proud heart therecan scarce be greater horrors), she felt that ifshe had succeeded in wreaking her vengeanceupon her father, the injury she had done herselfwas the more lasting and irremediable.Still, through it all, her firmness of characterforsook her not. Fallen she might be ; yet itwas by her own act that she fell ; and shewould have died, rather than utter a murmurhave endured a martyrdom, sooner thanseek for a reconciliation.Brighter days did indeed dawn upon her.A slight accession of fortune restored her tocomparative independence, and her husband'sdecease shortly after, liberated her from a certaincontroul which she had found irksome, andB 5ROOKWOOD.completed her emancipation. By prudent management,and by entirely residing abroad inastate of seclusion, and in a style of themost rigid economy, she had greatly increasedher means ; but still, with a sense of her ownsufferings fresh in her remembrance, she determinedthat never, with her consent, shoulda daughter of heres wed other than a wealthysuitor.With this disposition, it may be readily conceivedMrs. Mowbray would view any materialchange in the condition of Ranulph Rook-woodas an absolute bar to his union withEleanor ; and that she did regard it in that lightwas certain. The match between the cousinsshe considered as in every way desirable ; nay,as most eligible ; and the coldness with which shereceived Ranulph's advances upon the intimacy,arose from the haughty reluctance on her partto be the first to make overtures of peace, thedifferences between the father and daughterhaving extended to the other children. AsRanulph appeared fixed in his attachment, andROOK WOOD. 11had incurred his father's resentment by his consistentadherence to his election, acceding onlyto a temporary estrangement from the object ofhis affections, with the express determination ofrenewing his offer at the expiration of thatperiod of probation; and as Eleanor herselfseemed to be equally involved in the sametender sentiment, Mrs. Mowbray tacitly compliedwith her daughter's inclinations, and,without making a remark on the subject, sufferedher to remain unmolested, up to the timeof Sir Piers's death, and of Ranulph's expectedreturn. Thus, when she conceived that all obstacleswere removed, a more fatal one presenteditself. She trembled for Eleanor ; but the spiritof worldliness prevailed. She persuaded herselfthat, in the event of the contingency ofwhich she was apprehensive, it was her dutyto break off the proposed alliance. Little sophisticationwas required to satisfy her scruples.Prudence and policy formed her mental salvo.It is surprising how easily people considerthemselves guided by a sense of duty, when12 ROOKWOOD.interest and inclination are at hand to directthem.And Eleanor ? As she stole a furtive glanceat her daughter, and saw her evident perturbation,some perception of the cruelty of such anact towards her darling child was awakenedwithin her bosom; but the feeling was transitory.Little of the softness, none of theweakness, of her sex pertained to Mrs. Mowbray.Love was a passion of which she hadoften heard, but which she had never felt.She could conceive it; but her theoretical (andwe might say likewise heretical) opinion wasso wide of the reality, as to lead her into theerroneous notion that the raging flame couldbe restrained within certain limits, and mightbe extinguished altogether, should circumstancesrequire it. She felt that she was able to do so,and reasoning upon that fallacious argument,she fancied that it would be equally in thepower of her daughter to exercise such contrivedover her affections. Nothing more, she imaginedwould be necessary, than the expression of herROOKWOOD. 13wish, to be followed by Eleanor ready acquiescence.Submission, the meekest, the gentlest,to her mother's behests, formed the mainfeature in Eleanor's affectionate character : compliancewith her injunctions seemed to be theprimary law of her nature, as, indeed, it shouldbe ever in the child ; but perhaps that tyrannousascendancy which a strong mind is apt toassume over one of weaker constitution (andby this epithet we mean that yielding weaknesswhich is woman's strength), led sirs. Mowbrayto exact more obedience from her daughter thanwas consistent with parental tenderness to require,and made the passive submission ofEleanor appear more in the light of subjectionthan of duty.Reared in the most perfect seclusion, the wholeof her childhood had been spent immediatelyunder her mother's eye, and to her alone was sheindebted for instruction and counsel; by hermother alone was the pliant material of herdisposition modelled. Up to the period whenshe first beheld Ranulph Rosewood, her Lockwood.ther, her brother, of whom lately she had seenlittle, her flowers, her music, her books, herbark, in which she skimmed the blue tide of theGaronne, her favourite dog her never-absentcompanion, these had formed the little world ofher regard, the nucleus of her sympathies, thesole objects of her solicitude ; they were herdelights — her occupations — her existence.Her brother returned. The family leftFrance for England. She exchanged the quietude,the solitude, of the lonely chateau, for thegiddy whirl of the British metropolis. Thetransition was too violent to be pleasing. Shewas dazzled, but overpowered ; delighted, yetbewildered ; and often sighed in secret for herbark upon the Garonne, and her bower uponits banks. It was long ere she became reconciledto customs, to usages, and to society,to which she had never been habituated. Shemet with Ranulph Rosewood. New emotionswere instantly awakened. Her heart she felthad hitherto been void. She loved, and for thefirst time. What a dawn of delight, freshROOKWOOD. 15and beautiful as a glimpse of Eden, burst uponher young imagination ! —For she on honey dew had fed,And drank the milk of Paradise.Filled with a thousand tender aspirations unknownbefore, inexplicable to the exquisite simplicityof her nature, her soul had now no longerto dwell upon memory for delight, the presenthad happiness sufficient. The impression oncereceived, she thought not of the flowers she hadcultured, of the river nooks she had haunted, ofthe large antiquated house (dearer to her than apalace), and its many untenanted and unfurnishedrooms, along whose sounding floors hermerry feet had skipped, or whose walls hadechoed with her joyous laughter, with her lightsomesong; or, if she thought of them, hermusings were now mysteriously associated withRanulph, peopling the wilderness with his image,and linking his presence with each favourite spot.Bright as was its dawn, the love of Eleanorwas scarce called into existence, ere it wascrushed ; the sky that was filled with the16 ROOK WOOD.purple light of love "*' was suddenly overcast; the opening flower was rudely troddendown ; the chords of harmony were shiveredas soon as struck. Ranulph departed. Allthat had hitherto been radiant, became asnight; amid which, Hope alone, like a solitarystar (and even Hope was oft obscure), shonedown upon her. They met again, it is true,after their lengthened separation, with heartsunchanged — with vows unbroken ; the sky foran instant was filled with rosy hue again, butnot as heretofore. Presentiments of comingmisfortune, like chilly winds, blighted the joyof their reunion, and clouds seemed gatheringin the horizon of their happiness.While Eleanor pursued this tristful trainof reflection, the time insensibly wore away, untilthe sudden stoppage of the carriage aroused theparty from their meditation. Major Mowbrayperceived that the occasion of the haltwas the rapid advance of a horseman, whowas nearing them at full speed. The appearanceof the horseman was somewhat singular,and might have created some uneasiness asROOK WOOD. 17to the nature of his approach, had not theMajor immediately recognised a friend ; he was,nevertheless, greatly surprised to see him, andturned to Mrs. Mowbray to inform her thatFather Ambrose, to his infinite astonishment,was coming to meet them, and appeared, fromhis manner, to be the bearer of unwelcometidings.Wrapped in a long black cloak, with a broadbrimmed hat drawn closely over his brows, itwas impossible to distinguish further of thepriest's figure and features beyond the circumstanceof his height, which was remarkable,until he had reached the carriage window,when, raising his hat, he disclosed a head thatTitian might have painted, and which, arisingfrom the dark drapery, looked not unlike thevisage of some grave and saturnine Venetian.There was a venerable expanse of forehead,thinly scattered with hair, towering over blackpent-housewife brows, which, in their turn,shadowed keen penetrating priest-like eyes ;the temples were hollow, and blue veins mightbe traced beneath the sallow skin; the cheeksLockwood.bones high, and there was something in theface that spoke of self-mortification ; while thethin livid lips closely compressed, and theaustere and sinister expression of his countenance,showed that his self-abasement, if hehad ever practised it, had scarcely prostratedthe demon of pride, whose dominion mightstill be traced in the lines and furrows ofhis haughty physiognomy. The Father lookedat Mrs. Mowbray, and then glanced suspiciouslyat Eleanor. Mrs. Mowbray appearedto understand him.You would say a word to me in private''said Mrs. Mowbray, " shall I descended*"The Priest bowed assent.It is not to you alone that my missionextends** said he, gravely ; " you are all inpart concerned; your son had better alightwith you."Instantly," replied the Major. " If youwill give your horse in charge to the postillion,we will attend you at once." ^With a feeling of renewed apprehension,connected, she knew not why, with Ranulph,ROOKWOOD. 19Eleanor beheld her mother and brother descendfrom the carriage.Father Ambrose was, perhaps, the only beingwhom Eleanor disliked. She had felt an unaccountableantipathy towards him, which she couldneither extirpate nor controul, during their longand close intimacy. It may be necessary to mentionthat Eleanor s religious' culture had beenin accordance ^vith the tenets of the RomishChurch, in whose faith (the faith of her ancestry)her mother had continued; and that FatherAmbrose, with whom she had first becomeacquainted during the residence of the familynear Bordeaux, was her ghostly adviser andconfessor. An Englishman by birth, he hadbeen appointed Cure to the diocese in whichthey dwelt, and was, consequently, a frequentvisitor, almost a constantinople, of the chateau :yet, though duty and respect would haveprompted her to regard the Father with affection,Eleanor could never conquer the feelingsof dislike and distrust which she had at firstentertained towards him ; a dislike which wasincreased by the strange controul in which heROOKWOOD.seemed to hold her mother, who regarded himwith a veneration approaching to infatuation'It was, therefore, with satisfaction that she badehim adieu. He had, however, followed his friendsto England under a feigned name (as, being arecusant Romish priest, and supposed to havebeen engaged in certain Jesuitical plots, his returnto his own country was attended^with considerablerisk), and had now remained domesticated withthem for some months. That he had been insome way, early in life, connected with a branchof the house of Rosewood, Eleanor was aware(she fancied he might have been engagedin political intrigue with Sir Reginald, whichwould have well accorded with his ardent, ambitioustemperament), and the knowledge of thiscircumstance made her doubly apprehensive,lest the nature of his*, present communicationshould have reference to her lover, towards whosecause the Father had never been favourable, andrespecting whose situation he might have madesome discovery, which she feared he might useto Ranulph's disadvantage.With such misgivings, therefore, EleanorROOKWOOD. 21watched the motions of the party narrowly, inhope to gain some clue, from their gestures,to the subject of their conversation. From theearnest manner of the priest, and the interestwhich his narrative seemed to excite in hishearers, it was evident that his communicationwas of importance.Accompanied by Father Ambrose, Mrs. Mowbrayreturned to the carriage, while the Major,mounting the horse of the latter, after biddinga hasty adieu to his sister, adding, with a lookthat belied the consolation intended to beconveyed by his words, " that all was well,"but without staying to offer her any explanationof the cause of his sudden departure, rode backthe way they had just traversed, and in thedirection of Rosewood. Bereft of the onlyperson to whom she could have applied forinformation, though dying with curiosity andanxiety, to know the meaning of this singularinterview, and of the. sudden change of planswhich she felt so intimately concerned herself,Eleanor was constrained to preserveJSJ3 Lockwood.silence, as, after their entrance into the carriage,her mother again seemed lost in painfulreflection, and heeded her not ; and the Fatherdrawing from his pocket a small volume,appeared intently occupied in its perusal.Dear mother'' said Eleanor, at lengthturning to Mrs. Mowbray, " my brother isgone ''To Rookwood,'' said Mrs. Mowbray, in atone calculated to check further inquiry ; butEleanor was too anxious to notice it.And wherefore, mother .^"" said she, " mayI not know ?''Not as yet, my child — not as yet'' repliedMrs. Mowbray ; " you will learn all sufficientlyearly."The priest now raised his cat-like eyes fromthe book, to watch the effect of this speech,but dropped them instantly, as Eleanor turnedtowards him. She had been about to appealto him, but having witnessed this look, sherelinquished her scarce-formed purpose, andendeavoured to divert her tristful thoughtsROOKWOOD. 23by gazing through the glimmering medium ofher tears upon the soothing aspect of externalnature — that aspect which, in sunshine or instorm, hath ever relief in store for a heartembittered by the stony coldness of humannature. Turn to the bosom of nature, ye thatare sore afflicted, and ye shall find the reliefye seek — the sympathy after which ye yearn !The road meanwhile had led them throughoa long woody valley, and was now climbing thesides of a steep hill. They were soon in thevicinity of the Priory, and of the gipsies'encampment. The priest leaned forward, andwhispered something in Mrs. Mowbray's ear,who looked towards the ruined shrine, partof whose mouldering walls were visible fromthe road.At this moment the clatter of a horse's hoofs,and the sound of a loud voice, commandingthe postillion, in a menacing tone, to stop,accompanied by a volley of imprecations,interrupted the conference, and bespoke theapproach of an unwelcome intruder, and one24 ROOKWOOD.whom all, too truly, feared would not be readilydismissed. The postillion, however, did hisbest to rid them of the assailant. Perceiving amasked horseman behind him, approaching ata furious rate, he had little doubt as to hisintentions, and Turpin soon made his doubtscertainties. He called to him to stop, but thefellow paid no attention to his command,however peremptory, and disregarded eventhe pistol which he saw, in a casual glimpseover his near side, was presented at hisperson. Clapping his spurs into his horses'"flanks, he sought succour in flight. Turpinwas by his side in an instant. As the highwaymanendeavoured to catch his reins, the ladsuddenly wheeled the carriage right upon lii,and but for the dexterity of Turpin, andthe clever conduct of his mare, would inevitablyhave crushed him against the road-side. Asit was, his left leg was slightly grazed. Irritatedat this, Turpin fired over the manshead, and with the butt-end of the pistolfelled him from his seat. Startled by theROOKWOOD. 25sound, and no longer under the governanceof their rider, the horses rushed with franticviolence towards a ditch, which bounded theother side of the highway, down which thecarriage was precipitated, and at once overturned.Turpin s first act, after he had ascertained thatno mischief had been occasioned to those within,beyond the alarm incident to the shock, was, tocompel the postillion, who had by this timegained his legs, to release the horses from theirtrace. This done, with the best grace he couldassume, and adjusting his mask, he openedthe carriage, and proceeded to liberate thecaptives.Beg pardon. Madam," said he, so soon as hehad released Mrs. Mowbray, " excessively sorry,upon my soul, to have been the cause of so muchunnecessary alarm to you — all the fault, I assureyou, of that rascal of a postillion ; had the fellowonly pulled up when I commanded him, all thismight have been avoided — you will rememberthat, when you pay him — all his fault, I assureyou, Ma'am." ^VOL. III. C^6. ROOKWOOD.Receiving no reply, he proceeded to extricateEleanor, with whose beauty the inflammablehighwayman was instantly smitten. Leaving theFather to shift for himself, he turned to addresssome observation of coarse gallantry to her;but she eluded his grasp, and flew to her mother'sside.It is useless, Sir," said Mrs. Mowbray, asTurpin drew near them, " to affect ignorance ofyour intentions. You have already occasionedus serious alarm, much delay and inconvenience.I trust, therefore, that beyond ourpurses, which are but scantily supplied, but towhich you are welcome, we shall sustain nomolestation. You seem to have less of theruffian about you than the rest of your lawlessrace, and are not, I should hope, destitute ofcommon humanity''Common humanity ! " replied Turpin, " blessyou, Madam, I'm the most humane creaturebreathing ; would not hurt a fly, much lessa lady. Incivility was never laid to my charge.This business may be managed in a fewLockwood. 27seconds ; and as soon as we have settled thematter, 111 lend your stupid Jack-boy a handto put the horses to the carriage again, and getthe wheels out of the ditch. You have a banker.Ma'am, I suppose in town — perhaps in thecountry ; but I don t like country bankers ;besides I want a little ready cash in Rumville —beg pardon, Ma'am, London I mean ; but myears have been so stunned with those Romanypatterns, I almost think in flash. Just draw meacheque ; I've pen and ink always ready : acheque for fifty pounds. Ma'am — only fifty.What's your banker's name ? I've blankcheques of all the best houses in my pocket ;that, and a kiss from the pretty lips of thatcherry-cheeked maid," winking to Eleanor,will fully content me. You see you haveneither an exorbitant nor uncivil personage todeal with."Eleanor shrank closer towards her mother.Exhausted by previous agitation of the night,greatly frightened by the shock which she hadjust sustained, and still more alarmed by the28 Lockwood.words and gestures of the highwayman, she feltthat she was momentarily in danger of fainting,and with difficulty prevented herself from falling.The Priest, who had succeeded in freeing himselffrom the carriage, now placed himselfbetween Turpin and the ladies.Be satisfied, misguided man," said theFather, in a stern voice, offering a purse, whichMrs. Mowbray hastily extended towards him,with the crime you have already committed,and seek not to peril your soul, by deeper guilt:be content with the plunder you now obtain, and .depart ; for, by my holy calling, I affirm to you,that if you advance one footstep towards thefurther molestation of these ladies, it shall beatthe hazard of your life."'' Bravo!" exclaimed Turpin. " Now this iswhat I like ; who would have thought the oldautem bawler had so much pluck in him. Sir,I commend you for your courage, but you aremistaken ; I am the quietest man breathing, andnever harm a human being ; in proof of which,only look at your rascal of a postillion, whomROOKWOOD. ^any one of my friends would have sent post-hasteto the devil, for half the trouble he gave me; buteasy as I am, I never choose to be baulked inmy humours. I must have the fifty, and thebuss, and then Fm off, as soon as you like, andI may as well have the kiss, while the old ladysigns the cheque, and then we shall have theseal as well as the signature. Pol — pol — nononsense. Many a pretty lass has thought itan honour to be kissed by Turpin."Eleanor recoiled with deepest disgust, as shesaw the highwayman thrust aside the uselessopposition of the priest, and approach her.He had removed his mask; his face, flushed withinsolent triumph, was turned towards her. Despitethe loathing which curdled the blood withinher veins, she could not avert her eyes. Hedrew near, she uttered a shrill scream. At thatmoment a powerful grasp was laid upon Turpin'sshoulder; he turned, and beheld Luke.Save me! save me!'"* cried Eleanor, addressingthe new comer.Damnation ! " said the highwayman, " whathas brought you here? one would think30 Lockwood.you were turned assistant to all distresseddamsels. Quit your hold, or by the God aboveus, you will repent it""Fool !"" exclaimed Luke, " talk thus to onewho heeds you."*' And as he spoke, he hurledTurpin backwards with so much force that,staggering a few yards, the highwayman fellto the ground.The priest stood like one stunned with surpriseat Luke's sudden appearance, and subsequentdaring action.Luke meanwhile approached Eleanor. Hegazed upon her with curiosity mixed with admiration,for his heart told him she was very fair.A death-like paleness had spread over her cheeks ;yet still, despite the want of colour, she lookedexquisitely beautiful, and her large blue eyeseloquently thanked her deliverer for her rescue.The words she wanted were supplied by Mrs.Mowbray, who thanked him in appropriateterms ; when they were interrupted by Turpin,who had by this time picked himself up, andwas drawing near them. His countenance worea fierce expression.ROOKWOOD. SI"I tell you what"" said he, " Luke Bradley,or Luke Rosewood, or whatever else you maycall yourself, you have taken a damned unfairadvantage of me in this matter, and deservenothing better at my hands than that I shouldcall you to instant account for it — and damme ifI don't too "'Luke Bradley ! " interrupted Mrs. Mowbray,are you that individual ?"Even so. Madam'' replied Luke.Father Ambrose, is this the person of whomyou spoke?" eagerly asked the lady.It is," returned the Priest.Did he not call you Luke Rosewood ?"eagerly demanded Eleanor of Luke. " Is thatalso your name ?"Rosewood is my name, fair cousin," repliedLuke, " if I may venture to call you so."And Ranulph Rosewood is "My brother."I never heard he had a brother," criedEleanor, with some agitation. " How canthat be?"32 BOOK WOOD.I am his brother, nevertheless'" repliedLuke moodily — " his elder brother rEleanor turned to her mother and the priestwith a look of imploring anguish — she saw aconfirmation of the truth of this statement intheir glances. No contradiction was offered byeither to his statement ; both, indeed, appearedin some mysterious manner prepared for it. This,then, was the dreaded secret. This, then, wasthe cause of her brother's sudden departure.The truth flashed with lightning swiftness acrossher brain.Chagrined and mortified, Luke saw that glanceof inquiry. His pride was hurt at the preferencethus naturally shown towards his brother.He had been struck, deeply struck, with herbeauty. He acknowledged the truth of Peter'swords. Eleanor's loveliness was without parallel.He had seen nought so fair, and the instant hebeheld her, he felt that for her alone could hehave cancelled his vows to Sybil. The spiritof rivalry and jealousy was therefore instantlyaroused, by Eleanor's exclamations.ROOKWOOD. S3His elder brother !" echoed Eleanor, dwellingupon his words, and addressing Luke—then you must be — but no, you are not, youcannot be — it is Ranulph's title — it is not your'syou are not '"I am Sir Luke Rookwood,^' replied Luke,proudly.Ere the words were uttered, Eleanor hadfainted.Assistance is at hand. Madam, if you willaccept it, and follow me," said Luke, raising theinsensible girl in his arms, and bearing herdown the hill towards the encampment, whitherhe was followed by Mrs. Mowbray and thePriest, between whom, during the hurried dialoguewhich we have detailed, very significantglances had been exchanged. Turpin, who, asit may be supposed, had not been an incuriousobserver at what was passing, burst into, hisusual loud laugh, on seeing Luke bear awayhis lovely burthen.Cousin ! Ha, ha !" said he. " So the wenchis his cousin. Damme, but I half suspect thatc534 ROOKWOOD.he has fallen in love with his new-found cousin ;and if so, Miss Sybil, or I'm mistaken, will lookas yellow as a bean*. If that little Spanishdevil gets it into her pretty jealous pate, thathe is about to bring home a new mistresswe shall have a tragedy scene, in the twinklingof a bed-post. However, I shan t lose sight ofSir Luke, until I have settled my accountswith him. Hark ye, boy'' continued he, addressingthe postillion, " remain where you are ;you won't be wanted yet awhile, I imagine.There's a guinea for you, to drink Dick Turpin'shealth."Upon which, he mounted his mare, andwalked her easily down the hill.And so that be Dick Turpin, folks talk somuch about," quoth the lad, looking curiouslyafter him ; " well, he's as civil speaking a chapas need be, blow my boots if he ain't; and ifI'd had a notion it were he, I'd have stopped atfirst call, without more ado. Nothing like expelROOKWOOD. 35hence — I shall know better another time*" addedhe, pocketing the shiner.Rushing swiftly down the hill, Luke tarriedat the river's brink, to sprinkle some of the coolelement upon the pale brow of Eleanor. Asheheld her in his arms, thoughts which he fainwould have stifled in their birth took possessionof his heart. " Would she were mine !''murmured he. " Yet no — the wish is unworthy"'But that wish returned unbidden.Eleanor opened her eyes. She was still tooweak to walk without support, and Luke, raisingher once more in his arms, and motioningMrs. Mowbray to follow, crossed the brook bymeans of stepping stones, and conducted hischarge along a bye-path towards the Priory, soas to avoid meeting with the crew assembledupon the green.They had gained one of the roofless halls,when he encountered Balthazar. Astonished atthe sight of the party, the Patrico was about toaddress the Priest as an acquaintance, when hismore orthodox brother raised his finger to his36 ROOK WOOD.lips, in token of caution. The action passed unobserved.Hie thee to Sybil," said Luke to thePatrico. " Bid her haste hither. Say that thismaiden — that Eleanor Mowbray is here, and«requires her aid — fly. I will bear her to therefectory."As Balthazar passed the Priest, he pointedwith a significant glance towards a chasm inthe wall, which seemed to be an opening tosome subterraneous chamber. The father againmade a gesture of silence, and Balthazar hastenedupon his mission.Luke led them to the refectory ; he brought achair for Eleanor's support; but so far fromreviving after such attention as could be affordedher, she appeared to become weaker.He was about to issue forth in search of Sybil,when to his surprise he found the door fastened.Our orders are, that you do not pass thisway," said a voice, which Luke instantly recognizedas that of the Knight of Malta.ROOKWOOD. 37Not pass I" echoed Luke. " What does thismean ?''Our orders are from the Queen," returnedthe Knight.At this instant the low tolling of a muffledbell was heard.The bell !"''' exclaimed Luke ; " some dangeris at hand."His heart smote him, as he thought of Sybil,end he looked anxiously towards Eleanor.Balthazar rushed into the room.Where is Sybil ?" cried Luke. " Will shenot come ?"She will be here anon'' answered thePatrico.I will seek her myself then'' said Luke,The door bv which you entered is free."*' It is not free," replied Balthazar. " Remainwhere you are."Remain here," echoed Luke. " Who willprevent my going forth .''"I will," said Barbara Lovel, as she suddenlyappeared in the door-way. " You stir38 ROOK WOOD.not, excepting at my pleasure. Where is themaiden?" continued she, looking around witha grim smile of satisfaction at the consternationproduced by her appearance. " Ha !I see — she faints. Here is a cordial that shallrevive her. Mrs. Mowbray, you are welcome tothe Gipsies' dwelling — you and your daughter ;and you. Sir Luke Rosewood, I congratulateyou upon your accession of dignity." Turningto the priest, who was evidently overwhelmedwith confusion, she exclaimed, " Think you Iknow not Richard Checkley ? We have met,ere this, at Rosewood. Know you not BarbaraLovel.? Ha, ha! It is long since my poordwelling has been so highly honoured. ButI must not delay the remedy. Give her todrink of this," said she, giving a phial to Mrs.Mowbray. " It will instantly restore her."It is poison," cried Luke, " she shall notdrink it."Poison !" reiterated Barbara. " Behold !"and she drank of the liquid. " I would notpoison thy bride," added she, turning to Luke.Lockwood. 39My bride?" echoed Luke.Ay, thy bride ;"' repeated Barbara.Luke recoiled in amazement. Mrs. Mowbrayalmost felt inclined to believe she was a dreamer,so visionary did the whole scene appear. A densecrowd of witnesses stood at the entrance. Foremostamongst them was the Sexton. Suddenly ashriek was heard, and the crowd opening, toallow her passage, Sybil rushed forward.CHAPTER VII.Well, go thy ways, old Nick Machiavel, there will never bethepeer of thee for wholesome policy and good counsel : thoucook's pains to chalk men out the dark paths and hiddenplots of murther and deceit, and no man has the grace to followthee. The age is unthankful, thy principles are quite forsaken,and worn out of memory.Shakerley Marion's Antiquary-sybil'ssudden entrance filled the group thatsurrounded Miss Mowbray with new dismay.But she saw them not. Her soul seemed rivetedby Eleanor, towards whom she rushed ; andwhile her eye wandered over her beauty, sheraised the braided hair from her brow, revealingthe clear, polished forehead. Wonder, awe,devotion, pity, usurped the place of hatred.The fierce expression that had lit up her darkorbs, was succeeded by tender commiseration.She looked an imploring appeal at Barbara.Ay, ay,'"" returned the old gipsy, extendingat the same time the phial ; '' I understand.Lockwood. 41Here is that will bring the blood once more intoher pallid cheeks, and kindle the fire within hereyes. Give her of this."This echoed Sybil, regarding the phialwith distrust.Ay, this'' retorted Barbara, " and quickly.Why dost pause ? Do it, and waste not a dropof the precious potion — ^'tis the drink of life''Of life eternal perchance," said Sybil, stillhesitating.Mrs. Mowbray vainly endeavoured to restoreher child to animation. Seriously alarmed, shenow called loudly for assistance.Go, I command thee ; give her of the cordial,"said Barbara, with a meaning gesture.My hand shakes or I would minister to heraid myself."Fear nothing," said Luke, approachingthem ; " 'tis, as she says, a cordial ; delay mayendanger Miss Mowbray's recovery."And do you likewise command me to doit.?" asked Sybil, reproachfully, of Luke.Luke signified his assent, and, without further42 ROOKWOOD.remonstrance, she obeyed. The effect of thepotion was almost instantaneous, amply attestingBarbara's skill in its concoction. Stifled respirationfirst proclaimed Eleanor's recovery. Sheopened her large and languid eyes — her bosomheaved almost to bursting — her pulses throbbedquickly and feverishly; and, as the stimulantoperated, the wild lustre of excitement blazed inher eyes.Sybil took her hand to chafe it. The eyes ofthe two maidens met. They gazed upon eachother stedfastly and in silence. Eleanor knewnot whom she regarded, but she could not mistakethat look of sympathy — she could notmistake the tremulous pressure of her hand —she felt the silent trickling tears. She returnedthe sympathising glance, and gazed with equalwonder upon the ministering fairy, for such shealmost seemed, that knelt before her. Lovelyit was, to see these two fair creatures together,alike in beauty, yet how different in its expression! Day and night could not be more opposite.Each was equally enchanted with the other.ROOKWOOD.Looks speak as plainly as words, nay plainer;they tell what words cannot, what words darenot — they talk from the heart, whereas the lipsoften speak the language of constraint. Theeyes of youth seldom belie the feelings; andhow much may not a glance convey ! In thisinstance it spoke volumes on both sides.As Eleanor's looks wandered from the kindlyglance of Sybil, to the withered and inauspiciousaspect of the Gipsy Queen, who, in her strangeand fantastical gear looked like the baleful witchMara, and shifted thence to the dusky gnome-likefigures of her gipsy gang, looming inthe twilight entrance, like familiars of the sorceress— as she gazed upon these wild objects,she exclaimed, " Who are these, and where amI?"You are in safety ,"*' replied Luke. " Thisis the ruined Priory of St. Francis ; and thosestrange personages are a horde of gipsies. Youneed fear no injury from them""My deliverer !" murmured Eleanor; when allat once the recollection that he had avowed44 ROOKWOOD.himself a Rosewood, and the elder brother ofRanulph, flashed across her memory. " Gipsies !did you not say these people were gipsies ? Yourown attire is the same as their's — You are not,cannot be the brother of Ranulph."I do not boast the same mother'' returnedLuke, proudly, "but my father was Sir PiersRosewood, and I am his elder bomb""He turned away. Dark thoughts swept acrosshis brain. Maddened by the beauty of Eleanor,stung by her slights, and insensible to thesilent agony of Sybil, who sought in vain tocatch his eye, but who spoke not, he thoughtof nothing but of revenge, and the accomplishmentof his purposes. All within was awild and fearful turmoil. His better principleswere chained down by the onward promptingsof evil. " That prophecy," said he " Butthat is nought. Yet Barbara called her mybride — my bride ! Oh that it were so ! — Wouldthat I could call her mine — would that sheloved me in lieu of Ranulph. He is my brother ;yet I have no brotherly love towards him ; andROOK WOOD. 45if that prophecy should be truth, and withher he should wrest from me my newly-acquiredpossessions, my happiness would be wrecked.But this shall never be. — She is here — she ismine — she shall be mine. And Sybil — whatof her? A stunning, yelling demon, shoutswithin, and drowns the cries of conscience.Methinks, if the tempter were near at hand,to offer that maiden to me, even at the perilof my soul's welfare, I could not resist it.'"*The tempter was at hand. He is seldomabsent on occasions like the present. TheSexton stood beside his grandson. Lukestarted — he eyed Peter from head to foot,almost expecting to find the cloven foot, supposedto be proper to the fiend. Peter grinnedin ghastly derision.So ho ! thou wouldst summon hell to thineaid ; and lo, the devil is at thine elbow. Pshaw !look not startled, man. I am no dealer in theblack art — I am no fiend, or familiar of fiend,or aught unearthly in the guise of earth. I amamere creature of clay, like thyself; but I can46 ROOK WOOD.render thee all the aid thou could'st derive frompowers of darkness. She is thine."*"*Miner"* echoed Luke, wildly. " PeterBradley — grandsire — man — fiend — be thou whatthou mayest, for I can hardly think thee human,trifle not with me; I am in no mood for it;I am distracted. Thou hast kindled wildfirein my heart, it scorches, it burns"*He has it'' muttered Peter, regarding himfixedly for a moment. " The dark delusionof his race is upon him. He is doomed, likethe rest."Devil ! didst thou not say she should bemines""Spare thy nick-names. I repeat it. — ^ Sheshall be thine.' "Make good thy words," cried Luke impatiently.Softly— softly," returned Peter. The birdis snared; it can only flutter; it cannot escape.Moderate thyself, and thy wishes shall be accomplished.Thine own desires chime with those ofothers ; nay, with those of Barbara. She wouldROOKWOOD. 47wed thee to Miss Mowbray. Thou stares. Butit is so. This is but a cover for some deeperplot ; no matter. It shall go hard, despite hercunning, if I foil her not at her OAvn weapons.There is more mischief in that old woman'sbrain than was ever hatched within the crocodile'segg; but she shall find her match. Donot thwart her ; leave all to me. She is aboutit now," added he, noticing Barbara and j\Irs.Mowbray in conference together. " Be patientI will watch her." And he quitted his grandsonfor the purpose of scanning more closely themanoeuvres of the old gipsy.Barbara, meanwhile, had not remained inactive.You need fear no relapse in your daughter,I will answer for that," said the old gipsy toMrs. Mowbray ; " Sybil will tend her. Quitnot the maiden's side," continued she, addressingher grandchild, adding, in a whisper, " Becautious — alarm her not — mine eye will be uponthee — drop not a word. "So saying, she shuffled to a little distancewith Mrs. Mowbray, keeping Sybil in view.48 ROOK WOOD.and watching every motion, as the panthermight watch the gambols of the fawn from outits lair.Know you who speaks to you?^' said theold crone, in the peculiar low and confidentialtone assumed by her tribe to strangers. " Haveyou forgotten the name of Barbara Lovel ? "I have no distinct remembrance of it*"returned Mrs. Mowbray.Think againe said Barbara ; " and thoughyears are flown, you may perchance recall theblack gipsy woman, who, when you were surroundedby gay gallants, with dancing plumes,lordlings, and gentles of high degree, perusedyour palm, and whispered in your ear thefavoured suitor's name. 'Bide with me amoment. Madam," said Barbara, seeing thatMrs. Mowbray shrank from the recollectionthus conjured up, " I am old — very old, I havesurvived the shows of flattery, and, being vestedwith a power over my people, am apt, perchance,to take too much upon myself with others."The old gipsy paused here, and then, assumingROOKWOOD. 49a more haughty manner, exclaimed, " Theestates of Rook wood are ample—"«Ha!"They should have been yours, lady, andwould have been, but for that marriage. Youwould have beseemed them bravely. But SirReginald was wilful, and erased the daughter'sname to substitute that of his son. Pity it isthat so fair a creature as Miss Mowbray shouldlack the dower her beauty and her birth entitleher to expect. Pity that Ranulph Rook woodshould lose those lands and titles, at the momentwhen he deemed they were dropping into hispossession. Pity that those broad lands shouldpass away from you and from your children,as they will do, if Ranulph and Eleanor areunited''They never shall be united'' replied Mrs.Mowbray, hastily surprised out of her caution.'Twere indeed to wed thy child to beggary,"said Barbara.Mrs. Mowbray sighed deeply.There is a way," continued the old crone,VOL. III. D50 ROOKWOOD.by which the estates might still be her's, andthine."How ?■" asked Mrs. Mowbray, eagerly.Sir Piers Rosewood had two sons."«Ha!"The elder is here."Luke — Sir Luke. He brought us hither."He loves your daughter. I saw his gazeof passion just now. I am old now, but I havesome skill in lovers' glances. Why not wedher to him ? I read hearts, you know."But," returned Mrs. Mowbray, with hesitation," though I might wish for — though Imight sanction this, Eleanor is betrothed toRanulph — she loves him."Think not of JieVy if you are satisfied. Shecannot judge so well for herself as you can forher. She is but a child — she knows not whatshe loves. Her affection will soon be Luke's.He is a noble youth — the image of his grandfather,your father. Sir Reginald ; and if she bebetrothed to any one, 'twas to the heir ofRosewood. Why should the marriage not takeplace at once, and here Y^ROOKWOOD. 51Here ?"Even here. Depart, and Ranulph and shemay meet — your plans may be overthrown.You are within sacred walls. I will take youwhere even an altar stands. There is no lack ofholy priest to join their hands together. Yourcompanion, Master Richard Checkley, or bywhatever other name he calls himself, will dothe office fittingly. He has essayed his clerklyskill already on others of your house."To what do you allude, mysterious woman ?"asked Mrs. Mowbray, with anxiety.To Sir Piers and Susan Bradley'' returnedBarbara.Ha ! did he unite them ? He never told methis''He dared not do so ; he had an oath whichbound him to concealment ; but death has nowabsolved him. The time is coming when greatermysteries may be revealed."'Tis strange I should not have heard of thisbefore," said Mrs. Mowbray, musingly; "andyet I might have guessed as much, from his52 ROOKWOOD.obscure hints respecting Ranulph. I see it allnow. I see the gulf into which I might haveplunged; but I am warned in time. FatherAmbrose," continued she to the priest, who waspacing the chamber at some little distance fromthem, " is it true that my brother was weddedby you to Susan Bradley'"Ere the priest could reply, the Sexton presentedhimself.Ha, the very father of the girl!" said Mrs.Mowbray, " whom I met within our family vault,and who was so strangely moved when I spoke tohim of Alan Rosewood. Is he here likewise ?""Alan Rosewood!" echoed Barbara, uponwhom a light seemed suddenly to break, " Ha !what said he of him ?"111 boding raven," interposed Peter, fiercely ;be content with what thou knowest of theliving, and trouble not the repose of the dead.Let them rest in their infamy."The dead," echoed Barbara, with a chucklinglaugh ; " ha, ha ! he is dead then ; and whatbecame of his fair wife — his brother's minion ?Lockwood. 53■^Twas a foul deed I grant, and yet there wasexpiation. Blood flowed — blood ^No blood — no blood," said Peter, T\4th adreadful look.No blood ! ha, I forgot ; the Rookwoodsnever strike. None since the first have done so ;and what of Alan s daughter ?"Silence, thou night hag,'^ thundered Peter,or I will have thee burned at the stake, for thesorcery thou practises. Beware,"^ added he, inadeep tone, " I am thy friend""Barbara's withered countenance exhibited foran instant the deepest indignation at the Sexton'sthreat. The malediction trembled on hertongue — she raised her staff to smite him, butshe checked the action. In the same tone, butwith a sharp, suspicious look, she answered,My friend, mayest thou ? See that it prove so,or beware of meAnd with a malignant scowl the Gipsy Queenslowly shuffled towards her satellites, who werestationed at the door.CHAPTER VIII.No marriage I esteem it, where the friendsForce love upon their children ; where the virginIs not so truly given as betrayed.I would not have betrothed people (forI can by no means call them lovers), makeTheir rites no wedlock, but a sacrifice.Combat of Love and Friendship,Miss Mowbray had witnessed her mother'swithdrawal from her side with infinite uneasiness,and was with difficulty prevented, by Sybil,from breaking upon her conference with theGipsy Queen. Barbara's dark eye was fixedupon them during the whole of the interview,and communicated an indefinite sense of dreadto Eleanor.Who — who is that old woman ?"" askedEleanor, under her breath. " Never, even inmy wildest dreams, have I seen aught so terrible.Why does she look so at us ? She terrifies me ;and yet she cannot mean me ill, or my motherwe have never injured here's"ROOKWOOD. 55Alas ! "" sighed Sybil.You sighs"' exclaimed Eleanor, in alarm.Is there any real danger then ? Help us toavoid it. Quick, warn my mother; she seemsagitated. Oh, let me go to her''Hush ! " whispered Sybil, maintaining anunmoved demeanour under the lynx-like gazeof Barbara. " Stir not, as you value yourlife — you know not where you are, or what maybefal you. Your mother is not in danger. Youalone have cause for fear."//" exclaimed Eleanor, growing pale asdeath, and with difficulty repressing a scream.'* Why should danger alight on me.^* What haveI done ? What Avill you gain by insuring me?Not you I fear, but her, — that terrible old woman,who glances at us, like a hungry wolf. Tell metell me, how am I in danger. Do not hold melet me go to my mother ; or lead me forthinto the open air — any where but here""Command yourself. Lady, I entreat you''said Sybil, " as you value your life, — let not thetrembling of a nerve, if you can controul it,56 ROOKWOOD.betray your apprehension ; your safety dependsupon your composure. Your life is not indanger ; but what is dearer than life, your love,is threatened with a fatal blow. There is adark design to wed you to another.""Heavens*" ejaculated Eleanor, "and towhom.''"To Sir Luke Rosewood."I would die sooner ! Marry him ? They shallkill me, ere they force me to it !"Could you not love him ?"Love him ! I loathe him ; I have only seenhim within this hour — I knew not of his existence— he rescued me from peril — I would thankhim — I would love him if I could, for Ranulph'ssake ; and yet for Ranulph's sake I hate him."Speak not of him thus to me," said Sybil,angrily. " If you love him not, / love him.Oh ! forgive me, lady ; pardon my impatience^my heart is breaking, yet it has not ceasedto beat for him. You say you will die soonerthan consent to this forced union. Here arethe means," and, unperceived by Barbara, sheROOKWOOD. 57placed the poignard within the folds of Eleanor'sbosom.I would rather die than wed him," saidEleanor, shuddering ; " but this is a dreadfulalternative. Take back your dagger — I darenot use it*"And you love Ranulph ?*"'' I dare not die — I shrink from self-destruction— my hand trembles, even while I touch thesteel''Yet keep it ; the moment may arrive whenyou will clutch it firmly."Oh, no. Yoti may view death with indifference— I never can ; not even Love can disarmit of its terrors. Life is very dear to me."Dearer than your lover !" said Sybil, with illdisguised scorn.Ranulph is true to me — he loves me," saidEleanor — " I cling to hope, as to existence."True, true," returned Sybil ; " you are notall desolate as I am. Give me the dagger — gotoyour mother — I will protect you. If theremust be a victim, I will be the sacrifice — Godd558 ROOKWOOD.grant I may be the only one. Be happy — ashappy as I am wretched. You shall see whatthe love of a gipsy can do.'^Sybil took the poignard, and burst into a floodof passionate tears. Eleanor regarded her withthe deepest commiseration ; but the feelingwas transient ; for Barbara, now advancing,exclaimed, " Hence, to thy mother. Thebridegroom is waiting ; to thy mother, girl !"and she motioned Eleanor fiercely away. " Whatmeans this?" continued the old gipsy. " Whathast thou said to that girl ? Did I not cautionthee against speech with her? and thou hastdared to disobey me. Thou, my grandchildthe daughter of my Agatha, with whom myslightest wish was law ! I abandon thee ! — Icurse thee "Oh, curse me not r cried Sybil. " Add notto my despair."Then follow my advice implicitly — knowthyself — cast off this weakness — all is in readiness.He shall descend into the vaulted chapel ;the ceremony shall there take place — there alsoLockwood. 59shall she die — and there again shalt thou bewedded "To death !" groaned Sybil.Take this phial," continued Barbara; —place it within the folds of thy girdle. Whenall is over, I ^vill tell thee when to use it. Befirm — be true — I will remove all obstacles;thou wilt have no fear of rivalry — all will thenbe over*"It will indeed be over," muttered Sybil.And have you no pity for youth andinnocence ?'"*None ! when they interfere with my purposes."'No fear for the consequences of crimes sodreadful ?"None — the guilt — the punishment — bemine — I will brave all — I will fulfil my word.Thou shouldst be Lady Rosewood, were thetitle to be purchased by the blood of all theirline. Art thou prepared ? shall we set out ?"I am — I am prepared," replied Sybil, inaccents hollow as despair; "but let me speakwith Luke before we go."60 ROOK WOOD.« To what end ?"Grant me this request, I beseech you,mother — this last request, and ask me not mymotive. I will obey you in all else ; leave us aninstant together .""'Be brief then — each moment is precious.Go to him. He is yonder. Keep a guard uponthy tongue. I will to Mrs. Mowbray. Stay.Thou hast placed the phial in safety. A dropwill free thee from thy troubles."'Tisin that hope I guard it'' replied Sybil,as she departed in the direction of Luke.Barbara watched her join her faithless lover,and then turned shortly towards Mrs. Mowbrayand her daughter.Luke was alone. The Sexton remained inearnest converse with Mrs. Mowbray and thePriest. Peter had instilled his venom — heleft it to operate: he had others besides Lukeupon whom to practise. Luke meanwhile, withhasty step, paced the further end of the apartment.From time to time he cast anxiousglances at Sybil and Eleanor. As he regardedthe former, he felt the bitterest remorse atROOKWOOD. 61his conduct,, internally execrating himself forhis cruelty and hardness of heart, yet didhe lack the resolution to avow his penitence,and implore her forgiveness. This feeling ofcompunction was, however, short lived. Helooked at Eleanor, and Sybil's image was obliterated.You are ill, dear Luke," said Sybil, who hadsilently approached him, " very ill""111 ! '' echoed Luke, breaking into franticlaughter. " 111 ! — Ha! ha ! — upon my weddingday. — No — I am well — well. Your eyes arejaundiced by jealousy""Jealousy ! Luke — Luke, this from you.Laugh not thus. — It terrifies me ; I shall thinkyou insane. Such laughter is ghastly — suchlevity fiendish. There, you are calmer — you aremore like yourself — more human. You lookedjust* now — Oh God ! that I should say it of youas if you were possessed by devil'sAnd if I were possessed, what then P'^What then ? Horrible ! Hint not at it.You almost make me credit the dreadful talesfM ROOKWOOD.I have heard, that on their wedding-day theRook woods are subject to the power of theEvil One."Upon their wedding-day — and I look thus ?"You do — you do. Oh ! cast it from you."She is mine — she is mine — I care not, thoughfiends possess me, so it be my wedding-day —and thou sayst I look like a Rosewood — ha,ha!"That wild laughter again. Luke, I implorethee, hear me one word — my last "I will not hear reproaches."I mean not to reproach you. I came to blessyou — to forgive you — to bid you farewell. Willyou not say farewell ? "Farewell."Not so — not so — mercy, my God ! compassionatehim and me — my heart will break withagony — Luke, if you would not kill me, recallthat word. Let not the guilt of my death beyours. 'Tis to save you from that, that Idie.""Die!"ROOK WOOD. bt>For you ; but oh ! let it not be hy you''Sybil, you have said rightly — I am notmyself — I know not what demons have possessionof my soul, that I can behold your agonieswithout remorse — that your matchless affectionshould awaken no return ; but so it is. Sincethe fatal moment when I beheld yon maid,I have loved her."Loved her ! " gasped Sybil.« Wildly — desperately''No more. Now I can part with you —farewell''Stay, stay — wretch that I am — stay, Sybil.If we must part, and that it must be so I feel,let me receive your pardon, if you can bestowit. Let me clasp you once more within myarms. May you live to happier days — mayyou "^Oh, to die thus !" sobbed Sybil, disengagingherself from his embrace. " Live tohappier days, saidst thou, Luke ? When haveI given thee reason to doubt, for an instant, thesincerity of my love, that thou shouldst ventureto insult me thus ?64 ROOKWOOD.Then live with me— live for me"'Live for thee' echoed Sybil. " If thou canstlove me still, I will live for thee — as thy slave— thyminion — thy wife — aught that thou wilt have mebe. Thou hast raised me from wretchedness.Oh'' continued she, in an altered tone, " haveI mistaken thy meanings saidst thou thosewords in false compassion for my sufferings ?speak — it is not yet too late — all may be well.My fate — my life, is in thy hands. If thoulowest me yet — if thou canst forsake Eleanor,speak — if not, be silent''Luke averted his head."Enough!" continued Sybil, in a voice ofagony ; " I understand — may God forgive thee.Fare thee well — we shall meet no more."Do we part for ever r" asked Luke, withoutdaring to regard her.For ever," answered Sybil.Before her lover could reply, she shot from hisside, and disappeared from his view. Swifteralmost than thought, she plunged amidstthe dark and dense assemblage near thedoor. Amongst the crowd she discovered theROOKWOOD. 65face of one upon whose fidelity she could depend,were it to peril life for her welfare, and theboon which Sybil was about to ask might endangerthe safety of any one who shouldconcede it. That she felt, but it was not amoment for hesitation.Her attendant, Handassah, was the individualwhom she beheld. In eager tremulouswhisper she breathed in her ears these words —Handassah, may I trust in thee ?"The faithful hand-maiden instantly signifiedher ready acquiescence."Gone with me then behind yon projection ofthe wall — we are unseen— give me thy cloak —quick — quick — none observe us amidst this confusion— Barbara is engaged now — give me thykerchief, girl — there, I have bound it round mytemples — do I look like thee, Handassah ? MyGod I look not thou like me — I would have noneother so miserable. Thou art of my own size, andof my complexion. We, gipsy girls, are all of onecomplexion ; and thine eyes, he said, they werelike mine ; but thou hast not my hair — no ;but thou shalt have'' and with her poignard'sOD ROOKWOOD.point the wretched maiden severed her luxuriantand braided tresses, and gave them toHandassah. " Attach these useless bands tothine own — fasten them so — keep them hereafter,for my sake — he once loved them, Handassah ;but that is gone. Robe thyself within thisshawl, as is the custom of our race when inaffliction — muffle thy face within it — haply thoumayest escape the scrutiny of Barbara — at leasttill all be over."This exchange of attire, though effectedwith wonderful promptitude by Handassah, wholooked in her disguise a very counterpart of hermistress, had not been altogether unperceived bysome of her band. Luckily the proceeding washidden from Barbara's view ; nor were they whowitnessed it disposed to betray the confidence sheinvoluntarily placed in them. Sybil was belovedby all, and her escape gladly connived at. Inthe apparel of Handassah, she gained the door,and though in her own person her departurewould have been refused, she was allowed to goforth in her present disguise.She emerged into the open air — she stoodROOKWOOD. 67within the roofless hall — it was filled withsunshine — with the fresh breath of morn.The ivied ruins, the grassy floor, the bluevault of heaven, seemed to greet her witha benignant smile — all was riant and rejoicing,all, save her. Amid such brightness, hersorrow seemed harsh and unnatural ; and asshe felt the glad influence of day, she was scarceable to refrain from tears, but she did refrain.The effort was heart-breaking — it was terrible toleave this beautiful world — that blue sky — thatsunshine — and all she loved — so young, so soon.Entering the low arch, that yawned withinthe wall, to which we have before alluded, shevanished like a ghost at the approach of mom.CHAPTER IX.Thou hast practised on her with foul charms —Abused her delicate youth with drugs and minerals.Shakspeare — Othello.Amongst those who had noticed Sybil's metamorphosisand departure, was Jerry Juniper,md he had remarked it not without some uneasiness; for if truth must be told, the black eyes)f the pretty brunette, Handassah, had been the'oadstars which attracted the caper merchant'sson towards the patterns of Romany, and detainedhim amongst their tents. Handassahwas neither a coquette nor a flirt — she requitedJerry's passion, and for such a fickle personage,Juniper was more constant than might havebeen anticipated. Three moons, however, hadonly revolved over their liaison !ROOK WOOD. 69'' What the devil are you about, my dear ?"" saidhe, becoming serious, though he could not, underany circumstances, divest himself of his slang andswagger — " If s as much as your life is worth todowhat you have done. I won't answer for theconsequences, if Barbara's hawk's eye penetratesyour disguise. Why need you meddle in thismatter .'* If Barbara has made up her mind, Ishould as soon think of opposing the arch Queenof Beelzebub as attempt to interfere with her''Hush, hush — ^be quiet," returned Handassah,;" I am frightened enough already, without youradding to my terror ; but I will risk any thingfor Sybil. If you love me, keep near, andcontrive, if possible, to interpose your personbetween me and Barbara, whenever she looksin my direction."I will do my best, certainly," answeredJerry ; " but it will be confoundedly awkward,and still more unpleasant, if any unexpectedeclaircissement should take place. For my part,I can't conceive what's to come of all thismystery and manoeuvring. But never fear, girl;70 Lockwood.Ill Stand by you, and by Sybil too, shouldneed be"' added he, affecting a sympathywhich we are sorry to say he did not feel.Hist ! Barbara calls for Sybil, that's you —you know now — keep behind me. I won'tindulge her with a more particular view ofyour pretty face than I can possibly help.You ask if I love you ? see what risks I amprepared to run for you : let my present conductbe my answer""With fear and trembling Handassah advanced,Jerry hovering before her in his jaunty fashion,chuckling and spreading himself out like aturkey guarding its chick from an adversebrood. All his dexterity and assurance wereneeded to shelter her from Barbara's scrutiny; andit is probable that, but for the libations he hadswallowed, even Jerry's impudence might havefailed him at this critical conjuncture. Barbarawas in no mood for trifling. He saw in aninstant, by her eye, the ticklish situation inwhich he stood ; but he could not in honourslink back. So he floundered forward ; but hisLockwood. 71laughter changed to somewhat of that sort whichis vulgarly described as being " on the wrong sideof one's mouth," as he stood close beside theGipsy Queen. After all, what a glorious thingis assurance ! It carries all before it — It is thegreatest privilege of genius. Jerry noddedslightly, not daring to make a salutation moreprofound, for fear of betraying his mistress.I called for Sybil. What wouldst thou ?ha — ;" cried Barbara, in a tone that showed himplainly enough that any pleasantry he mightattempt would be ill-timed. The joke he hadmeditated, died away upon his lips.It is ill playing with edged tools'' thoughtJerry.Where is Sybil ?" asked Barbara.She is here," replied Jerry. — " All's up,"muttered he. " What the devil shall I do ?"Art thou her spokesman," said Barbara.'stand aside."Might I have a moment's speech with you ?"continued Jerry, struggling to maintain hisground.72 ROOKWOOD.Not now — well what isn't ? speak quickly,thou pertinacious knave"""It concerns your self /"*Out with it then."This marriage'""Ha?"The crew murmur'"Murmur — ha — ^" .Not exactly murmur — I am wrong ;but they talk. You understand, — they talk.You know what I mean by talking. They knowyou are a wonderfully wise woman ; that you havemore in you than half of your sex put togetherthey admit all this — they are prepared, likegood and faithful lieges, to do whatever youbid them, and ask no questions ; but still theydon't exactly see how marrying Sybil's lover toher rival can benefit either her or you. Perhapsyou will deign to give them some explanation."Explanation ! ha — dost thou chaffer withthem thus? I know thee, sirrah. Thou art notone of us. Thou art not gipsy born. I havemarked thee. A marriage, saidst thou ? ThouROOKWOOD. 73shalt have another marriage of my making, besidesthis, to talk of. Thou hast trifled with theaffections of one of the daughters of my peoplewith Handassah. The wench must havebeen a weak fool indeed to credit the professionsof such a one as thou art, better men haveineffectually besought her — howbeit, as she wishesit, she shall wed thee."Wish it. Madam, she does not wish it. Iam perfectly persuaded that you could not doHandassah greater displeasure than to marry herto me."Handassah heard it all, and longed to throwherself at Barbara's feet, and acknowledge thejustice of her sentence ; but that was impossible ;and the faithful handmaiden could only heave adeep sigh, and bewail her lover's inconstancy.And thou denies all intimacy with her ?"All intimacy of the sort you allude to,Madam, certainly."Handassah heaved a deeper sigh. It reachedthe ears of Barbara.'Tis false," returned the Gipsy Queen.VOL. III. E74 ROOKWOOD."Handassah hath avowed her love, and her fearsof thee, to Sybil — beseeching my interference inher behalf. Is it not so, Sybil? Said shenot this to thee ?"Her silence contradicts it. There must besome mistake. Were Handassah here, shewould readily refute the charge. Sybil musthave misunderstood her. She tacitly acknowledgesher error. It is astonishing what illconsequences arise from misapprehensions of thissort. My attentions were of the most triflingkind ; such as a man of gallantry must pay toevery pretty girl. I may have said more thanI meant-:-who can always command his speech ?'"*^ c« jijot thou, I am sure," returned Barbara ;thou shalt wed her, or I will have theescourged through the camp, till not an ounceof flesh shall hang upon thy bones. Speak,Sybil — Handassah's fate rests with thee""Madam, I assure you she cannot speak —you only embarrass her ; — Handassah wouldonly be committed by any indiscretion on herpart — and Sybil be betrayed into difficulties."ROOKWOOD. 75Jerry threw as much meaning as he daredinto his speech, in hopes that Handassah wouldtake the hint. The situation of both partieswas, it must be owned, sufficiently embarrassing :Jerry, however, conducted himself throughoutwith very considerable nonchalance.This is strange," muttered Barbara. " Whatcan Sybil's silence mean ? Retire, sirrah, I willconsult with her."Whatever she may say, Madam," replied theunblushing Juniper, " she will sooner be able toconvict me of designs against herself than ^"Peace ! Come hither, Sybil ?"Faint, my charmer," cried Jerry, turningtowards her ; " faint, or we are dished entirely."Perfidious wretch," replied Handassah ; " Iwill scratch your eyes out, you vile monster, onthe first seasonable opportunity."Faint in the meantime, or alas up withSybil," returned Jerry, with delectable coolness.Handassah accordingly uttered one of thosehysterical screams which many of her sex haveready for occasions like the present, and fallingROOKWOOD.into Jerry's arms, buried her face in his bosom,contriving, at the same time, to give him a verysevere pinch, which the delinquent endured ^viththe resignation of a martyr.Poor thing, she struggles shockingly'' criedJerry, with admirably-affected alarm ; " it mustbe a fit — how excessively unlucky""'' Unlucky indeed'' exclaimed Barbara; " thegirl's weakness will destroy my fairest plans.Call Handassah to her assistance."Had I not better bear her into the open airshe will never recover here, I am persuaded''Do so. Thy life be answerable for thycharge. Stay — bear her at once to the vaultedchapel. Let Handassah go with thee."She shall go with me, depend upon it,"answered Jerry, bearing her off in triumph,somewhat allayed by the scene which he anticipatedin private.To return to Miss Mowbray. — In a stateof mind bordering upon distraction, Eleanorrushed to her mother, and, flinging her armswildly round her neck, besought her to protectaooKwooD. ,Tryher. Mrs. Mowbray was deeply touched byher daughter's distress. What mother couldbe otherwise? she was alarmed at her franticmanner, at the words she uttered, and which,though incoherent, were not to be mistaken.She folded Eleanor to her bosom, and sought,by every means in her power, to restore herto calmness. Eleanor became calm; but herterrors returned as she looked around.Mother, dear mothers** said she, at length,I have been a timid creature ever ; but I havehitherto been spared the consciousness ofmy own weakness. With j^ou near me, Ihave never, as yet, known what it has been to beafraid ; but now I fear even you will lack thepower to aid me. What will your single armavail against yon fearful band, were you toraise it in my defence ? They will murder me,mother, in your presence."Who do you fear, my child ?"I know not whom, and scarcely what, I haveto dread'' said Eleanor. " All seem to desert meeven my reason."78 ROOKWOOD.Mrs. Mowbray gazed anxiously upon thealtered countenance of her daughter, but a few-momentsrelieved her from much of her uneasiness.The expression of pain gradually subsided,and the look of vacuity was succeeded by one offrenzied excitement. A film had, for an instantor two, dimmed her eyes — they now gleamedwith unnatural lustre. She smiled — the smilewas singular ; it was not the playful, pleasurablelighting up of the face that it used to be;but it was a smile, and the mother's heart wassatisfied.Mrs. Mowbray knew not to what circumstanceshe could attribute this wondrous change. Shelooked at the Priest standing beside them — shewas equally surprised ; but he was more apt indivining the probable cause of the suddenalteration in Eleanor's manner.What if she have swallowed a love powder ?"said he, approaching Mrs. Mowbray, and speakingin a whisper. " I have heard of such abominablemixtures; indeed, the holy St. Jeromehimself relates an instance of similar sorcery, inROOKWOOD.his life of Hilarious ; and these people are saidto compound them."It may be so," replied Mrs. Mowbray in thesame tone. " I think that that peculiar softnessin the eye is more than natural*"I will at least hazard an experiment, toattest the truth or fallacy of my suppositionsreturned the Father. " I have heard that thosewho have drank of these philters conceive asudden and irresistible passion for him theygaze upon while under the influence of thepotion. I will direct her attention to theyouth. See'st thou thy destined bridegroomyonder?" continued he, addressing Eleanor.She followed with her eyes in the directionwhich Father Ambrose pointed. She beheldLuke. We know not how to describe thesensations which now possessed her. Shethought not of Ranulph ; or if she did, it waswith vague indifference. Wrapped in a kind ofmental trance, she yielded to the pleasurable impulse,which directed her unsettled fanciestowards Luke. For some moments she did not80 . IIOOKWOOD.take her eyes from him. The Priest and ]airs.Mowbray watched her in silence.Nothing passed between the party till Lukejoined them. Eleanor continued gazing at him, andthe seeming tenderness of her glance emboldenedLuke to advance towards her. The soft firethat dwelt in those orbs was, however, cold asthat which sparkles on the wing of the lucia.Luke approached her ; he took her hand — shewithdrew it not. He kissed it — still she withdrewit not — but gazed at him with gentlyglimmering eyes.My daughter is your's. Sir Luke Rook-wood,"exclaimed Mrs. Mowbray.What says the maid herself .?" asked Luke.Eleanor answered not. Her eyes were stillfixed on him.She Tvdll not refuse me her hand'' said Luke.Ha ! it is not Eanulph's hand ! "" screamedEleanor, recoiling from his touch.Ranulph's ?'' echoed Luke, gloomily.You are aware of her attachment to yourbrother ?" said Mrs. Mowbray.ROOKWOOD. 81I am — time may conquer it. You give herto me, iVIadam ?"I do."Enough' returned Luke, again taking Eleanor'shand. This time the victim resisted not.Benedicite," exclaimed the holy hypocrite.To the subterranean shrine'' cried Barbara ;and she gave the preconceived signal to theband.There !" cried Luke, " why should it nottake place here ? these walls are hallowed."Within that chapel lived and died a saint,"said Barbara, " there shall it be."It must not — it shall not take place there,"said the Priest.What ! — Do you refuse, Richard Checkley ?""said Barbara, with a ghastly smile. " Dare yourefuse m^ ? — I say it shall take place there, orwheresoever else I please."You give strange license to your tongue—"Wilt thou obey me ?"Nay, let her have her way," whisperedPeter. " I have prepared them."e582 ROOKWOOD.Are you ready?" asked Barbara. The Priestbowed reluctant assent.The signal was repeated by the gipsycrew. Elevating a lighted torch over hishead, the Knight of Malta drew Excaliburfrom its scabbard, and prepared to lead theway to the subterranean chapel. We mayhere casually note, that the crew had beenby no means uninterested or silent spectators ofpassing events; but had, on the contrary, indulgedthemselves in a variety of conjectures asto their probable issue.Make way there — make way, palls, for thebride and bridegroom'' cried the Knight ofMalta.The train began to move. Eleanor leanedupon the arm of her mother. Beside them stalkedBarbara, with an aspect of triumph. Luke followedwith the Priest. One by one the assemblagehad quitted the apartment.The Sexton alone lingered. " The momentis at hand'' said he, musingly, " when all shallbe consummated."HOOKWOOD. 83A few steps brought him into the court. Thecrowd was there still. A moment's delay hadtaken place. The Knight of Malta then enteredthe mouth of the vault. He held his torch so asto reveal a broken flight of steps, conducting,it would seem, to regions of perpetual night.So thought Eleanor, as she shudderingly gazedinto the abyss. She hesitated — she trembledshe refused ; but her mother's entreaties, andBarbara's threatening looks, induced, in the end,reluctant compliance. At length the place wasempty. Peter was about to follow, when the soundof horses' hoofs broke upon his ear. He tarriedfor an instant, and the mounted figure of theHighwayman burst within the limits of the court.Ha, ha ! old earthworm," cried Dick,my Nestor of the churchyard, alone ! wherethe devil are all the folks gone ? Where's SirLuke, and his new-found cousin, eh ?''Peter hastily explained.A wedding under ground ? famous ! thething of all others I should like to see. I'llhang Bess to this ivy tod, and grub my waywith you thither, old mole."84 ROOK WOOD.You must stay here, and keep guard,"returned Peter.Stay here ! May I be hanged if I do, whensuch fun is going on."Hanged, in all probability, you will be,"returned Peter ; " but I should not, were I you,desire to anticipate my destiny. Stay here youmust, and will, that's peremptory. You will bethegainer by it. Sir Luke will reward younobly — I will answer for him. You can servehim most effectually. Ranulph Rosewood andMajor Mowbray are expected here."The devil they are; but how, or why "I have not time to explain. In case of asurprise, discharge a pistol — they must notenter the vault. Have you a whistle ? for youmust play a double part, and we may need yourassistance below."Sir Luke may command me — here's a pipeas shrill as the devil's own cat-call."If it will summon you to our assistancebelow, 'tis all I need. May we rely on you ?"lely on me ? When did Dick Turpindesert his friends ? Any where on this side theROOKWOOD. 85Styx the sound of that whistle will reach me.Ill ride about the court, and stand sentry."Enough," cried the Sexton, as he divedunder ground.Take care of your shins," shouted Dick.That's a cursed ugly turn, but he's used tothe dark. A surprise, eh ! Ill just give alook to my snappers — flints all safe. Now I'mready for them, come when they like." And,having made the circuit of the place after themanner of the amphi theatrical Ducrow, hehalted near the mouth of the subterraneanchapel, to be within hearing of Peter's whistle,and throwing his right leg lazily over his saddle,proceeded coolly to light a short pipe (theluxury of the cigar being then unknown),humming the while snatches of a ballad, thetheme of which was his own exploits.As 1 was riding o'er Hounslow Moor,I saw a lawyer trot on before ;So I rode up and asked if he was not afraidTo meet Dick Turpin, that mischievous blade.To meet Dick Turpin, that mischievous blade.86 ROOKWOOD.Thus, between long-drawn whiffs did he chauntslapped in the smoker's dreamy elysium, withshort pipe ruminant' — his solitary song; andthough apparently lost in forgetfulness, andlistening to his own melody, he remained withone ear thrown back like that of the hare,on the alert for every sound. It was thispower of abstraction which gave to our Highwaymanthat philosophic character which wehave heretofore remarked, as distinguishing himbeyond his fellow herd. When meditating hisgreatest exploits he appeared the most indifferentwhen surrounded by danger he seemed themost insensible; yet it was not so. He was never,as he himself expressed it, " caught napping."He was ever ready to start to arms, yet lolledupon the cannon's breech. Whatever his existencemight be, he made the most of it : He understoodthe savoir vivre to perfection. Beholdhim now ! How negligently his hat is set on oneside of his head — yon Bond-street lounger couldnot have more of the look fatuity — yet Turpin,take our words for it, was neither Si fat nor aLockwood. 87Bond-street lounger. His eyes are half closed ;but a quick glance beams beneath the eyelids.His leg, equipped in that peculiarly-fashionedboot, which, in his day, obtained for it the nameof the " Turpin top," and which was quite therage amongst the sporting characters of theperiod, is thrown indolently and caressinglyover the neck of his favourite mare ; yet aninstant will bring his foot to the stirrup —he looks the picture of repose. Reader, are youdisposed to capture a Highwayman? Now isyour moment — his eyes absolutely close — henods — I feel assured he is asleep — approach himsoftly — there, now rush upon him — you havereceived a cursed kick from that black mare,and a voice thunders in your ear,"Dick Turpin never Sleeps!"Never ! for at this moment he resumes his song —Says I, " All my money I've managed to popWhere no man will find it, beneath my boot-top."Says the lawyer, " Dick Turpin my cash ne'er will find,For its sewed in the folds of my coat-cape behind ;So I care not for Turpin, that mischievous blade."88 ROOKWOOD.Another whiff of the short pipe :I rode till I came to the powder mill,Where the smell of my pops made him soon stand still.My mare wants anew saddle-cloth," said I —Permit me the cape of your coat to try,For I am Dick Turpin, that mischievous blade."And thus, for the present, we leave him. Orare Dick Turpin !Music sellers are respectfully informed that the copyrightof this song is the entire property of that spirited publisher,Mr. Catch, of Monmouth-court, Seven Dials.CHAPTER X.Fascinate agni speranza voi chi' estate.Dante.CypRiAN DE MuLVERTOXj fifth Poor of themonastery of St. Francis, a prelate of singularsanctity, being afflicted, in his latter days, witha despondency so deep that neither penance norfasting could remove it, vowed never again tobehold, with earthly eyes, the blessed lightof heaven, nor to dwell longer with his fellowmen; but relinquishing his spiritual dignity,the world forgetting, by the world forgot"' toimmure himself, while living, within the tomb.He kept his vow. Out of the living rockthat sustained the saintly structure, beneath thechapel of the monastery, was another chapelwrought, and thither, after bidding a solemnfarewell to the world, and bestowing his benedictionupon his flock, whom he committed toLockwood.the care of his successor, did the holy manretire.Never, save at midnight, and then only duringthe performance of masses for his soul's repose,did he ascend from his cell ; and as the solelight allowed within the dismal dungeon of hischoice was that of a dim sepulchral lamp, asnone spake with him when in his silent retreat,save in muttered syllables, what effect must theflash of lustre emanating from a thousand tapers,the warm and pungent odours of the incense-breathingshrine, contrasted with the chillyvapours of his prison-house, and the solemnswell of the sanctus, have had upon his excitedsenses? Surely they must have seemed like aforetaste of the heaven he sought to gain !Ascetic to the severest point to which Nature'sendurance could be stretched, he even deniedhimself repose. He sought not sleep, and knewit only when it stole on him unawares. Hiscouch was the flinty rock ; and long afterwards,when the zealous resorted to the sainted prior'scell, and were shown those sharp and jaggedROOKWOOD. 91Stones, they marvelled how one like unto themselves,could rest or even recline upon theirpoints without anguish, until it was explained tothem that, doubtless, he who temperate the windto the shorn lamb had made that flinty couchsoft to the holy sufferer as a bed of down. Hislimbs were clothed in a garb of horse-hair of thecoarsest fabric ; his drink, the dank drops thatoozed from the porous walls of his cell; and hissustenance, such morsels as were bestowed uponhim by the poor — the only strangers suffered toapproach him. No fire was suffered, where perpetualwinter reigned. None were admitted tohis nightly vigils — none witnessed any act ofpenance — nor were any groans heard to issuefrom that dreary cave ; but the knotted, bloodstainedthong, discovered near his couch, tooplainly betrayed in what manner those long, lonenights were spent. Thus did a year roll on.Traces of his sufferings were visible in hisfailing strength. He could scarcely crawl ; buthe meekly declined assistance. He appearednot, as had been his wont, at the midnight92 ROOK WOOD.mass ; but the door of his cell was thrown openat that hour ; the light streamed down like aglory upon his reverend head ; he heard thedistant reverberations of the deep miserere ;and breathed odours as if wafted from Paradise.One morn it chanced that they who soughthis cell found him with his head upon hisbosom kneeling before the benign image of thevirgin patroness of his shrine. Fearing to disturbhis devotions, they stood reverently lookingon, and thus silently did they tarry for an hour ;but, as in that space he had shown no signs ofmotion, fearing the worst, they ventured to approachhim. He was cold as the marble beforewhich he knelt. In the act of humblest intercession— it may be in the hope of grace, had hisspirit fled.Blessed are they who die in the Lord'' exclaimedhis brethren, regarding his remains withdeepest awe. On being touched, the body fellto the ground. It was little more than askeleton.Under the cloisters of the holy pile were hisROOKWOOD . 9Sbones interred with a degree of pomp and ostentationwhich but little accorded with the lowlinessand self-abasement of this man of many sorrows.This chapel, at the time of which we treat,was pretty much in the same condition as itexisted in the days of its holy inmate. Hewnout of the entrails of the rock — the roof, thevaults, the floor, were of solid granite. Threehuge cylindrical pillars, carved out of the nativerock, rough as the stems of gnarled oak-trees,lent support to the ceiling. Support, however,was unneeded — an earthquake would scarcehave shaken down those solid rafters. Onlyin one corner, where the water welled througha crevice of the rock, in drops that fell liketears, was decay manifest. Here the stone,worn by the constant dripping, had, in someplaces, given way. In shape, the vault was circular.The interval between each massive pillarformed a pointed arch. Again, from each pillarsprang other arches, which, crossed by diagonal,give branches, weaving one into the other, andradiating from the centre, formed those beautiesROOKWOOD.fully intricate combinations upon which the eyeof the enthusiast loves to linger. Within thering formed by these triple columns, in which,again, the pillars had their own web of arches,was placed an altar of stone, and beside it agreat crucifix of the same rude material. Herealso stood the sainted image of her who had filledthe Prior with holy aspirations ; now, a shapelessstone. The dim lamp, that, like a starstruggling with the thick gloom of the wintrycell, had shed its slender radiance over the browof the Virgin Thecla, was gone. But aroundthe key stone of the central arches whence achain had once depended might be traced inancient characters, half effaced by time§ta. CPjiSarita ©Ka PK© N©BH$.One outlet only was there from the chapel —that which led by winding steps to the monastery,— one only recess — the Prior's cell. Theformer faced the altar — the latter yawned likethe mouth of a tomb at its back. Altogether itwas a dreary place. Dumb were its walls asLockwood. 95when they refused to return murmured orisonsof the anchorite. One uniform sad colouringprevailed throughout. The grey granite wasgrown hoar with age, and had a ghostlylook; but the columns were ponderous,and projected heavy shadows. Sorrow andsuperstition had their tale, and a moralgloom deepened the darkness of the spot.Despair, which had inspired its construction,seemed to brood therein. Hope shunned itsinexorable recesses.Alone, within the dismal sanctuary, with handsoutstretched towards the desecrated image of itstutelar saint, knelt Sybil. All was darkness.Neither the heavy vapours that surrounded her,nor the shrine before which she bent, werevisible; but, familiar with the dreary spot,she knew that she had placed herself aright.Her touch had satisfied her that she bowedbefore the altar of stone — that her benightedvision was turned towards the broken image ofthe saint, though now involved in gloom themost profound.ROOKWOOD.Gipsy as she was, infidel as she might besupposed, Sybil possessed, notwithstanding, azeal and fervour in her faith that might havefound favour in the eyes of the most orthodoxprofessor of Catholicism ; and if her fierySpanish blood, flowing too swiftly in her veins,sometimes impelled her to actions, inconsistentit might be with the principles of that faith,the blame of them rested not so much with herwant of proper religious bias, as with her sanguineand uncontrollable temperament. Anyaberrations of this sort were succeeded by fitsof severe repentance ; and upon those occasionswould she resort alone to St. Cyprian's cell,pouring forth at its altar her penitential prayers.Her sins indeed were light and venial ; and shespeedily left the shrine with a heart lightenedof its load. The most grievous offence shehad committed was her betrothment to Luke.Offence we say, because her mother, with herdying lips, had interdicted it. And yet shehad dared to act in opposition to the last injunctionsof her parent. At this very altar wasROOK WOOD. 97she plighted to him. Much as she loved him, sheshuddered as her hand was clasped in his — shefaltered as she pronounced the binding oath —an ill-omen she deemed it then, that she thoughtof her dying mother, whose figure seemed to arisebetween her and her lover. But those thoughtswere speedily banished. Often, afterwards, atthat altar, had she implored her mother's forgiveness,and she trusted that she had obtainedit. Now she saw the vanity of that hope — therealization of that dark foreboding. As sheknelt before the altar, the voice of prayer wasstifled.In her agony she cried out, and the sullenwalls returned her wail with a response hollowas the mockery of a fiend. Sorrow for uncommittedsin availed nothing. With conceptionshideous as those which pressed upon her soul —with premeditated guilt clogging her heart, andchoking her utterance, she could not pray, andshe resigned herself, conscience-stricken and self-abased.Remorse shrieked in her ears, "away''^-despair, with scorpion lash, impelled heronwards — she could neither advance nor retreat.VOL. III. F98 ROOKWOOD.Then in that dark hour did a phantasm,such as is said to haunt the couches of thedying, and to predict immediate dissolution,appear before her. And who shall say in whatenchanting colours the retrospect may not thenarray itself, contrasted, as it must be, with thenear approach of death, and the utter darknessin which he cometh enveloped ? Clear and distinctas the reality, did the events of her pastexistence retrace themselves before Sybil's mentalvision; and, without losing the sense of herpresent misery, she endured the agonizingconsciousness of past happiness fled for ever.Her eyes filled with tears, she could see nolonger — her very brain was blinded. Nomore visions of past blissfulness, turning herpresent woe to more intense wretchedness, distractedher — all was blank despair; but evendespair has its limits, and beyond them yawnedthe wide gulph of madness. Sybil's senses reeledshe laughed in her agony — she tottered towardsthe brink of this terrible precipice — she wasupon the very verge of actual insanity, when, byalmost super-human effort, she saved herself.ROOKWOOD. 99^' Mother of mercy," cried she, " whither wasI going ? What crouching fiend was that aboutto seize me ? AVhat pit was that which openedbeneath me, to engulph me in its depth forever? But I am rescued. A saving arm hathbeen stretched out towards me — a ray of comfortshines out from above — I can pray now — myhardness of heart hath passed away — I can weepas heretofore, and my heart will feel refreshed."And with clasped hands, and streaming eyes,in low and mournful tones, she addressed herselfin the following hymn to the tutelar saintof the spot : —HYMN TO ST. THECLA.In my trouble, in my anguish,In the depths of my despair,As in grief and pain I languish.Unto thee I raise my prayer.Sainted Virgin ! martyr' d maiden!Let thy countenance inclineUpon one with woes o'erladen.Kneeling lowly at thy shrine ;That in agony, in terror.In her blind perplexity,Wandering weak in doubt and error,Calleth feebly upon thee.100 Lockwood.Sinful thoughts, sweet Saint, oppress me,Thoughts that will not be dismissed ;Temptations dark possess me,Which my strength may not resistI am full of pain, and wearyOf my life, I fain would die ;Unto me the world is dreary ;To the grave for rest I fly.For rest ! oh, could I borrowThy bright wings, celestial Dove!They should waft me from my sorrow,Where peace dwells in bowers above.Upon one with woes o'erladen,Kneeling lowly at thy shrine ;Sainted Virgin ! martyr'd maiden !Let thy countenance incline.Mei miserere, Virgo,Requiem eternal dona !By thy loveliness — thy purity,Unpolluted — undefiled.That in serene security.Upon earth's temptations smiled ; —By the fetters that constrained thee,By thy flame-attested faith ;By the fervour that sustained thee.By thine angel-ushered death ; —By thy soul's divine elation,'Mid thine agonies assuringOf thy sanctified translation,To beatitude enduring ; —By the mystic interfusionOf thy spirit with the raysThat in ever-bright profusionRound the throne eternal blaze ; —aooKwooi). 101By thy portion now partaken,With the pain-perfected Just ;Look on one of hope forsaken,From the gates of mercy thrust ;Upon one with woes o'erladen,Kneeling lowly at thy shrine,Sainted Virgin ! martyr' d maiden,Let thy countenance incline.Or a pro me mortis hardSancta Virgo oro te !Kyrie Ellison !The sweet, sad voice of the singer died faintlyaway. The sharpness of her sorrow was assuaged.Seldom, indeed, is it that ferventsupplication fails to call down solace to theafflicted. Sybil became more composed. Shestill, however, trembled at the thoughts of whatremained for her to do.They will be here ere my prayer befinished'' murmured she; " ere the end be accomplishedfor which I came hither alone. Letme, oh let me make my peace with my Creator,ere I surrender my being to his hands, and thenlet them deal with me as they will"' And shebowed her head in lowly prayer.Again raising her hands, and casting her eyes102 ROOKWOOD.upwards towards the black ceiling, she implored,in song, the intercession of the saintly man, whohad bequeathed his name to the cell.HYMN TO ST. CYPRIAN.Hear, oh hear me, sufferer holy,Who didst make thine habitation'Mid these rocks, devoting whollyLife to one long expiationOf thy guiltiness, and solelyBy severe mortificationDidst deliver thee. Oh, hear me.In my dying moments cheer me.By thy penance — self-denial —Aid me in the hour of trial.May, through thee, my prayers prevailingOn the majesty of heaven,O'er the hosts of hell assailingMy soul, in this dark hour be driven ;So my spirit, when exhaling.May of sinfulness be shriven ;And his gift unto the giver,May be rendered pure as ever.By thy own dark — dread possession,Aid me with thine intercession.Scarcely had she concluded this hymn, whenwhispered accents and stealthy footsteps caughther ear. She arose at once, challenging theintruders in a firm tone.ROOKWOOD. 103'' Who approaches ?" asked she.A friend," replied the voice of Handassah.You are not alone," returned Sybil.'Tis I," replied the peculiarly-conceitedtones of Jerry Juniper ; " your friend, madam,if you will allow me to call myself such.I have ventured into this dungeon-looking placeat Handassah^s special request; and now I amhere, I beg to say that, if I can be of theslightest use, you have only to command me.Infernally dark, to be sure. What the devil ?"added he, stumbling forwards, " a stone pillar,eh ? s'death, IVe nearly cracked my head againstit. Give me your hand, Handassah, you knowthe way about this cursed place." And Jerrygroaned dismally from the effects of the concussion."It serves you right," said the relentlessHandassah; " I hope it will do you good."Jerry answered not; but would, in all probability,had the darkness permitted, have givenher a look such as Byron says he bestowedwhen a similar benison was passed upon his104 ROOK WOOD.broken tooth, " Do me good ! " Jerry mentallye j aculatecl ; " may the devil fly away with you,if that's all the sympathy my broken pate islikely to meet with. My own opinion is, thatthe sex was only created to be a perpetualplague to the better species. The sooner Iclear myself of my present incumbrance thebetter''Follow me"" said Handassah.Whither ?demanded Jerry, sulkily; "Ican't possibly tell where to follow, unless youlead the way."I am just before you," returned she ; " stepon boldly."Jerry obeyed. He marched angrily forwards ;but while essaying to grasp the hand of hismistress, which he fondly imagined was stretchedout, to guide him upon his way, his shins encounteredthe sharp edges of what appeared tobe a huge box, laid upon the floor, and, hisequilibrium being thus destroyed, he was pitchedforward, his head coming once more into contactwith a hard stone pillar.ROOKWOOD. 105Smothered laughter from Handassah explainedto Jerry, if he wanted explanation, the trickwhich his treacherous mistress had played him.How troublesome," cried she, in a tone ofmock commiseration, " in people to leave theirlumber here ! I'm afraid your shins musthave suffered severely, Jerry. Your head,too, I fear, has not altogether escaped ; luckily,it's none of the softest. But I'm sincerely sorry,I assure you, for your accident ; besides, a blowon the shins is so painful."Accident!" echoed Jerry, springing to hisfeet, " do you call that an accident ? Vm lamed,I fear, for life, and that's the greatest misfortunethat could happen to a man of my figure anddexterity. Accident ! To the devil with you,whimpering hussy ; it's an accident, with aspice of design in it ; it's odds, but I'll be evenwith you before long. For my own part,I can't tell what this big lumbering chest isdoing here at all, except it be to occasionaccidents. Let me feel whether it's open — here—take care of your own shins, my darling."f5106 ROOKWOOD.Saying which, he pushed the chest, angrily,in the direction where he thought Handassahstood. Jerry missed his mark; but the boxbeing struck forcibly against the stone altar,upset its contents upon the floor.What have you done'' asked Handassah,in alarm. " What does that box contain ?"How the devil should I know ! " repliedJerry ; " you, who placed it there, ought tobe acquainted with its contents."/ placed it there !" retorted Handassah, " Inever saw it in the course of my life ; andwhat can you be thinking about, to suppose Icould carry such a box as that — but do feelwhat it contains. I'm sure I heard a groan."Not I," returned Juniper; " no moretricks upon travellers, if you please — Hark ! Ihear their voices in the court — they come."They come !" echoed Sybil, aroused fromher abstraction. " Is the hour then arrived ?"See, the torchlight gleams down the staircase,"cried Handassah ; " they are here."** Not a moment is to be lost," exclaimed Sybil,ROOKWOOD. 107addressing Juniper. " Here is a jewel; be itthy portion ^vith Handassah. Wed her, andoh ! be happy''Jerry hemmed slightly, but he took thejewel.You hear the conditions P'^ said Handassah.I do," replied he.What am I to do for you asked he, ofSybil. " Command me as you think proper.My life is at your disposal."Sybil whispered in his ear.It shall be done," replied he ; "I will notfail you."Remain within yon cell until the appointedmoment," said Sybil ; " give me your hand — Iwill guide you thither."Jerry extended his hand.Scarcely was he concealed, when the torch ofthe Knight of Malta in part dissipated thegloom that hung around the chapel.CHAPTER XI.Cari — I will not die, I must not— I am contractedTo a young gentleman.Executioner. — 'Here's your wedding ring.Duchess of Malay.Slowly did the train descend ; solemnly andin silence, as if the rites at which they wereabout to assist had been those of funereal,and not of nuptial, solemnization. Indeed, tolook upon those wild and fierce faces, by theruddily-flashing torchlight, which lent to eacha stern and savage expression — to look atthose scowling visages, surrounding a bride,from whose pallid cheeks every vestige ofcolour, and almost of animation, had fled ;and a bridegroom, with countenance yetmore haggard, and demeanour yet moredistracted, the beholder must have imaginedthat the spectacle was some horrible cere-rosewood.109menial, practised by daemons rather tianhuman beings. The arched vault, the pillars,the torchlight, and the wild figures, formed apicture worthy of Callot, or Salvator.Is Sybil within the chapel ?'' asked Barbara.I am here," returned a deep voice from thealtar. It was so uttered, that Barbara scarcelyrecognized in its tones those of her grandchild.Why do we tarry ?'' said the Gipsy Queen,we are all assembled. To the altar."To the altar ?" shrieked Eleanor. " Oh !no — no-remembermy threat, and obey," mutteredBarbara ; " thou art in my power now."A convulsive sob was all the answer Eleanorcould make.Our number is not complete," said thePriest, who had looked in vain for the Sexton ;Peter Bradley is not with us."Ha !" exclaimed Barbara. " Let him besoughtfor instantly."Their search need not extend beyond thisspot," said Peter, stepping forward.110 ROOK WOOD.The Knight of Malta advanced towards thealtar. The torchlight reddened upon the hugestone pillars. It fell upon the shrine, and uponthe ghastly countenance of Sybil, who stoodbeside. Suddenly, as the light approached her,an object hitherto hidden from view was revealed.Sybil uttered a prolonged and fearful shriek ; theKnight recoiled likewise in horror ; and a simultaneouscry of astonishment burst from the lipsof the foremost of the group. All crowdedforwards, and universal consternation prevailedamongst the assemblage. Each one gazed at hisneighbour, anxious to learn the occasion of thistumult, and vague fears were communicated tothose behind, from the terrified glances, whichwere the only answers returned by their comradesin front.Who has dared to bring that body here's"*demanded Barbara, in a tone in which angerstruggled with apprehension, pointing at thesame time to the ghastly corse of a female,with streaming hair, at the altar's feet. " Whohas dared to do this, I say ? My curse light onLockwood. Illhim, whosoever he be. Quick ! remove it, I say.What do you stare at ? Craven ! is this thefirst time you have looked upon a corse — thatyou shrink aghast — that you tremble before it ?It is a clod — ay, less than a clod. Away withit — away, I say "Touch it not," cried Luke, lifting a cloudof black hair from off the features; — " It is mymother."My daughter!" exclaimed the Sexton.What ! " vociferated Barbara — " Is that thydaughter — is that Lady Rosewood ? — Are thedead arisen to do honour to these nuptials?Speak; thou canst perchance explain how shecame hither."I know not," returned Peter, glancingfiercely at Barbara : " I may, anon, demandthat question of thee. How came this bodyhere?"Ask of Richard Checkley," said Barbara,turning to the Priest. " He can perchanceinform thee. Priest," added she, in a low voice,this is thy handiwork."112 ROOKWOOD.Checkley replied not."Will none remove the body?" ejaculatedBarbara. " Once more I ask you, do you fearthe dead?"A murmur arose. Balthazar alone venturedto approach the corse.Luke started to his feet as he advanced, hiseyes glaring with tiger fury.Back, old man," cried he, " and dare not,any of you, lay a sacrilegious finger on her corse,or I will stretch him that advanced, as lowlyas lies my mother's head. When, or how, itcame hither, matters not. Here, at the altar,hath it been placed, and none shall move ithence. The dead shall witness my nuptials.Fate hath ordained it — my fate — o'er which thedead preside! Her ring shall link me to mybride. I knew not, when I snatched it fromher death-cold finger, to what end I preservedit. I learn it now. It is here ; and he heldforth a ring.'Tis a fatal boon, that twice-used ring,"cried Sybil ; " such a ring my mother, on herROOKWOOD. 113death-bed, said should be mine own — such aring she said should wed me "Unto whom ?'^ fiercely demanded Luke.*' Unto Death," she solemnly rejoined.Luke's countenance fell. He turned aside,deeply abashed, unable further to brook her gaze ;while in accents of such wildly touching pathosas sank into the hearts of each who heard her —hearts, few of them framed of lightly penetrablestuff — the despairing maiden burst into thefollowing strain : —THE TWICE-USED RING.Beware thy bridal day'On her death-bed, sighed my mother;Beware — beware, I say.Death shall wed thee, and no other.Cold the hand shall grasp thee,Cold the arms shall clasp thee,Colder lips thy kiss shall smother —Beware thy bridal kiss.Thy wedding ring shall beFrom a clay-cold finger taken ;From one that, like to thee,Was by her love forsaken.114 Lockwood.For a twice-used ringIs a fatal thing ;Her griefs who wore it are partaken—Beware that fatal ring.The altar and the grave,Many steps are not asunder;Bright banners o'er thee wave,Shrouded horror lieth under.Blithe may sound the bell,Vet 'twill toll thy knell ;Scathed thy chaplet by the thunder —Beware that blighted wreath."Beware my bridal day !Dying lips my doom have spoken ;Deep tones call me away ;From the grave is sent a token.Cold — cold fingers bringThat ill omen' d ring,Soon will a second heart be broken ;This is my bridal day.There was a deep, profound silence, as thelast melancholy cadence of the song died away,and many a rugged heart was melted, even totears. What a vacancy is left in the bosom,when sweet sounds, which have held it intheir thrall, fade, and are heard no more !For a moment all was hushed — all eyes weredirected towards Sybil. During her song thereLockwood. 115had been something in her rapt looks whichcommunicated to them that pathetic and sublimeexpression, often conferred by the painter uponthe features of the Sainted Cecilia. More ofpain perhaps might dwell in the countenance ofSybil than would be proper to the lineaments ofthe divine lyrist ; but there was, combined evenwith the anguish, an ecstatic elevation of soul,which lent to her dark dilated eyes, turnedheavenwards, and fraught with unutterablepassion, no inapt resemblance of the VirginMartyr, about to immolate herself at the shrineof pure and holy affection. Eleanor remainedin a state of passive stupefaction, vacantlygazing at Sybil, upon whom alone her eyeswere fixed, and appearing but indistinctly toapprehend the meaning of her song.This is my bridal days"* murmured she, in alow tone, when Sybil had finished. " Said notthat sweet voice so ? I know 'tis my bridal day.I am to wed him. Yet he was buried yesternight.I know it, I saw him in his coffin, cold and dead.My love — my Ranulph — and would you wed me116 ROOKwooir.to him there — well, as you like — better a deadbridegroom than none at all — better, ah ! betterthan wed me to another — what a chapel youhave chosen, mother ! A tomb — a sepulchre —but 'tis meet for such nuptials as mine — andwhat wedding guests ! — Was that pale woman,in her shroud-like dress, invited here by you ?Tell me that, mother'My God, her senses are gone !" criedMrs. Mowbray. " Why did I venture intothis horrible place ?"Ask not why, now. Madam'' rejoined thePriest. " The hour for consideration is past —we must act. Let the marriage proceed, atall hazards ; we will then take means to extricateourselves from this accursed place."Spoken aright, father," said the Sexton, whowas near them ; " the time for action is arrived.Proceed with the marriage. You shall departin safety ; of that I pledge myself."Remove that horrible object," said Mrs.Mowbray, " it fascinates the vision of mychild."ROOKWOOD. 117*' Lend me thine hand, father'' said Peter,staring fixedly at the Priest.No, no"" replied the Priest, shuddering.I will not — cannot touch it — do thou aloneremove it""Peter approached Luke. The latter nowoffered no further opposition, and the body wastaken away. The eyes of Eleanor followed itinto the dark recesses of the vault ; and whenshe could no longer distinguish the white flutterof the sere-cloths, her labouring bosom seemedtorn asunder with the profound sigh that burstfrom it, and her head declined upon hershoulder.Give me to see that ring'' said the Priest,addressing Luke, who still held the weddingring between his fingers.I am not naturally superstitious," saidMrs. Mowbray ; " whether my mind be affectedwith the horrors of this place, I know not ;but I have dread of that ring. She shall notwear it."Where no other can be found," said the Priest,with a significant and peculiar look at sirs.118 Lockwood.Mowbray, " I see no reason why this should beobjected to. I should not have suspected you,Madam, of such weakness — but grant there wereevil spell, or charm, attached to it, which, trustme, there is not — as how should there be, to aharmless piece of gold? my benediction, andaspersion with holy lymph, hath sufficient powerto exorcise and expel it. To remove your fears,it shall be done at once."A cup containing water was brought him,together with a plate of salt, which condimentthe Devil is said to abhor, and which is held tobe a symbol of immortality and of eternity ; inthat, being itself incorruptible, it preserves allelse from corruption.* And with the customaryformula of prayer and exorcism, the Priest thricemingled the crystal particles with the purefluid ; after which, taking the ring in his hand,with much solemnity, he besprinkled it with afew drops of the water which he had blessed ;made the sign of the cross upon the goldencirclet ; uttered another and more potent exorcism,to eradicate and expel every device ofSatan, and delivered it back to Luke.ROOKWOOD. 119She may wear it now in safety," said theSexton with strong contempt. " Were the snakehimself coiled round that consecrated bauble,thy prayers would unclasp his lithest folds.But wherefore do we tarry now ? Naught liesbetween us and the altar — the path is clear.The bridegroom grows impatientlyAnd the bride ?"" asked Barbara.Is ready"" replied the Priest. " Madam,delay not longer. Daughter, your hand""Eleanor gave her hand. It was clammy andcold. Supported by her mother, she movedslowly towards the altar, which was but a fewsteps from where they stood. She offered noresistance, but did not raise her head. Lukewas by her side. Then for the first time did theenormity of the barbarous, dishonourable act hewas about to commit, strike him with its fullforce. He saw it in its darkest colours. It wasone of those terrible moments when the headlongwheel of passion stands suddenly still.There is yet time'' groaned he. " Oh letme not damn myself perpetually — let me saveher — save Sybil — save myself''120 ROOKWOOD.They were at the altar — that wild weddingtrain. High over head the torch was raised.The red light flashed on bridegroom and onbride, giving to the pale features of each analmost livid look — it fell upon the gauntaspect of the Sexton, and lit up the smile oftriumphant malice that played upon his face —it fell upon the fantastical habiliments ofBarbara, and upon the haughty but perturbedphysiognomy of Mrs. Mowbray — it fell uponthe salient points of the Gothic arches — uponone moulded pillar — upon the marble image ofthe Virgin Thecla — and on the scarcely lessmarble countenance of Sybil, who stood behindthe altar, silent, statue-like, immovable. Theeffect of light and shade on other parts ofthe scene, upon the wild drapery, and harshlineaments of many of the group, was alsoeminently striking.Just as the Priest was about to commence themarriage service, a yelling chorus, which thegipsies were accustomed to sing at the celebrationof the nuptials of one of their own tribe,§«-<rv-a«^ C-ru4^5Wv43^oROOKWOOD. 121burst forth. Nothing could be more horriblydiscordant than their song.WEDDING CHORUS OF GIPSIES.Scrape the cat-gut — pass the liquor,Let your quick feet move the quicker.Ta ra-la.Dance and sing in jolly chorus,Bride and bridegroom are before us,And the Patrico stands o'er us.Ta-ra-la.To unite their hands he's ready ;For a moment, palls, be steady ;Cease your quaffing,Dancing, laughing ;Leave off riot,And be quiet,While 'tis doing.'Tis begun!All is over !Two are one !The Patrico has link'd 'era.Daddy Hymen's torch has blinked 'em.Amen!Tort again.Now for quaffing.Now for laughing.Stocking throwing.Liquor flowing ;For our bridal are no bridles, and our altars never alterFrom the flaggon never flinch we, in the jig we never falter.VOL. III. G19,2 ROOKWOOD.No ! that's not our way, for tveAre staunch lads of Romany.For our wedding, hurrah !Hurrah ! Hurrah ! Hurrah !This uncouth chorus ended, the marriage proceeded.Sybil had disappeared. Had she fled ?No ! she was by the bride. Mechanically didEleanor take her place. A faint voice syllabledthe responses. You could scarce have seen herlips move ; but the answers were given, and thePriest was satisfied.He took the ring ; he sprinkled it once againwith the holy water, in the form of the cross.He pronounced the prayer. " Benedict, Domine,annum hunch quern nos in trio nommebenedictus, ut qucB eum gestaverit^fidelitatemterram suo sponsor tenens, in pace et voluntarytut permanent atque in mutud charitablesemper vivantHe was about to return the ring to Luke,when the torch, held by the Knight of Malta,was dashed to the ground by some unseen hand,and instantly extinguished. The wild pageantROOK WOOD. 123vanished, as suddenly as the figures disappearwhen the magic glass is removed. A wildhubbub succeeded. Hoarsely above all theclamour arose the voice of Barbara.To the door, quickly — to the door — let noone pass. We will find out the author of thismishap, anon. Away."She was obeyed. Several of the crew stationedthemselves at the door.Proceed now with the ceremony'' continuedBarbara. " By darkness or by light, the matchshall be completed ."*"*Right'' cried the Sexton. " Proceed—proceed."The ceremonial proceeded. The ring wasplaced upon the finger of the bride; and asLuke touched it, he shuddered. Cold was itas that of the corpse which he had claspedbut now. The prayer is said — the blessinggiven — it is complete.Suddenly then, there issued from the darkness,deep dirge-like tones, and a voice solemnlychaunted, what all knew to be a death-song of124 ROOKWOOD.their race, always hymned by wailing womenover an expiring sister. The music seemed tofloat in the air. Thus ran the rhymes, whichwe shall entitleTHE SOUL BELL.Fast the sand of life is failing,Fast her latest sigh exhaling —Fast, fast, is she dying.With death's chills her limbs are shivering.With death's gasp the lips are quivering —Fast her soul away is flying.O'er the mountain-top it fleetest,And the skiey wonders greeted,Singing loud, as stars it seemeth,On its way.Hark ! the sullen Soul-bell tolling.Hollowly in echoes rolling,Seems to say —She will ope her eyes — oh never IQuenched their dark light — gone for ever !She is dead.Meanwhile the marriage group lingered nearthe altar, awaiting, it would seem, permissionfrom the Gipsy Queen to quit the cell. LukeROOK WOOD. 125Stirred not. Clasped in his own, the cold handof his bride detained him ; and when he wouldhave moved, her tightened grasp prevented hisdeparture.Mrs. Mowbray's patience was exhausted by thedelay. She was not altogether free from apprehension." Why do we linger here?" shewhispered to the Priest. " Do thou, father,lead the way."The crowd is dense," replied Checkley.They resist my effort."Resist !" cried Mrs. Mowbray, in alarm, " arewe prisoners here ?"Let me make the attempt," cried Luke, withfiery impatience. " I will force a passage out."Quit not thy bride," whispered Peter, " asthou values her safety. Heed not aught else.She alone is in danger. Suffer her not to bewithdrawn from thy hand, if thou wouldst notlose her. Remain here. I will bring the matterto a speedy issue."Enough," replied Luke ; I stir not hence,and he drew his bride closer towards him. He126 ROOKWOOD.Stooped to imprint a kiss upon her lips. A coldshudder ran through her frame as he touchedthem, but she resisted not his embrace.Peter's attempt to effect an egress, was asunsuccessful as that of the Priest. PresentingExcalibur at his bosom, the Knight of Maltachallenged him to stand.You cannot pass'' exclaimed the Knight,our orders are peremptory."What am I to understand by this ?"" saidPeter, angrily. " Why are we detained ?"You will learn all anon," returned Barbara ;*' in the mean time you are my prisoners ; —or, if you like not the phrase, my weddingguests."The wedding is complete," repeated thesexton ; " the bride and bridegroom are impatientto depart, and we, the guests, albeit someof us may be no foes to darkness, desire not tohold our nuptial revels here."But Sybil's wedding hath not taken place,"said Barbara ; " you must tarry for that."Ha ! now it comes," thought Peter. " AndROOKWOOD. 127who, may I ask,"^ said he aloud, " amongst thisgoodly company, is to be her bridegroom ?''The best amongst them"' returned Barbara ;** Sir Luke Rosewood. Art thou answerednow ?"No," replied Peter, " he hath a bridealready."*' She may be removed'' said Barbara, withbitter and peculiar emphasis. " Dost understandmy meaning now ?"'I ^\dll not understand it'' said Peter.*' Thou canst not mean to destroy her whonow stands at the altar ?"She who now stands at the altar must makeway for a successor — she who grasps the bridegroom'shand, shall die'"Recall that oath," exclaimed a voice from thealtar.I may not. 'Tis irrevocable. She mustdie."And think you, you will be allowed toexecute your murderous intention with impunity?" shrieked Mrs. iVIowbray, in an agonyof terror. " Think you that I will stand by,128 ROOKWOOD.and see my child slaughtered before my face —that my friends will suffer it ? Think you thateven your own tribe will dare to execute yourhorrible purpose? They will not. They willside with us. Even now they murmur. Whatcan you hope to gain by an act so wild anddreadful ? What object can you have ?''The same as your own," reiterated Barbara !" the advancement of my child. Sybil is asdear to me, as Eleanor is to you. She is mychild's child — the daughter of my best beloveddaughter. I have sworn to marry her to SirLuke Rosewood. The means are in my power.I will keep my vow. I will wed her to him.You did not hesitate to tear your daughter fromthe man she loved, to give her to the man shehated ; and for what ? For gold — for power —for rank. I have the same motive. I love mychild, and she loves Sir Luke, has loved himlong, and truly ; therefore shall she have him.What to me is thy child, or thy feelings, exceptthey are subservient to my wishes ? She standsin my way — I remove her."Who placed her in thy path ?" asked theROOKWOOD. 129Sexton. " Didst thou not lend a helping hand,to create that obstacle thyself?"« I did," replied Barbara. " Wouldst thouknow wherefore? I will tell thee. I had adouble motive for it. There is a curse upon thehouse of Rosewood, that killed the first fairbride each generation leadeth to the altar. Hastthou never heard of that ?"I have ! And did that idle legend swaythee?"And dost thou call it idle ! Thou I — well —I had another motive — a prophecy."By thyself uttered," replied Peter.Even so," replied Barbara. " The prophecyis fulfilled. The stray rook is found. Therook hath with rook mated. Luke hath weddedEleanor. He will hold possession of his lands.The prophecy is fulfilled."But how r asked Peter, " will thy art tellthee how and why she shall now hold possession ?Canst tell me that ?"My art goeth not so far. I know the whyand wherefore he will now hold them. I haveG 5130 ROOKWOOD.predicted the event. It hath come to pass. Iam satisfied. He hath wedded her. Be it mineto free him from that yoke." And Barbara .laughed exultingly.The Sexton approached the old crone, andlooked her steadfastly in the face.Hear me," said he ; " and I will tellthee that with which thy juggling art refused toacquaint thee. Eleanor Mowbray is heir to thelands of Rosewood — the estates are her's — theywere bequeathed to her by her grandsire, SirReginald."She was unborn when he died," cried Mrs.Mowbray.True," replied Peter ; " but the lands wereleft to thy issue female, should such issue bebon to thee.^'And did Sir Piers, my brother, know ofthis ? did he see this will ?" asked Mrs. Mowbray,with trembling impatience.He did — but he withheld the knowledge ofit from thee and thine."My curses on his memory. Why knew IROOKWOOD. 131not this before ? Why didst thou not tell meere this was done which cannot be undone ? Ihave sacrificed my child"*Because it did not chime with my purposesto tell thee," returned Peter, coldly.Thou hast, indeed," replied Barbara.Thou hast lost all. But it works well for me."*"*A deep groan burst from the bosom of thebride. Luke had heard all. He had withdifficulty controuled his rising choler. He did,however, controul it ; but not without a terribleeffort.It is false — it is false," cried Mrs. Mowbray ;her anger and vexation getting the better of herfears. " I will not believe it. Who art thou,that pretences to know the secrets of ourhouse ?""Wouldst thou know who I am ?" repliedthe Sexton, in a hollow voice. " I am AlanRook wood !"Alan Rosewood !" echoed Mrs. Mowbray.Ay, Alan Rosewood — the sworn enemy of132 ROOK WOOD.thy father — of thee — of all ye : your fate — yourdestiny — your curse. I am that Alan Rook-wood,whose name thou breathed in the vault.I am he, the avenger — the avenged. I saw thyfather die. I heard his groans — his groans ! —ha, ha. I saw lies sons die ; — one fell in battle,I was with him there — the other expired inhis bed. I was hidden in Sir Piers's room whenhe breathed his last, and listened to his deathagonies. 'Twas I who counselled him to keepthe lands from thee, and from thy child, and hewithheld them. One only amongst the racewhose name I have cast off have I loved ; andhim — because," added he, with something likeemotion — " because he was my daughter's childLuke Rosewood — and even he shall ministerto my vengeance. He will be thy curse — thydaughter's curse — for he loves her not. Yet heis her husband, and hath her lands; — ha, ha !''And he laughed till he became convulsed withthe paroxysm of laughter.]\Iine ears are stunned'* cried Mrs. mowbray.ROOKWOOD. 133The bride is mine, relinquish her to me," criedBarbara. " Advance and seize her, my children''Alan Rook wood (as we shall now denominatethe Sexton) suddenly grew calm : he raised thewhistle to his lips, and blew a call so loud andshrill, that those who were advancing hungback, irresolute.There was a rush at the door of the vault.The sentinels were struck down; and, withpistols in each hand, and followed by twoassistants, Dick Turpin sprang into the thick ofthe crew.Here we are'' cried he, " ready for action.Where is Sir Luke Rook wood ? where mychurch-yard pal, Peter ?"'' Here," cried the Sexton and Luke simultaneously.Then stand aside," cried Dick, pushing inthe direction of the sounds, and bearing downall opposition. " Have a care there — thesetriggers are ticklish. Friend or foe, whotouches me, shall have a bullet in his gizzard.134 ROOKWOOD.Here I am, pal Peter ; and here are my twochums. Rust and Wilder. Cut the white*"Have we license to pass scatheless now ?"*'asked the Sexton ; "or shall we make goodour way ?"You shall not pass," cried Barbara,furiously. " Think you to rob me of myprey ? Upon them — seize her. What, cowards !Do you hesitate ? Ha !"Kindle the torches," cried several voices.We fight not in the dark."A pistol was flashed. The torch again blazed.Its light fell upon a tumultuous group.Seize the bride," cried Barbara.Hold !" exclaimed a voice from the altar.It was Sybil.Her hand was clasped in that of Luke.Eleanor had fainted in the arms of JerryJuniper.Art thou my bride?" ejaculated Luke.Behold the ring upon my finger ! — Thyown hand placed it there."ROOK WOOD. 135Betrayed f screamed Alan, in a voice ofanguish. " My schemes annihilated — myselfundone — my enemies triumphant — lost — lost.All is destroyed — all."*' Joy — joy." exclaimed Mrs. Mowbray ;my child is saved."And mine destroyed," groaned Barbara.I have sworn to slay the bride — and Sybilis that bride."CHAPTER XII.The wolf shall find her grave, and scrape it up ;Not to devour the corse, but to discoverThe horrid murther.Webster.Bravo ! capital !'' cried Turpin, laughingloud and long as an Olympian Deity ; " has thissimple wench outwitted you all — turned thetables upon the whole gang of plotters — eh ? —excellent ! — ha, ha, ha ! the next time you getmarried. Sir Luke, let me advise you not tochoose a wife in the dark — a man should haveall his senses about him on these occasions.Make love when the liquor's in, but marry whenit's out, and above all, with your eyes open — thisbeats every thing — ha, ha, ha ! — you mustexcuse me, but, upon my soul I can't help it — "and his laughter seemed inextinguishable.ROOKWOOD. 137Take your men without,'^ whispered AlanRosewood, " keep watch as before — and let thedischarge of a pistol bespeak the approach ofdanger, as agreed upon — much yet remains tobe done here'How so ?'' asked Dick ; " it seems to me thejob's entirely settled — if not to your satisfaction.I'm always ready to oblige my friend Sir Luke,but curse me, if I'll lend my help to any underhandwork — steer clear of foul play, or DickTurpin holds no hand with you — as to that poorwench, if you mean her any harm d — — me ifI will "No harm is intended her'' replied Alan. " Iapplaud your magnanimity," added he, sarcastically— '' such sentiments are, it must be owned,in excellent keeping with your conduct."In keeping or not," replied Turpin, gravely,cold-blooded murder is altogether out ofmy line, and I wash my hands of it — a shotor two in self-defence is another matter — andwhen "A truce to this," interrupted Alan ; " thegirl is safe — will you mount guard again .^"138 ROOKWOOD.If that be the case, certainly' replied Dick,'' I shall be glad to get back to Bess — I couldn'tbring her with me into this black hole. Acouple of shots will tell you 'tis RanulphRosewood — but mind — no harm to the gipsygirl — to Day Rosewood I should say — she's ajewel, take my word for it, which Sir Luke mustbe mad to throw away." And calling his men,he departed.Alan Rosewood bent his steps towards theGipsy Queen. Dark thoughts gathered thicklyo'er his brow. He smiled as he drew nigh toBarbara — a smile it wasThat wrinkled up his skin, even to the hair."Barbara looked at him at first with distrust, butas he developed his secret purposes, that smilebecame reflected upon her own features. Twofiends they seemed — grinning and gloating overhuman misery — their conference took placeapart. We willingly leave them, to return tothe altar.Mrs. Mowbray and the Priest were still there.Both were occupied in ineffectual endeavours torestore Eleanor to consciousness. She recoveredROOK WOOD. 139from her swoon, but it was evident her sensesstill wandered, and vainly did Mrs. Mowbraylavish her tenderest caresses upon her child.Eleanor returned them not.Luke meanwhile had given vent to the wildestfury. He shook away Sybil's grasp — he dashedher from lii — he regarded her with witheringglances — he loaded her with reproaches. Shebore his violence with meekest submission — shelooked imploringly — but she replied not to histaunts — again she clung to the hem of hisgarment when cast aside. Can the heart ofman resist such love in woman ? hath it nocompunction — no pity ? Luke appeared unmoved;what passed within, we pause not toexamine. He grew calmer — his calmness wasmore terrible to Sybil than his previous wrathhad been.You are my wife,'** said he ; " what then ? —by fraud, by stratagem, you have obtained thattitle, and perforce must keep it — but the titleonly shall you retain. No rights of wife shallever be your's. It will be in your power to call140 ROOK WOOD.yourself Lady Rosewood — you will be so inname — in nothing else''I shall not bear it long," murmured Sybil.Luke laughed scornfully. " So you saidbefore"* replied he; " and yet I see not whereforeyou are likely to abandon it. The event will show.Thus far you have deceived me, and I place nofurther faith in your assertions. My hand wasyour's — you refused it — when I wovild give it toanother, clandestinely you grasp it. And amI then to believe what now you say ? The windwill change — the vane veer with it.It will not veer from you," she meeklyanswered.Why did you step between me and mybride?"To save her life; to lay down mine for her's."An idle subterfuge. Well do you knowyou run no risk of being called upon to doso. Your life is in no danger. The sacrificewas unnecessary. I could have dispensed withyour assistance : — my own would have sufficedto protect Eleanor."ROOKWOOD. 141Your single arm would not have prevailedagainst numbers : — they would have killed youlikewise""Tush !" said Luke fiercely. " Not onlyhave you snatched from me my bride — youhave robbed me of my fair estates — my housemy all — save of my barren title — and that,even that, you have tarnished''True — true," sighed Sybil. " I knew notthat the lands were her's, else had I neverdone it''False — false," cried Luke; — " false as therest. They will be his — She will be his. Ishall still be an outcast, while he will riot in myhalls — will press her to his bosom. Cling notto me. — Hence — or I will spurn thee from me.I am undone — undone by thee, accursed one."Oh curse me not — your words cut deepenough."Would they could kill thee," cried Luke,with savage bitterness. " Thou hast placed abar between me and my prospects, whichnothing can now remove — nothing but — ha ! — "142 ROOK WOOD.and his countenance assumed a deadly hue,and fearful expression. " By heaven, thoualmost rouses the fell spirit which is saidto dwell within the breast of my devoted race.I feel as if I could kill thee""No, no*" cried Sybil; " for mercy's sake —for thy own sake, do not stab me. It is nottoo late — I will repair thy wrong !''Ever deceiving — thou wouldst again deludeme. Thou canst not repair it. One way aloneremains, and that — ''^I will pursue"* responded Sybil, sadlybut firmly.Nevers"* echoed Luke ; " thou shalt not.Ha !'"* exclaimed he, as he found his arms suddenlypinioned behind him. " What new treachery isthis ? By whose orders am I thus fettered ?^By mines"* said Alan Rosewood, steppingforward.^* By thine !" echoed Luke. " And wherefore? Release me""Be patient"" replied Alan. " You will hearall anon. In the mean time you must be contentROOK WOOD. 143to remain my prisoner. Quit not your hold"'added he, addressing the gipsies who keptcharge of Luke.Their lives shall answer for their obedience,'^said Barbara.Upon a further signal from Alan, Eleanorwas torn from her mother s arms, and a bandagepassed so suddenly over Mrs. Mowbray's face,that before she could raise a cry of alarm, allpossibility of utterance was effectually prevented.The Priest alone was left at liberty.Barbara snatched the hand of Eleanor. Shedragged her to Sybil.Thou art Lady Rook wood'' whispered she;but she hath thy domains. I give her to thee."She is the only bar between thy husbandand his rights," whispered Alan Rosewood, in atone of horrible irony, " It is not too late torepair thy wrong"'Away, tempter !" cried Sybil, horror-stricken." I know thee well. Yet'' continuedshe, in an altered tone, " I will risk all for him.I have done him wrong:. But one mode of144 ROOKWOOD.atonement remains ; and, horrible though it be,I will embrace it. Let me not pause. Give herto me." And she seized upon the unresistinghand of Eleanor.Need'st thou my aid," asked Barbara ?I need no aid," replied Sybil ; " Let noneapproach us. A clapping of hands will let youknow when all is over." And she dragged herpassive victim deeper into the vault.Sybil — Sybil," cried Luke, struggling withfrantic violence to liberate himself. " Hurther not — I was rash — I was mad — butI am calmer now : — she hears me not — shewill not turn. God of heaven, she will murderher — it will be done while I speak. Releaseher — I must prevent it. I am the cause of allrelease me, villains. Would that I had died,ere I had seen this day 1"At a signal from the Sexton, Luke also wasblindfolded. He ceased to struggle; but hislabouring breast told of the strife within.Miscreants !" exclaimed the Priest, who hadhitherto witnessed the proceedings in horror.ROOK WOOD, 145Why do not these rocks fall in, and crush youand your iniquities? Save her — oh save her.Have you no pity for the innocent ?"Such pity have we," replied Barbara, " asthyself did show to Susan Rosewood. She wasas innocent as Eleanor Mowbray, and yet thoudidst not pity her"'Heaven is my witness," exclaimed the Priest,that I never injured her."Take not heaven s name in vain," criedBarbara. " Who stood by while it was doing ? —who — but thou? Whose firmer hand lent aidunto the murderer s trembling efforts? Thine.Whose pressure stifled her thrilling screams, andchoked her cries for mercy ? Thine — thine : andnow thou protest to me of pity — thou, the slayerof the sleeping and the innocent!"What ! " cried Alan, with terrific eagerness,Was not Sir Piers alone guilty of that damnedact ? Was there an accessory ?"There was," replied Barbara ; — " beholdhim."VOL. III. H146 ROOKWOOD.'Tis false' exclaimed the Priest, in extremityof terror.False !'' echoed Barbara. " I had Sir Piers'sown confession. He told me all. You haddesigns upon Sir Piers, which his wife opposed —you hated her — you were in the confidenceof both — how did you keep that confidence ? —He told me how, by awakening a spirit ofjealousy and pride, that overmastered all his betterfeelings. False ! — He told me of your hellishmachinations — your Jesuitical plots — yourschemes — but they failed. He was too weaktoo feeble an instrument to serve you —you left him, but not before she had left him. —False ! ha ! I have that shall instantly convictyou. The corse is here, within this cell.Who brought it hither ? You, or I ?'''The Priest was silent : he seemed confoundedby the crone's violence of manner.You did'' continued Barbara. " Your agent,Balthazar, has betrayed you. It was broughthither to prevent the discovery of Sir LukeBOOK WOOD. 147Rosewood's legitimacy. You meant to makeyour own terms about it. It has come hither toproclaim your guilt — to be a fearful witnessagainst you. You have called heaven to witnessyour innocence — you shall attest it by oathupon that body: and should aught indicateyour guilt, I will hang you as I would a dog,and clear off one long score with justice. Doyou shrink from this ?"*^ I shrink not"' replied the Priest, in a voicehollow and broken. " Bring me to the body."Seize each an arm," said Barbara — addressingZoroaster and the Knight of malta,and lead him to the corse."I will administer the oath," said Alan Rook-wood,sternly.'•' No — not thou," stammered the Priest.And wherefore not ?" asked Alan. " If youare innocent, you need fear nothing from her."I fear nothing from the dead'" repliedCheckley; " lead on."Sybil was alone with her victim. They werenear the mouth of the cell which had been Prior.ROOKWOOD.Cypi-ian**s flinty dormitory, and were almost involvedin darkness — one stream of light glancingthrough the pillars. Eleanor had not spoken.She had suffered herself to be dragged thitherwithout resistance, scarce conscious, it wouldseem, of her danger. Sybil relinquished her hold :but Eleanor attempted not to fly. The gipsy girlgazed upon her for some minutes with sorrowand surprise. " She comprehends not her periloussituation," murmured Sybil. " She knows notthat she stands upon the threshold of the grave.Oh ! would that she could pray. Shall I, hermurderess.'^ P^'ay for her. My prayers wouldnot be heard. And yet to kill her unshriven,will be a twofold crime. Let me not look on hermy hand trembles — I can scarce grasp thedagger. Let me think on all he has said. Ihave wronged him — I am his bane — hi curse.I have robbed him of all — there is but oneremedy — 'tis this — Oh, God! — she recovers —I cannot do it now."It was a terrible moment for Eleanor'srevival, when the bright steel flashed before herROOKWOOD. 149eyes. Better, if it were to strike her, that theweapon had found its way upon the instant toher heart, than that time should be given foragonizing reflection. Better she had died atonce, than by degrees, in prolonged torture.Terror at once restored her. She cast herselfat Sybil's feet.Spare — spare mess'' cried she. " Oh what adream I have had — and to waken thus, Tvath thedagger's point at my breast — but you will not.kill— you, gentle maid, who promised to preserveme. Ah, no, I am sure you will not''Appeal no more to me," said Sybil, sternly.Make your peace with heaven. Your minutesare numbered''I cannot pray," said Eleanor, " while youare near me''Will you pray if I retire, and leave you ?Give me a signal when you are prepared."I cannot give the signal. Terrible as youare — much as I fear you, I love you still. Oh !do not leave me, or let me go."If you but stir," said Sybil, " I stab youto the heart."150 Lockwood.I will not stir — I will kneel here for ever..Stab me as I kneel — as I pray to you. Youcannot kill me while I cling to you thus —while I kiss your hands — while I bedew themwith my tears. Those tears will not sully them,not so my blood."Speak not of that'' cried Sybil shudderingly,endeavouring to withdraw her hand.Ah no, I quit you not : your hand tremblesthese is hope — there is mercy ; — this shakinghand could ne'er shed blood."It shall not do so," gasped Sybil.'' Say you so," cried Eleanor, in transport.You are my benefactress — you have givenme life."I am your worst of foes," responded Sybil,sadly, yet firmly. " You must partake of this ;"and she extended a phial towards her.It is poison," shrieked Eleanor.« It is."I will not drink it. I have no choice ofdeath, if die I must. Both ways equally affrightme. Choose thou. Tell me not how, or when.Yet a moment — thou lowest, maiden, isn't not so ?"ROOKWOOD. 151Love !'' echoed Sybil. " Few have lovedas I love.""And art beloved?"Not so," sighed Sybil.Yet think upon thy lover, and spare me,for my Ranulph's sake."For my lover s sake I slay thee," returnedSybil. " Thou ^vilt never wed thy Ranulph !Prepare. Thy sand is run."Yet a moment hear me."Not a second. Close thine eyes."No, I will fix them on thee thus — thoucanst not strike then. I will use every art tomove thee. Thy nature is not cruel — thy soulis full of pity. It melts — those tears — thou wiltbe merciful — thou canst not deliberately killme."I cannot— I cannot," said Sybil. " Takethy life on one condition."Name it !"That thou eldest Sir Luke Rosewood."Ha !" exclaimed Eleanor ; " all rushes backupon me at that name, the whole of that fearfulscene passes in review before me."152 ROOK WOOD.^' Do you reject my proposal ?^I dare not."I must have your oath. Swear by yourevery hope of eternity, that you will wed noneother than Sir Luke Rookwood.""*By every hope, I swear it.""While he liveth.J^"While he liveth."Enough. I am satisfied. Tarry with me.Stir not — scream not, whatever you may seeor hear. Your Hfe depends upon your firmness.When I am no more "^No more," echoed Eleanor, in horror ?"Be calm," said Sybil. " Ashen I am dead,clap your hands together. They will come toseek you. They will find me in your stead.Then rush to him — to Sir Luke Rosewood. Hewill protect thee. Say to him hereafter, that Idied for the wrong I did him — that I died, andblessed him."Can you not live, and save me?" sobbedEleanor.Ask it not. While I live, your life is indanger. When I am gone, none will seek toROOKWOOD. 153harm you. Fare your well ! — Remember youroath. Remember also — ha ! — that groan"'Both maidens started, as a deep groan knelledin their ears.Whence comes that sound :^ cried Sybil.« Hist!— a voice?"It is that of the Priests"* reeked Eleanor. —Hark ! he groans. They have murdered him.Kind heaven receive his soul."Pray for me," cried Sybil : " pray ferventlyavert your face— down on your knees — downdown."We must now quit this painful scene foranother scarcely less painful, and return to theunfortunate Priest.The father had been brought before the bodyof Susan Rosewood. Even in the gloom, theshimmer of the white neckcloths, and the pallidfeatures of the corpse, was ghastly enough. Thetorchlight made them terrible.Kneel," said Alan Rosewood. The Priestcomplied. Alan knelt beside him.^ Knowest thou these features?" asked he.H 5154 ROOKWOOD,Regard them well — fix thine eyes full uponthem. Dost thou know them ?"I do."Place thy hand upon her breast. Doth notthe flesh creep, and shrink beneath thy touch?doth she not writhe and struggle, as when 'twasdone ? Art still firm ? Now raise thine hand —make the cross of thy faith upon her bosom.By that faith thou dearest thou art innocent."I do," returned the Priest ; " art thou nowsatisfied ?"No," replied Alan. " Let the torch beremoved. Thy innocence must be moredeeply attested," continued he, as the light waswithdrawn. " This proof will not fail. Entwinethy fingers round her throat."« Her throat ?"« Thourefusest?— Ha!"Have I not done enough ?"Thy hesitation proves thy guilt," exclaimedBarbara.That proof is wanting then ?" returned thePriest ; " my hand is upon her throat — whatmore .''"ROOKWOOD. 155*• As thou dost hope for mercy in thine hourof need, swear that thou didst never refuse hei'mercy !""I swear."May the dead convict thee of perjury ifthou hast forsworn thyself," said Alan ; " thouart free. Take away thy hand."Ha ! what is this ?" exclaimed the Priest.You have put some jugglery upon me. Icannot withdraw my hand. It sticks to herthroat, as though twere glued by blood. Tearme away — I have not force enough to liberatemyself. WTiy dost thou grin at me ? Thecorse grins likewise. It is jugglery. I aminnocent. — You would take away my life. Tearme away, I say : the veins rise — they blacken —they are filling with new blood, I feel themswell — they coil like living things around myfingers — She is alive.""And thou art innocent .^"I am — I am. Let not my ravings convictme. For Jesu's sake release me."Blaspheme not, but arise. I hold thee not."156 ROOKWOOD.Thou dost;' groaned the Priest. " Thygrasp tightens round my throat ; — thy hard andskinny fingers are there — I strangle — helpsThy own fears strangle thee. My handis at my side," returned Alan, calmly.Villain, thou lies. Thy grasp is like a vice.The strength of a thousand devils is in thyhand. Will none lend help ? I never pressedso hard. She never suffered this torture ! — Ichoke — choke — ha'' And the Priest rolledheavily backwards.There was a groan — a rattle in the throat —and all was still.He is dead — strangled," cried several voices,holding down the torch. The face of the Priestwas blackened and contorted — the " eye-ballsfarther out than when he lived." It was aghastly sight.A murmur arose amongst the spectators.Barbara deemed it prudent to appease them.He was guilty," cried she. " He was themurderer of Susan Rosewood."ROOKWOOD. 157And I, her father, have avenged her"' saidAlan, sternly.The dreadful silence which followed his speechwas broken by the report of a pistol. Its sound,though starting, was felt almost as a relief.We are beset"" cried Alan. " Some of youfly to reconnoitre'To your posts," cried Barbara.Several of the crew flocked to the entrance.Unbind the prisoners," cried Alan.Mrs. Mowbray and Luke were accordinglyset free.Two almost simultaneous reports of a pistolwere now heard.'Tis Ranulph Rosewood," shouted Alan ;that was the preconceived signal.Ranulph Rosewood," echoed Eleanor, whocaught the exclamation ; " he comes to saveRemember thy oath," gasped a dying voice.He is no longer thine."I remember," replied Eleanor, tremblingly.158 Lockwood.A moment afterwards a faint clapping ofhands reached the ears of Barbara.All is over," muttered she.Ha !" exclaimed Alan Rosewood, with afrightful look—" Is it done?"Barbara motioned him towards the fartherend of the vault.CHAPTER XIII.Grimm. — Look, Captain, here comes one of the blood-houndsof justice.Schw. — Down with him. Don't let him utter a word.Moor. — Silence, I will hear him.The Robbers. — Schiller.Gladly do we now exchange the dank atmosphereof St. Cyprian's cell, and the gloomyhorrors which have detained us there so long,for balmy air and genial sunshine — and theboon companionship of Dick Turpin.Upon regaining the verdant ruins of theancient Priory, all appeared pretty much asour Highwayman had left it. Dick wendedtowards his mare. Black Bess uttered an affectionatewhinnying sound as he approached her,and yielded, as he drew near, her sleek neck tohis caresses.No Bedouin ever loved his horse more160 Lockwood.tenderly than Turpin. — " 'Twill be a hard daywhen thou and I part ! " murmured he, affectionatelypatting her soft and silky cheeks.Bess thrust her nose into his hand, biting himplayfully, — as much as to say — " That day shallnever arrive""Turpin at least understood the appeal. Hewas skilled in the language of the Huoyhnymns —I would rather lose my right hand than thatshould happen," sighed Dick ; — " but, there'sno saying: — the best of friends must part;and thou and I may be one day separateddestination is the knacker — mine, perhaps,the gallows. We are neither of us cut out for oldage, that's certain. Curse me if I can tell howit is, but since I've been in that vault, I've gotsome queer crotchet into my head. I can't help'likening thee to that poor gipsy wench, Sybil,but, may I be d d if I'd use thee as herfancy man Luke has used her."A hoarse laugh roused Dick from his meditations.Silence," thundered Dick to his associates.ROOKWOOD. 161what can you, you sniggering spice-cloaks*,know of a pray like this, or of the feelingsof a scampsman. When you get more up inthe stirrups, you will grow wiser, and laugh less."^I dare say we shall"' returned Wilder, " forthen our time will be nearly up too."And that won't be no laughing matter ,""returned Rust, becoming grave.Let us be serious now, at any rate'' criedDick. " All the wedge-f- we got at the crackslast night must be chanted ; it must be/ewced||at York tomorrow."It shall be done. Captain," replied bothrobbers.And the rag it returns brought to ourflash ken on Thorne Waste, and given to ConeyJem, the old lag, that keeps it — I shall have tomake myself scarce for a few days."Indeed !" exclaimed Wilder.Footpads. t Silver.X Housebreaking, § The cipher or crest removed.II Disposed of to a receiver. % Money.ROOKWOOD.There's some pull at the bottom of the jobdown stairs, that I'm not fly to — the devil onlyknows what will be the upshot of the game,when his cater cousin Peter Bradley takes theflats* in hand. But whatever it may be, I don'tpart with this document — this marriage certificateof Sir Piers Rosewood, that I told youof, unless I get the dibsf in hand, or screens tothe amount."Right, Captain — stick to the parks'' criedWilder, " that's as good as cas."It's a prime stake that," ejaculated Rust.Stake, or no stake," interrupted Dick, " myword is at stake — my honour as a Tobyman isat stake — and if Sir Luke don't settle with methis morning, he must wait my convenience. I'mpledged to be in London tomorrow."Leave Yorkshire for Rumville," criedWilder, " why you haven't tried the NorthRiding yet?"My riding must be to the South, in the firstCards. f Cash. % Bank-notes.ROOKWOOD. 163place," replied Dick. " I'm engaged in a jobwith Tom King — you have heard of Tom,the gentleman Highwayman as he is called —a better fellow never breathed — nor a bolder ;were sworn brothers — I wouldn't disappointhim, to prove the legitimacy of any bloodyhand in Christendom."But the park — "^ grumbled Rust ; " whatbecomes of that. Captain, in the meantime ?''It must take its chance. I shan't be manydays away. Bess is no lagger. You shall see whatshe can do. Ill meet you at our crib as before."But, Captain," still grumbled Rust, " youwon't throw us over the bridge — we're in it aswell as yourself, you know."Crack such whigs again, Rob Rust," repliedDick, in a towering voice, " and I'll crack yourthick sconce in answer to them. As you wereconcerned, you shall have your share in theregulars — but look out for some other leader, youserve no more with Dick Turpin."Rust would fain have appeased his Captain,but Dick was evidently offended.164 ROOKWOOD.Ha ! '' exclaimed he, drawing a pistol witha suddenness that made Rob start — adding, in awhisper — " we are watched. See you not howyon shadow falls from behind the wall ?"I do'' replied Wilder.The varmint shall be speedily unearthed,"cried Rust, anxious to show his alacrity — andboth robbers rushed to the spot.In another instant the shadow manifesteditself in a most unsubstantial personage, booted,spurred, and mud-bespattered. He was broughtbefore our Highwayman, who had meanwhilevaulted into his saddle.Mr. Coates !" cried Dick, bursting into aloud laugh at the ridiculous figure presented tohis view, " or the mud deceives me."It does not deceive you. Captain Turpin'"replied the Attorney ; " you do indeed beholdthat twice unfortunate person.""What brings you here?" asked Dick.Ah ! I see. You are come to pay me mywager."I thought you gave me a discharge forROOK WOOD. 165that'' rejoined Coates, unable, even in his distress,to resist the too-tempting quibble.True — but it was m blank,'''' replied Turpinreadily ; " and that don't hold good in law youknow. But here you are again. You havethrown away a second chance. Play or pay, allthe world over. I shan't let you off so easilythis time, depend upon it. Come, post thepony — or take your measure on that sod. Nomore replications or rejoinders, Sir, but outwiththe blunt. How dare you bandy jokes atthe point of the pistol ? "No ! " replied Coates — " You are better ableto keep up the hall, than I am."Shall we break his neck, or shoot him ?"cried Wilder.Fly the mags *, and let's see," repliedRust ; " if heads, we scrag him — if tails, wifeweserI'm sure I don't know which is worser, 'muttered Coates.« Toss up halfpence.166 ROOKWOOD."A truce to this'' exclaimed Turpin; " leavehim alone — overhaul his toggery — Fake hisdies. Let us see what he has about him*"'ein the twinkling of a bed post," repliedRust. " We'll turn him inside out. What'shere ?" cried he — searching the Attorney's pockets.— " A brace of barkers," handing a pair ofpistols to Turpin ; " a haddock, stuffed withnothing I'm thinking; one quid, two coachwheels, half a bull, three hogs, and a kick * ;a d d dickey concern. Captain !"Three hogs and a kick," muttered Coates,*' the knave says true enough."Bug over the rag "I-," cried Turpin. " Isthere any thing else ?""Only an old snuffy ogle, and a pewtersneezer."No reader ? Try his hotter :|:."A guinea — two dollars, half-a-crown, three shillings, andsixpence. Rust's elegant enumeration of the money, remindsus of a waiter at one of the clubs, giving orders to a fellow-servantbelow stairs, who vociferated — "One ox — two mocks —three peas — and a bully!"f Hand over the money. J Inside coat pocket.ROOKWOOD. 167Here's a pit-man *, Captain'"Give it me. — Ah ! this will do," cried Dick,examining the contents of the pocket-book ;"this is a glorious windfall indeed — a bill ofexchange for £.500 — payable on demand-^^h !Mr. Coates — quick, indorse it, Sir — here's penand ink — rascal, if you attempt to tear the bill111 blow your brains out — steady. Sir sign —good — ^" added he, as Coates most reluctantlyindorsed the bill. " You have now fairly paidyour wager, and I'm sure you won't begrudgeanother hundred or so, to snake up the with your friends there. Sorry I can'treturn you the change out. Sir ; off to town, andshall want some small steven -f, for the dubs atthe knapping jiggers . — Eh ! what's this? — myLady Rosewood's superscription ! — Excuse me,Mr. Coates, but I must have a peep at herLadyship's billet doux. — All's safe with me —man of honour — I must detain your reader amoment longer''You should take charge of yourself then,"♦ A small pocket book. f Money.X Turnpike men.168 ROOKWOOD.replied Coates, sulkily — " Viii appear to bemy readers**Bravo," cried Turpin. " You may jestnow with impunity, Mr. Coates. You have paiddear enough for your jokes, and when should aman be allowed to be pleasant, if not at his ownexpense; ha, ha. What's this?" exclaimed he,opening the letter — " a sawney*, as I'm awake,and from her Ladyship's own fair fame-|- I'llbe sworn, for it bears her chant J ineffaceableimpressed as your image upon her heart, eh,Coates. Egad, you are a lucky dog, after all, toreceive such a favour from such a lady ; ha, ha.Meantime, I'll take care of it for you," continuedDick, slipping the ring on his little finger.Dick, we have before remarked, had a turnfor mimicry ; (lie was almost as largely endowedwith the faculty of imitation as our own inimitableYates, who, like some weird magician, canmake the " great departed flit and talk beforeus;" and it was with an irresistible feeling ofA Ring. t Finger. J Cipher.Lockwood, 169deferential awe creeping over him, that Coatesheard the contents of Lady Rosewood's epistle,delivered with an enunciation as peremptory andimperious as that of her Ladyship's self. Theletter was hastily indited, but in a clear firmhand, and partook of its writer s bold decisionof character. Dick found no difficulty in decipheringit. Thus ran the missive: —Assured of your devotion and secrecy, Icommit my own honour, and that of my son,to your charge. Time will not permit me tosee you, or I would not write ; but I placemyself entirely in your hands. You will notdare to betray my confidence. To the point :A Major Mowbray has just arrived here withintelligence, that the body of Susan Bradley(you will know to whom I allude) has been*' removed from our family vault by a RomishPriest and his assistants. How it came there,or wherefore it was removed, I know not. — Itis not my present purpose to inquire. Sufficeit, that it now lies in a vault beneath the ruinsof Davenham Priory, My son, Sir Ranulph,VOL. III. J170 HOOK WOOD,who has lent a credulous ear to the artfultales of the impostor, who calls this womanmother, is at present engaged in arming certainof the household, and of the tenantry, to seizeupon, and bring away this body, as resistanceis apprehended from a horde of gipsies whoinfest the ruins. Now mark me. ThatBODY MUST NOT BE FOUND. Be it your businessto prevent its discovery. Take thefleetest horse you can procure — spare neitherwhip nor spur — haste to the Priory — procureby any means, and at any expense, the assistanceof the gipsies. Find out the body — concealit — destroy it — cut it into a thousandpieces — do what you will, so my son find it not.Fear not his resentment — I will bear you harmlessof the consequences with him. You will actupon my responsibility. I pledge my honourfor your safety. My curse shall rest onRanulph's head if he molest you. Use alldispatch, and calculate upon due requital ofyour service fromMaude Rookwood.''Lockwood. 171Haste, and God speed you r*' God speed you'' echoed Dick, in his ownvoice contemptuously. " The devil drive you,would have been a fitter postscript. And so itwas upon this precious errand you came, i\Ir.Coates''Exactly'" replied the Attorney ; " but I findthe premises pre-occupied — fast as I have ridden,you were here before me.""And what do you now propose to do""asked Turpin."Bargain with you for the body"" repliedCoates, coolly.Bargain with me,''' shouted Dick — " Do youtake me for a resurrection cove — for a dealer indead stock, eh ! sirrah ? "^I take you for one sufficiently alive, in ageneral way, to his owt interests" — returnedCoates. " These gentlemen may, perhaps, notbe quite so scrupulous, when they hear myproposals.Hark ! " interrupted Turpin — " I hear thetramp of horses' hoofs, without ; hark — thatshout."172 ROOK WOOD."Make your own terms before they comes*'insinuated Coates. "Leave all to me — 111 put'em on a wrong scent**"To the devil with your terms'" — criedTurpin ; " the signal ! '' and he pulled the triggerof one of Coates's pistols, which he held in hishand, the shot of which, rang in the ears of theastounded Attorney, as it whizzed past him*""Drag him into the mouth of the vaults''thundered Turpin, " he will be a capital coverin case of attack. Look to your sticks — andkeep tout *, — away.'*'Vainly did the unfortunate Attorney kickand struggle — swear and scream — his hat waspushed over his eyes, his bob wig thrust intohis mouth, and his legs tripped from under him.Thus blind, dumb, and half suffocated, washe hurried within the entrance of the cell.Turpin, meanwhile dashed to the archedoutlet of the ruin. He there drew in the rein,and Black Bess stood motionless as a statue.As his quick eye ranged over the spreadingKeep guard.ROOKWOOD. 173sward in front of the ancient Priory, Dick'sbrow became for an instant contracted, and hebit his lips with vexation. But the feelingwas transient — the next instant saw him thesame easy reckless being that he had been before ;there was a little more paleness in his cheek thanusual; that was all — but then his eyes werekeener, and brighter, and his knees involuntarilyclasped his saddle the more firmly — therewas no other outward symptom of anxiety abouthim. It would be no impeachment to Dick'svalour, were it necessary for us here to admit,that a slight tremor crossed him, as he scannedthe formidable array of his opponents. No suchadmission is, however, necessary. — Dick himselfwould have been the last man to notice it — norshall we do the memory of our undaunted highwaymanany such dishonour. Turpin wasintrepid to a fault — he was rash — apt to runinto risks for the mere pleasure of getting outof them; danger was his delight, and thedegree of excitement was always in proportion tothe peril incurred. After the first glance, he1 74 Lockwood.became, to use his own words, "as cool as acucumber — ^'^ and continued as long as they permittedhim, like a skilful commander, calmly tocalculate the numerical strength of his adversaries,and to arrange his own plan of resistance.This troop of horsemen, for such it was, mightprobably amount, in the aggregate, to twentymen, and presented an appearance like that of astrong muster at a rustic fox chase, due allowancebeing made for the various weapons ofoffence ; to wit, naked sabres, firelock, and aworld of huge horse pistols, which the presentfield carried along with them. This resemblancewas heightened by the presence of an oldhuntsman, and a gamekeeper or two, in scarletand green jackets, and a few yelping hounds,that had followed after them. The majorityof the crew consisted of sturdy yeomen — someof whom, mounted upon wild unbroken colts,had pretty lives of it to maintain their seats,and surveyed about in " most admired disorder;"others were seated upon more docile,but quite as provoking specimens of the cart-lockwood.175horse breed, whose sluggish sides, reckless alikeof hobnailed heel, or ash sapling, refused toobey their riders' intimations to move — whileothers again brought stiff, wrong-headed poniesto the charge-obstinate, impracticable littlebrutes, that seem to prefer revolving on theirown axis, and describing absurd rotatory motions,to proceeding in the direct and propercourse pointed out to them. Dick could scarceforbear from laughing at these ridiculous manoeuvres,but his attention was chiefly attractedtowards three individuals, who were evidentlythe leaders of this warlike expedition. In thethin tall figure of the first of these, he recognisedRanulph Rook wood. — With the featuresand person of the second of the group, he wastotally unacquainted, but fancied (nor incorrectlyfancied) that his military bearing, or, ashewould have expressed it, " the soldier-likecut of his jib'' could belong to no other thanMajor Mowbray. — In the round, rosy countenance,and robustious person of the last of the176 Lockwood.trio, he discovered his ancient ally, Titus Tyr-conned.Ah, Titus my jewel — are you there ?""exclaimed Dick, as he distinguished the Irishman." Come, I have one friend among them,whom I may welcome. — Soh, they see me now.Off they come, pall-mall. Back Bess, back —slowly wench, slowly — there — stand"" AndBess again remained motionless.The report of Turpin's pistol had reached theears of the troop, and as all were upon the alert,he had scarcely presented himself at the archwaymany seconds, when a loud shout was raised, andthe whole cavalcade galloped towards him,creating, as may be imagined, the wildestdisorder — each yelling, as they neared the arch,and concentrated their forces into the other'sway, mutually belabouring each other with oathsand blows, and reciprocating their cuffs andconcussions with such unlimited good will, that,had Turpin ever read Ariosto or Cervantes,or heard of the discord of King Agramante'sROOKWOOD. 177camp, this mere must have struck him as itsrealization. As it was, entertaining littleapprehension of the result of this on-taught,he* shouted encouragement to them. Scarcely,however, had the foremost horseman disentangledhimself from the press of his companions, and,struggling to the door, was in the act of levellinghis pistol at Turpin's head, when a well-directedball pierced the brain of his charger, and horseand man rolled to the ground. Vowing vengeance,a second succeeded, and was in like mannercompelled to bite the dust.« That will let old Peter know that RanulphRosewood is at hand*" exclaimed Dick. " Ishan't throw away another shot""The scene at the archway was now one of completeconfusion. Terrified by the shots, some ofthe boors would have drawn back, while others,in mid career, advanced, and propelled them forwards.It was like the meeting of two tides.Here and there, regardless of the bit, and scaredby the firing, would a wild colt break all bounds,i5178 ROOKWOOD.and, hurling his rider in the air, dart off into thegreen ; or, in another case, rush forwards, andencountering the prostrate cattle that strewed theentrance to the Priory hall, would stumble, andprecipitate his master neck over heels at the veryfeet of his enemy. During all this tumult, afew shots were fired at the highwayman, which,without doing him one jot of mischief, servedmaterially to increase their own confusion.The voice of Turpin was now heard, abovethe din and turmoil, to sound a parley ; and asheappeared disposed to offer no opposition,some of his antagonists ventured to raise themselvesfrom the ground, and to approach him.I demand to be led to Sir Ranulph Rook-wood,"said Turpin.He is here," said Ranulph, riding up.Villain, you are my prisoner""As you list. Sir Ranulph," returned Dick,coolly : " but let me have a word in privatewith you ere you do aught you may repenthereafter."ROOK WOOD. 179Repent, villain— deliver up your arms, or — ''My pistols are at your services repliedDick, " I have just discharged them'"'' You may have others — we must search you."Hold'' cried Dick ; "if you will not listento me, read that letter ;" and he handed Ranulphhis mother's letter. It was without the envelope,which he had thrown aside.My mother's hand," exclaimed Ranulph,reddening with anger, as he hastily perused itscontents. " And she sent this to you ? Youlie, villain — 'tis a forgery."Let this speak for me," returned Dick,holding out the finger upon which Lady Rook-wood'sring was placed ? " Knovv you thatcipher ?"You have stolen it," exclaimed Ranulph.My mother," added he, in a deep sternwhisper, articulated only for Turpin's hearing,would never have entrusted her honour toyour keeping."She has entrusted more — her life," replied180 Lockwood.Dick, in a careless tone. " She would havebribed me to do murder."Murder !" echoed Ranulph, aghast.Ay, to murder your brother'" returned Dick ;but let that pass. You have read that note.I have acted solely upon your mother's responsibility.Lady Rosewood's honour is pledgedfor my safety. Of course her son will set mefree."Villain — I know not — yet my mother ^'Is in my power. Betray me, and youbetray her. Free me, and none shall ever bethewiser."How shall I act ?" mused Ranulph. " Myduty to society, my respect for the laws hehath outraged, impel me to seize his personbut my mother — I cannot bring shame uponher head — and then her curse "Will rest upon thy head, if thou molest me,"said Turpin.No more," returned Ranulph, sternly. " Goyour ways — you are free."ROOKWOOD. 181Pledge me your word of honour that I amsafe."Ranulph had scarcely given his pledge, whenMajor Mowbray rode furiously up. A deepflush of anger burst upon his cheeks ; his swordwas drawn in his hand. He glanced at Turpin,as if he would have felled him from the saddle.This is the ruffian"" cried the [Major, fiercely,who robbed my mother and my sister. Thepost-boy knew him the moment he came up.Where are they, villain? — Whither are theygone ? — answer !'"*I know not," replied Turpin, calmly. " Didnot the lad tell you they were rescued ?"Rescued ! — by whom ?'' asked Ranulph,with great emotion.By one who calls himself Sir Luke ''answered Turpin, with a meaningsmile.By him !" ejaculated Ranulph ! « Whereare they now ?""I have already answered that question''said Dick. " I repeat it, I know not."18^ ROOKWOOD.You are my prisoner," cried the Major,seizing Turpin's bridle.I have Sir Ranulph's word of honour for mysafety'' rejoined Turpin. " Let go my rein.""How is this?" asked the Major, incredulously.Ask me not. Release him," replied Ranulph.I will explain all hereafter. Let us search forthem — for Eleanor. Surely, after this, you willhelp us to find them," added he, addressingTurpin.I wish, with all my soul, I could do so'"replied the highwayman.I seed the ladies cross the brook, and enterthese old ruins," interposed the post-boy, whohad now joined the party. " I seed 'em fromwhere I stood in the hill side, and as I kept apretty sharp look out, and have a tolerablybright eye of my own, I don't think as howthey ever comet out again."And is that all you've got to say upon thesubject," exclaimed a voice, ^vith whose accentDick was perfectly familiar? " then, by my soul.ROOKWOOD. 183you might just as well have kept that uglymouth of your's shut ; for sure, and should wenot have met the ladies, bless their hearts, ifthey'd come out of this place at all. Don't weknow that they've hidden themselves here toget out of the way of that vagabond''Easy words, friend Titus, if you please,"said Dick.Aise words ; and is it to me you're talking,you thief of the night — you notorious rapparee,"replied Titus : " because if it is, I'd liketo know how it is that you are afteraddressing me as your friend; but that itwould be beneath me to fight with a highwayman,I'd have satisfaction for the affront onthe spot ; by St. Patrick ! and so I would."You may have it in a twinkling, if that'syour desire," returned Dick. " I'm as free asair. One of these gentlemen will lend me apistol, and we'll have it out at once."Lend you a pistol," said Titus ; " by myfaith, Sir, but your modesty will never standin your way. And do you think if they wouldlend you one, that I'd demand myself by184 ROOKWOOD.fighting with you. Do you think I'd makesuch a hole in my manners. It is plain youknow little of the pride of the Tyrconnels.While you were Jack Palmer, the thing wouldhave been all mighty well — but as you areblown as Dick Turpin, the thing's clane outof the question. Fight with a rapparee ! — louttout man, I'd lose my grade in society by it,entirely, and, like my friend Doctor PolyphemusSmall, IVe too much of a caste in my eyefor that."None of your d d palaver, Titus," repliedTurpin, contemptuously; " if you won't fight, sayso like a man, and don't throw your cowardiceupon your caste. Your caste indeed. Whatwould society say, were I, Dick Turpin, to screwyour nose for you, which I feel devilishly inducedto do, for your insolence."The further progress of this dispute was interruptedby a loud exclamation from RanulphRosewood.Some one is hidden within yon fissure inthe wall," cried he ; "I see a figure moves**And he flung himself from his horse, rushingROOK WOOD. 185towards the mouth of the cell. Imitating hisexample, Major Mowbray followed his friend,sword in hand.The game begins now in right earnest""said Dick to himself; " the old fox will be soonunearthed — I must look to my own bull dogs,"and he sliced his hand quietly into his pocket.Just as Ranulph and the Major reached therecess, they were startled by the sudden apparitionof the ill-fated Attorney.Mr. Coates !"''' exclaimed Ranulph, in surprise." What do you here, Sir?"I — I — that is — Sir Ranulph — you mustexcuse me. Sir — particular business — can't say,"returned the trembling Attorney; for at thisinstant his eye caught that of Turpin, and theominous reflection of a polished-steel barrel, heldcarelessly towards him. He was aware, also,that he was held in like manner, en pen, as theFrench have it, by Rust and Wilder behind ;those ruffians having threatened him with abrace of' slugs in his brain if he dared to betrayROOKWOOD.their hiding place. " It is necessary that I shouldbe guarded in my answers," murmured he.Is there any one within that place besideyourself?" said the Major, making a movementthither.No, Sir, no," answered Coates hastily, fancyingat the same time that he heard the clickof the pistol that was to be his death-warrant.How came you here. Sir?" demandedRanulph.Do you mean in this identical spot ?" repliedCoates.You can have no difficulty in answeringthat question," said the Major, sternly.Pardon me. Sir — I find considerable difficultyin answering any question, situated as I am."Have you seen Miss Mowbray ?" askedRanulph, eagerly.Or my mother ?" said the Major in the samebreath.Neither," replied Coates.I suspect you are deceiving us, Sir," said theROOKWOOD. 187Major. " Your manner is confused — I amconvinced that you know more of this matterthan you choose to explain ; and if you do notsatisfy me at once fully and explicitly, I vow toheaven '''' and the Major's sword describeda glittering circle round his head.Are you privy to their concealment P"^ askedRanulph. " Have you seen aught of them, or ofLuke Bradley ?''Speak, or this moment is your last," saidthe Major.If it is my last, I cannot speak," returnedCoates, " I begin to think the world is at an end."And you positively assure me you have notseen them ? " said Ranulph.Turpin here winked at Coates. The Attorneyunderstood him.I don t positively assert that," faltered he.How ! you have seen them ?"" shoutedRanulph.Where are they ? — In safety — speak ! "Another expressive gesture from the highestROOK WOOD.layman, communicated to the Attorney thenature of his reply.Without Sir — without — yonder'' he replied.I will show you myself — follow, gentlemen,follow"" And away scampered Coates, withoutonce venturing to look behind him.In an instant the ruined hall was deserted,and Turpin alone left behind. In the excitementof the moment, his presence had been forgotten.In an instant afterwards, the arenawas again occupied by a company equallynumerous. Rust and Wilder issued from theirhiding places, followed by a throng of thegipsy crew.Where is Sir Luke Rosewood ? " askedTurpin."He remains below'' was the answer returned."And Peter Bradley?"Stays there likewise."No matter. Now make ready, palls. Give'em one shout — Hurrah ! "ROOK WOOD. 189"Hurrah'' replied the crowd, at the topof their voices.Ranulph Rosewood and his companions heardthis shout. Mr. Coates had already explainedthe stratagem which had been practised upon themby the wily highwayman, as well as the periloussituation in which he himself had been placed ;and they were in the act of returning, to makegood his capture, when the loud shouts of thecrew arrested them. From the clamour, it wasevident that some considerable reinforcementmust have arrived from some unlooked-for quarter,and although burning to be avenged uponthe audacious highwayman, the Major felt thatit would be a task of difficulty, and thatextreme caution could alone ensure their success.With difficulty restraining the impatience ofRanulph, who could scarcely brook these fewminutes of needful delay, Major Mowbraygave particular instructions to each of the menindetail, and caused several of them to dismount.By this arrangement, Mr. Coates foundhimself accommodated with a horse, and a pair190 ROOK WOOD.of pistols, with which latter he vowed to wreakhis vengeance upon some of his recent tormentors.After a short space of time occupied inthis manner, the troop slowly advanced towardsthe postern, in much better order than uponthe previous occasion ; but the stoutest of themquailed, as they caught sight of the numerousgipsy gang drawn out in battle array, withinthe Abbey walls. Each party scanned theother's movements, in silence and wonder, anxiouslyawaiting, yet in a measure dreading, theirleader's signal to begin. That signal was notlong wanting. A shot from the ranks of Rook-wood,did instant and bitter execution. RobRust was stretched lifeless upon the ground.Nothing more was needed. The action nowbecame general. Fire arms were dischargedon both sides without much damage to eitherparty — but a rush being made by a detachmentof horse, headed by Major Mowbray, the conflictsoon became more serious. The gipsies,after the first fire, threw aside their pistols, andfought with long knives, with which they in-ROOK WOOD. 191flitted desperate gashes, both on men and horses.Major Mowbray was slightly wounded inthe thigh, and his steed receiving the blowintended for himself, stumbled, and threw hisrider. Luckily for the Major, RanulphRosewood was at hand, and with the buttend of a heavy-handled pistol, felled theruffian to the earth, just as he was upon thepoint of repeating the thrust.Turpin, meanwhile, had taken comparativelya small share in the conflict. He seemed to contenthimself by acting upon the defensive, andexcept, in the case of Titus Tyrconnel, whom,espying amongst the crowd, he had considerablyalarmed, by sending a bullet through his \vig,he did not fire a single shot.He also succeeded in unhorsed Coates, byhurling with great dexterity, the empty pistolat his head. Though apparently unconcerned inthe skirmish, he did not flinch from it, butkept his ground unyielding. " A charmed life""he seemed to bear, for amid the shower of bullets.192 ROOKWOOD.many of which were especially aimed at himself,he came off unhurt.He that's born to be hanged, will never bedrownded, that's certain'' said Titus. " It's nouse trying to bring him down. But by Jesus he'sspiled my best hat and wig, any how. There'sa hole in my beaver as big as a crown piece."But your own crown's safe, and that's somesatisfaction," said Coates, " whereas mine has abump on it, as large as a swan's egg. Ah ! —if we could only get behind him."The strife continued to rage without intermission; and though there were now several ghastlyevidences of its fury, in the shape of woundedmen, and slaughtered or disabled horses, whosegaping wounds had flooded the turf with gore,it was still difficult to see upon which side victorywould eventually declare herself. Thegipsies, though by far the greater sufferers ofthe two, firmly maintained their ground.Drenched in the blood of the horses they hadwounded, and brandishing their long knives, theyROOK WOOD. 193presented a formidable and terrific appearance,the effect of which was not at all diminished bytheir wild yells and savage gesticulations. Onthe other hand, headed by Major Mowbrayand Randolph, the troop of yeomen pressed onundauntedly; and where the sturdy farmers couldget a firm gripe of their lithe antagonists, ordeliver a blow with their ox-like fists, they seldomfailed to make good the advantages which superiorweight and strength gave them. It will thusbe seen that as yet they were pretty wellmatched — numbers were in favour of the gipsies,but courage was equally distributed, and perhaps,what is emphatically called " bottom," was infavour of the rustics. Be this as it may, fromwhat had already occurred, there was every prospectof a very serious termination to the fight.From time to time, Turpin glanced to the entranceof the cell, in the expectation of seeing SirLuke Rook wood make his appearance; and, ashewas constantly disappointed in his expectation,he could not conceal his chagrin. At length heresolved to dispatch a messenger to him, andVOL. Ill, K194} ROOKWOOD.one of the crew accordingly departed upon thiserrand. He returned presently with a look ofsuch blank dismay, that Turpin might haveaddressed him in the words of Macbeth —The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon,Where hottest thou that goose look ? —But Macbeth himself was scarcely more stunnedby the intelligence of the invasion, more " sickat heart " than Turpin, as the communicationwas breathed in his ear.In our hasty narrative of the fight, we havenot paused to particularize, nor have weenumerated the list of combatants. Amongstthem, however, were a few well known to thereader ; to wit, Jerry Juniper, the Knight ofMalta, and Zoroaster. Excalibur, as may beconceived, had not been idle; but that brightblade had been shivered by Ranulph Rook-woodin the early stage of the business, andthe Knight left weaponless. Zoroaster, whowas not merely a worshipper of fire, but athorough milling cove, had engaged to someROOKWOOD. 195purpose in a pugilistic encounter with the rustics;and, having fought several rounds, now"bore his blushing honours thick upon him'Jerry, like Turpin, had remained tolerablyquiescent. " The proper moment," he said,had not arrived." A fatality seemed to attendTurpin's immediate companions. Rust was thefirst who fell ; Wilder also was now among theslain.Things were precisely in this condition whenthe messenger returned. A marked change wasinstantly perceptible in Turpin's manner. Heno longer looked on with indifference. Heseemed angry and distrustful. He gnawed hislip, ever a sign with him of vexation. Headdressed a few words to those about him, andthen spoke more loudly to the rest of the crew.Being in the jargon of the tawney tribe, hiswords were not intelligible to the oppositeparty ; but their import was soon made knownby the almost instant and total relinquishmentof the field by the gipsies. They took to theirheels at once, to a man, leaving only a few196 ROOK WOOD.desperately wounded behind them; and, flyingalong the intricate ruins of the Priory, baffledall pursuit, wherever it was attempted. JerryJuniper was the last in the retreat ; but, uponreceiving a hint from Turpin, vaulted like a roeover the heads of his adversaries, and made goodhis escape.Turpin alone remained. He stood like alion at bay, quietly regarding the huntsmenhurtling around him. Ranulph Rook wood rodeup, and bade him surrender.Detain me not,"*' cried he, in a voice ofthunder. " If you would save her who is dearto you, descend into that vault. Off I says"*And Turpin shook away, with ease, thegrasp which Ranulph had laid upon him.Villain, you do not escape me this time,"said Major Mowbray, interposing himself betweenTurpin and the outlet.Major Mowbray, I would not have yourblood upon my heads** said Dick. " Let mepass'' and he levelled a pistol at the Major.Fire if you dare'" said the Major, raisingROOKWOOD. 197his sword. " You pass not. I will die ratherthan allow you to escape. Barricade the door.Strike him down, if he attempt to pass*"I will not take your life," said Turpin.Go seek your mother and sister within yonvault. You will find employment enough there''Saying which, he suddenly forced Bess toback a few yards ; and then, striking his heelssharply into her sides, ere his purpose could bedivined by the spectators, charged, and clearedthe lower part of the mouldering Priory walls.This feat was apparently accomplished at nogreat effort by his admirable and unequalledmare.By the powers"" cried Titus, " and he'sgiven us the slip, after all. And just when wethought to make sure of him too. Why, Mr. Coates,that wall must be higher than a five-barred gate,or any stone wall in my own country. Ifs justthe most extraordinary leap I ever set eyes on''The devil's in the fellow, certainly, or in hishorse," returned Coates ; " but if he escapes me,198 ROOKWOOD.I'll forgive him. I know whither he's bound.I'll follow him. — I'll track him like a bloodhound,slowly but surely. Recollect the hareand the tortoise. The race is not always to theswift. What say you ? 'Tis a match for fivehundred pounds — nay, for five thousand; forthere is a certain marriage certificate in theway — a glorious golden venture. You shall gohalves, if we win. We'll have him dead, or alive.What say you for London, Mr. Tyrconnel ? —Shall we start at once ?« With all my soul," replied Titus. « I'mwith you." And away this par nobile scoured.Ranulph meantime had plunged into thevault. The floor was slippery, and he had nighstumbled. Loud and deep lamentations, and awailing sound, like that of a lament for the dead,boomed in his ears. A light at the fartherextremity of the vault attracted his attention.He was filled with terrible forebodings, buteven these were not so terrible as suspense. Herushed towards the light. He passed the massiveROOKWOOD. 190pillars, and there, by the ruddy torch flame, discoveredtwo female figures. One was that of anold woman, fantastically attired, wringing herhands and moaning, or gibbering wild strains inbroken discordant, yet pathetic tones. The otherwas Mrs. Mowbray. Both were images of despair.Before them lay an object of dread. Henoticed not that old woman — he scarce sawMrs. Mowbray — he beheld only that ! It wasa female figure, but it moved not — it breathednot. The light fell imperfectly upon the face —he could not discern the features, but the veilin which it was swathed — that veil was her's ! —was Eleanor's ! He asked no more.With a wild cry he stumbled forward. —Eleanor, my beloved,'^ shrieked he.Mrs. Mowbray started at his voice, butappeared stunned, and helpless.She is dead," said Ranulph, stoopingtowards the body. " Dead — dead !''Ay*" echoed the old woman, in accents ofequal anguish — " dead— dead !"But this is not Eleanor," exclaimed he, as200 ROOK WOOD.he viewed the features more closely. " This facethough beautiful, is not heres. This dishevelledhair is black. The long lashes that shade hercheek are black. She is scarce dead. The handI clasp is yet warm— the fingers are pliant'Yet she is dead," said the old woman, in abroken voice. " She is slain""Who hath slain her ?"" asked Ranulph.I — I — her mother's mother, slew her."Thou !" exclaimed Ranulph, horror stricken.And where is Eleanor !" asked he. " Was shenot here .?*"Better she were here now, even though shewere as that poor maid," groaned Mrs. Mowbray," than where she is."Where is she, then ?" asked Ranulph, withfrantic eagerness ?Fled ! Whither I know not."With whom ?"With Sir Luke Rook wood — with AlanRosewood. They have borne her hence —Ranulph, you are too late."Gone— gone," cried Ranulph. " HowLockwood. 201escaped they? There appears to be but oneentrance to this vault. I will search each nookand cranny'''Tis vain'" replied Mrs. Mowbray. " Thereis another outlet through yon cell. By thatpassage did they escape""Too true — too true'' shouted Ranulph, whoflew to examine the cell. " And whereforefollowed you not ?"The stone rolled to its mouth, and resistedmy efforts ; I could not follow."My sister !" exclaimed Major Mowbray,who had now joined them. " Where isshe?"Gone," said Ranulph, in accents of despair.Gone," echoed the Major. " And FatherAmbrose .^"Murdered," answered Mrs. Mowbray.She is gone— she is lost to me for ever,"cried Ranulph bitterly.No," exclaimed Barbara, clutching hisarm.k5202 ROOKWOOD.Place thy trust in me, and I will find her forthee''Thou !" said Ranulph.Even I," replied Barbara. " Thy wrongsshall be righted — my Sybil be avenged."END OF BOOK THE THIRD.BOOK IV,CJe fgiglftljDapman.Many a fine fellow with a genius extensive enough to haveeffected universal reformation, has been doomed to perish bythe halter ; but does not such a man's renown extend throughcenturies and tens of centuries ; while many a prince would beoverlooked in history, were it not the historian's interest toincrease the number of his pages ? Nay, when the travellersees a gibbet, does he not exclaim, " that fellow was no fool !"and lament the hardness of the times ?ScmLLER.BOOK THE FOURTH.CHAPTER I.Ibid. Drink deep, my brave boys, of the bastinado,Of Stramazons, tinctures, and lie passages ;Of the barricade, and rare embrocado,Of blades, and rapier hilts of surest guard,Of the Vincent and Burgundian ward.Have we not bravely tossed this bombast foil button?Win gold and wear gold boys, 'tis we that merit it.Prince of Prigs' Revels,An excellent Comedy, replete with various conceits andTarltonian mirth.Allowing a space of three or four days toelapse without notice, we shall now transport ourreaders to the neighbourhood of the metropolis,and, with their permission, conduct them to aretired arbour adjoining the bowling green ofthe old hostel of Kilbum Wells.The present straggling suburb, known asTilbury, had scarcely been called into existence206 ROOKWOOD.a century ago, and the inn of which we speak,with a few detached farm-houses, were the solehabitations to be found in the present populousvicinage. The place of refreshment for therealizing cockney of 17^ was an ancient tenement of the good old stamp,with great bay windows, and a balcony in front,bearing as its ensign the jovial visage of thelusty knight. Jack FalstafF. Shaded by aspreading elm, stood a circular bench, embracingthe aged trunk of the tree; sufficientlytempting, no doubt, to incline the wandereron those dusty ways (the Edward Road hasever been proverbial for its dust and its paupers)to " rest and be thankful," and to cry encore toa frothing tankard of the best ale to be obtainedwithin the chimes of Bow Bells.Upon a table, green as the privet and hollythat formed the walls of the bower, was placed agreat china bowl, one of those leviathanmemorials of bygone wassail, which we maysometimes espy (reversed in token of itsdesuetude), perched on the top of an oldROOK WOOD. S07japanned closet, but seldom, if ever, encounterin its proper position at the genial board. Allthe appliances of festivity were at hand. Pipesand rummers strewed the board. Perfume,subtle yet mellow, as of pine and lime, exhaledfrom out the bowl, and, mingling with the scentof a neighbouring bed of mignonette, and thesubdued odour of the Indian weed, formedaltogether as delectable an atmosphere of sweetsas one would wish to inhale on a melting Augustafternoon. So at least thought the inmates ofthe arbour, nor did they, by any means, confinethemselves to the gratification of a single sense.The ambrosial contents of the china bowl provedas delicious to the taste, as its bouquet to thesmell ; while the eyesight was soothed andgratified by reposing on the smooth sward of thebowling green, spread out immediately before it,or in dwelling upon gently undulating meads,terminating at about a mile's distance in thewoody, spire-crowned heights of Hampstead.At the left of the table was seated, or ratherlounged, a slender, elegant-looking young man.208 ROOKWOOD.with dark languid eyes, sallow complexion, andfeatures wearing that peculiarly pensive expression,often communicated by dissipation; anexpression which, we regret to say, is sometimesfound more pleasing than it ought tobe in the eyes of the gentle sex. Habited in alight summer riding dress, fashioned accordingto the taste of the time, but of plain, and unpretendingmaterial, and rather under, than overdressed,he had, perhaps, on that very account,perfectly the air of a gentleman. There was,altogether, an absence of pretension about him,which, combined with great apparent self-possession,contrasted very forcibly with thevulgar assurance of his showy companions.The figure of the youth was slight, even tofragility, giving little outward manifestationof the vigour of frame he in reality possessed.His features would have been altogethereffeminate, but for a pair of raven whiskers,with which his cheeks were shaded. To savethe reader any speculation as to who this sparkmight be, we will at once acquaint him with hisROOKWOOD. 209name and calling. He was a no less distinguishedpersonage than Tom King, a notedTobyman of his time, who obtained, from hisappearance and address, the sobriquet ofthe " Gentleman Highwayman."Tom was indeed a pleasant fellow in his day.His career was brief, but brilliant : yourmeteors are ever momentary. He was a youngerson of a good family — had good blood in hisveins — but not a groat in his pockets. Accordingto the old song,When he arrived at man's estate,It was all the estate he had !And all the estate he was ever likely to have.Nevertheless, though he had no income, hecontrived, as he said, to live as if he had; amiracle which has not been solely confined tohimself. For a moneyless man, he had ratherexpensive habits. He kept his three nags;and, if fame does not belie him, a like number ofmistresses ; — nay, if we are to place any faith incertainscandalous chronicles to which we havehad access, he was for some time the favoured210 ROOKWOOD.lover of a celebrated actress, who for the timesupplied him with the means of keeping up hisshowy establishment. But things could notlong hold thus. Tom was a model of infidelity,and that was the only failing his mistress couldnot overlook. She dismissed him at a moment'snotice. Unluckily too, he had other propensities,which contributed to involve him. Hehad a taste for the turf — a taste for play — waswell known in the hundreds of Drury, andcut no mean figure at Howell's, and the Farotables thereanent. He was the glory of theSmyrna, d'Osyndar's, and other chocolate housesof the day, and it was at this time he fell intothe hands of certain dexterous sharpers, bywhom he was first plucked, and subsequentlypatronized. Under their tuition he improvedwonderfully. He turned his wit and talent tosome account. He began to open his eyes.His nine days' blindness was over. The dogsaw; but, spite of his quickness, he was atlength discovered, and ejected from Howell'sin a manner that left him no alternative. HeROOKWOOD. 211must either have called out his adversary, orgo out himself. He preferred the latter, andtook to the road ; and in his new line, he hadbeen eminently successful. Fortunately, he hadno scruples to get over. Tom had what SirWalter Scott happily denominates " an indistinctnotion of meum and tuum and became confirmedin the opinion, that every thing he couldlay hands upon constituted lawful spoil. Andthen, even those he robbed admitted that he wasthe most gentlemanlike highwayman they hadever had the fortune to meet with, and trustedthey might always be so lucky. So popular didhe become upon the road, that it was accounted adistinction to be stopped by him ; he made a pointof robbing none but gentlemen, and — Tom'sshade would quarrel with us were we to omitthem — ladies ! His acquaintance with Turpinwas singular, and originated in a rencontre.Struck with his appearance, Dick presented apistol, and bade King deliver. The latter burstinto a laugh, and an explanation immediatelyensued. Thenceforward they became sworn212 ROOKWOOD.brothers— the Py lades and Orestes of the Road ;and though seldom seen together in public, hadmany a merry moonlight ride in company.Tom still maintained three mistresses, his valet,his groom (tiger we should have called him),and many a change of clothes besides*" sayshis biographer, " with which he appeared morelike a lord than a highwayman." And whatmore, we should like to know, would a lordwish to have ? Few younger sons, we believe,can boast so much ; and it is chiefly on theiraccount, with some remote view to the benefit ofthe unemployed youth of all professions, that wehave enlarged so much upon Tom King's history.The road, we must beg to repeat, is stillopen — the chances are greater than theyever were — we fully believe it is their onlyroad to preferment, and we are sadly in want ofhighwaymen !Fancy Tom lounging at d' Osyndar's, carelesslytapping his boots on the steps — there hestands ! Is he not a devilish good-looking gentlemanlikesort of fellow ? You could never haveROOKWOOD. mistakenhim for a highwayman but for our information.A waiter appears — supper is ordered attwelve — a broiled chicken and a bottle ofBurgundy — his groom brings his nags to thedoor — he mounts. It is his custom to ride outon an evening — he is less liable to interruption*.At Marylebone Fields (now the Regents' Park)his groom leaves him. He has a mistress in theneighbourhood. He is absent for a couple ofhours, and returns gay or dispirited,* as his luckmay have turned out. At twelve he is at supper,and has the night before him. How very easyall this seems. Can it be possible, we have noTom Kings ?But to return to Tom as he was in the arbour.Judging from his manner, he appeared to bealmost insensible of the presence of his companions,and to be scarcely a partaker in theirrevelry. His back was towards his immediate• We have heard of a certain gentleman Tobyman, we forgetwhom, taking the horses from his curricle for a similarpurpose, but we own we think King's the simpler plan, andquite practicable still. A cabriolet would be quite out of thequestion, but particularly easy to stop I214 Lockwood,neighbour ; his glass sparkled untouched at hiselbow — and one hand, beautifully white andsmall, a mark of his birth and breeding (creteByron), rested upon the edge of the table,while his thin delicate digits, palpably demonstrativeof his faculty of adaptation (crete JamesHardy Vaux), were employed with a silvertoothpick. In other respects, he seemed to belost in reverie, and was, in all probability,meditating new exploits.Next to King, sat our old friend Jerry Juniper;not, however, the Jerry of the gipsies, butamuch more showy-looking personage. — Jerrywas no longer a gentleman of " three outs'' — thedifficulty would now have been to say what he was^' without." Snake-like he had cast his slough,and rejoiced in new and brilliant investiture.His were " speaking garments, speaking pocketstoo." His linen was of the finest, his hose ofthe smartest. Gay rings glittered on hisfingers — a crystal snufF box underwent gracefulmanipulation — a handsome gold repeater wassometimes drawn from its location with aROOK WOOD. 215monstrous bunch cf onions (anglice seals),depending from its massive chain. Laceadorned his wrists, and shoes (of which they hadbeen long unconscious) with buckles nearly aslarge as themselves, confined his feet. A richpowdered peruke, and silver liked sword, completedthe gear of the transmogrified Jerry, or,as he now chose to be designated, Count AlbertConfers. The fact was, that Jerry, after thefracas, apprehensive that the country wouldbe too hot for him, had, in company withZoroaster, quitted the ranks of the cantingcrew, and made the best of his way to town. Alucky spice * on the road set them up, and havingsome acquaintance with Tom King, the party ontheir arrival sought him out at his customaryhaunt, d'Osyndar's, and enlisted under hisbanners.Tom received them with open arms, gavethem unlimited use of his wardrobe, and onlyrequired a little trifling assistance in return.♦ Foot-pad Rubbery.216 ROOK WOOD.He had a grand scheme in petty, in the executionof which they could mainly assist him. Jerrywas a Greek by nature, and could land a flatas well as the best of them. Zoroaster was justthe man to lose a fight ; or, in the language ofthe Fancy, to play a cross. No two legs couldserve Tom's purposes better ; he welcomed themwith fraternal affection.But in the meantime, we must proceed toreconnoitre Jerry ""s opposite neighbour, who was,however, no other than that Upright Man,The Magus Zoroaster, that great name.Shelley.Changed as was Juniper, the Magus was yetmore whimsically metamorphosed. Some tracesof Jerry still remained, but not a vestige wasleft of the original Timber Amber. Histawny mother had not known her son. Thisalteration, however, was not owing to change ofdress ; it was the result of the punishment he hadundergone at the " Set to " at the Priory. Not afeature was in its place ; his swollen lip trespassedROOK WOOD. 217upon the precincts of his nose, his nose trod hardupon his cheek, while his cheek again, not to bebehind the rest, rose up like an apple-dumplingunder his single eye — single we say — foralas ! — there was no speculation in the other —his dexter daylight was utterly darkened — andindeed, the orb that remained, was as sanguinea luminary as ever struggled through a Londonfog at noon day. To borrow a couplet or twofrom the Laureate of the Fancy :One of his peepers was putOn the bankruptcy list, with his shop-windows shut,While the other had nearly as tag-rag a show,All rimmed round with black, like the Courier in woe.One black patch decorated his rainbow-colouredcheek, another adorned his chin ; agrinder or so having been dislodged, his pipetook possession of the aperture. His toggervwas that of a member of the prize ring — whatwe now call a " beecher "" bound his throat — aspotted ogle bandaged his job bern owl, andshaded his right peeper, while a white beavercrowned the occiput of the Magus. AmiVOL. III. L218 ROOKWOOD.though at first sight there would appear to besome incongruity in the association of such abattered character as the Upright Man, withhis smart companions, the reader's wonder willrapidly diminish, when he reflects, that any distinguishedP. C. man can ever find a readypassport to the most exclusive society. Viewedin this light, Zoroaster's familiarity with hisswell acquaintance occasioned no surprise toold Simon Carr, the bottle-nosed landlordof the Falstaff, who was a man of discernmentin his way, and knew a thing or two. Despitesuch striking evidences to the contrary, theMagus was perfectly at his ease, and sacrificingas usual to the god of flame. His mithra, orpipe, the symbol of his faith, was zealouslyplaced between his lips, and never did hisChaldean, Bactrian, Persian, Amphibia, Pro-connexion,or Babylonian namesake, which everof the six was the true Zoroaster {mde Bayle),respire more fervently at the altar of fire, thanour Magus at the end of his enkindled tube.In his creed we believe he was a Dualism, andROOK WOOD. 219believed in the co-existence, and mystical relationof the principles of good and ill — his pipebeing his Yezdan, or benign influence ; hisempty pouch his Fireman, or the devil. But weshall not pause to examine his tenets — wemeddle with no man's religious opinions, anshall leave the Magus to the enjoyment of hisown sentiments, be they what they may.One guest alone remains, and him we shallbriefly dismiss. The reader, we imagine, willscarcely need to be told who was the owner ofthose keen, gray eyes — those exuberant redwhiskers — that airy azure frock ! It wasOur brave co-partner of the Roads,Skilful surveyor of highways and hedges ;in a word — Dick Turpin !Dick had been called upon to act as presidentof the board, and an excellent president hemade, sedulously devoting himself to the dueadministration of the punch bowl. Not arummer was allowed to stand empty for aninstant. Toast, sentiment, and anacreontic220 ROOKWOOD.song, succeeded each other at speedy intervals; but there was no speechifying — no politics.He left church and state to take care of themselves.Whatever his politics might be, Dicknever allowed them to interfere with his pleasures.His maxim was to make the most of the passingmoment ; the dum vicious vivamus was neverout of his mind ; a precautionary measure whichwe recommend to the adoption of all gentlemenof the like, or any other precarious profession.Notwithstanding all DicVs efforts to promoteconviviality, seconded by the excellence of thebeverage itself, conversation somehow or otherbegan to flag; from being general it becameparticular. Tom King, who was no punch-cibber,especially at that time of day, fell into adeep reverie — your gamesters often do so — whilethe Magus, who had smoked himself drowsy, wascomposing himself to a doze. Turpin seizedthis opportunity of addressing a few words onmatters of business to Jerry Juniper, or, as henow chose to be called. Count Confers.My dear Counts** said Dick, in a low andROOKWOOI>. 221confidential tone, " you are aware that myerrand to to^\^l is accomplished — I have smashedLawyer Coates's screen — pocketed the hammock(here ^tis,^"* continued he, parenthetically slappinghis pockets), " and done t'other trick in primetwig for Tom King. With a cool thousandin hand, I might, if I chose, rest awhile on myoars ; but a quiet life don't suit me. I must bemoving. So I shall start to Yorkshire tonight''Indeed," said the soi-disant Count, in alanguid tone — " so soon ? '"*I have nothing to detain me," replied DickAnd, to tell you the truth, I want to see howmatters stand with Sir Luke Rosewood. Ishould be sorry if he went to the wall for wantof any assistance I can render him."True," returned the Count, " one wouldregret such an occurrence certainly — but I fearyour assistance may arrive a little too late. Heis pretty well done up, I should imagine, by thistime.""That remains to be seen," said Turpin.222 Lockwood.His case is a bad one to be sure — d d bad —but I trust not utterly hopeless. With all hisimpetuosity and pride, I like the fellow, andwill help lii if I can. It will be a difficultgame to set him on his legs, but I think it maybedone. That underground marriage wassheer madness, and turned out as ill as such ascheme might have been expected to do. PoorSybil ! if I could pipe an eye for any thing, itshould be for her. — I wouldn't have her deathat my door for a trifle — but that's neither herenor there. It was her own act, and no one isanswerable for it in any court below stairs,whatever they may be at that above. I don'tknow how it is, Jerry ; I'm not much given tothinking of those things, but that girl's lookshave been running in my noddle ever since Isaw her by torchlight at the altar, just before herdeath. I never saw any thing that moved me somuch. I can't get her out of my head. — Giveme a pinch of snuff". Such thoughts unman one.As to the priest, that's a totally different affair.If he strangled his daughter, old Alan didROOKWOOD. 323right to take the law into his own hands, andsqueeze his throttle for him. — I'd have done thesame thing myself; and, being a proscribedJesuit, returned, as I understand, without theKing's licence for so doing, why father Checkley'smurder (if it mus be so called, I can't abidehard terms) won't lie very heavy at Alan's door.That, however, has nothing to do with Sir Luke.He was neither accessory nor principal. Still hewill be in danger, at least from Lady Rosewood'smachinations. The whole county of York,I make no doubt, is up in arms by this time."Then why venture thither ?" said the Count,somewhat ironically, " for my part, I've a strangefancy for keeping out of harm's way as long aspossible."Every man to his taste," returned Turpin —I like a row. My craft sails latest when thebreeze is brisk ; for then there is always most tobe picked up. I love to confront danger. Runaway! pshaw ! always meet your foe half way."True," replied the Count, " half way I — but224 ROOKWOOD.you go the whole distance. What prudent man •would beard the lion in his den ?"I never was a prudent mans*' rejoined Dick,smiling — " I have no superfluous caution aboutme. Come what will, I shall try to find out thisLuke Rosewood, and offer him my purse, suchas .it is, and it is now better lined than usual ;a hand free to act as he lists, and a head, whichimprudent though it be, can often think betterfor others than for its own master"""Vastly fine"" exclaimed the Count, with anill-disguised sneer — " but I hope you don't forgetthat the marriage certificate, which you hold, isperfectly valueless now. The estates, you areaware ^'"*Are no longer Sir Luke's — I see what youare driving at, Counts"* returned Dick coldly. —But he will need it, to establish his claim to thetitle — and he shall have it. — While he was SirLuke with ^.10,000 a-year, I drove a hard bargain,and would have stood out for the laststiver I demanded ; but now that he is one ofROOKWOOD. 225Us'' a simple Chevalier industria, he shallhave it, and welcome'"Perhaps Lady Rook wood, or Mrs. Mowbray,might be inclined to treat"" maliciously insinuatedthe Count ; " the title may be worthsomething to Ranulph.""It is worth more to Luke ; and if it werenot — he gets it. Are you satisfied .^""Perfectly"" replied the Count, with affectedhonhommie — " and I will now let you into asecret respecting Miss Mowbray, from whichyou may gather something for your guidance inthis matter ; and if the word of woman be at allto be trusted, though individually I cannotsay that I have much faith in it. Sir Lakesplanetary hour is not yet completely overcast""That's exactly what I wish to know, mydear fellow"" said Turpin, eagerly. — " You havealready told me that you were witness to asingular interview between Miss Mowbray andSir Luke, after my departure from the Priory,If I mistook you not, the whole business willhinge upon that. What occurred ? Let meL 5ROOKWOOD.have every particular ? The whole history andmystery."You shall with pleasure," said the Count —and I hope it may tend to your benefit ;as I have just observed, the fabric rests on asandy foundation. But, before I begin, I mustclear my whistle, for it's a long tale. Here's totheir speedy union, ha — ^ha! though an oldcatch that I've heard, says, —No mate ever brook would,A rook of the Rosewood.'I wonder how it will turn out in Sir Luke'scase."Pol — pol," cried Dick, impatiently — " theinterview-the interview."Well," said the Count, " You shall have itwithout nitre delay. After I had quitted thescene of action at the Priory, and at your desireleft the Rosewood party masters of the field, Ifled with the rest of the crew towards therocks. There we held council of war for ashort time. Some were for returning to theROOKWOOD. 227fight ; but this was negatived entirely, and inthe end it was agreed that those who had wives,daughters, and sisters, should join them asspeedily as possible at their retreat in thegrange; but as I happened to have none ofthese attractive ties, and had only a troublesomemistress, who I thought could take care ofherself, I did not care to follow them, butstruck deeper into the wood, and made myway, guided by destiny, I suppose, towards thecave""The cave !*'* cried Dick, rubbing his hands —I delight in a cave. Tom King and I oncehad a cave of our own at Epping, and I'll haveanother, one of these fine days — a cave is asproper to a high Tobyman as a castle to aBaron ; but go on*"The cave I speak of*" continued the Count,was seldom used, except upon great emergencies,by any of the Stop Hole Abbey crew. Itwas a sort of retiring den of our old lionessBarbara, and, like all belonging to her, respectedby her dupes;" however, the cave is a good cave228 Lockwood.for all that— is well concealed by brushwood,and comfortably lighted from a crevice in therock above ; it lies near the brink of the stream,amongst the woods, just above the waterfall, andis somewhat difficult of approach /"*I know something of the situation"" saidTurpin.Well'' returned the Count ; " not to losetime, into this den I crept, and, expectingto find it vacant, you may imagine my surpriseon discovering that it was already occupied, andthat Sir Luke Rosewood, his grand-dad. MissMowbray, and worst of all, the very person Iwished most to avoid, my old flame Handassah,constituted the party's*'A disagreeable rencontre truly," saidTurpin.Fortunately, they did not perceive myentrance," continued Jerry ; " and I tookespecial care not to introduce myself. Retreat,however, was for the moment impracticable, andI was compelled to be a listener. I cannot tewhat had passed between the parties before myJIOOKWOOD. 229arrival, but I heard Miss Mowbray implore SirLuke to conduct her to her mother. He seemedhalf inclined to comply with her piteousentreaties; but old Alan shook his head. Itwas then Handassah put in a word ; the minxwas ever ready at that. ' Fear not,' said she,that she will wed Sir Ranulph. Deliver herto her friends, I beseech you, Sir Luke, and wooher honourably. She will accept you.' SirLuke stared incredulously, and grim old Alansmiled. ' She has sworn to be your s,' continuedHandassah ; ' sworn it by every hope of heaven,and the oath has been sealed by blood — ^bySybil's blood.' — ' Speaks she true?' asked SirLuke, trembling with agitation. Miss Mowbrayanswered not. ' You will not deny it,lady,' said Handassah. ' I heard that oathproposed — I heard it uttered — I saw it registered.You cannot — you will not — dare not deny it.'I do not,' replied Miss Mowbray, with muchanguish of manner ; ' if he claim me, I am his,'And he will claim thee,' said Alan Rookwood^triumphantly. « He has thy oath, no matter230 Lockwood.how extorted — thou must fulfil thy vow — * Iam prepared to do so"" said Eleanor. ' But ifyou would not utterly destroy me, let this maidconduct me to my mother — to my friends,'To Ranulph ?' asked Sir Luke, bitterly. ' No,no,' returned Miss Mowbray, in accents ofdeepest despair — ' to my mother — I wish not tobehold him again.' — ' Be it so,' cried Sir Luke ;but remember, in love or hate, thou art mine ;I shall claim the fulfilment of thy oath. Farewell.Handassah will lead thee to thy mother.'Miss Mowbray bowed her head, but returned noanswer, while, followed by old Alan, Sir Lukedeparted from the cavern."Whither went they ?" demanded Turpin ?That I know not," replied Jerry. " I wasabout to follow, when I was prevented.""How?" asked Dick. « By the abruptentrance of another party. Scarcely, I thinkcould the two Rookwoods have made good theirretreat, when shouts were heard without, andyoung Ranulph and Major Mowbray forcedtheir way, sword in hand, into the cave. HereROOKWOOD. 231was a situation — for me 1 mean — to the younglady, I make no doubt, it was pleasant enoughbut my neck was in jeopardy. However, youknow that I am not deficient in strength, and,upon the present occasion, I made the best useof the agility with which boon nature hasendowed me. Amidst the joyous confusion —the sobbing, and embracing, and congratulationsthat ensued, I contrived, like a wild cat, toclimb the rocky sides of the cave, and concealedmyself behind a jutting fragment of stone. Itwas well I did so, for scarcely was I hidden,when in came old Barbara, followed by Mrs.Mowbray, and a dozen others**Barbara !" ejaculated Dick. " Was she aprisoner ?'"*A prisoner !''' repeated Jerry, smiling significantly." No, the old hell cat is too deep for that.She had nosed upon Sir Luke, and hoped theywould grab him and his grand-dad. But thebirds were flown""I 'm glad she was baulked," said Dick.Was any search made after them ?'"23^ ROOK WOOD.Can't say" replied Jerry. " I could onlyindistinctly catch the sounds of their voicesfrom my lofty hiding place. Before they leftthe cavern, I made out that Mrs. Mowbrayresolved to go to Rosewood, and to take herdaughter thither, a proceeding to which thelatter strongly objected."To Rookwood,"" said Dick, musingly.Will she keep her oath, I wonder P''That's more than I can say'' said Jerry,dipping his punch. " 'Tis a deceitful sex."A deceitful sex, indeed," echoed Dick,tossing off a tumbler ; " for one Sybil we meetwith twenty Manassas, eh. Count."Twenty — a hundred to one," repliedJerry. " 'Tis a vile sex ! "-Tuulj-S WJC-c^CHAPTER II.Grimm. How gloriously the sun sets to-night.Moor. When I was a boy, my favourite thought was, thatI should live and die like yonder glorious orb. It was aboyish thought.Grimm. True, Captain.The Robbers.Peace, base calumniators"' exclaimed TomKing, aroused from his toothpick reverie by theseaspersions of the best part of creation. " Peace,I say. None shall dare to abuse that deardevoted sex in the hearing of her champion,without pricking a lance with me in her behalf.What do you, either of you, who abuse womanin that wholesale style, know of her ? Nothing —less than nothing ; and yet you venture, uponyour paltry experience, to lift up your voicesand decry the sex. Now, I do know her — andupon my own experience, I avouch, that as a234 ROOKAVOOD.sex, woman, compared with man, is as an angelto a devil. As a sex, woman is faithful —loving — self-sacrificing. We 'tis that make herotherwise ; zve, selfish, exacting, neglectful men ;we teach her indifference, and then blame herapt scholarship. We spoil our own hand, andthen blame the cards. No abuse of women inmy hearing. Give me a glass of grog, Dick —the sex — three times three; and here's a songfor you into the bargain." Saying which, inamellow plaintive tone, Tom gave the following: —PLEDGE or THE HighwaymanCome fill up a bumper to Eve's fairest daughters,Who have lavished their smiles on the brave and the free ;Toast the sweethearts of Dudley, Hind, Wilmot, and Waters*,Whate'er their attractions, whate'er their degree.Pledge — pledge in a bumper, each kind-hearted maiden,Whose bright eyes were dimmed at the Highwayman's fall —Who stood by the gallows with sorrow o'erladen.Bemoaning the fate of the gallant Du Vals .Four celebrated highwaymen, all rejoicing in the honourabledistinction of Captain.f Of this gay and chivalrous robber, his flageolet andcourant, his bonnes fortunes, his masked visitants, his gorgeousfuneral, and the crowd of damsels who bewailed his loss, weROOK WOOD. 235Here's to each pretty lass chance of war bringeth near one,Whom, with manner impassioned, we tenderly stop ;And to whom, like the lover addressing his dear one,In terms of entreaty, the question we pop.How oft in such case rosy lips have proved sweeterThan the rosiest book — bright eyes saved a bright ring,While that one other kiss has bought off a repeater ;And a bead as a. favour — the favourite string.With our hearts ready rifled, each pocket we rifle,With the pure flame of chivalry stirring our breasts ;Life's risk for our mistress's praise is a trifle ;And each purse is a trophy cur homage attests.Then toss off your glasses to all girls of spirit.Ne'er with names, or with number, your memories vex ;Our toast, boys, embraces each woman of merit,And for fear of omission we'll toast the whole sex !have spoken at some length in our first volume ; but they whodesire to hear more of him will do well, if they are not alreadyacquainted with it, to turn to a delightful essay on the subjectof Thieves, Ancient and Modern, in Mr. Leigh Hunt's Indicator,in which there is a sparkling sketch of the gallant Claude.Our only regret is that Mr. Hunt did not expatiate moreupon the Highwaymen ; but we trust he will repair this errorin the London Journal, and give us a brilliant page or twoon the denizens of the empire of High Toby. A-propos of theLondon Journal, let us, even in a hasty note, wish Mr. Hunt allthe success in his new undertaking, which he so richly merits ;and counsel all our readers who love the cordial, the kindly,the amiable, the poetical, the fanciful, and the reasonable inevery sense, at once to become subscribers to this pleasantnessof pleasant hebdomadabs. He who can turn even " stones*'to gems must possess a subtle alchemy.2136 ROOKWOOD.Well," replied Dick, replenishing King'srummer, while he laughed heartily at his ditty,I shan't refuse your toast, though my heartdon't respond to your sentiments. Ah, Tom !the sex you praise so much, may, I fear, proveyour undoing. Do as you please, but curse meif ever I pin my life to a petticoat. I'd assoon think of neglecting the four cautions."The four cautions," said King ; " what arethey?"Did you never hear them .^" replied Dick.Attend then, and be edified."THE FOUR CAUTIONS.Pay attention to these cautions four,And through life you will need little more.Should you dole out your days to three score :Beware of a pistol before,Before, before,Beware of a pistol before.And when backwards his ears are inclined.And his tail with his ham is combined.Caution two you will bear in your mind :Beware of a prancer behind.Behind, behind,Beware of a prancer behind.KOOXWOOD. 237Thirdly, when in the park you may ride,On your best bit of blood, Sir, astride.Chatting gay to your old friend's young bride,Beware of a coach at the side,At the side, at the side,• Beware of a coach at the side.Lastly, whether in puq^le or grey,Canter, ranter, grave, solemn, or gay,Whate'er he may do or may say.Beware of a priest every way,Every way, every way.Beware of a priest every way.^' Methinks ! ^' exclaimed Jerry, " I haveheard something like that before; but therewas a trifling variation in the reading of the firststanza''Very possibly"" returned Dick. " Myversion is intended for the Family Library*."*'Well," said Tom King, " all you can singor say don't alter my good opinion of the women.Not a secret have I from the girl of my heart.This is no anachronism, though it would appear to be one.Turpin alluded to the records of the rigging fraternity ! allwbo live upon the cross being included, amongst themselves, inthe affectionate designation of " the Family."ROOKWOOD.She could have sold me over and over again, ifshe had chosen — but my sweet Sue is not thewench to do that."It is not too late'' said Dick. " YourAllah may yet hand you over to thePhilistines."Then I shall die in a good cause," saidKing : " butThe Tyburn treeHas no terrors for me,Let better men swing — I'm at liberty.I shall never come to the scragging post, unlessyou turn osman*, Dick Turpin. My nativityhas been cast, and the stars have declared thatI am to die by the hand of my best friend — andthat's you—eh, Dick ?"It sounds like it," replied Turpin ; " but Iadvise you not to become too intimate with JackKetch — he may prove your best friend after all."Why faith, that's true," replied KingHangman.ROOK WOOD. 239laughing ; " and if I must ride backwards upHolbom Hill, FU do the thing in style, andhonest Jack shall never want his regulars. Aman should always die game. We none of usknow how soon our turn may come, but comewhen it will, / shall never flinch from it. Andnow to change the subject. You are off, Iunderstand, to Yorkshire to-night ; Dick — ^'ponmy soul you are a wonderful fellow — an alibipersonified ! — here and there and every where atoneand the same time — no wonder you are calledthe flying highwayman. To-day in town — tomorrowat York — the day after at Chester. Thedevil only knows where you will pitch yourquarters a week hence — neither beak nor trapcan have a chance of guessing. There arerumours of you in all counties at the samemoment. This man swears you robbed him atHounslow — that, on Salisbury Plain — whileanother swears you monopolize Cheshire andYorkshire, and that it is'nt safe even tohunt without pops in your pocket. I heard240 ROOKWOOD.some devilish good stories of you at D'Osyndar'stether day ; the fellow who told them to me,little thought that I was a brother blade''You flatter me'' said Dick, smiling complacently," but it's no merit of mine. BlackBess alone enables me to do it, and her's be thecredit. Talking of being every where at thesame time, you shall hear what she once did formein Cheshire. Meantime a glass to the bestmare in England — you won't refuse that toast,Tom. Ah ! if your mistress was only as true toyou, as my nag to me, you might set at noughtthe tightest hempen cravat that was ever twisted,and defy your best friend to hurt you — BlackBess ! and God bless her. And now for thesong." Saying which, with much emotion, hechaunted the following rhymes.BLACK BESS.Let the lover his mistress's beauty rehearse,And laud her attractions in languishing verse ;Be it mine in rude strains, but with truth to express,The love that I bear to my bonny Black Bess..ROOK WOOD. 241From the West was her dam from the East was her sire,From the one came her swiftness, the other her fire ;No peer of the realm better blood can possess,Than flows in the veins of my bonny Black Bess.Look ! look I how that eyeball glows bright as a brand !That neck proudly arches, those nostrils expand !Mark ! that T;\-ide-flowing mane 1 of which each silky tressMight adorn prouder beauties — though none like Black Bess.Mark ! that skin sleek as velvet, and dusky as night,With its jet disfigured by one lock of white ;That throat branched with veins, prompt to charge or caressNow is she not beautiful — bonny Black Bess ?Over highway and byway, in rough and smooth weather,Some thousands of miles have we journey together ;Our couch the same straw, and our meal the same mess,No couple more constant than I and Black Bess.By moonlight, in darkness, by night, or by day,Her headlong career there is nothing can stay.She cares not for distance — she knows not distress —Can you show me a courser to match with Black Bess ?Egad, I should think not' exclaimedKing ; " you are as sentimental on the subjectof your mare, as I am when I think of mydarling Susan — but I beg pardon for myinterruption — pray proceed"'Let me first clear my throat'' returnedDick, " and now — to resume — "^VOL. III. M242 ROOKWOOD.Once it happened in Cheshire, near Dunham, I poppedOn a horseman alone, whom I speedily stopped ;That 1 lightened his pockets you'll readily guess —Quick work makes Dick Turpin when mounted on Bess.Now it seems the man knew me ; " Dick Turpin," said he,You shall swing for this job, as you live d'ye see;"I laughed at his threats and his vows of redress,I was sure of an alibi then with Black Bess.The road was a hollow, a sunken ravine*,Overshadowed completely by wood like a screen ;I clambered the bank, and I needs must confessThat one touch of the spur grazed the side of Black Bess.Brake, brook, meadow, and plough'd field, Bess fleetlybestrode.As the crow wings her flight, we selected our road,We arrived at Hough Green in five minutes or less,My neck, it was saved, by the speed of Black Bess.The exact spot where Turpin committed this well-knownrobbery, and which has often been pointed out to us, lies inwhat is now a woody hollow, though once the old road fromNottingham to Knutsford, skirting the rich and sylvan domainsof Dunham, and descending t*lie hill which brings you to thebridge crossing the river Bollin. With some little difficultywe penetrated this ravine ; it is just the locality for such anadventure. A small brook wells through it, and the steep banksare overhung with every description of timber, and were, theother day, a perfect nest of primroses and wild flowers. Hough(pronounced Hoo) Green lies, we believe, at about three milesdistance across the country — the way Turpin rode. The oldBowling green is one of the pleasantness inns in Cheshire.ROOKWOOD. 243Stepping carelessly forward, I lounge on the green,Taking excellent care that by all I am seen,Some remarks on time's flight, to the squires I address,But I say not a word of the flight of Black Bess;I mention the hour — it was just about four —Play a rubber at bowls — think the danger is o'er,When athwart my next game, like a checkmate at chess,Comes the horseman in search of the rider of Bess.What matter details ? OS* with triumph I came,He swears to the hour — and the squires swear the same,I had robbed him at four — while at four they professI was quietly bowling — all thanks to Black Bess.Then one halloo, boys — one loud cheering halloo —To the swiftest of coursers — the gallant, the true ;For the sportsman unborn, shall the memory bless,Of the horse of the highwayman, bonny Black Bess !Loud acclamations rewarded Dick's performance.Awakened from his doze, Zoroasterbeat time to the melody, the only thing, Jerrysaid, he was capable of heating in his presentshattered condition. After some little persuasion,the Magus was prevailed upon toenliven the company with a strain, which hetrolled forth after a maudlin manner : it was asfollows —S44 ROOKWOOD.THE DOUBLE CROSS.-Though all of us have heard o{ crost fights,And certain gains, by certain lost fights ;I rather fancies that it's news,How in a mill, both men should losesFor vere the odds are thus made even.It plays the dickens with the steven * ;Besides, against all rule they're sinning,A' ere neither has no chance of winning.Ri— tol-lol— &c.Two milling coves, each vide awake,Vere backed to fight for heavy stake ;But in the meantime, so it vos.Both kids agreed to play a cross ;Bold came each buffer f to the scratch.To make it look a tights match ;They peeled X in style— and bets vere making,Twas six to four — but few were taking.Ri— tol-lol— &c.Quite cautiously the mill began.For neither knew the other's plan ;Each cull § completely in the dark.Of wot might be his neighbour's mark ;Resolved his Jibbing \\ not to mind.Nor yet to pay him back in kind ;So on each other kept they tout ^,And sparred a bit, and dodged about.Ri— tol-lol— &c.Money. f Man. J Stripped. § Fellow.II A particular kind of pugilistic punishment.% Kept each an eye upon the other.Lockwood. ^45^With males * raised, Tom bent his back,As if to plant a heavy thwack,Vile Jem with neat left-handed stopper,Straight threatened Tommy with a topper;'Tis all my eye ! no claret flows,No facers sound — no smashing blows —Five minutes pass — yet not a hit,How can it end, palls ? wait a bit?Ri— tol-lol— &c.Each cove vos teazed with double duty.To please his backers, yet play booty f ;Even luckily for Jem a tellerVos planted right upon his smeller ;Down dropped he stunned — even time was called,Seconds in vain the seconds bawled —The mill is o'er— the crosser crost,The loser's von, the winner lostRi— tol-lol— &c. 'The party assumed once more a lively airand the glass was circulated so freely, that atlast a final charge drained the ample bowl ofits contents.The best of friends must part' said Dick,and willingly would I order another whiff ofpunch, but that I think we have all had enoughto satisfy us, as you milling coves have it,Tory ! — Your one eye has got a drop in it already,Hands. f Deceive them.246 ROOKWOOD.old fellow — and to speak the truth, I must begettinginto the saddle without more delay, forI have a long ride before me. And now friendJerry, before I start, suppose you tip us one ofyour merry staves ; we haven't heard your pipeto-day, and never a cross cove of us all, be hehigh or low toby, cracksman, spicegloak, orsneak, can throw off so rum a chaunt as yourself.A song, a song""Ay, a song"" reiterated King and theMagus.You do me too much honour, gemmen,""said Jerry modestly, taking a pinch of snuff; " Iam sure I shall be most happy — my chaunts areall of a sort — you must make all due allowanceshem ! " and clearing his throat, he forthwithwarbledTHE MODERN GREEK.not translated from the Romaic.)Come penmen name, and make your game.See round the ball is spinning.Black, red, or blue, the colours view,Vne, deux, cinque, 'tis beginning.Then make your game,The colour name,While round the ball is spinning.ROOKWOOD. 24TThis sleight of hand my flat shall landWhile covered by my bonnet *.I plant my ball, and boldly call,Come make your game upon it.Thus rat-a-tat,I land my flat,'Tis black — not red — is winning.At gay roulette was never metA lance like mine for bleeding;I'm ne'er at fault, at nothing halt,All other legs preceding.To all awake,I never stakeA mag t, unless I nip itBlind-hookey sees how well I squeeze,The well' packed cards in shuffling ;Ecarte — whist — I never missedA nick the broads % while ruffling.Mogul or loo.The same I do.I'm down to trumps as trippet.French Hazard ta'en, / 7iick the main,Was ne'er so prime a caster.No crabs for me, I'm fly d'ye see,The bank shall change its master.Seven, quatre, trois—The stakes are high,Ten mains — ten mains are mine, pals,• Accomplice.t A farthing. J Cards.248 ROOKWOOD.At Rouge et Noir, yon hellish * choir,I'll make no bones of stripping,One glorious coup for me shall do,While they may deal each pip in. —Trente-un-apreSf mNe'er clogs my way,The game — the game's divine, pals.At Billiards set, I make my bet,I'll score and win the rub, pals ;I miss my cue, my hazard too,But yet my foe I'll drub, pals.That cannon-twist,I ne'er had missed,Unless to suit my views, pals.To make all right, the match look fight.This trick you know is done pals;But now be gay, I'll show my play,Hurrah ! the game is won, pals.No hand so fine,No wrist like mine.No odds I e'er refuse, pals.Then choose your game, whate'er you name,To me alike all offers ;Chick-hazard, whist, whate'er you list,Replenish quick your coffers.Thus rat-a-tat,I land my flat,To every purse I speak, pals.• Qy. e/«7e.— Printer's DevaROOKWOOD. 249Cramped boxes 'ware — all's right and fair.Barred balls I bar when goaded.The deuce an ace is out of place,The deuce a die is loaded.Then make your game,Your colour name.Success attend the Greek, pals.Bravo, Jerry — bravissimo ! '' chorused theparty.And now, pals, farewell ! — a long farewell I"*said Dick, in a tone of theatrical valediction.^* As I said before, the best friends mustseparate. We may soon meet again, or wenow may part for ever. We cannot commandoui luck ; but we can make the best of thespan allotted to us. You have your game to playI have mine : may each of us meet with thesuccess he deserves."Egad I hope not*" said King ; " I'm afraidin that case the chances would be against us."AVell then, the success we anticipate, if youlike it better," rejoined Dick. " I have only toobserve one thing more, namely, that I mustinsist upon standing Squire upon the presentoccasion. Not a word — I won't hear a syllable.1^1 5Landlord, I say — what ho I'' continued Dick,stepping out of the arbour, " here, my oldAdmiral of the White, what's the reckoning —what's to pay, I say ?"Let ye know directly, Sir," said mine hostof the Falstaff.Order my horse — the black mare*" addedDick.And mine'' said King, " the sorrel colt,ril ride with you a mile or two on the road, Dick,perhaps we may stumble upon something"*Very likely."We meet at twelve, at D'Osyndar's, Jerry,"said King, " if nothing happens."Agreed," said Jerry.What say you to a rubber at bowls in themeantime?" said the Magus, taking his pipefrom his lips.Jerry nodded acquiescence; and while theywent in search of the implements of the game,Turpinand King sauntered gently on the green.It was a delicious evening. The sun wasslowly declining, and glowed like a ball of fireLockwood. 931amid the thick foliage of a neighbouring elm.Whether, like the robber Moor, Tom Kingwas touched by this glorious sunset, we pretendnot to determine, but certain it was, that a shadeof inexpressible melancholy passed across hishandsome countenance, as he gazed in thedirection of Harrow-on-the-Hill, which lying tothe west of the green upon which they walked,stood out with its pointed spire and lofty college,against the ruddy sky. He spoke not — butDick noticed the passing emotion."What ails you, Tom"" said he, with muchkindness of manner, " are you not well, lad ?''Yes, I am well enough," said King ; " Iknow not what came over me, but looking atHarrow, I thought of my school days, and whatI was then, and that bright prospect remindedme of my boyish hopes*"Tut— tut," said Dick, " this is idle— youare a man now."I know I am," replied Tom, " but I havebeen a boy. Had I any faith in presentiments,25S ROOKWOOD.I should say this is the last sunset I shallever see."Here comes our host'' said Dick, smiling.IVe no presentiment that that is the last billI shall ever pay*"The bill was brought, and settled. As Turpinpaid it, the man's conduct altogether was singular,and awakened Turpin's suspicions.Are pur horses ready ?" asked Dick, quickly.They are, Sir'' said the landlord.Let us begone," whispered Dick to King,'' I don't like this fellow's manner. I thoughtI heard a carriage draw up at the inn door justnow — there may be danger. Be fly," added heto Jerry and the Magus. " Now, Sir," said heto the landlord, " lead the way. Keep on thealert, Tom." Dick's hint was not lost upon thetwo bowlers. They watched their comrades ;and listened intently for any manifestation ofalain.CHAPTER III.Was this well done, Jenny ?Captain Macbeth.While Turpin and King are walking acrossthe bowling-green, we shall see what has beenpassing outside the inn. Tom's presentimentsof danger were not, it appeared, without foundation.Scarcely had the ostler brought fortiour two Highwaymen's steeds, when a postchaise, escorted by two or three horsemen, drovefuriously up to the door. The sole occupant ofthe carriage was a lady, whose slight and prettyfigure was all that could be distinguished ofher, her face being closely veiled. The landlord,who was busied in casting up Turpin's account,rushed forth at the summons. A word or twopassed between him and the horsemen, upon254 ROOKWOOD.which the former's countenance fell. Heposted in the direction of the garden ; and thehorsemen instantly dismounted.We have him now, sure enough," said oneof them, a very small man, who looked, in hisboots, like Buckle equipped for the Oaks.By the powers, I begin to think so," repliedthe other horseman ; " but don't spile all,Mr. Coates, by being too precipitate."Never fear that, Titus," said Coates, for itwas the gallant Attorney, " he's sure to comefor his mare. That's a trap certain to catchhim, eh, Mr. Paterson. With the Chief Constableof Westminster to back us, the devil'sin it if we are not a match for him."And for Tom King too," replied the ChiefConstable, " since his woman's peached, thegame's up with him too. We've long had aneye upon him, and now we'll have a finger.He's one of your dashing trouts that we alwaysgive a long line to, but we'll land him thistime anyhow. If you'll look after Dick Turpin,penmen, I'll make sure of Tom."HOOKWOOD. 255Vd rather you would have helped us, Mr.Paterson'' said Coates ; " never mind Tom King,another time will do for him."No such thing," said Paterson, " one weighsjust as much for that matter as t'other. Illtake Tom to myself, and surely you two, withthe landlord and ostler, can manage Turpinamongst you.'"'I don't know that'' said Coates, doubtfully,he's a devil of a fellow to deal with."Take him quietly," said Paterson. — " Drawthe chaise out of the way, lad. Take our tits toone side, and place their nags near the door,ostler. Shall you be able to see him, ma'am,where you are ?" asked the Chief Constable,walking to the carriage, and touching his hatto the lady within ; and having received a satisfactorynod from the bonnet and veil, returnedto his companions. " And now, penmen," addedhe, " let's step aside a little. Don't use yourfire-arms too soon."As if conscious what was passing around her,and of the danger that awaited her master.Black Bess exhibited so much impatience, and256 ROOKWOOD.plunged so violently, that it was with difficultythe ostler could hold her. " The devils inthe mare," said he ; " what's the matter withher ; she was quiet enough a few minutes since.So, ho ! lass — stand*"Turpin and King meanwhile, walked quicklythrough the house, preceded by the host, whoconducted them, not without some inward fearand trembling, towards the door. Arrived there,each man rushed swiftly to his horse. Dickwas in the saddle in an instant, and stamping herfoot upon the ostler's leg, Black Bess compelledthe man, yelling with pain, to quit his hold of thebridle. Tom King was not equally fortunate.Before he could mount his horse, a loud shoutwas raised, which startled the animal, and causedhim to swerve, so that Tom lost his footing in thestirrup, and fell to the ground. He was instantlyseized by Paterson, and a struggle commenced,King endeavouring, but in vain, to draw apistol.Flip him*, Dick — fire, or I'm taken*" criedShoot him.IIOOKWOOD. 257King. " Fire, damn you — why don't you fire ?''shouted he in desperation, still struggling vehementlywith Paterson, who was a strong man,and more than a match for such a light weightas King.I can't'' cried Dick ;— " I shall hit you, if Ifire."Take your chance," shouted King — " Isthis your friendship ?"Thus urged, Turpin fired. The ball rippedup the sleeve of Paterson's coat, but did notwound him.Again !" cried King — " d — n your blood,Dick, why don't you hear me ? Fire again."Pressed as he was by foes on every side,himself their mark, for both Coates andTyrconnel had fired upon him, and were nowmounting their steeds to give chase, it was impossiblethat Turpin could take sure aim ; add towhich, in the struggle, Paterson and King wereeach moment changing their relative positions. He,however, would no longer hesitate, but again, athis friend's request, fired. The ball lodged itself258 ROOKWOOD.in King's breast ! He fell at once. At this instanta shriek was heard from the chaise : the windowwas thrown open, and her thick veil being drawnaside, the features of a very pretty female, nowimpressed with terror and contrition, were suddenlyexhibited.King fixed his glazing eyes upon her.Susan !'' sighed he, " Is it you, that I behold ?''Yes — eyes 'tis she, sure enough," said Paterson.— " You see, ma'am, what you and such likehave brought him to. However, you'll loseyour reward ; for he's going fast enough."Reward !" gasped King, " reward ! did shebetray me ?""Ay, ay, Sir " — said Paterson, " she blowedthe gaff, if it's any consolation to you to know it."Consolation !" repeated the dying man —perfidious — oh — the prophecy — my best friend —Turpin — I die by his hand." And vainlystriving to raise himself, he fell backwards andexpired. Alas ! poor Tom !Mr. Paterson — Mr. Paterson," cried Coates,leave the landlord to look after the body of thatROOK WOOD. 259dying ruffian, and mount with us in pursuit ofthe living rascal Come, Sir — quick — mount —dispatch. — You see he is yonder — he seems tohesitate — we shall have him now."Well, penmen — I'm ready," said Paterson,but how the devil came you to let himescape you ?"St. Patrick only knows !" said Titus ; " he'sas slippery as an eel — and, like a cat, turn himwhich way you will, he is always sure to alightupon his legs. I shouldn't wonder but we losehim now, after all, though he has such a smallstart ; that mare flies like the wind."He shall have a tight run for it, at allevents," said Paterson, putting spurs into hishorse. " IVe a good nag under me, and you areneither of you badly mounted — he is only threehundred yards before us, and the devil's in it ifwe can't run him down. It's a three hundredpound job, Mr. Coates, and well worth a race."You shall have another hundred from me.Sir, if you take him," said Coates, urging hissteed forward.260:ROOKWOOD.Thank you, Sir, thank you — follow mydirections, and we'll make sure of him," said theConstable. " Gently — gently — not so fast upthe hill — you see he's breathing his horse — all ingood time, Mr. Coates — all in good time. Sire"*And maintaining an equal distance, bothparties cantered leisurely up, what we believe isnow called the Windmill Hill. We shall nowreturn to Turpin.Aghast at the deed he had accidentally committed,Dick remained for a few momentsirresolute ; he perceived that King was mortallywounded, and that all attempts at rescue wouldbe fruitless ; he perceived, likewise, that Jerryand the Magus had effected their escape fromthe bowling green, as he could detect theirfigures stealing along the hedge-side. He hesitatedno longer. Sauve qui pent was the orderof the day. He turned his horse, and gallopedslowly off, little heeding the pursuit with whichhe was threatened.Every bullet has its billet," said Dick ;"but little did I think that I really shouldROOKWOOD. 261turn poor Tom's executioner. To the devilwith this rascally snapper," cried he, throwingthe pistol over the hedge. " I could never haveused it again. 'Tis strange too that he shouldhave foretold his OAvn fate — devilish strange;and then that he should have been betrayed bythe very bio wen he trusted ! that's a lesson, if Iwanted any — but trust a woman — not I, thelength of my little finger."Arrived at the brow of the hill, whencesuch a beautiful view of the country surroundingthe Metropolis is obtained, Turpinturned for an instant to reconnoitre hispursuers. Coates and Titus, he utterly disregarded; but Paterson was a more formidable foe,and he well knew that he had to deal with aman of experience and resolution. It was then,for the first time, that the thoughts of executinghis extraordinary ride to York, first flashedacross him — this bosom throbbed high with rapture,and he involuntarily exclaimed aloud, asheraised himself in the saddle, " ByI will do it!"262 ROOKWOOD.He took one last look at the great Babel thatlay buried in a world of trees beneath him, andas his quick eye ranged over the magnificentprospect lit up by that gorgeous sunset, hecould not help thinking of Tom Kings lastwords — " Poor fellow !'' thought Dick, " hesaid truly — he should never see another sunset !*"Aroused by the approaching clatter of hispursuers but little behind him, Dick struckinto a lane which lies on the right of the road,now called Shoot-uphill Lane, and set off at agood pace in the direction of Hampstead.Now," cried Paterson, " put your tits to it,my boys — we must not lose sight of him for asecond in these lanes."And accordingly, as Turpin was by no meansdesirous of inconveniencing his mare in thisearly stage of the business, and as the groundwas still upon an ascent, the parties stillpreserved their relative distances.At length, after various twisting and turningsin that deep and devious lane, after scaring oneor two farmers, and riding over a brood orROOKWOOD. 263two of ducks, dipping into the verdant valleyof West End, and ascending another hill, Turpinburst upon the gorsy, sandy, and beautifulHeath of Hampstead ; still shaping his courseto the left, Dick made for the lower part ofthe heath, and skirted a path which leadstowards North-end, passing the furze-crownedsummit, which is at present crested by a clumpof lofty pines.It was here that the chase first assumed acharacter of interest. Being open ground, thepursued and pursuers were in full view of eachother, and as Dick rode swiftly across the heath,with the shouting trio hard at his heels, thescene had a very animated appearance. Hecrossed the hill — the Tendon Road — passedCrackskuU Common — and dashed along thecross-road to Highgate.Hitherto, no advantage had been gained bythe pursuers — they had not lost ground, butstill they had not gained an inch, and muchspurring was required to maintain their position.But, as they approached Highgate, Dick slackedLockwood.ened his pace ; and the other party redoubledtheir efforts. To avoid the town, Dick struckinto a narrow path at the right, and rodeeasily down the hill.His pursuers were now within a hundredyards, and shouted to him to stand. Pointingto a gate, which seemed to bar their farther progress,Dick unhesitatingly charged it, clearingit in beautiful style. Not so with Coates'sparty — and the time they lost in unfasteningthe gate, which none of them liked to leap,enabled Dick [sto put additional space betwixtthem. It did not, however, appear to be hisintention altogether to outstrip his pursuers ;the chase seemed to give him excitement,which he was willing to prolong, as muchas was consistent with his safety. Scuddingrapidly past Highgate, like a swift-sailingschooner, with three lumbering Indiamen inher wake, Dick now took the lead along anarrow lane, that threads the fields in thedirection of Hornsey. The shouts of his folio w-hers had brought others to join them, and as heROOKWOOD. g05neared Crouch End, . traversing the lane whichtakes its name from Du Val, and in which ahouse frequented by him, stands, or stood, ^<Ahighwayman — a highwayman"" rang in hisears, in a discordant chorus of many voices.The whole neighbourhood was alarmed by thecries, and by the tramp of horses — the men ofHornsey rushed into the road to seize the fugitive— and women held up their babes to catch aglimpse of the flying cavalcade, which seemed togain number and animation as it advanced.Suddenly three horsemen appear in the road —they hear the uproar and the din. " A highwayman— a highwayman!" cry the voices, 'stophim, stop him !" But it is no such easy matter.With a pistol in each hand, and his bridlein his teeth, did Turpin boldly pass on. Hisfierce looks — his furious steed — the impetuswith which he pressed forward, bore down allbefore him. The horsemen gave way, and onlyserved to swell the list of his pursuers.*' We have hiiji now— we have . him now ! ""VOL. Ill, jjW6) ROOKWOOD.cried Paterson, exultingly. " Shout for yourMves-r-the turnpike man will hear us— shouta^sun — again — the fellow has heard it — the gateis shut ; we have him — ha — ^ha ! "The old Hornsey toll bar was a high gate-withcheveucD de fri^e in the upper rail — sit may be sostill. The gate was swung into its lock, and likeSi tiger in his lair was the prompt custodian of theturnpike trusts ensconced within his doorway,and ready to spring forth upon the runaway.But Dick kept steadily on. He coollycalculated the height of the gate — he lookedto the right and to the left; nothing betteroffered — he spoke a few words of encouragementto Bess — gently patted her neck — then struckspurs into her sides, and cleared the spikes byan inch. Out rushed the amazed turnpike-man,thus unmercifully bilked, and was nearlytrampled to death under the feet of Paterson'shorse.Open the gate, fellow, and be d d toyou"" said the chief constable.H0RN5F.TCATE. j^^^FSC^^i"^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^ . ,=^^; .ytpnrO?^ S-f\lDtCs>UlMJtCLockwood. 267Not I,'' said the man, sturdily — "unless I getsmy dues — IVe been done once already; butstrike me stupid if I'm done a second time''"Don't you perceive that's a highwayman?don't you know that I'm chief constable ofWestminster ?" said Paterson, showing his staff.How dare you oppose me in the discharge ofmy duty ?"That may be or it may not be," said the man,doggedly ; " but you don't pass, unless I gets theblunt, and that's the long and short on't."Amidst a storm of oaths, Coates flung downa crown piece, and the gate was thrown open.Turpin took advantage of this delay, • tobreathe his mare ; and, striking into a bye lane,at Bucket's green, cantered easily along in thedirection of Tottenham. Little repose washowever, allowed him. Yelling like a pack ofhounds in full cry, his pursuers were again athis heels. He had now to run the gauntlet ofthe long straggling town of Tottenham, andvarious were the devices of the populace toentrap him. The whole place was up in arms,268 KDOKWOODishouting, screaming, running, dancing, andhurling every possible description of missile atthe horse and her rider. Dick merrily respondedto their clamour, as he flew past, and ' laughedat the brick bats that were showered thick ashail, and quite as harmlessly around him.A few more, miles'* hard riding tired thevolunteers, and before the chase reached Edmonton,most of them were " no where Here,however, fresh relays were gathered, and a strongfield again mustered. John Gilpin himself, couldnot have excited more astonishment amongstthe. good folks of Edmonton, than did ourHighwayman, as he galloped through theirtown. Unlike the men of Tottenham, the mobreceived him with acclamations, thinking, nodoubt, that, like " the citizen of famous Londontown'' he rode for a wager. Presently, however,borne on the wings of the blast, came thecries of " Turpin, Dick Turpin ! " and thehurrahs were changed to hooting; but suchwas the pate at which our Highwayman rode,that na serious opposition could be offered to1JCT.J<^jviuT-iivMieLROOKWOOD. 269him. A man in a donkey cart, unable to getout of the way, drew himself up in the middleof the road — but Turpin treated him as he haddone the duh at the knapping jigger andcleared the driver and his little wain with ease.This was a capital stroke, and well adapted toplease the multitude, who are ever taken with abrilliant action. " Hark away Dick !^ resoundedon all hands — while hisses were as liberallybestowed upon his pursuers.CHAPTER IV.The Peons are capital horsemen, and several times we sawthem at a gallop throw the rein on the horse's neck, take fromone pocket a bag of loose tobacco, and with a piece of paper,or a leaf of Indian corn, make a cigar, and then take out aflint and steel and light it.Head's Rough Notes.Away they fly past scattered cottages,swiftly and swimmingly, like eagles on the wing,along the Field highway. All were wellmounted, and the horses, now thoroughlywarmed, had got into their paces, and didtheir work beautifully. None of the Coatesparty had lost ground, but they had maintainedit at the expense of their steeds, which werestreaming like water carts, whereas Black Besshad scarcely turned a hair.Turpin, the reader already knows, was acrack rider ; he was the crack rider of Englandof his time, and perhaps of any time; heROOKWOOD. 271ought to be classed among " Nimrod's '' splendidarray of horsemen — and would that ithad devolved on that great master of thesporting world, instead of on ourselves, torecord his wondrous achievements ! Howwould his nimble pen have galloped fleetly acrosshis pages, carrying the reader along with himin this, as in all his other spirited descriptions !The craft and mystery of jockey ship was notat that time so well understood as it is now-a-days ;men treated their horses differently; and fewrode then, as well as many ride now, whenevery youngster takes to the field as naturallyas if he had been bred a Guacho. DickTurpin was a glorious exception to the rule,and anticipated a later age. He rode wonderfullylight, yet sat his saddle to perfection ;distributing his weight so exquisitely, that hishorse scarce felt his pressure; he yielded toevery movement made by the animal, and becameas it were part and parcel of itself; hetook care she should be neither strained norwrung. Freely, and as lightly as a feather,272 HOOKWOOO.was she borne along; beautiful was it to seeher action — to watch her style and temper ofcovering the ground, and many a first-rate Mel-ionianmight have got a wrinkle from Turpin'*sseat and conduct.We have before stated that it was not Dick'sobject to ride away from his pursuers ; he couldhave done that at any moment ; he liked the funof the chase, and would have been sorry to puta period to his own excitement. Confident inhis mare, he just kept her at such speed asshould put his pursuers completely to it, withoutin the slightest degree inconveniencing himself.The reader may judge of the speed at whichthey went, when we inform him that little betterthan an hour had elapsed, and nearly twentymiles had been ridden over. " Not bad travellingthat's methinks we hear him exclaim.By the mother that bore me," said Titus,as they went along in this slapping style; —Titus, by the bye, was on a big, Roman-nosedpowerful horse, well adapted to his weight, butwhich required a plentiful exercise both of legJW^V C-rviKrll.<M|il."~'£>~-'^^4: :-f 3<//?^tooKwooD. 273and arm, to call forth all his action, and keephis rider alongside his companions — "by themother that bore me'' said he, almost thumpingthe wind out of his flea-bitten Bucephaluswith his calves, after the Irish fashion, " if thefellow isn't lighting his pipe ! I saw the sparksfly on each side of him — and there he goes likea smoky chimney on a frosty morning! seehe turns his impudent phiz, with the pipe inhis mouth ! are we to stand that, Mr, Coates ?"Wait awhile, Sir — wait awhile," said Coates,well smoke him by and bye."Paeans have been sung in honour of the Peonsof the Pampas, by the Headlong Sir Francis, butwhat the gallant Major extols so loudly in theSouth American horsemen, vix. the lighting ofa cigar when in mid career, was accomplishedwith equal ease by our English Highwayman, ahundred years ago, nor was it esteemed by himany extravagant feat either. Flint, steel, andtinder, were bestowed within Dick's ample pouch,the short pipe was at hand, and within a fewseconds there was a stream of vapour exhalingn5Sri ROOKWOOD.from his lips, like the smoke from a steam-boatshooting down the river, and tracking his stillrapid course through the air.111 let 'em see what I' think of "'em,'' saidDick coolly, as he turned his head.It was now gray twilight. The mists ofcoming night were weaving a thin curtain overthe rich surrounding landscape. All the soundsand hum of that delicious hour were heard,broken only by the regular clatter of the horses'hoofs. Tired of shouting, the chasers now kepton their way in deep silence ; each man held hisbreath, and plunged his spurs, rowel deep, intohis horse ; but the animals were already at thetop of their speed, and incapable of greaterexertion. Paterson, who was a hard rider, andperhaps a thought better mounted, kept thelead; the rest followed as they might.Had it been undisturbed by the rush of thecavalcade, the scene would have been still andand soothing. Overhead a cloud of rooks werewinging their garrulous flight to the ancestralavenue of an ancient mansion to the right—Lockwood. SY5the bat was on the wing — the distant lowing ofa herd of kine saluted the ear at intervalsthe blithe whistle of the rustic herdsman,and the merry chime of waggon bells rangpleasantly from afar.But these cheerful sounds, which make thestill twilight hour delightful, were lost in thetramp of the horsemen, now three abreast. Thehind fled to the hedge for shelter ; and thewaggoner pricked up his ears, and fancied heheard the distant rumbling of an earthquake.On rush the pack, whipping, spurring,tugging for very life. Again they gave voice, inhopes the waggoner might succeed in stoppingthe fugitive ; but Dick was already by his side.Harkee, my tulips cried he, taking the pipefrom his mouth as he passed. " Tell my friends,behind, they will hear of me at York."What did he say ?'" asked Paterson.That you'll find him at York," said thewaggoner.At York !" echoed Coates, in amaze.Turpin was now out of sight, and although276 Lockwood.our trio flogged with might and main, theycould never catch a glimpse of him until, withina short distance of Ware, they beheld him atthe door of a little public-house, standing withhis bridle in his hand, coolly quaffing a tankard.No sooner, however, were they in sight, thanDick vaulted into the saddle, and rode off.Devil seize you. Sir ! why didn't you stophim ?" exclaimed Paterson, as he rode up. " Myhorse is dead lame. I cannot go any farther.Do you know what a prize you have missed .''Do you know who that was ?"No, Sir, I don t,'' said the publican ; " but Iknow he gave his mare more ale than he tookhimself, and he has given me a guinea instead ofa shilling. He's a regular good un''A good uns*' said Paterson; " it was Turpin,the famous highwayman. We are in pursuit ofhim. Have you any horses ? our cattle are allblown''You'll find the post-house in the town,gentlemen. I'm sorry I can't accommodate you ;but I keeps no stabling. I wish you a veryROOKWOOD. 277good evening, Sir"" Saying which, the publicanretreated to his domicile.That's a flash crib, 111 be bound'' saidPaterson. " I'll chalk you down, my friend, youmay rely upon it. Thus far we're done, sir.Coates ; but curse me if I give it in. 1*11 followhim to the world's end first."Right, Sir — right," said the Attorney. « Avery proper spirit, Mr. Constable. You would beguilty of neglecting your duty, were you to actotherwise. We shall have a fine moon in anhour — bright as day — to the post-house— to thepost-house."Accordingly to the post-house they went ;and, with as little delay as circumstances admitted,fresh hacks being procured, accompaniedby a postillion, the party again pursued theironward course, encouraged to believe they werestill in the right scent.Night had now spread her mantle overthe earth ; still it was not wholly dark. A fewstars were twinkling in the deep, cloudlessheavens, and a pearly radiance in the easternSTS lockwood.horizon, heralded the rising of the orbof night. A gentle breeze was stirring — thedews of evening had already fallen — and theair felt bland and dry. It was just the nightone would have chosen for a ride, if one everrode by choice at such an hour; and to Turpin,whose chief excursions were conducted by night,it appeared little less than heavenly.Full of ardour and excitement, determined toexecute what he had mentally undertaken, didTurpin hold on his solitary course. Every thingwas favourable to his project ; the roads were inadmirable condition, his mare was in like order —she was inured to hard work, had rested sufficientlyin town to recover from the fatigueof her recent journey, and had never been inmore perfect training. " She has now got herwind in her"' said Dick — " I'll see what she can 'do — ^liark away, lass — hark away ! I wish theycould see her now," as he felt her almost fly awaywith him.Encouraged by her master's voice and hand,Black Bess started forward at a pace which few'ROOKWOOD. 279horses could have equalled and scarcely anyhave sustained so long. Even Dick, accustomedas he was to her magnificent action, feltelectrified at the speed with which he wasborne along. " Bravo — Bravo ! '' shouted he,hark away, Bess."The deep and solemn woods through whichthey were rushing, rang with his shouts, andthe sharp rattle of Bess's hoofs; and thus heheld his way, while, in the words of the ballad,Fled past, on right and left, how fast,Each forest, grove, and bower ;On right and left, fled past, how fast,Each city, town, and tower.CHAPTER V.Hurrah — hurrah — avoid the way of the avenging Child,His horse is swift as sands that drift — an Arab of the wild.LocKHART, Spanish Ballad.Black Bess, being undoubtedly the jeromeof " book four," our readers will, perhaps, pardonour expatiating a little in this place, upon herbirth, parentage, breeding, appearance, andattractions. And first as to her pedigree;for in the horse, unlike the human species.Nature has strongly impressed the nobleor ignoble caste ; he is the real aristocrat — sandthe pure blood that flows in the veins of thegallant steed will be infallibly transmitted, ifhis mate be suitable, throughout all his line,Bess was no cock tail — she was thorough bred —ROOKWOOD. 281she boasted blood in every bright and branchingvein : —If blood can give nobility,A noble steed was she ;Her sire was blood, and blood her dam,And all her pedigree.As to her pedigree. Her sire was a desertArab, renowned in his day, and brought to thiscountry by a wealthy traveller ; her dam Alas anEnglish Racer, coal black as her child. Bessunited all the fire and gentleness, the strengthand hardihood, the abstinence, and endurancepf fatigue of the one, with the spirit, andextraordinary fleetness of the other. HowTurpin became possessed of her, is of littleconsequence. We never heard that he paid aheavy price for her ; though we doubt, if anysum would have induced him to part with her.In colour, she was perfectly black, with a skinsmooth on the surface as polished jet; not asingle white hair could be found in her satin coat.In make she was magnificent. Every point wasperfect, beautiful, compact ; modelled, in little,282 ROOKWOOD.for strength and speed. Arched was her neck,as that of the swan; clean and fine wereher lower limbs, as those of the gazelle ;round, and . sound as a drum was her carcase,and as broad as a cloth-yard shaft her widthof chest. Her's were the ^' pulchrce dunes, brevecaput, arduaque cervix'' of the Roman bard.There was no redundancy of flesh 'tis true ; herflanks might, to please some tastes, have beenrounder, and her shoulder fuller ; but look atthe nerve and sinew, palpable through theveined limbs ! She was built more for strengththan beauty, and yet she was beautiful.Look at that elegant little head — those thintapering ears, closely placed together, that broadsnorting nostril which seems to snuff* the galewith disdain — that eye, glowing and large as thediamond of Giamschid ! — Is she not beautiful ?Behold her paces ! how gracefully she moves !She is off" ! — no eagle on the wing could skim theair more swiftly. — Is she not magnificent ? Asto her temper, the lamb is not more gentle.A child might have guided her.EOOKWOOI>. 283But hark back to Dick Turpin. We left himrattling along in superb style and in the highestpossible glee. He could not in fact be otherwisethan exhilarated; nothing being so wildlyintoxicating as a mad gallop. We seem to startout of ourselves — to be endued, for the time, withnew energies — our thoughts take wings rapid asour steed — we feel as if his fleetness andboundless impulses were for the moment ourown. We laugh — we exult — we shout forvery joy. We cry out with Mephistopheles,but in any thing but a Sardonic mood. " WhatI enjoy with spirit, is it the less my own on thataccount ? If I can pay for six horses, are nottheir powers mine — I drive along, and am aproper man, as if I had four-and-twenty legs'"These were Turpin's sentiments precisely, — givehim four legs and a wide plain, and he neededno Mephistopheles to bid him ride to the devil,as fast as his nag could carry him. Away —away ! — the road is level, the path is clear — presson, thou gallant steed, no obstacle is in thy way !— and lo ! — the moon breaks forth ; her silvery9^ ROOKWOOD.light is thrown over the woody landscape.Dark shadows are cast athwart the road — andthe flying figures of thy rider and thyselfare traced, like giant phantoms, in the dust !Away — away — our breath is gone, in keepingup with this tremendous run — yet Dick Turpinhas not lost his wind, for we hear his cheeringcry — hark ! he sings. The reader will bear inmind that Oliver, means the moon — to whittleis to blab.OLIVER Riddles.Oliver whistles ! — the tatler old !Telling what best had been left untold ;Oliver ne'er was a friend of mine ;All glims* I hate, that so brightly shine.Give me a night black as hell — and thenSee what I'll show to you, my merry men.Oliver whistles ! — who cares — who caresIf down upon us he peers and stares?Mind him who will ? with his great white face,Boldly /'// ride by his glim to the chase ;Give him a Rowland, and loudly as everShout, as I show myself, " Stand and deliver !"Egad*" soliloquized Dick, as he concludedLights.:^ooKwooD, 285^his song, looking up at the moon, " old NolFsno bad fellow either. I wouldn't be withouthis white face to-night, for a trifle. He's asgood as a lamp to guide one, and let Bess onlyhold on as she goes now, and 111 do it with ease.Softly, wench — softly — dost not see it's a hillwe're rising. The devil's in the mare, she caresfor nothing." And as they ascended the hill,Dick's voice once more awoke the echoes ofnight.A gang of robbers then,Myself did entertain,Notorious HighwaymenWho did like princes reign.We'd rob, we'd laugh, we'd joke,And revel night and day,But now the knot of us is broke,'Tis I that leads the way*.« Poor Will Davies !" sighed Dick.• From an old ballad in the British Museum, entitledthe Golden Farmer's last Farewell. Will Davies, theGolden Farmer, was hanged in Fleet Street, in 1690, andafterwards gibbeted on Earshot Heath, where a public-housebearing his name now stands.286 ROOKWOOD.But having run my raceI now at last do see,In shame and sad disgraceMy life will ended be.I took delight to robAnd rifle rich and poor,But now my friend old Mob*I ne'er shall see thee more.And what matters it," exclaimed Dick, " ifit were so ? Would old Mob regret him ? nothe — she was a rusty old cove, who cared not arush for any one but himself. Why not diewithout whimpering then ? But 'pshaw ! whatam I thinking about ? Will Davies never feltin that fashion. He was no faint heart — she wasa blade of steel. Well, whatever comes andgoes, I suppose one day it will be with me likeall the rest of 'em ; and, I trust, whenever thechanter culls-f and last speech scribblers get hold♦ Old Mob, alias Thomas Simpson, a well-known Highwaymanof the time, whose feats are they not chronicledby Charles Whitehead, and to be had at the sign ofTaurus, in Holies Street ? Why en passant, may we ask, didMr. Whitehead give us none of the songs relating to theseworthies ? Surely he could not have known of their existence.f Ballad-mongers.ROOKWOOD. 287of me, they'll at least not put such cursed stuffas that into my mouth ; but make me speak as Iever felt, like a man who never either feareddeath, or turned his back upon his friend. Inthe meantime 111 give them something to talkabout. This ride of mine shall ring in theirears long after I'm done for — put to bed with amattock, and tucked up with a spade.And when I'm gone, boys, each huntsman shall say,None rode like Dick Turpin, so far in a day.And thou, too, brave Bess ! — thy name shallbe linked with mine, and well go down toposterity together ; and what," added hedespondingly, "if it should be too much forthee? what if but no matter Better die now,while I am with thee, than fall into the knacker'shands. Better die now, with all thy honoursupon thy head, than drag out thy old age at thesan dart. Hark-forward, lass — hark-forward ! "^By what peculiar instinct it is that this nobleanimal, the horse, will at once perceive theslightest change in his master's physical tempEOOKWOODipermanent, and allow himself so to be influencedby it, that, according as his master's spiritsfluctuate, will his own energies rise and fall,waveringFrom walk to trot — from canter to full speed ?How is it, we ask of those more intimatelyacquainted with the metaphysics of thehuoyhnymn than we pretend to be — do the saddleor the rein convey, like metallic tractors, vibrationsof the spirit betwixt the two ? We know not—but this much is certain, that no servant partakesso much of the character of his master,as the horse. The horse, we are wont to ride,becomes a portion of ourselves. He thinksand feels with us. As we are lively, he issprightly — as we are depressed, his couragedroops. In proof of this, let the reader see whathorses some men make — make we say, becausein such hands their character is wholly altered.Partaking, in a measure, of the courage andthe firmness of the hand that guides them,and of the resolution of the frame that swaysROOKWOOD. 289them — what their rider wills they do, or striveto do. When that governing power is relaxed,their energies are relaxed likewise; and their finesensibilities supply them Tvdth an instant knowledgeof the disposition and capacity of therider. A gift of the gods is the gallant steed,which, like any other faculty we possess, touse or to abuse — to command or to neglect —rests with ourselves: he is the best generaltest of our own self-government.Black Bess's action amply verified what we havejust asserted ; for during Turpin's momentarydespondency, her pace was perceptibly diminishedand her force retarded; but as he revived,she rallied instantly, and, seized apparently witha kindred enthusiasm, snorted joyously, as sherecovered her speed. Now was it that herhereditary endurance told that the child of thedesert had showed herself the offspring of thehardy loins from whence she sprung. Fullfifty miles had she sped, yet she showed nosymptom of distress. If possible, she appearedfresher than when she started. SheVOL. in. o290 ROOKWOOD.had breathed — her limbs were suppler — heraction freer — easier — lighter. Her sire, who,upon his trackless wilds could have outstrippedthe pestilent Simoom, with throat unslaked,and hunger unappeased — could thrice haveseen the scorching sun go down — had notgreater powers of endurance. His vigour washerheritage. Her dam, who upon the velvetsod was of almost unapproachable swiftness, andwho had often brought her owner goldenassurances of her worth, could scarce have keptpace with her, and would have sunk under athird of her fatigue. But Bess was a paragon.We ne'er shall look upon her like again, unlesswe can prevail upon some Bedouin Chief topresent us with a brood mare, and then theracing world shall see what a breed we willintroduce into this country. Eclipse, Chiltern,or Hambletonian, shall be nothing to our colts,and even the rail-road slow travelling comparedwith the speed of our new nags.But to return to Bess, or rather to go alongwith her, for there is no halting now ; we areROOKWOOD. 291going at the rate of twenty knots an hour —sailing before the wind ; and you must eitherkeep pace with us, or drop astern. Reader ! — Bessis now in her speed, and Dick happy. Happy !he is enraptured — maddened — furious — intoxicatedas with wine. Pshaw ! wine couldnever throw him into such a burning delirium.Its choicest juices have no inspiration like this.Its fumes are slow and heady. This is ethereal,transporting. His blood spins through hisveins — winds round his heart — mounts to hisbrain. Away — away! He is wild with joy. Hall,cot, tree, tower, glade, mead, waste, or woodland,are seen, passed, left behind, and vanish as in adream. Motion is scarce perceptible — it is impetus— propulsion. The horse and her rider aredriven forward, as it were, by self-acceleratedspeed. A hamlet is visible in the moonlight. Itis scarce discovered, ere the flints sparkle beneaththe mares hoofs. A moments clatter upon thestones, and it is left behind. Again, it is thesilent, smiling country. Now they are buried inthe darkness of woods — now sweeping along on^mROOKWOOD.the wide plain — now clearing the unopened tollbar—now trampling over the hollow-soundingbridge, their shadows momently reflected in theplacid mirror of the stream — now scaling thehill side a thought more slowly — now plunging,as the horses of Phoebus into the ocean, down itsprecipitous sides.The limits of two shires are already past.They are within the confines of a third. Theyhave entered the merry county of Huntingdonthey have surmounted the gentle hill thatslips into Godmanchester. They are by thebanks of the rapid Ouse — the bridge is past,and as Turpin rode through the deserted streetsof Huntingdon, he heard the eleventh hourgiven from the iron tongue of Saint Mary'sspire. In four hours (it was about seven whenhe had started) Dick had accomplished fullsixty miles !A few reeling topers in the streets saw thehorseman flit past, and one or two windowswere thrown open; but peeping Tom ofCoventry would have had small chance ofJRGOKWOOD. 293beholding the unveiled beauties of QueenGodiva, had she ridden at the rate of DickTurpin. He was gone, like a meteor, almost assoon as he appeared.Huntingdon is left behind, and he is oncemore surrounded by dew-gemmed hedges andsilent slumbering trees ; broad meadows or pastureland, with drowsy cattle, or low bleatingsheep, lie on either side ; but what to Turpin,at that moment, is nature, animate or inanimate ?He thinks only of his mare — his future fame.None are by to see him ride — no stimulatingplaudits ring in his ears — no thousand handsare clapping — no thousand voices buzzing — nohandkerchiefs are waved — no necks strained — nobright eyes rain down their influence upon himno eagle orbs watch his motions — no bells arerung — no cup awaits his achievement — no sweepstakes— no plate. But it will be renown — everlastingreno^vTi : it will be fame, which will notdie with him — which will keep his reputation,albeit a tarnished one, still in the mouths of men.294 ROOK WOOD.He wants all these adventitious excitements, buthe has that within which is a greater excitementthan all these. He is conscious that heis doing a deed to live by. If not riding forlife, that he is riding for immortality ; and as thehero may perchance feel (for even a highwaymanmay feel like a hero), when he willingly throwsaway his existence in the hope of earning aglorious name, Turpin cared not what mightbefal himself, so he could proudly signalizehimself as the first of his land.And witch the world with noble horsemanship.What need had he of spectators.? The eyeof posterity was upon him ; he felt the influenceof that Argus glance which has made many apoor wight spur on his Pegasus with not half sogood a chance of reaching the goal as DickTurpin. Multitudes, yet unborn, he knew,would hear, and laud his deeds. He trembledwith excitement, and Bess trembled under him.But the emotion was transient — on, on they fly :ROOKWOOD. 295the torrent leaping from the crag — the boltfrom the bow — the air-cleaving eagle — thoughtsthemselves, are scarce more winged in theirflight !The night had hitherto been balmy andbeautiful, with a bright array of stars, and agolden harvest moon, which seemed to diffuseeven warmth with its radiance ; but nowTurpin was approaching the region of fog andfen, and he began to feel the influence of thatdank atmosphere. The intersecting dykes —yawners — gullies — or whatever they are called,began to send forth their steaming vapours, andchilled the soft and wholesome air, obscuring thevoid, and in some instances as it were, chokingup the road itself with vapour. But fog orfen was the same to Bess, her hoofs rattledmerrily along the road, and she burst from acloud, like Rous at the break of dawn.It was upon this occasion, that travellingthrough a fog of this kind, the moment theyemerged from its dense canopy, they burst uponROOKWOOD.the York Stage*. It was not an uncommon thingfor the coach to be stopped ; and so furious wasthe career of our highwayman, that the maninvoluntarily drew up his horses. Turpinhad also to draw in his rein, a task of no littledifficulty, as charging a huge lumbering coach,with its full complement of passengers, wasmore than even Bess could accomplish. Themoon shone bright on Turpin and his mare.He was unmasked, and his features distinctlyThe following Notice is copied from an old affiche, stillpreserved in the Coffee Room of the Black Swan, at York: —'* York Four Days ! Stage Coach, begins on Friday,the Isti of April, 1706. All that are desirous to pass fromLondon to York, or from York to London, or any other placeon that road, let them repair to the Black Swan, in Lowborn,in London, or to the Black Swan, in Coney Street, in York.At both which places they may be received in a Stage Coach,every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, which performs thewhole journey in four days (if God permits) ; and sets forth atfive in the morning. And returns from York to Stamford intwo days, and from Stamford, by Huntingdon, in two daysmore. And the like stages in their return. Allowing eachpassenger fourteen pounds weight, and all above three-penceper pound. Performed by Benjamin Kingman, Henry Harrison,and Walter Baines."Lockwood. 297visible. An exclamation was uttered by a gentlemanon the box, who it appeared instantlyrecognised him.Pull up — draw your horses across theroad," cried the gentleman — " that's DickTurpin, the highwayman. His capture wouldbe worth three hundred pounds to you'" addedhe, addressing the coachman, " and is of equalimportance to me. Stand !" shouted he, presentinga cocked pistol.This resolution of the gentleman was notapparently agreeable, either to the coachman orthe majority of the passengers — the name ofTurpin acting like magic upon them. One manjumped ois behind, and was with difficulty afterwardsrecovered, having tumbled into a deep ditchat the road side. An old gentleman with a cottonnightcap, who had popped out his head to swearat the coachman, drew it suddenly in. Afaint scream in a female key issued from within,and there was a considerable hubbub on theroof. Amongst other ominous sounds, theguard was heard to click his long horse pistols.o5298 ROOKWOOD.Stop the York four-day stage !" said he,forcing his smoky voice through a world ofthroat-embracing shawl ; " the fastest coach inthe kingdom : vos ever such atrocity heard of ?I say Joe, keep them ere leaders steady — weshall all be in the ditch. Don''t you see wherethe hind wheels are ? Who — whoop, I say""The gentleman on the box now discharged hispistol, and the confusion within was redoubled.The white night-cap was popped out like a rabbit'shead, and as quickly popped back, on hearingthe highwayman's voice. Owing to the plungingof the horses, the gentleman had missed his aim.Prepared for such emergencies as the present,and seldom at any time taken aback, Dickreceived the fire without flinching. He thenlashed the horses out of his course, and rode up,pistol in hand, to the gentleman who had fired.Major Mowbray'' said he, in a stem tone, " Iknow you. I meant not either to assault youor these gentlemen — yet you have attempted mylife, Sir, a second time. But you are now inmy power, and by hell, if you do not answerROOKWOOD. 299the questions I put to you, nothing earthlyshall save you."If you ask aught I may not answer, fire !''said the Major ; " I will never ask life fromsuch as you""Have you seen aught of Sir Luke Rook-wood?*''' asked Dick.The villain you mean is not yet secured,"replied the Major, " but we have traces of him,'Tis with the view of procuring more efficientassistance that I ride to town."They have not met then since?" said Dick,carelessly.Met ! Whom do you mean ?"Your sister and Sir Luke"" said Dick."My sister meet him!" cried the Major,angrily — "think you he dare show himself atRosewood ?"Ho — ho !" laughed Dick — " she is at Rook-woodthen ? A thousand thanks. Major — goodnightto you, gentlemen."Take that vrith you, and remember theguard," cried the janitor, who, unable to take300 ROOKWOOD.aim from where he sat, had crept along the coachroof, and discharged thence one of his large horsepistols at what he took to be the highwayman'shead, but which, luckily for Dick, was his hat,which he had raised to salute the passengers.Remember you' said Dick, coolly replacinghis perforated beaver on his brow, "you mayrely upon it, my fine fellow, I'll not forget you,the next time we meet."And off he went like the breath of thewhirlwind.CHAPTER VI.O'er moss and moor, o'er holt and hill,His track the steady bloodhounds trace ;O'er moss and moor, unwearied still,The furious Earl pursues the chase.The Wild Huntsmen.We will now make inquiries after Mr. Coatesand his party, of whom both we and Dick Turpinhave for some time lost sight. ^ With unabatedardour did the vindictive man of law and hismyrmidons press forward. A tacit compactseemed to have been entered into between thehighwayman and his pursuers, that he was tofly while they were to follow. Like bloodhounds,they kept steadily upon his trail — norwere they so far behind as Dick imagined. Ateach post house they passed, they obtained freshhorses, and, while these were saddling, a post-boy302 Lockwood.was dispatched en courier to order relays at thenext station. In this manner they proceededafter the first stoppage without interruption.Horses were in waiting for them, as they,bloody with spurring, fiery hot with haste,"and their jaded hacks arrived. Turpin had beenheard or seen in all quarters. Turnpike men —waggoners, carters, trampers, all had seen him.Besides, strange as it may sound, they placedsome faith in his word. York they believedwould be his destination.At length the coach which Dick had encountered,hove in sight. There was anotherstoppage and another hubbub. The old gentleman'snightcap was again manifested, andsuffered a sudden occultation, as upon the formeroccasion. The post-boy, Who was in advance,had halted, and given up his horse toMajor Mowbray, who exchanged his seat on thebox for one on the saddle, deeming it more expedient,after his interview with Turpin, to returnto Rosewood, rather than to proceed to town.The post-boy was placed behind Coates, as beingROOKVVOOD. 303the lightest weight ; and, thus reinforced, theparty pushed forward as rapidly as heretofore.Eighty and odd miles had now been traversed— the boundary of another county,Northampton, passed ; yet no rest, nor respite,had Dick Turpin or his unflinching mareenjoyed. But here he deemed it fitting to makea brief halt.Bordering the beautiful domains of Burleighhouse, stood a little retired hostelry ofsome antiquity, which bore the great LordTreasurer's arms. With this house Dick wasnot altogether unacquainted. The lad whoacted as ostler was known to him. It was nowmidnight, but a bright and beaming night. Tothe door of the stable then did Dick ride, andknocked in a peculiar manner. ReconnoiteringDick through a broken pane of glass in the lintel,and apparently satisfied with his scrutiny, thelad thrust forth a head of hair as full of strawas mad Tom's is represented to be upon the stage.A chuckle of welcome followed his sleepy salusROOKWOOD.nation. " Glad to see you, Captain Turpin"' saidhe, " can I do any thing for you ?'"*Get me a couple of bottles of brandy, anda beef-steak," said Dick.As to the brandy, you can have that in ajifFy — but the steak, Lord love 'y^? the oldwoman won't stand it at this time ; but there'sa cold round, mayhap a slice of that might do —or a knuckle of ham ?''D-m your knuckles, Ralph'' cried Dick,'' have you any raw meat in the house ?"Raw meat !" echoed Ralph, in surprise,oh yes, there's a rare rump o' beef — you canhave a cut off that if you like."That's the thing I want," said Dick, un-farthinghis mare; " give me the scraper — thereI can get a whip of straw from your head —now run and get the brandy — better bring threebottles — uncork 'em, and let me have half apail of water to mix with the spirit."A pail full of brandy and water to washdown a raw steak — my eyes!" exclaimed Ralph,ROOKWOOD. 305opening wide his sleepy peepers, adding, as hewent about the execution of his task, " I alwaysthought them Rum-ladders, as they calls themselves,rum fellows, but now Ism martin sure onit."The most sedulous groom could not havebestowed more attention upon the horse of hisheart, than Dick Turpin now paid to his mare.He scraped, chafed, and dried her, sounded eachmuscle, traced each sinew, pulled her ears,examined the state of her feet, and, ascertainingthat " her withers were unwrung,'*'' finallywashed her from head to foot in the dilutedspirit ; not however before he had conveyed athimbleful of the liquid to his own parchedthroat, and replenished what Falstaff calls apocket pistol " which he had about him. WhileRalph was engaged in rubbing her downafter her bath, Dick occupied himself, not indressing the raw steak in the manner thestable boy had anticipated, but in rolling itround the bit of his bridle.She will now go as long as there's breath in306 ROOKWOOD.her body,^' said he, putting the flesh-coverediron within her mouth.The saddle being once more replaced, afterchamping a moment or two at the bit, Bessbegan to snort, and paw the earth, as if impatientof delay ; and, acquainted as he was withher indomitable spirit and power, her conditionwas a surprise even to Dick himself. Hervigour seemed inexhaustible, her vivacity wasnot a whit diminished, but as she was led intothe open space, her step was as light and free aswhen she started on her ride, and her senseof sound as quick as ever. Suddenly shepricked her ears, and uttered a low neigh. Adull tramp was audible.Ha !'■" exclaimed Dick, springing into hissaddle, " they comes"*Who come. Captain ?'' asked Ralph.The road takes a turn here — don't it ?''asked Dick, " sweeps round to the right — bythe plantations in the hollow ?"Ay — ay — Captains"* answered Ralph, " it'splain you knows the ground,"ROOKWOOD. 307What lies behind yon shed ?''A stiff fence, Captain — a regular rasper —beyond that a hill side steep as a house — no lossas was ever shoed can go down it.'"*Indeed !" laughed Dick.A loud halloo from Major Mowbray, whoseemed advancing upon the wings of the wind,told Dick that he was discovered. The Majorwas a superb horseman, and took the lead ofhis party. Striking his spurs deeply into hishorse, and giving him bridle enough, the Viatorseemed to shoot forwards like a shell throughthe air. The Burleigh Arms retired somehundred yards from the road, the space in frontbeing occupied by a neat garden, with lowclipped hedges. No tall timber intervenedbetween Dick and his pursuers, so that themotions of both parties were visible to eachother. Dick saw in an instant that if he nowstarted, he should come into collision with theMajor exactly at the angle of the road, and hewas by no means desirous of hazarding such arencontre. He looked wistfully back at thedouble fence.308 ROOKWOOD.Come into the stable — quick, Captain,quick'' exclaimed Ralph.The stable ? — ^" echoed Dick, hesitating.Ay, the stable — it's your only chance.Don't you see he's turning the corner, and theyare all coming — quick. Sir, quick."Dick, lowering his head, rode into the tenement,the door of which was most unceremoniouslyslapped in the Major's face, and boltedon the other side.Villain!" cried Major Mowbray, thunderingat the door. " Come forth — you are now fairlytrapped at last — caught like the woodcock inyour own springe. We have you — open thedoor I say, and save us the trouble of forcing it.You cannot escape us. We will burn thebuilding down, but we'll have you."What do you want, master ?''"' cried Ralph,from the lintel, whence he reconnoitred theMajor, and kept the door fast. " You 're cleanmistaken — there be no one here."We'll soon see that," said Paterson, whohad now arrived ; and, leaping from his horse,the chief constable took a short run, to give him-rookWOOD. 309self impetus, and with his foot burst open thedoor. This being accomplished, in. dashed theMajor and Paterson, but the stable was vacant.A door was open at the back. They rushed toit.The sharply sloping sides of a hill slippedabruptly downwards, within a yard of the door.It was a perilous descent to the horseman, yetthe print of a horse's heels was visible in thedislodged turf, and scattered soil.Confusion !" cried the Major, " he hasescaped us''He is yonder," said Paterson, pointing outTurpin moving swiftly through the steamingmeadow. " See, he makes again for the road —he clears the fence. A regular throw he hasgiven us by .'"Nobly done, by heaven !" cried the Major :With all his faults, I honour the fellow'scourage, and admire his prowess. He's alreadyridden to-night, as I believe never man rodebefore. I would not have ventured to slidedown that wall, for it's nothing else, withthe enemy at my heels. What say you,310 ROOK WOOD.gentlemen ? have you had enough — shall we lethim go, or ^ ?"As far as chase goes, I don't care if webring the matter to a conclusion ,'' said Titus.I don't think, as it is, that I shall have a sateto sit on this week to come. I've lost leathermost confoundedly."What says Mr. Coates .^" asked Paterson.I look to him."Then mount, and off,' cried Coates, " Publicduty requires that we should take him.""' And private pique,'''' returned the Major.No matter — the end is the same — justice shallbe satisfied. To your steeds, my merry men all.Hark, and away."Once more upon the move, Titus forgot hisdistress, and addressed himself to the attorney,by whose side he rode.What place is that we're coming to ?" askedhe, pointing to a cluster of moonlit spiresbelonging to a town which they were rapidlyapproaching.Stamford," replied Coates.ROOKWOOD. 311Stamford !'' echoed Titus ; " by the powersthen, were ridden a matter of ninety miles.Why the great deeds of Redmond O'Hanlon werenothing to this. Ill remember it to my dyingday, and with rason,^' added he, slightly alteringhis position on the saddle.And who was Redmond O'Hanlon?'' inquiredCoates, desirous of keeping Titus in goodhumour.A famous Rapparee, or Tory'" replied theIrishman. " Just such another as Dick Turpin,though not quite such a desperate fellowon horseback. But, talking about Tories,did I never sing you a song I made in praiseof Vm?"Never"' said Coates. " I should like, of allthings, to hear it. Might I ask the favour now.You can give it an excellent ruymiyig accompanimentto your laud-a-Tory strains**I shan't do it justice, I'm afraid"" saidTitus, still wincing in his seat ; " but, however,to please you, Ill do my best ;"" and with lustylungs, that drowned even the rattle of their812 ROOKWOOD.horses, Titus sang as follows : — to the tune ofthe Groves of the Pool.THE RAPPAREES.Let the Englishman coast of his Turpin and Shepherds, ascocks of the walk,His Mulsacks, and Cheney and Swiftness* — it's all botherationand talk ;Compared with the robbers of Ireland, they don't come withinhalf a mile,There never were yet any rascals, like those of my own nativeisle.First and foremost comes Redmond O'Hanlon, allowed thefirst thief of the worlds,That o'er the broad province of Ulster, the Rapparee bannerunfurled ;Och ! he was an elegant fellow, as ever you saw in your life,At fingering the blunderbuss trigger, or handling the throat-cuttingknife.A trio of famous high Tobygloaks; Swiftness was a captainof Irish dragoons by the bye.■\ Redmond O'Hanlon was the Rob Roy of Ireland, andhis adventures, many of which are exceedingly curious,would furnish as rich materials for the novelist, as theyhave already done for the ballad mongers : some of themare, however, sufficiently well narrated in a pleasant littletome, published at Belfast, entitled The History of the Rap-pares,from which we have here as elsewhere quoted. Wearealso in possession of a funeral discourse preached at theobsequies of the " noble and renowned" Henry St. John, Esq.Lockwood. 313And then such a dare devil squadron as that which composedRedmond's tail!Meet, Mactigh, Jack Reilly, Shan Bernard, Phil Gallons, andArthur O'Neal ;who was unfortunately killed by the Tories — in the inductionto which, we find some allusion to Redmond. After describingthe thriving condition of the North of Ireland, about 1680, theRev. Lawrence Power, the author of the sermon, says, " Onemischief there was, which indeed in a great measure destroyedall, and that was, a pack of insolent bloody outlaws, whomthey here call Tories. These had so riveted themselves in theseparts, what by the interest they had among the natives, andsome English too, to their shame be it spoken, that they exercisea kind of separate sovereignty in three or four countiesin the North of Ireland. Redmond O'Hanlon is their chief,and has been these many years ; a cunning, dangerous fellow,who, though proclaimed an outlaw with the rest of his crew,and sums of money set upon their heads, yet he reigns still,and keeps all in subjection, so far, that 'tis credibly reportedhe raises more in a year by contribution a-la-mode de France,than the King's Lund taxes and Chimney money come to, andthereby is enabled to bribe clerks and officers, IF not theirMASTERS (!) and makes all too much truckle to him" Agitation,it seems, was not confined to our day — but the " finest countryin the world " has been, and ever will be the same. Theold game is played under a new colour — the only differenceis, that had Redmond lived in our time, he would in all probability,not only have pillaged a County, but representedit in Parliament. The spirit of the Rapparee is still abroad —though we fear there is little of the Tory left about it. Werecommend this note to the serious consideration of thedeclaimers against the sufferings of the " six millions."VOL. III. PS14 ROOKWOOD.Sure never were any boys like 'em, for rows, agitation, andsprees ;Scarce a rap did they leave in the country, and hence theywhere called TJapparees*.Next comes Power the great Tory of Munster, a gentlemanborn every inch,And strong Jack Macpherson of Leinster, a horse-shoewho broke at a pinch ;The last was a fellow so lively, not death e'en his courage coulddamp,For as he was led to the gallows, he played his own ' marchto the camp:{:.'Paddy Fleming, Dick Half, and Mulhoni, I think, are thenext on my list,All adepts in the beautiful science of giving a pocket a twist ;Jemmy Carrick § must follow his leaders, ould Burney whoput in a huff,By dancing a hornpipe at Tyburn, and bothering the hangmanfor snufF.Here Titus was slightly in error; he mistook the cause forthe effect. " They were called Rapparees," Mr. Malone says,*' from being armed with a half pike, called by the Irish aropery." — Todd's Johnson.f Tory, so called from the Irish word To7-ee, give me yourmoney. — Todd's Johnson.X As he was carried to the gallows. Jack played a fine tuneof his own composing on the bagpipe, which retains the nameof Macpherson' s tune to this day. — History of the Rap-pares.§ This shameless conduct of the Tory, we regret to say, hada precedent in the case of one Tom Cox, who, just before he wasHOOKWOOD. 315There's Paul Giddy the curly-pate Tory, whose noddle wasstuck on a spike,And Billy Delaney the " Songster," we never shall meetwith his like ;For his neck by a witch was anointed, and warranted safe byher charm,No hemp that was ever yet twisted, his wonderful throttlecould harm.turned off, kicked Mr. Smith, the ordinary, and the hangman,out of the cart." Notwithstanding he was so great a rogue, Delaney wasa handsome portly man, very diverting in company, and couldbehave himself before gentlemen very agreeably. He had apolitical genius (not altogether surprising in so eminent a Tory)and would have made a great proficiency in learning if he hadrightly applied his time. He composed several songs, and puttunes to them ; and by his skill in music had gained the favourof some of the leading musicians in the country, who endeavouredto get him reprieved." — History of the Rapparees.We have already given some account of Delaney, and of ChinaCappul, the " Whisperer," in our first volume. Theywere both indebted, we believe, to the same ould womanfor their enchantments. The particulars of the Songster'sexecution are singular. — *' When he was brought into court toreceive sentence of death, the Judge told him that he was informedhe should say ' that there was not a rope in Irelandsufficient to hang him. But,' says he, ' I'll try if Kilkennycan't afford one strong enough to do your business ; and if thatwill not do, you shall have another and another.' Then heordered the Sheriff to choose a rope, and Delaney was orderedfor execution the next day. The Sheriff, having notice of hismother's boasting that no rope could hang her son (and pursuantto the Judge's desire), provided two ropes, but Delaney316 Lockwood,And lastly there's Cahir na Capful, the handiest rogue ofthem all,\\'ho only need whisper a word, and your horse will trot out ofhis stall ;Your tit is not safe in your stable, though you or your groomshould be near,And devil a bit in the paddock, if Cahir gets hould of his ear.Lieu success to the Tories of Ireland, the generous, the gallant,the gay.With them the best Rumps* of England are not to be namedthe same day ;And were further proof wanting to show what precedence wetake with our prigs,Recollect that our robbers are Tories, while those of yourcountry are Whigs.Tyrconners song was barely completed, whenthey reached Stamford. Their first inquirywas for post-horses.broke them one after another ! The Sheriff was then in arage, and went for three bed cords, which he plaited three-foldtogether, arid they did Diis business. Yet the Sheriff was afraidhe was not dead ; and in a passion, to make trial, stabbed himwith his sword in the soles of his feet, and at last cut the rope.After he was cut down his body was carried into the courthouse,where it remained in the coffin for two days, standing up,till the Judge and all the spectators were fully satisfied that hewas stiff and dead, and then permission was given to his friendsto remove the corpse and bury it !History of the Rapfarees.Highwayman.CHAPTER VII.Dost fear ? Dost fear ? The moon shines clear ;Dost fear to ride with me ?Hurrah ! hurrah — the dead can ride ! "Oh William let them be !See there, see there ! what yonder swings,And creaks, mid whistling rain?"Gibbet and steel, the accursed wheel —A murderer in his chain."William and Helen.Dick Turpin meanwhile held bravely on hiscourse. — Bess was neither strained by her glidingpassage down the slippery hill side, nor shakenby larking the fence in the meadow. As Dicksaid, " It took a devilish deal to take it out ofher On regaining the high road, she resumedher old pace, and once more they were distancingTime's swift chariot in its whirlingpassage o'er the earth. Stamford, and the tongueof Lincoln's fenny shire, upon which it is situated,are passed almost in a breath. Rutland is won,318 ROOKWOOD.and past, and Lincolnshire once more entered.The road now verged within a bow-shot ofthat sporting Athens (Corinth, perhaps, weshould say) Melton Mowbray. Melton was thenunknown to fame, but, asia in spired by that furorvexatious which now inspires all who come withintwenty miles of this Charybdis of the chase, Besshere let out in a style with which would havepuzzled the best Leicestershire squire's bestpray to have kept pace. The spirit whichshe imbibed through the pores of her skin,and the juices of the meat she hadchamped, seemed to have communicated preternaturalexcitement to her. Her pace was absolutelyterrific — her eyeballs were dilated, andglowed like flaming carbuncles; while herwidely-distended nostril seemed, in the coldmoonshine, to snort forth smoke, as from a hiddenfire. Fain would Turpin have controuledher ; but, without bringing into play all his tremendousnerve, no check could be given herheadlong course, and for once, and the only timein her submissive career, Bess resolved to haveROOKWOOD. 319her own way — and she had it. Like a sensiblefellow, Dick conceded the point. — There Alassomething even of conjugal philosophy in hisself communion upon the occasion. " E'en let hertake her own way and be hanged to her, for anobstinate, self-willed jade as she is," said he;now her back is up, there '11 be no stopping her,I'm sure: she rattles away ike a woman'stongue, and when that once begins, we all knowwhat chance the curb has. Best to let her haveit out, or rather to lend her a lift — twill beover the sooner. — Tantivy, lass — Tantivy ! Iknow which of us will tire first."We have before said, that the vehementexcitement of continued swift riding producesa paroxysm in the sensorium, amounting todelirium. Dick's blood was again on fire.He was first giddy, as after a deep draught ofkindling spirit; this passed off, but the spiritwas still in his veins — the estro was working inhis brain. All his ardour, his eagerness,his fury, returned — he rode like one insane,ROOKWOOD.and his courser partook of his frenzy.She bounded — she leaped — she tore up theground beneath her — while Dick gave vent to hisexultation in one wild prolonged halloo. Morethan half his race is run. He has triumphedover every difficulty. He will have no furtheroccasion to halt. Bess carries her forage alongwith her. The course is straightforward — successseems certain — the goal already reached —the path of glory won. Another wild halloo, towhich the echoing woods reply, and away — !Away! — away — thou matchless steed ! — yetbrace fast thy sinews — hold, hold thy breath,for alas the goal is not yet attained \But forward — forward, on they go,High snorts the straining steed,Thick pants tl:ke rider's labouring breath.As headlong on they speed !As the eddying currents sweep over its plainsin howling bleak December, did the pair passoverwhat remained of Lincolnshire. Grahamis gone, and now more slowly are they lookingROOK WOOD. 321up the ascent of Gonerby hill, a path well knownto Turpin ; where often, in by-gone nights, hadmany a purse changed its owner. With thatfeeling of independence and exhilaration whichevery one feels, we believe, on having climbedthe hill side, Turpin turned to gaze around.There was triumph in his eye, but the triumphwas checked as his glance fell upon a gibbetnear him to the right, on a round point ofhill which is a landmark to the wide vale ofRevoir. Pressed as he was for time, Dickimmediately struck out of the road, andapproached the spot where it stood. Twoscarecrow objects, covered with rags and rustylinks of chain, depended from the tree. A nightcrow screaming around the carcases, added tothe hideous effect of the scene. Nothing butthe living highwayman and his skeleton brethrenwere visible upon the solitary spot. Around himwas the lonesome waste of hill, overlooking themoonlit valley — beneath his feet, a patch of bareand lightning-blasted sod — above, the wanV 5322 ROOKWOOD.declining moon and skies, flaked with ghostlyclouds — before him, the bleached bodies of themurderers, for such they were.Will this be my lot, I marvel ? " saidDick, looking upwards, with an involuntaryshudder.Ay, marry, will it'' cried a crouching figure,suddenly springing from beside a tuft of briarsthat skirted the blasted ground.Dick started in his saddle, while Bess rearedand plunged, at the sight of this unexpectedapparition.What, ho ! thou devils dam, Barbara, is itthou ?'' exclaimed Dick, re-assured upon discoveringthat it was the gipsy queen, and nospectre whom he beheld. " Stand still, Bess —stand, lass. What dost thou here, mother ofdarkness? Art gathering mandrakes for thypoisonous messes, or pilfering flesh from thedead. Meddle not with their bones, or I will,drive thee hence. What dost thou here, I say,,old dam of the gibbet ?"Lockwood. 323'' I come to die here !'^ replied Barbara, in afeeble tone, and, throwing back her hood, shedisplayed features well nigh as ghastly as thoseof the skeletons above her,Indeed,'^ replied Dick. " You've madechoice of a pleasant spot, it must be o^vTied. Butyou'll not die yet."Knowest thou whose these bodies are ?'" saidBarbara, pointing upwards.Two of thy race," replied Dick ; " rightbrethren of the blade."Two of my sons," cried Barbara ; " mytwin children. I am come to lay my bonesbeneath their bones — my sepulchre shall be theirsepulchre ; my body feed the fowls of the air astheir's have fed them. And if ghosts can walk,we'll scour this heath together. I tell thee what,Dick Turpin," said the hag, drawing as near tothe highwayman, as Bess would permit her ;dead men walk and ride — ay, ride — there'sa comfort for thee. I've seen these do it.I have seen them fling off their chains, anddance — ay dance with me — with their mother.S24 ROOKWOOD.No revels like dead men's revels, Dick. I shallsoon join 'em."But you will not lay violent hands uponyourself, mother'' said Dick, with difficultymastering his terror.No," replied Barbara, in an altered tone.But I will let Nature do her task — wouldshe could do it more quickly, but such alife as mine won't go out without a longstruggle. What have I to live for now ? Allare gone — she and her child ! But what is thisto thee? Thou hast no child — And if thouhadst, thou couldst not feel like a father —but no matter — I rave. Listen to me. I havecrawled hither to die. 'Tis five days since Ibeheld thee, and during that time, food has notpassed these lips — nor aught of moisture, saveHeaven's dew, cooled this parched throat, norshall they to the last. That time cannot befar off — and now canst guess how I mean to die ?Begone, and leave me — thy presence troublesme. I would breathe my last breath alone,with none to witness the parting pang."ROOKWOOD, 325I will not trouble you more, mother*" saidDick, turning his mare, " nor will I ask yourblessings"*My blessing ! '"* scornfully ejaculated Barbara." Thou shalt have it if thou ^vilt, butthou wilt find it a curse. Stay — a thoughtstrikes me. Whither goes thou ?'"To seek Sir Luke Rookwood,*" replied Dick ;know you aught of him .?"Sir Luke Rook wood ! — thou meekest him —thou wouldst find him !"" — screamed Barbara.I would"" said Dick.And thou wilt find him"" said Barbara —and that ere long. But I shall never againbehold him — would I could ! But I have amessage for him — one of life and death. Wiltthou convey it to him ?""I will"" said Dick.Swear by those bones to do so"" criedBarbara, pointing with her skinny fingers to thegibbet. " That thou wilt do my bidding""I swear"" cried Dick.Fail not, or we will haunt thee to thy life'sS26ROOK WOOD.ends cried Barbara, adding, as she gave asealed package to the highwayman. " Give thisto Sir Luke — to him alone. 1 would havesent it to him by other hands ere this, but mypeople have deserted me — have pillaged mystores — shave rifled me of all, save this. I whobut no matter. Give this, I say, to Sir Luke,with thy own hands : — thou hast sworn it, andwilt obey. Give it to him, and bid him, as heopens it, to think of Sybil. But this mustnot be till Eleanor is in his power ; and shemust be present when the seal is broken. Itrelates to both. Dare not thou to tamper withit, or my curse shall pursue thee. That packetis guarded with a triple spell, which to theewere fatal. Obey me, and my dying breathshall bless thee.'^Never fear," said Dick, taking the packet —'' I'll not disappoint you, mother, dependupon it.""*Hence," cried the crone ; and as she watchedDick's figure lessening upon the Waste, and atlength beheld him finally disappear down theROOKWOOD. 327hill side, she sank to the ground, her frailstrength being entirely exhausted — " Body andsoul may now part in peace"' gasped she —All I lived for is accomplished'' And ereone hour had elapsed, the night crow wasperched upon her still breathing frame.Long pondering upon this singular interview,Dick pursued his way. At length he thoughtfit to examine the packet, with which the oldgipsy had entrusted him—" It feels like acasket V thought he ; " it can't be gold — butthen it may be jewels — though they don't rattle,and it ain't quite heavy enough. What can itbe ? — I should like to know. There is somemystery that's certain, about it — but I will notbreak the seal, not I. As to her spell —that I don't value a rush, but I've sworn to giveit to Sir Luke, and deliver her message, and I'llkeep my word if I can — he shall have it."Saying which, he replaced it in his pocket.CHAPTER VIII.The sight renewed my courser's feetA moment, staggering feebly fleetA moment, with a faint low neighHe answered, and then fell ;With gasps and glazing eyes he lay.And reeking limbs immovable.His first and last career is done.Mazeppa.Time presses. We may not linger in ourcourse. We must fly on before our flying highwayman.Full forty miles shall we pass overin a breath. Two more hours have elapsed, andhe still urges his headlong career, with heartresolute as ever, and purpose yet unchanged.Fair Newark, and the dashing Trent, "mostloved of England's streams," are gathered to hislaurels. Broad Notes and its heavy paths, andsweeping glades — its waste (forest no more) ofSherwood past — bold Robin and his merrymen, his Marian and his moonlight ridesROOKWOOD. 329recalled, forgotten, left behind. — Hurrah ! Hurrah! that wild halloo ! that waving arm, thatenlivening shout ! What means it ? He isonce more upon Yorkshire ground — his horse'shoof beats once more the soil of that nobleshire. So transported was Dick, that he couldalmost have flung himself from the saddle tokiss the dust beneath his feet. Thrice fiftymiles has he run, nor has the morn yetdawned upon his labours. Hurrah — the enddraws nigh. The goal is in view — halloo —halloo — on.Bawtrey is past — he takes the lower road byThorne and Selby. He is skirting the watersof the deep-channelled Don.Bess now began to manifest some slightsymptoms of distress. There was a strain in thecarriage of her throat — a dulness in her eye —a laxity in her ear — and a slight stagger in hergait, which Turpin noticed with apprehension.Still she went on, though not at the same gallantpace as heretofore. But, as the tired bird stillbattles with the blast upon the ocean — as theROOKWOOD.swimmer still stems the stream, though spent —on went she — nor did Turpin dare to check her —fearing that if she stopped she might lose herforce, or that if she fell, she would rise nomore.It was now that gray and grimly hour, ereone flicker of orange or rose has gemmed theeast, and when unwearying Nature herselfseems to snatch brief repose. In the roar ofrestless cities, this is the only time when theirstrife is hushed. Midnight is awake — alive —the streets ring with laughter, and with rattlingwheels. At the third hour, a dread deep silenceprevails. The loud-voiced streets grow dumb.They are deserted of all, save the few guardiansof the night, and the skulking robber. Buteven far removed from the haunts of men, andhum of towns, it is the same. " Nature's bestnurse," seems to weigh Nature down, and stillnessreigns throughout. Our feelings are in agreat measure influenced by the hour, exposedto the raw crude atmosphere, which has neitherthe nipping, wholesome shrewdness of morn,ROOKWOOD. 331nor the profound chillness of night ; the framevainly struggles against the dull, miserable sensationsengendered by the damps, and at oncecommunicates them to the spirits. Hope forsakesus. We are weary, exhausted; our energy isdispirited. Sleep does "not weigh our eyelidsdowns** we stare upon the vacancy — we conjureup a thousand restless, disheartening images —we abandon projects we have formed, andwhich, viewed through this medium, appearfantastical, chimerical, absurd. We want rest,refreshment, energy.We will not say that Turpin had all thesemisgivings. But he had to struggle hard withhimself to set sleep and exhaustion at defiance.The moon had set. The starsPinnacled deep in the intense inane,Shelley,had all — save one, the herald of the da\vTi, withdrawntheir lustre — a dull mist lay on the streamand the air became piercing cold. Turpin'schilled fingers could scarcely grasp the slackeningrein, while his eyes, irritated by theROOKWOOD.keen atmosphere, scarce enabled him to distinguishsurrounding objects, or even to guide hissteed. It was owing, probably, to this lattercircumstance, that Bess suddenly floundered andfell, throwing her master over her head.Turpin instantly recovered himself. His firstthought was for his horse. — But Bess was instantlyupon her legs — covered with dust andfoam, sides and cheeks — and with her large eyesglaring wildly, almost piteously, upon hermaster.Art hurt, lass ?"" asked Dick, as she shookherself, and slightly shivered. — And he proceededto the horseman's scrutiny. " Nothing butashake — though that dull eye — those quiveringflanks — " added he, looking earnestly at her.She won't go much farther, and I must give itup — what, give up the race just when it's won ?No, that can't be. — Ha — well thought on — I'vea bottle of liquid, given me by an old fellowwho was a knowing cove, and famous jockey inhis day, which he swore would make a horse goaslong as he'd a leg to carry him, and bade meLockwood. 333keep it for some great occasion. — I've never usedit — but I'll try it now. — It should be in thispocket. Ah ! Bess, wench, I fear I'm usingthee, after all, as Sir Luke did his mistress, thatI thought so like thee — but no matter — it willbe a glorious end."Raising her head upon his shoulder, Dickpoured the contents of the bottle down thethroat of his mare. — Nor had he to wait longbefore its invigorating effects were instantaneous.The fire was kindled in the glassy orb — hercrest was once more erected^her flank ceasedto quiver — and she neighed loud and joyously."Egad, the old fellow was right," criedDick. — "The drink has worked wonders. — Whatthe devil could it have been? — It smells likespirit," added he, examining the bottle. " I wishI'd left a taste for myself. But here's that willdo as well." — And he drained his flask of thelast drop of brandy.Dick's limbs were now become so excessivelystiff, that it was with difficulty he could remounthis horse — but this necessary preliminary534 ROOKWOOD.being achieved by the help of a stile, he foundno difficulty in resuming his accustomed positionupon the saddle. We know not whetherthere was any likeness between our Turpin andthat modern Hercules of the sporting world,Mr. Osbaldeston — far be it from us to instituteany similitude, though we cannot help thinkingthat, in one particular, he resembled thatfamous " copper-bottomed'' Squire. But thiswe will leave to our readers"* discrimination.Dick bore his fatigues wonderfully — he sufferedsomewhat of that martyrdom which,according to Tom Moore, occurs " to weaversand M. P.'s, from sitting too long'' — but onceon his courser's back, he cared not for any thing.Once more at a gallant pace is he traversingthe banks of the Don, skirting the fields of flaxthat bound its sides, and hurrying far more swiftlythan its current to its confluence with the Aire.Saith was past. He was on the road to Selbywhen dawn first began to break. Here andthere a twitter was heard in the hedge ; a hareran across his path, gray looking as the morningROOKWOOD. 335self; and the mists began to rise from the earth.A bar of gold was drawn against the east, likethe roof of a gorgeous palace ; but the mistswere heavy in this world of rivers and theirtributary streams. The Ouse was before him, theTrent and Aire behind ; the Don and Derwenton either hand, all in their way to commingletheir currents ere they formed the giant Humber.Amid a region so prodigal of water, no wonderthe dews fell thick as rain. Here and there theground was clear ; but then again came a volleyof vapour palpable almost as smoke.While involved in one of these fogs, Turpinbecame aware of another horseman by his side.It was impossible to discern the features of therider, but his figure, in the mist, seemed gigantic ;neither was the colour of his steed distinguishable.Nothing was visible but the meacrre-lookinfjphantom-like outline of a horse and his rider, and,as the unknown rode upon the turf that edgedthe way, even the sound of his horse's hoofswere scarce audible. Turpin gazed not withoutsuperstitious awe. Once or twice did he essayROOKWOOD.to address the strange horseman, but his tongueclave to the roof of his mouth. He fancied hediscovered in the mist-exaggerated lineaments ofthe stranger a wild and fantastic resemblance tohis friend, Tom King. " It must be Tom"'thought Turpin ; " he is come to warn me ofmy approaching end — I will speak to him.^'But terror overmastered his speech — he couldnot force out a word, and thus side by side theyrode in silence. Quaking with fears, he wouldscarce acknowledge to himself, Dick watchedevery motion of his companion — he was still,stern, spectre-like, erect, and looked for all theworld like a demon on his phantom steed. Hiscourser seemed, in the indistinct outline, to behuge and bony, and as he snorted furiously inthe fog, Dick's heated imagination supplied hisbreath with a due proportion of flame. Not aword was spoken — not a sound heard, save thesullen dead beat of his heels upon the grass.It was intolerable to ride thus cheek by jowlwith a goblin. Dick could stand it nolonger — she put spurs to his horse, and endear33*7poured to escape ; but it might not be — thestranger, apparently without effort, was still byhis side, and Bess's feet, in her master's apprehensions,were nailed to the ground. By andbye, however, the atmosphere became clear-^^r —bright quivering beams burst through thevaporous shroud, and then it was that Dickdiscovered the apparition of Tom King wasno other than Luke Rosewood. He wasmounted on his old horse, Rook, and lookedgrim and haggard as a ghost vanishing at thecrowing of the cock.Sir Luke Rosewood by this light ! '' exclaimedDick, in astonishment. '* Why I tookyou for *"The devil, no doubt ?'^ returned Sir Luke,smiling sternly, " and were sorry to find me sohard pressed ; but don't disquiet yourself, I amstill flesh and blood."Had I taken you for one of mortal mould,"said Dick, " you should have soon seen whereI'd have put you in the race; but that d— dfog deceived me, and Bess acted the fool as wellVOL. Ill, QS38 ROOKWOOD.myself. However, now I know you. Sir Luke,you must spur alongside, for the hawks are onthe wing ; and though I've much to say, I've notasecond to lose." And Dick briefly detailed theparticulars of his ride, concluding with his rencontrewith Barbara. " Here's the packet," saidhe, " just as I got it — you must keep it till theproper moment. And here," added he, fumblingin his pocket for another paper, " is themarriage document. You are now your father'slawful son, let who will say you nay — take itand welcome. If you are ever master of MissMowbray's hand, you will not forget DickTurpin."I will not," said Luke, eagerly graspingthe certificate ; " but she never may be mine."You have her oath ?"I have."What more is needed ?"Her hand."That will follow."It shall follow," replied Sir Luke, wildly.Thou art right — she is my affianced bride —ROOK WOOD. 339affianced before hell, if not before heaven. Ihave purchased her hand at the penalty of myimmortal soul, and it shall be mine. I havesealed the contract with blood. — with Sybil'sblood, and it shall be fulfilled— mine shall shebe. I have her oath — her oath — ^ha, ha !Though I perish in the attempt, I will wrest herfrom Ranulph's grasp. Never shall she be his —I would stab her first — I hate him with all abrother'' s hatred. Dost know what that feeling is ?No hate is like it. Twice have I failed in myendeavours to bear her oflp. I am from Rook-woodeven now ; but to-night I shall renewthe attack."To-night !'' interrupted Dick.To-night. Wilt thou assist me.?''I will — she is at Rosewood .?"She languishes there at present, attended byher mother and her lover — ay, her lover — herfavoured lover. The hall is watched andguarded — Ranulph is ever on the alert, andone more dangerous than him is Lady Rook-wood.But we will storm their garrison — I have34)0 liooKwooD.a spy within its walls — a gipsy girl, faithful tomy interests, Handassah. From her I havelearnt that there is a plot to wed Eleanor toRanulph — that the marriage is to take placeprivately tomorrow — this must be prevented*"It must. But why not boldly advance, andclaim her .P''Why not ? Askest thou that ? I am a proscribedfelon — a price is set upon my head — Iam hunted through the country — I am drivento concealment, and dare not show myself forfear of capture. What could I do now ? Theywould load me with fetters — bury me in a dungeon,and wed Eleanor to Ranulph. Whatwould avail my rights ? What would avail heroath to them ? No ; she must be mine by force.His she shall never be. Again, I ask thee,wilt thou aid me ?"I will. Adhere is Alan Rosewood V^' Concealed within the hut on ThoseWaste — thou knowest it — it was one of thyhaunts."*' I know it well'' said Dick, " and ConveyRosewood*; 341Jem, its keeper, into the bargain — she is aknowing file. And you mean to try it on tonightfor the last time?"dido."*' I'll join you at the hut at midnight, if allgoes well. We'll bring off the wench, in spite ofthem all — j must the thing I like ; but in case of abreak down on my part, suppose you takecharge of my purse in the mean times''Luke would have declined this offer.Pshaw," said Dick. " Who knows whatmay happen ? and it's not ill lined either. You'llfind an odd hundred or so, in that silken bag —it's not often your highwayman gives away apurse ; but take it, man — we'll settle all to-night ;and if I don't come, keep it — it will help youinstead of me to your bride — and now off withyou to the hut, for you are only hindering meAdieu. My love to old Alan — we'll do thetrick to-night. Away with you to the hut —keep yourself snug there till midnight, and we'llride over to Rosewood."342 ROOKWOOD.At midnight,'^ replied Sir Luke, wheelingoff — " I shall expect you.'*''Ware hawks," hallooed Dick.But Luke had vanished. In another instantDick was scouring the plain as rapidly as ever.In the mean time, as Dick has casually alludedto the hawks, it may not be amiss to inquirehere how they have flown throughout the night,and whether they are still in chase of theirquarry. — With the exception of Titus, who wascompletely done up at Graham ; — " havinggot," as . he said, " a complete belly-full of it,"they were still on the wing — and resolved sooneror later to pounce upon their prey — pursuingthe same system as heretofore, in regard to thepost horses. Major Mowbray and Patersontook the lead, but the irascible Attorney wasnot far in their rear, his wrath having been byno means allayed by the fatigue he had undergone.At Bawtrey they held council of war forafew minutes, being doubtful which course hehad taken; — but their incertitude was relievedROOKWOOD. 343by a foot traveller, who had heard Dick's loudhalloo on passing the boundary of Nottinghamshire,and had seen him take the lower road.They struck, therefore, into the path to Those,at a hazard, and were soon satisfied they wereright. Furiously did they now spur on. Theyreach Selby — they change horses at the inn infront of the fine old cathedral church; — and fromthe post-boy they learn that a toil-worn horseman,on a jaded steed, had ridden through thetown, about five minutes before them, and couldnot be more than a quarter of a mile in advance.His horse was so dead beat," said the lad,that I'm sure he cannot have got far — and, ifyou look sharp, I'll be bound you'll overtake himbefore he reaches Cawood Ferry."Mr. Coates was transported — " We'll lodgehim snug in York Castle before an hour. Paterson,"cried he, rubbing his hands.I hope so. Sir," said the Chief Constable —but I begin to have some qualms."Now, gentlemen," shouted the post-boy —"come along — I'll soon bring you to him."544 ROOKWOOD.The sun had just overtopped the " high easternhill" as Turpin reached the Ferry of Cawood,and his beams were reflected upon the deep andsluggish waters of the Ouse. Wearily had hedragged his course thither — wearily and slow.The powers of his gallant steed were spent, andhe could scarcely keep her from sinking — yetstill it was now midway 'twixt the hours of fiveand six — nine miles only lay 'twixt him, and thatthought again revived him. He reached thewater's edge — she hailed the ferry-boat, which wasthen on the other side of the river. At thatinstant a loud shout smote his ear — it was thehalloo of his pursuers. Despair was in his look.He cried to the boatman, and bade him pullfast. — The man obeyed, but he had to breasta strong stream — and had a lazy bark, andheavy sculls, to contend with. He had scarcelyleft the shore — when another shout was raisedfrom the pursuers — the tramp of their steedsgrew louder and louder.The boat had scarcely reached the middle ofthe stream. His captors were at hand. QuietlyROOKWOOD* 345he walked down the bank — cautiously enteredthe water — there was a plunge — steed and riderwere swimming down the river.Major Mowbray was at the brink of the water.He hesitated an instant, and stemmed the tide.Seized as it were by a mania for equestriandistinction, Mr. Coates braved the torrent.Not so, Paterson. He very coolly took outhis bull-dogs, and, watching Turpin, cast up inhis own mind the pros and cons of shooting himas he was crossing. " I could certainly hit him''thought or said the constable; "but what ofthat ? A dead highwayman is worth nothing — -alive, he weighs 300/. I won't shoot him, butI'll make a pretence — " and he fired accordingly.The shot skimmed over the water, but didnot, as it was intended, do much mischief. Ithowever occasioned a mishap, which had nearlyproved fatal to our aquatic Attorney. Alarmedat the report of the pistol, in the nervous agitationof the moment, Coates drew in his rein sotightly that his steed instantly sank. A momentor two afterwards he rose, shaking his ears, andq5546 ROOKWOOD.floundering heavily towards the shore ; and suchwas the chilling effect of this sudden immersion,that Mr. Coates now thought much more ofsaving himself, than of capturing Turpin.Dick, meanwhile, had reached the opposite bank,and, refreshed by her bath, Bess scrambled upthe sides x>f the stream, and speedily regainedthe road. " I shall do it, yet'' shouted Dick,that stream has saved her. — Hark away, lass !Hark away !''Bess heard the cheering cry, and she answeredto the call. She roused all her energies — shestrained every sinew — she put forth all herremaining strength. Once more on wings ofswiftness, she bore him away from his pursuers,and Major Mowbray, who had now scrambledon the shore, and made certain of securing him,beheld him spring, like a wounded hare, frombeneath his very hand. " It cannot hold out''said the Major ; " it is but an expiring flash —that horse must soon drop."She be regularly booked, that's certain," saidthe post-boy. — " We shall find her on the road,"ROOKWOOD. 347Contrary to all expectation, however, Bessheld on, and set pursuit at defiance. Her pacewas swift as when she started — but it was unconsciousand mechanical action — it wanted theease, the lightness, the life of her former riding.She seemed screwed up to a task which she mustexecute. There was no flogging — no gory-heel: — but the heart was throbbing, tugging atthe sides within — and her spirit spurred heronwards. Her eye was glazing — her chestheaving — lier flank quivering — her crest againfallen. — Yet she held on. " She is dying, byGod'' said Dick— « I feel it r No, sheheld on.Belford is past. — The towers and pinnaclesof York burst upon him in all the freshness,the beauty, and the glory of a bright, clear,autumnal morn. '' The ancient city seemed tosmile a welcome — a greeting. — The nobleMinster and its serene and massive pinnacles,crocketed, lantern-like, and beautiful — St.Mary's lofty spire — All Hallow's Tower—the massive mouldering walls of the adjacentpostern — the grim castle — and Clifford's weighsROOKWOOD.pouring keep— all beamed upon him, " like abright-eyed face, that laughs out openly'' — " Itis done — it is won," cried Dick. " Hurrah-hurrah."And the sunny air was cleft with hisshouts.Bess was not insensible to her master's exultation.She neighed feebly, and reeled forwards.It was a piteous sight to see her — to markher staring, protruding eye-balls — her shakingflanks ; — but, while life and limb held together,holds she on. Another mile is past. Yorkis near.Hurrah," shouted Dick ; but his voice washushed.Bess tottered — fell. — There was a dreadfulgasp — a parting moan — a snort — her eye gazed,for an instant, upon her master, with a dyingglare — then grew glassy, rayless, fixed — a shiverran through her frame. — Her heart had burst.Dick's eyes were blinded, as with rain. HisTriumph, though achieved, was forgotten — hispresent safety unthought of. He stood weepingand swearing like one beside himself.<^And art thou gone, Bess!" cried he, in aC-rttul'sluvvvK'ROOKWOOD. 349despairing voice, lifting up his courser's head,and kissing her lips, covered with blood-fleckedfoam. " Gone — gone — and I have killed thebest steed that was ever crossed ! '^At that moment the deep bell of theMinster clock tolled out the hour of six.I am answered," said Dick ; " it was to hearthose strokes*"Turpin was roused from the state of stupefactioninto which he had fallen by a smart slap onthe shoulder. Recalled to himself by the blow,he started at once to his feet, while his handssought his pistols, but he was spared the necessityof using them by discovering in the intruderthe bearded visage of the gipsy Balthazar.The Patrico was habited in mendicant weeds,and sustained a large wallet upon his shoulders.So it's all over with the best mare in England,I see," said Balthazar ; " but I can guesshow it has happened — you are pursued."I am," said Dick, roughly.Your pursuers are at hand ?"Within a few hundred yards."Then why stay here? — fly while you can "350 ROOKWOOD.Never — never'' cried Turpin ; " I'll fight itout here — by Bess's side. Poor lass ! I've killedher — but she has done it — ^ha, ha — we have wonwhat ? " and his utterance was again choked.Hark ! I hear the tramp of horse, andshouts," cried the Patrico. " Take this wallet —you will find a change of dress within it — dartinto that thick copse — save yourself."But Bess — I cannot leave her," exclaimedDick, with an agonizing look at his horse.And what died Bess for, but to save you ?"rejoined the Patrico." True — true," said Dick ; " but take care ofher. Don't let those dogs of hell meddle "'^ Away," cried the Patrico ; " leave her to me."Possessing himself of the wallet, Dick disappearedin the adjoining copse.He had not been gone many seconds, whenMajor Mowbray rode up.Who is this ?" exclaimed the Major,flinging himself from his horse, and seizingthe Patrico : " this is not Turpin."Certainly not," replied Balthazar, coolly. " Iam not exactly the figure for a highwayman."ROOKWOOD. Sphereis he ? what has become of him ?""asked Coates in despair, as he and Patersonjoined the Major.Escaped I fear'' replied the Major. " Haveyou seen any one, fellow P"' added he addressingthe Patrico.I have seen no one," replied Balthazar. " Iam but this instant arrived — this dead horselying in the road attracted my attention."Ha !" — exclaimed Paterson, leaping fromhis steed ; " this may be Turpin after all. Hehas as many disguises as the devil himself, andmay have carried that goats hair in his pocket."Saying which he seized the Patrico by the beard,and shook it with as little reverence as the Gaulhandled the chin of the Roman senator.The devil ! — hands ois," roared Balthazar.By Salmon, but I shan't stand such usageDo you think a beard like mine is the growthof a few minutes ? Hands off, I say."Regularly done ! " said Paterson, removinghis hold of the Patrico's chin, and looking asblank as a cartridge.352 Lockwood.Ay'' exclaimed Coates, " all owing to thisworthless piece of carrion. If it were not that Ihope to see him dangling from those walls,"pointing towards the Castle, " I should wish hermaster were by her side now. To the dogs withher C and he was about to spurn the breathlesscarcase of poor Bess, when a sudden blow, dealtby the Patrico's staff, felled him to the ground.I'll teach you to molest me," said Balthazar,about to attack Paterson.Come, come," said the discomfited ChiefConstable, " no more of this. It's plain we'rein the wrong box. Every bone in my bodyaches sufficiently without the aid of your cudgel,old fellow. Come, Mr. Coates, take my arm,and let's be moving. We've had an infernallong ride for nothing."Not so," replied Coates ; " I've paid prettydearly for it. However, let us see if we canget any breakfast at the bowling-green, yonder ;though I've already had my morning draught,"added the facetious man of law, looking at hisdripping apparel.lockwood; 35STo the bowling-green the party proceeded,leaving the Patrico in undisturbed possession ofthe lifeless body of Black Bess. Major Mowbrayordered a substantial repast to be preparedwith all possible expedition.A countryman in a smock was busily engagedat his morning's meal.To see that fellow bolt down his breakfast,one would think he had fasted for amonth," said Coates ; " see the wholesomeeffects of an honest industrious life, Paterson.I envy him his appetite — I should fall to withmore zest, were Dick Turpin in his place."The countryman looked up. He was an odd-lookingfellow, with a terrible squint, and astrange contorted countenance.An ugly dog ! " exclaimed Paterson—*' what a devil of a twist he has got !"What's that you says about Dick Turpin ?"asked the countryman, with his mouth half-fullof bread."Have you seen aught of him?" askedCoates.354 ROOKWOOD.'* Not I/' mumbled the rustic — " but I hearsaw the folk hereabouts talk on him — they sayhe sets all the lawyers and constables at defiance,and laughs in his sleeve at their efforts to catchhim — ha — ha. He gets over more ground inaday, than they do in a week — ho — ^ho.''That's all over now'' said Coates, peevishly.He has cut his own throat — ridden his famousmare to death."The countryman almost choked himself, ^^the attempt to bolt a huge mouthful. " Ay —indeed! How happened that?" asked he, sosoon as he recovered speech.The fool rode her from London to York,last night," returned Coates ; " such a feat wasnever performed before — what horse could beexpected to live through such work as that ?""Ah, he were a fool to attempt that,"observed the countryman, " but you followed,belike?""We did."" And took him after all ?" asked the rustic,squinting more horribly than ever.ROOKWOOD. 555No"" returned Coates, " I can't say wedid — But we'll have him yet. I'm pretty surehe can't be far off — we may be nearer himthan we imagine."May be so. Sir," returned the countryman; " but might I be so bold as to ask howmany horses you used i' the chase — some halfdozen, perhaps .'"'Half dozen ! " grow led Paterson ; " we hadtwenty at the least."And I ONE," mentally ejaculated Turpin,for he was the countryman.End OF BOOK THE FOURTH.BOOK V.Fie i!^at%It was an ill oath, better broke than kept;The laws of nature, and of nations, doDispense with matters of divinityIn such a case.Tateham,BOOK THE FIFTHCHAPTER I.Hind. Are all our horses and our arms in safety ?Fur bo. They feed like Pluto's palfreys, under ground ;Our pistols, swords, and other furniture,Are safely locked up at our rendezvous.Prince of Prigs' Revels.The hut on Thorne Waste, to which we havebefore incidentally alluded, and whither we arenow about to repair, was a low, lone hovel, situateon the banks of the deep and oozy Don, at theeastern extremity of that extensive Moor.Ostensibly its owner fulfilled the duties of ferrymanto that part of the river ; but as the roadwhich skirted his tenement was but little frequented,his craft was for the most part allowedto sleep undisturbed in her moorings.360 ROOKWOOD.In reality, however, he was the inland agentof a horde of smugglers, who infested the neighbouringcoast; his cabin was their rendezvous;and not unfrequently, it was said, the depositoryof their contraband goods. Conkey Jem (sowas he called by his associates, on account ofthe Slawkenbergian promontory which decoratedhis countenance) had been an old hand at thesame trade ; but having returned from a sevenyears' leave of absence from his own country,procured by his lawless life, now managed matterswith more circumspection and prudence, andhad never since been detected in his former illicittraffic; nor, though so marvellously gifted inthat particular himself, was he ever known to noseupon any of his accomplices; or, in other words,to betray them. On the contrary, his hut wasa sort of asylum for all fugitives from justice ;and, although the sanctity of his walls would,in all probability, have been but little regarded,had any one been detected within them, yet,strange to say, even if a robber had beentracked (as it often chanced) to Jem's imme-ROOKWOOD. 361date neighbourhood, all traces of him weresure to be lost at the ferryman's hut ; and furthersearch rendered useless.Within, the hut presented such an appearanceas might be expected, from its owner's pursuits,and its own unpromising exterior. Consistingof little more than a couple of rooms, the rudewhite-washed mud walls exhibited, in lieu ofprints of more pretension, a gallery of choicely-illustratedballads, celebrating the exploits ofvarious highwaymen, renowned in song; amongstwhich, our friend Dick Turpin figured conspicuouslyupon his sable steed, Bess beingrepresented by a huge rampant, black patch,and Dick, with a pistol considerably longerthan the arm that sustained it. Next tothis curious collection, was a drum net, afishing rod, a landing net, an eel spear, and otherpiscatorial apparatus, with a couple of sculls,and a boat hook, indicative of Jem's ferryman'soffice, suspended by various hooks ; the wholeblackened and begrimed by peat smoke, therebeing no legitimate means of exit permitted toVOL. III. E362 ROOKWOOD.the vapour which was generated by the turf-coveredhearth-stone. The only window indeedin the hut was to the front ; the back apartment,which served Jem for dormitory, had no aperturewhatever for the admission of light, exceptsuch as was afforded through the door of communicationbetween the rooms. A few brokenrush-bottomed chairs, with a couple of dirtytables, formed the sum total of the ferryman'sfurniture.Notwithstanding the grotesque effect of hisexaggerated nasal organ, Jem's aspect was atonce savage and repulsive ; his lank black hairhung about his inflamed visage in wild elf locks,the animal predominating throughout ; his eyeswere small, red, and wolfish, and glared suspiciouslyfrom beneath his scarred and tuftedeye-brows — while certain of his teeth projected,like the tusks of a boar, from out his coarse-tipped,sensual mouth. Dwarfish in stature, anddeformed in person, Jem was built for strength ;and what with his width of shoulder, and shortnessof neck, his figure looked as square and solidLockwood.as a cube. His throat and hirsute chest, constantlyexposed to the weather, had acquired aglowing tan, while his arms, uncovered to theshoulders, and clothed with fur like a bear'shide, down, almost, to the tips of his fingers —presented a knot of folded muscles, the concentratedforce of which few would havedesired to encounter in action.It was now on the stroke of midnight,and Jem, who had been lying extendedupon the floor of his hovel, suddenly arousedby that warning impulse which never fails toawaken one of his calling at the exactmoment when they require to be upon thealert, now set about fanning into flame theexpiring fuel upon his hearth. Having succeededin igniting further portions of turf, Jemproceeded to examine the security of his doorand window, and satisfied that lock and boltwere shot, and that the shutter was carefullyclosed — he kindled a light at his fire, and walkedtowards his bed-room. But it was not to retirefor the night, that the ferryman entered hisdormitory. Beside his crazy couch stood a litter364 ROOKWOOD.of empty bottles, and a beer cask, crowding thechamber. The latter he rolled aside, and pressinghis foot upon the plank beneath it, theboard gave way, and a trap-door opening, discovereda ladder conducting, apparently, intothe bowels of the earth. Jem leaned over theabyss, and called, in hoarse accents, to some onebelow.An answer was immediately returned, and alight became soon afterwards visible at the footof the ladder. Two figures next ascended ; thefirst who set foot within the ferryman's chamberwas Alan Rook wood ; the other, as the readermay perhaps conjecture, was his grandson."Is it the hour ?'' asked Luke, as he sprangfrom out the trap-door.Ay," replied Jem, with a coarse laugh ;"or I had not disturbed myself to call you.But may be'' added he, softening his manner alittle, " you'll like some refreshment before youstart ? A stoup of Nantes will put you in cue forthe job, ha, ha !"Not I," replied Luke, who could ill toleratehis companion's familiarity.IROOKWOOD. 365*' Give me to drink*" said Alan — walkingfeebly towards the fire, and extendinghis skinny fingers before it. " I am chilled bythe damps of that swampy cave — the naturalheat within me is nigh extinguished"""Here is that shall put fresh marrow intoyour old bones'" returned Jem, handing hima tumbler of brandy—" never stint it. I'll besworn you 11 be the better on't, for you look desperatequeer, man, about the mazzard""Alan was in sooth a ghastly spectacle ; sincethe reader last heard of him, he was fearfullychanged. His countenance was almost exanimate;and when, with shaking hand and trembling lips,he had drained the fiery potion to the dregs, aterrible grimace was excited upon his features,such as is produced upon the corpse by theaction of the galvanic machine. Even Jem regardedhim with a sort of apprehension. Afterhe had taken breath for a moment, Alan brokeout into a fit of wild and immoderate laughter.Why, ay'' said he, " this is indeed to growyoung again, and to feel fresh fire within one's366 ROOKWOOD.veins. Who would have thought so much of lifeand energy could reside in this little vessel ? Iam myself once more, and not the same soulless,pulse-less, lump of clay, I was a momentor two back. The damps of that den haddestroyed me — and the solitude — the wakingdreams IVe had — the visions! — horrible! — but Iwill not think of those — I am better now — readyto execute my plans — Thy plans I should say,grandson Luke. Are our horses in readiness ?Why do we tarry ? The hour is arrived, andI would not that my new-blown courage shouldevaporate, ere the great work, for which I live,be accomplished. That done, I ask no furtherstimulant — Let us away""We tarry but for Turpin," said Luke ; " Iam as impatient as yourself. I fear some mischancemust have befallen him, or he wouldhave been true to his appointment. Do younot think so V added he, addressing theferryman.Why'' replied Jem, reluctantly, " since youput it home to me, and I can't conceal it no longer,ROOKWOOD. 367ril tell you what I did'nt tell afore, for fear youshould be down in the mouth about it; DickTurpin can do nothing for you — he's grabbed TTurpin apprehended ! " ejaculated Luke.Ay'' returned Jem. " I learnt from a farmer,who crossed the ferry at night-fall, that he werecrabbed this morning at York, after havingridden his famous cherry-coloured pray todeath — that's what hurts me more nor all therest ; though I fear Dick will scarce cheat thegallows this go. — His time's up, I reckon."Will you supply his place, and accompanyus?" asked Luke, of the ferryman.No — no — " replied Jem, shaking his head —'* there's too much risk, and too little profit, inthe business for me — it won't pay."And what might tempt you to undertakethe enterprise ?" asked Alan.- " More than you have to offer, Master Peter,"replied Jem, who had not been enlightened uponthe subject of Alan's real name or condition."How know you that?" demanded Alan,Name your demand. "368 Lockwood*Well then, I'll not say but a hundredpounds, if you had it, might bribe me .""*' To part with your soul to the devil, I doubtnot," said Luke, fiercely stamping the ground.Let us begone — we need not his mercenaryaid — we will do without him.""Stay," said Alan — "you shall have thehundred, provided you will assure us ofyour services,"Cut no more blarneyfied whigs. MasterSexton," replied Jem, in a gruff tone. — " IfI'm to go, I must have the chink down — andthat's more nor either of you can do, I'mthinking."Give me thy purse," whispered Alan, tohis grandson — " Pshaw," continued he, " dosthesitate ? This man can do much for us. Thinkupon Eleanor, and be prudent. Thou canstnot accomplish thy task unaided." Taking theamount from the purse, he gave it to the ferryman,adding — " If we succeed, the sum shallbe doubled, and now let us set out."During Alan's speech, Jem's sharp eyes hadLockwood. 369been fastened upon the purse, while he mechanicallyclutched the bank notes which weregiven to him. He could not remove his gaze,but continued staring at the treasure beforehim, as if he would willingly, by force, havemade it all his own.Alan saw the error he had committed,in exposing the contents of the purseto the avaricious ferryman, and was about torestore it to Luke, when the bag was suddenlysnatched from his grasp, and himself levelled, bya blow, upon the floor. Conkey Jem had foundthe temptation irresistible. Knowing himself tobe a match for both his companions, andimagining himself secure from interruption, heconceived the idea of making away with them,and possessing himself of their wealth. Nosooner had he disposed of Alan, than heassaulted Luke, who met his charge half way.With the vigour and alacrity of the latter,the reader is already acquainted, but he wasno match for the Herculean strength of thedouble-jointed ferryman, who, with the ferocityr5370 ROOKWOOD.of the boar he so much resembled, thus furiouslyattacked him. Nevertheless, as may be imagined,he was not disposed to yield up his life tamely.He saw at once the villain's murderous intentions,and, well aware of his prodigious power,would not have risked a close struggle, could hehave avoided it; but it was inevitable. Snatchingthe eel spear from the wall, he had hurled it atthe head of his adversary, but without effect. Inthe next instant, he was locked in a clasp terribleas that of a polar bear. In spite of all his struggles,Luke was speedily hurled to the ground ;and Jem, who had thrown himself upon him,was apparently searching about for some weapon,to put a bloody termination to the conflict, whena horse was heard at the door, three tapsrepeated slowly, one after the other, and a callfrom a whistle.Damnation !" ejaculated Jem, gruffly;interrupted ! '' And he seemed irresolute,slightly altering his position on Luke's body.The moment was fortunate for Luke, and, inall probability, saved his life. He extricatedROOKWOOD. 371himself from the ferryman's grasp — regained hisfeet; and, what was of more importance, theweapon he had thrown away.Villain !" cried he, about to plunge the spearwith all his force into his enemy's side. " Youshall "The whistle was again heard without.Don't you mark that ? '^ cried Jem ; — " 'tisTurpin's call."Turpin !" echoed Luke — dropping the pointof his weapon. " Unbar the door, thoutreacherous rascal, and admit him."Well, say no more about it, Sir Luke""said Jem, fawningly ; " I knows I owes you mylife — and I thank you for it. Take back the^wr* — he should not have shown it me — it wasthat as did all the mischief."Unbar the door, and parley not," saidLuke, contemptuously.Jem complied with pretended alacrity, butwith real reluctance, casting suspicious glances» Money.372 ROOKWOOD.at Luke, as he withdrew the bolts. The door,at length, being opened — haggard, exhausted,and covered with dust, Dick Turpin staggeredinto the hut.Well, I am here'' said he, with a hollowlaugh. — " Fve kept my word — ha — ha! IVebeen damnably put to it — but here I am, ha —ha r and he sank upon one of the stools.We heard you were apprehended"" saidLuke. " I am glad to find the informationwas false," added he, glancing angrily at theferryman.False !" echoed Dick. — " Whoever told youthat, told you a lie. Sir Luke. — But what are youscowling at, old Charon ? — and you. Sir Luke ?Why do you glower at each other ? — Makefast the door — bolt it, Cerberus — right. Nowgive me a glass of brandy — and then I'll talk — abumper — so — another. What's that I see — adead man ? Old Peter. — Alan, I mean — has anythinghappened to him, that he has taken hismeasure there so quietly ? "Nothing, I trust," said Luke, stooping toROOKWOOD. 373raise up his grandsire. — " The blow has stunnedhim."The blow ?''— repeated Turpin.— " What !there has been a quarrel then ? I thoughtas much, from your agreeable looks at eachother. Come — come — we must have no differences.Give the old earthworm a taste of thisI'll engage it will bring him too, fast enough. —Ay, rub his temples with it if you'd rather — butit's a better remedy down the gullet — the naturalcourse — and hark ye, Jem, search your cribquickly, and see if you have any grub within it,and any more huh in the cellar — I'm as hungryas a hunter, and as thirsty as a camel."While the ferryman went in search of suchprovisions as his hovel afforded, Turpin lenthis assistance towards the revival of Alan Rook-wood;and it was not long before his efforts,united with those of Luke, were successful, andAlan restored to consciousness. He was greatlysurprised to find the highwayman had joinedthem, and expressed an earnest desire to quitthe hut as speedily as possible.That shall be done forthwith, my dear374 ROOK WOOD.fellow," said Dick. " But if you had fasted aslong as I have done, and gone through a few ofmy fatigues into the bargain, you would perceive,without difficulty, the propriety of supping beforeyou started. In the mean time here comesJem, with a flitch of bacon and a loaf. Egad,T can scarce wait for the toasting. In my presentmood, I could almost devour a grunter inthe sty." Whereupon, he applied himself tothe loaf, and to a bottle of stout March ale,which Jem placed upon the table, quaffingcopious draughts of the latter, while the ferrymanemployed himself in toasting certain rashersof the flitch upon the hissing embers.Luke meanwhile stalked impatiently aboutthe room. He had laid aside his oriental spear,having first, however, placed a pistol within hisbreast, to be ready for instant service, shouldoccasion demand it, as he could now put littlereliance upon the ferryman's fidelity. Heglanced with impatience at Turpin, who pursuedhis meal with a steady voracity, worthy ofa half-famished soldier; — but the highwaymanreturned no answer to his looks, except such asROOKWOOD. 375was conveyed by the incessant clatter of hismasticating jaws, during the progress of his,apparently, interminable repast.Ready for you in a second, Sir Luke"" saidDick ; " all right now— capital ale, Charon —strong as Styx — ha, ha ! — one other rasher, andIVe done — sorry to keep you — cant conceivehow clever I put the winkers upon 'em at York,in the dress of a countryman — all owing to oldBait, the Patrico— an old pall — ha, ha ! Myold palls never nose upon me, eh, Jem — alwayshelp one out of the water — always staunch —here's health to you, old crony .'"*Jem returned a sulky response, as he placedthe last rasher on the table, which was speedilydiscussed.Poor Bess'' muttered Dick, as he quaffedoff the final glass of ale. " Poor wench ; — weburied her by the road side, beneath the trees —deep — deep. Her remains shall never be disturbed.Alas ! Alas ! my bonny Black Bess !but no matter — her name is yet alive — herdeeds will survive her — the trial is over. And376 ROOKWOOD.now," continued he, rising from his seat ; " Fmwith you. Where are the tits ?'^In the stable, underground"" growledJem.Alan Rosewood in the meantime had joinedhis grandson, and they conversed an instant ortwo apart.My strength will not bear me through thenight," said he. " That fellow has thoroughlydisabled me. You must now go without meto the hall. Here is the key of the secret passage.You know the entrance. I will await you in thetomb."« The tomb !" echoed Luke.Ay, our family vault," returned Alan, witha ghastly grin — " it is the only place ofsecurity for me now. But let me see her there.Let me know that my vengeance is complete —that I triumph in my death over him, the accursedbrother — through thee, my grandson. Thouhast a rival brother — a successful one — thouknowest now what hatred is."I do," returned Luke, fiercely.ROOKWOOD, 377But not such hate as mine — which througha life, a long life, hath endured — intense as when'twas first engendered in my bosom — which fromone hath spread o'er all my race — o'er all savethee — and which, even now, when death stares meinthe face — when the spirit pants to fly from itsprison-house, burns fierce as ever. Thou canstnot know what hate like that may be. Thoumust have wrongs — such wrongs as mine first''My hate to Ranulph is bitter as thine ownName him not," shrieked Alan. " But oh !to think upon the bride he robbed me of — theyoung — the beautiful — whom I loved to madnesswhose memory is a barbed shaft, yet ranklingkeen as ever at my heart. God of Justice, howis it that I have thus long survived — but somemen die by inches. My dying lips shall namehim once again, and then 'twill be but to blendhis name with curses."I speak of him no more," said Luke. " Iwill meet you in the vault."« And if thou fairest ^"378 ROOKWOOD.I return not."Remember, tomorrow is her wedding-daywith Ranulph/'Think'st thou I forget it''Bear it constantly in mind. To-morrow'sdawn must see her thine or his. Thou hast heroath. To thee or to death she is affianced. Ifshe should hesitate in her election', do not thouhesitate ; woman's will is fickle — her scruples ofconscience will be readily overcome — she willnot heed her vows but let her not escapethee. Cast off all thy weakness. Thouart young, and not as I am, age-enfeebled.Be firm, and," added he, with a look of terriblemeaning, " if all else should fail — if thou artsurrounded— if thou canst not bear her off, usethis," and he placed a short dagger in Luke'shands. " It hath avenged me ere now on a perjuredwife — it will avenge thee of a forswornmistress, and remove all obstacle to Rosewood."Luke took the weapon. " Wouldst thouhave me kill her ?" demanded he.Sooner than she should be his."ROOK WOOD. 379Ay, aught sooner than that ; but I wouldnot murder both""Both ?''' echoed Alan. " I understand theenot."Sybil and Eleanor'' replied Luke ; " for assurely as I live, will Sybil's death lie at my door."How so ?'' asked Alan ; " the poison wasself-ministered''True," replied Luke, with terrible emphasis,"but I spoke daggers. Hearken to me,"said he, hollowly whispering in his grandsire'sear. " Methinks I am not long for this world.I have seen her since her death "'■' Tut— tut," replied Alan. " 'Tis not forthee to talk thus. A truce to these womanishfancies."Womanish or not," returned Luke ; " eithermy fancy has deceived me, or I beheld her,distinctly as I now behold thee, within yon cave,while thou wert sleeping by my side."Art sure of that .?" said Alan, slightlyshivering, and regarding his grandson with alook of inquisitive horror. " Was she alone .^"380 ROOKWOOD.No ! There was another with her."It is disordered fancy," cried Alan Rook-wood; " thou shalt live — live to inherit Rook-wood— live to see them fall crushed beneaththy feet. For myself, if I but see thee masterof Elinor's hand, or know that she no longerlives to bless thy rival, or to mar thy prospects,I care not how soon I brave my threateneddoom."Of one or other thou shalt be resolved tonight,"said Luke, placing the dagger withinhis vest.At this moment a trampling of a horse washeard before the hovel, and in another instanta loud knocking resounded from the door. Theferryman instantly extinguished the light, motioninghis companions to remain silent.What, ho ! " shouted a voice ; " ferrywanted."Gad zooks !" exclaimed Dick, "as I live,'tis Major Mowbray."Major Mowbray," echoed Alan, in amazement." What doth he here ?"Lockwood. 381He's on his way from York to Rosewood Iconclude"" said Dick. " If he's here, I'll engagethe others are not far off''Scarcely were the words out of Dick's mouthwhen further clatter was heard at the door, andthe tones of Coates were heard, in altissimo key,demanding admittance.Let us retire into the next room," whisperedTurpin, " and then admit them by all means,Jem ; and hark ye, manage to detain 'em a fewseconds."I'll do it," said Jem. " There's a bit of ahole, you can peep through."Another loud rat-tat was heard at the door,threatening to burst it off its hinges.Well, I be coming," said Jem, seeing thecoast was clear, in a drowsy yawning tone, as ifjust awakened from sleep. " You'll cross theriver none the faster for making so much noise."Saying which, he unbarred the door, and Coatesand Paterson, who, it appeared, were proceedingto Rosewood with the Major, entered the hovel.382 ROOKWOOD.Major Mowbray remained on horseback at thedoor.Can you find us a glass of brandy, to keepout the fog ?'"* said Coates, who knew somethingof our ferryman's vocations. " I know you arealad of amazing spirited''May be I can, Master, if I choose ; butwon't the other german walk in doors, likewise '''^No, no"" said Coates, " Major Mowbraydon't choose to dismount."Well, as you please," said Jem ; " but it willtake me a minute or two to get the punt in orderfor all them prads."The brandy in the first place," said Coates.What's here?" added the loquacious Attorney,noticing the remnants of Turpin's repast. " Butthat we're hurried I should like a little frizzledbacon, myself."Jem opened the door of his dormitory withthe greatest caution, but apparent indifference,and almost instantly returned with the brandy.Coates filled a glass for Paterson, and thenROOKWOOD. 383another for himself. The ferryman left thehouse apparently to prepare his boat, halfclosing the door after him.By my faith but this is the right thing,Paterson'' said the Attorney. " We may besure that the strength of this was never testedby a ganger's proof ; take another thimblefull,we've twelve miles and a heavy pull to gothrough, ere we reach Rosewood. After all, wemade but a poor night's work of it, Paterson —cursed stupid in us, to let him escape. I onlywish we had such another chance. Ah, if wehad him within reach now — how v»'e wouldspring upon him — secure him in an instant — Ishould glory in the encounter. I tell you what,Paterson, if ever he is taken, I shall make apoint of attending his execution, and see whetherhe dies game — ha, ha ! — You think he's sure toswing, Paterson, eh ? "Why yes," replied the chief constable ; " Iwish I was as certain of my reward, as that Turpinwill eventually figure at the scragging post.""Your rewarded" replied Coates. "Make384 ROOKWOOD.yourself easy on that score, my boy ; you shallhave your dues, depend upon it; nay, for thematter of that, 111 give you the money now, ifyou think properestNothing like time present"' said Paterson ;well make all square at once""Well then," said Coates, taking out a pocketbook," you shall have the hundred I promised— you won't get Turpin's reward, thethree hundred pounds, but that can be helpedyou shall have mine — always a man of myword, Paterson," continued the Attorney,counting out the money.So I perceive," said the chief constable — " Ishall always be happy to serve you."And then there's that other affair, said theAttorney, mysteriously, still occupied in dolingout his bank notes — that Luke Bradley's case —the fellow, I mean, who calls himself Sir LukeRosewood — ha, ha ! A rank imposter ! — Twofives, that makes fifty — you want anotherfifty, Paterson — but as I was saying, we maymake a good job of that — we must ferret himROOKWOOD. 385out— I know who will come down properlyfor that, Paterson ; and if we could only tuckhim up with his brother blade, why it wouldbe worth double — he's all along been a thornin my Lady Rosewood's side — he's an artfulscoundrel''' Leave him to me," said Paterson ; " I'llhave him in less than a week. But what's yourcharge against him ?"Felony, burglary, murder, every descriptionof crime under the heavens," said Coates. " He'sa very devil incarnate. Dick Turpin is as mildas milk compared with him. By the bye, now Ithink of it, this Jem, Conkey Jem, as folks callhim, may know something about Bradley — he'sa keen file — I'll sound him. Thirty, forty, fiftythere's the exact amount. So much for DickTurpin."Dick Turpin thanks you for it in person,"said Dick, suddenly snatching the whole sumfrom Paterson's hands, and felling the chiefconstable with a blow of one of his pistols.r wish I was as sure of escaping the gallowsVOL. III. s386 ROOK WOOD.as I am certain that Paterson has got his reward.You stare, Sir — you are once more in the handsof the Philistines. See who is at your elbow""Coates, who was terrified almost out of hissenses at the sight of Turpin, scarcely venturedto turn his head ; but when he did so he wasperfectly horror stricken at the threatening-aspectof Luke, who held a cutlass in his hand,which he had picked up in the ferryman's bedroom.So you would condemn me for crimes whichI have never committed"* said Luke. " I amtempted, I own, to add the destruction of yourworthless existence to their number''Mercy, for God's sake mercy ! " cried Coates,throwing himself at Luke's feet ; " I meant notwhat I said."Hence, reptile," said Luke, pushing himaside. *' I leave thee to be dealt upon byothers."At this juncture the door of the hut was flungopen, and in rushed Major Mowbray, sword inhand, followed by Conkev Jem.Lockwood. 387There he stands, Sir," cried the latter ;upon him."What! Conkey Jem turned snitch uponhis palls?" cried Dick; "I scarce believe myown ears."Make yourself scarce, Dick," scowled Jem ;the jigger's* open, and the boat loose — leaveLuke to his fate — he's sold."Never, vile traitor," shouted Dick ; " 'tisthou art sold, not he ;" and almost ere the wordswere spoken a ball was lodged in the brain ofthe treacherous ferryman.Major Mowbray, meanwhile, had rushedfuriously upon Luke, who met his assault withdetermined calmness. The strife was sharp,and threatened a speedy and fatal issue ; on theMajor's side it was a desperate attack of cut andthrust, which Luke had some difficulty in parrying;but as yet no wounds were inflicted.Soldier as was the Major, Luke was not a whitDoor.388 ROOKWOOD.inferior to him in his knowledge of the scienceof defence, and in the exercise of the broadswordhe was perhaps the more skilful of thetwo: upon the present occasion his coolnessstood him in admirable stead. Seeing himhard pressed, Turpin would have come to hisassistance, but Luke shouted to him. to standaside, and all that Dick could do, amid theterrific clash of steel, was to kick the tables outof the way of the combatants. Luke's arm wasnow slightly grazed by a pass made by theMajor, which he had parried. The smart ofthe wound roused his ire. He attacked theMajor in his turn with so much vigour andgood will, that, driven backwards by the irresistibleassault. Major Mowbray stumbled overthe ferryman's body, which happened to lie inhis way, and, his sword being struck out of hisgrasp, his life became at once at his adversary'sdisposal.Luke sheathed his sword. " Major Mowbray,"said he, sternly, " your life is in myROOKWOOD. 389power — I spare it for the blood that is betweenus — for your sister's sake — I would not raise myhand against her brother."I disclaim your kindred with me, villain ! "^wrathfully exclaimed the Major. " I hold youno otherwise than as a wretched imposter, whohas set up claims you cannot justify; and asto my sister, if you but dare to couple liername," and the Major made an ineffectualattempt to raise himself, and to regain his sword,which Turpin, however, removed.Dare !" echoed Luke, scornfully ; " hereafteryou may learn to fear my threats, and acknowledgethe extent of my daring; and in that confidence Igive you life. Listen to me. Sir. I am now boundfor Rook wood — I have private access to thehouse — to your sister's chamber — her chambermarked you that ? I shall go anne — attended.This night she shall be mine. From you — fromRanulph — from Lady Rosewood, from all will Ibear her off. She shall be mine, and you beforethe dawn my brother, or ^" and Luke paused.390 ROOKWOOD."What further villainy remains untold?"inquired the Major, fiercely.You shall bewail her memory's replied Luke,gloomily."I embrace the latter alternative with raptures'"replied the Major — " God grant herfirmness to resist thee — but I tremble for her ;"and the stern soldier groaned aloud in hisagony.Here is a cord to bind him," said Turpin ;"he must remain a prisoner here's*'Right," said Alan Rosewood — " unless —bit enough blood has been shed already."Ay, marry has it," said Dick — " and I hadrather not have given Conkey Jem a taste ofblue plumb, had there been any other mode ofsilencing the snatching scoundrel, which there wasnot ; but as to the Major, he's a gallant enemy,and shall have fair play as long as Dick Turpinstands by. — " Come, Sir," added he to theMajor, as he bound him hand and foot with therope. " I'll do it as gently as I can — but youROOKWOOD. 391had better submit with a good grace — there's nohelp for it. And now for my friend Paterson,who was so anxious to furnish me with a hempencravat, before my necK was in order — he shall havean extra twist of the rope himself, to teach himthe inconvenience of a tight neckcloth, when herecovers." Saying which, he bound Paterson insuch manner, that any attempt at liberation on thechief constable's part, would infallibly stranglehim. . " As to you, Mr. Coates," said he, addressingthe trembling man of law, " you shall to Rook-woodwith us. — You may yet be useful, and I'llaccommodate you with a seat behind my ownsaddle — a distinction I never yet conferred uponany of your tribe. Recollect the countrymanat the bowling-green at York — ha, ha ! Comealong. Sir'' And having kicked out the turffire, Dick prepared to depart.It would be vain to describe the feelingsof rage and despair which agitated the Major'sbosom, as he saw the party quit thehovel, accompanied by Coates. Aware as he wasof their destination, after one or two desperate392 Lockwood.but ineffectual attempts to liberate himself, bywhich he only increased the painful constrictionof his bond, without in the slightest degreeameliorating his condition, he resigned himself,with bitterest forebodings, to his fate. Therewas no one even to sympathize with his sufferings; beside him lay the gory corpse of the ferryman,and at a little distance, the scarcely moreanimate frame of the chief constable. And herewe must leave him, to follow, for a short space,the course of Luke and his companions.Concerning themselves little about their ownsteeds, the party took those which first offered,and embarking man and horse in the boat, soonpushed across the waters of the flatulent Don.Arrived at the opposite banks of the river,they mounted, and, guided by Luke, after halfan hour's sharp riding arrived at the skirtsof Rook wood Park. Entering this beautifulsylvan domain, they rode for sometimesilently among the trees, till theyarrived at the knoll, whence Luke had beheldthe hall, on the eventful night of his dis-lockwood.3^cover of his mother's wedding ring. —A few days only had passed over his head ;but during that brief space what stormshad swept over his bosom — what ravages hadthey not made ! He was then all ardour — allimpetuosity — all independence. The futurepresented a bright unclouded prospect. Wealth,honours, and happiness, apparently awaited him.It was still the same exquisite scene, hushed,holy, tranquil — even solemn, as upon thatglorious night. The moon was out, silveringwood and water, and shining on the white wallsof the tranquil mansion. Nature was calm, serene,peaceful as ever. Beneath the trees, he saw thebounding deer — upon the water, the mistywreaths of vapour — all, all was dreamy, delightful,soothing, all save his heart — there was theconvict— there the change. Was it a troubleddream, with whose dark oppression he wasstruggling, or was it stern, waking, actuallife ? That moments review of his wild careerwas terrible. He saw to what extremes hiss5S94 ROOKWOOD.ungovernable passions had hurried him — hesaw their inevitable consequences — he saw alsohis own fate — but he rushed madly on.He swept round the park, keeping under thecovert of the wood, till he arrived at the avenueleading to the mansion. The stems of the agedlimes gleamed silvery white in the moonshine.Luke drew in his rein beneath, one of thelargest of the trees* .A branch has fallen," said he, as his grandsirejoined him.*' Ha !" exclaimed Alan, " a branch fromthat tree?"It bodes ill to Ranulph," whispered Luke,doth it not ?"Perchance," muttered Alan. " 'Tis a vastbough."We meet within an hour," said Luke,abruptly.At the tomb," replied Alan ; " I will awaitthee there."CHAPTER II.You have heard it rumoured for these many yearsNone of our family dies, but there is seenThe shape of an old woman, which is givenBy tradition to us to have been murtheredBy her nephews for her riches. Such a figureOne night — as the prince sat up late at's book —Appeared to him ; when crying out for helpThe gentlemen of his chamber found his GraceAll in a cold sweat, altered much in faceAnd language ; since which apparitionHe hath grown worse and worse, and much I fearHe cannot live.Duchess of Malay.We shall now revisit Rosewood Place, fromwhich we have so long, of necessity, absentedourselves.In one of those large antique rooms, which,the reader may perchance remember, belonged tothe suite of apartments constituting the easternwing of the mansion — upon the same night asthat in which the events just detailed took place,and it might be about the same time, sat396 Lockwood.Eleanor, and her now attendant, the gipsyHandassah. The eyes of the former werefixed, with a mixture of tenderness and pity,upon the lineaments of another lovely femalecountenance, bearing a striking resemblanceto her own, though evidently, from its attire,and bygone costume, not intended for her,depicted upon a tablet, placed upon a raisedframe before her. It was nigh the witchinghour of night, " The room was sombre anddusky, partially dismantled of its once flowingarras, and the lights, which were set upon thetable, but feebly illumined its dreary extent.Tradition marked it out as the chamber inwhich many of the hapless dames of Rosewoodhad expired — and hence had Superstition claimedit as her peculiar domain. The room was reputedto be haunted, and had for a long space sharedthe fate of haunted rooms — complete desertion.It was now tenanted by one too young, too pure,to fear aught unearthly. Eleanor seemed, nevertheless,affected by the profound melancholy ofthe picture upon which she gazed. At lengthROOK WOOD. 397Handassah observed her start, and avert hereyes shudderingly from the picture.Take it hence"' exclaimed Eleanor ; " I havelooked at that image of my ancestress, till ithas seemed endowed with life — till its eyes haveappeared to return my gaze, and weep. Removeit, Handassah."Handassah silently withdrew the tablet,placing it against the wall of the chamber.Not there — not there"" cried Eleanor ; " turnit with its face to the wall — I cannot bear thoseeyes ; and now come hither, girl — approach menearer— for I know not what of sudden dreadhas crossed me — this was her room, Handassah —the chamber of my ancestress — of all the LadiesRook wood — where they say — ha ! — Didst thounot hear a noise H — a rustle in the tapestry — afootstep near the wall ? — why, thou look'stfrightened as I look, wench — Stay by me — I willnot have thee stir from my side — "twas merefancy."No doubt. Lady," said Handassah, with hereyes fixed upon the arras.398 ROOKWOOD.Hist !"" exclaimed Eleanor. " there 'tisagain."'Tis nothing," replied Handassah ; but herlooks belied her words.Well, I will command myself," said Eleanor,endeavouring to regain her calmness ; " but thethoughts of the Lady Eleanor — for she was anEleanor like to me, Handassah — and ah ! evenmore ill-fated and unhappy — have brought awhole train of melancholy fancies into my mindI cannot banish them : nay, though painfulto me, I recur to these images of dread with aspecies of fascination, as if in their fate Icontemplated mine own. Not one who hathwedded a Rosewood, but hath rued it."Yet you will wed one," said Handassah.He is not like the rest," said Eleanor.How know you that. Lady .?" asked Han-vassal." His time may not yet be come. Seewhat tomorrow will bring forth."Thou art averse to my marriage withRanulph, Handassah."I was SybiFs handmaid, ere I was your's.Lockwood. 399Lady. I bear in memory a solemn compact withthe dead, which this marriage will violate. Youare plighted by oath to another, if he demandyour hand."But he has not demanded it."Would you accept him were he to do so ?"asked Handassah, suddenly.I meant not that," replied Eleanor. " Myoath is annulled "Say not so, Lady," cried Handassah, " 'twasnot for this that Sybil spared your life. I loveyou, but I loved Sybil, and I would see herdying behests complied with."It may not be, Handassah," replied Eleanor." Why, from a phantom sense of honour, am I tosacrifice my whole existence to one who neithercan love me, nor whom I myself could love ? AmI to wed this man because, in her blind idolatryof him, she enforced an oath upon me which I hadno power to resist, but which was mentallycancelled while taken ? Recal not the horrors ofthat dreadful cell — urge not the subject more.'Tis in the hope that I may be freed for ever400 ROOKWOOD.from this persecution, that I have consented thusearly to wed with Ranulph. This will setLuke's fancied claims at rest for ever*"Handassah answered not, but bent her head,as if in acquiescence.Steps were now heard near the door, and aservant ushered in our old acquaintance, DoctorSmall and Mrs. Mowbray.I came to take my leave of you for thenight, my dear young lady*" said the Doctor ;'• but before I start for the Vicarage, I have justaword or two more to say, in addition to theadvice which you were so good as to receivefrom me this morning. Suppose you allowyour attendant to retire for a few minutes.'What I have got to say concerns yourself solely.Your mother will bear us company. There*'continued the Doctor, a^ Handassah was dismissed— " I am glad that dark-faced gipsy hastaken her departure. I can't say that I likeher sharp suspicious manner ; and the firstexercise I should make of my powers, were Ito be your husband, should be to discharge theROOKWOOD. 401souhrette. But to the point of my visit. Wearealone, I think. But this is a queer house.Miss Mowbray ; and this is the queerest part ofit. Walls have ears, they say ; and there are somany holes and comers in this mansion, thatone ought never to talk secrets above one'sbreath''But I am yet to learn, Sirs said Eleanor,that there is any secret to be told''Why, not much I own," replied the Doctor ;at least what has occurred is not a secret inthe house by this time. What do you think hashappened .?""It is impossible for me to conjecture.'Nothing to Ranulph I hope."Nothing of consequence, I trust — though heis in part concerned with it."What is it ?" asked Eleanor.Pray satisfy her curiosity. Doctor ?" interposedMrs. Mowbray.Well then," said Small, rather more gravely,the fact of the matter stands thus : — LadyRosewood, who, as you know was not the402 ROOK WOOD.meekest wife in the worlds now turns out by nomeans the gentlest mother, and has, within thishour, found out that she has some objection toyour union with her son"*You alarm me. Doctor."Don''t alarm yourself at all. It will be allgot over without difficulty, and only requires alittle management. Ranulph is with her now,and I doubt not will arrange all to her satisfactions*"But what was her objection?" asked Eleanor;was it any one founded upon my obligationto Luke — my oath ?"Tut — tut! — dismiss that subject from yourmind entirely," said the Doctor. " That oath isno more binding on your conscience than wouldhave been the ties of marriage had you beenwedded by yon recusant Romish Priest, FatherCheckley, upon whom however the Lord bemerciful. Bestow not a thought upon that.My anxiety, together with that of your mother, isto see you now, as speedily as may be, wedded toRanulph, and then that idle question is set at restPwOOKWOOD. 403for ever; and therefore, even if such a thingwere to occur, as that Lady Rook wood shouldnot yield her consent to your marriage, why, asthat consent is totally unnecessary, we must gothrough the ceremonial without it."The grounds of Lady Rosewood's objections,"said Mrs. MowbrayAy, the grounds of her Ladyship's objections,"interposed Small, who liked nobody totalk but himself, " are simply these, and exactlythe sort of objections one would expect her toraise. She cannot bear the idea of abandoningthe control of the house and estates to otherhands. She cannot and will not relinquish herstation as head of the establishment, whichRanulph has insisted upon as your right. Ithought, when I conversed with her on thissubject, that she was changed, butNaturam expelled furc^, tamen usque recurredI beg your pardon. She is, and always will bethesame."But why did not Ranulph concede the point404 ROOKWOOD.to her ? I wish not to dwell here. I care notfor these domains — for this mansion. Theyhave no charms for me. I could he happy withRanulph any where, but happier any where thanhere."The kind-hearted Doctor squeezed her handin reply, brushing a tear from his eyes.Why did he not concede it !"" said Mrs.Mowbray, proudly* " Because the choice remainednot with him. It was not his to concede.This house — these lands — all — all are thine —and it were meet requital indeed, that, after theyhave so long been wrongfully withheld fromthee, thou shouldst be a dependant of LadyRook wood."Without going quite so far as that,Madam," said the Doctor, " it is but justiceto your daughter that she should be put infull possession of her rights ; nor should Ifor one instant advise, or even consent, to herinhabiting the same house with Lady Rosewood.Her Ladyship's peculiarities of temper are suchas to preclude all possibility of happiness ; butROOKWOOD. 405at the same time I trust that by management —always by management, Madam — her Ladyship'squick departure may be ensured. I understandthat all such legal arrangements in the way ofsettlements as could be entered into, betweenyour daughter and her future husband, are completed.I have only to regret the absence of myfriend, Mr. Coates, in this momentous occurrence.It ^vill be a loss to him. But hark ! I hearRanulph's step in the gallery. He will tell usthe result of his final interview. I came to giveyou advice, my dear," added the Doctor in a lowtone to Eleanor ; " but I find you heed it not.Whoso humble himself, shall be exalted.' Iam glad you do not split upon that rock whichhas broken the shins of half your generation''At this moment, Ranulph Rosewood enteredthe room. His cheeks were flushed, and hismanner agitated.The whole party were startled by his looks.What has happened?" asked Doctor Smalland Mrs. Mowbray, in the same breath.Ranulph hesitated for a moment in his4P6 EOOKWOODianswer, during which space he regarded Eleanorwith the deepest anxiety, and seemedrevolving within himself, how he could framehis reply, in such way as should be least painfulto her feelings ; while, with instinctive apprehensionof coming misfortune. Miss Mowbrayeagerly seconded the inquiries of her friends.It is with great pain"" said he, at length, inatone of despondency, not unmingled with displeasure," that I am obliged to descant uponthe infirmities of a parent, and to censure herconduct as severely as I may do now. I feel theimpropriety of such a step, and I would willinglyavoid it, could I do so in justice to my ownfeelings — and especially at a moment like thepresent — when every hope of my life is fixedupon uniting you, dear Eleanor, by ties almostas near as my own to that parent. But theinterview which I have just had with LadyRosewood — the bitter, heart-breaking interview,compels me to reprobate her conduct in thestrongest, terms, as harsh, unjust, and dishonourable; and if I could wholly throw off the son.ROOKWOOD. 40Tas she avows she has thrown off the mother, Ishould unhesitatingly pronounce it as little shortof ''Dear Ranulph," said Eleanor, palpitatingwith apprehension, " I never saw you so muchmoved*'Nor with so much reason," rejoinedRanulph. " For myself, I could endure anything— but for you "And does your dispute relate to me ? "" askedEleanor. "And is it for my sake that youhave braved your mother's displeasure? Is itbecause Lady Rosewood is unwilling to resignthe control of this house, and those lands totrie, that you have parted in anger with yourmother ? Was this the cause of your quarrel ?"'It was the origin of it"" replied Ranulph.Mother'' said Eleanor, firmly, to Mrs. Mowbray," go with me to Lady Rosewood'schamber."Wherefore .^" demanded jVIrs. Mowbray. "*Question me not, dear mother — or let mego alone."408 ROOKWOOD."Daughter, I guess your meanings'' saidMrs. Mowbray, sternly — " You would relinquishyour claims in favour of Lady Rook-wood— Is it not so ?"Since you oblige me to answer you, mother''said Eleanor, blushing, " I must admit thatyou have guessed my meaning. To LadyRosewood, as to yourself, I would be a daughteras far as is consistent with my duty," added she,blushing still more deeply, " but my first considerationshall be my husband; and if LadyRosewood can be content — but pray questionme not further — accompany me to her chamber''"Eleanor," interposed Ranulph — "dearestEleanor — the sacrifice you would make isnecessary — uncalled for. You do not know mymother — she would not, I grieve to say it,appreciate the generosity of your motives — shewould not give you credit for your feelingsshe would only resent your visit as anintrusion."My daughter comprehends you, Sir," saidMrs. Mowbray, haughtily. " I will take careROOKWOOD. 409that in her own house, my daughter shall remainfree from insult.""Mother, dear mother'' said Eleanor, "donot wilfully misunderstand him.""You can be little aware. Madam," saidRanulph calmly, but sadly, "how much Ihave recently endured — how much of parentalanger — how much of parental malediction Ihave incurred, to save you and your daughterfrom the indignity you apprehend. As Ibefore said, you do not know my mother ; norcould it enter into any well-regulated imaginationto conceive the extremities to which theviolence of her passion will, when her schemesare thwarted, hurry her. The terms uponwhich you met together, will not escape yourrecollection — nor shall I need to call to yourmind, her haughtiness, her coldness. — Thatcoldness has since ripened into distrust — and thematch which she was at first all anxiety topromote, she would now utterly set aside, wereit in her power to do so. Whence this alterationin her views has arisen, I have no means ofVOL. III. T410 ROOKWOOD.ascertaining ; it is not my mother's custom to givea reason for her actions, or her wishes : it isall sufficient to express them ; but I haveperceived that as the time has drawn nigh forthe fulfilment of my dearest hopes, her unwillingnesshas increased ; until to-day what hadhitherto been confined to hints, has been openlyexpressed, and absolute objections raised. Such,however, is the peculiarity of her temper, that Itrusted, even at the eleventh hour, I should beable to work a change — but no ! — our lastmeeting was decisive. She commanded me tobreak off the match. At once, and peremptorily,I refused. Pardon me, madam — pardon me,dearest Eleanor, if I thus enter into particulars —but it is absolutely necessary now that I shouldbe explicit. Enraged at my opposition to herwishes, her fury became ungovernable. Withappalling imprecations upon the memory ofmy poor father, and upon your father madam,whose chief offence in her eyes was, it seems,the disposition of his property to Eleanor, shebade me begone, and take her curses as my wed-rosewood.411ding portion. Beneath this roof — beneath nerroof, she added, no marriage of mine should e'ertake place. I might go hence, or might stay,as I thought fitting ; but you and your daughter,whom she characterized as intruders, shouldnot remain another hour within her house. Tothis wild raving, I answered, with as muchcomposure as I could command, that sheentirely mistook her own position, and that,so far from the odium of intrusion restingWith you, if applicable to any one, the termmust necessarily affix itself on those who,through ignorance, had for years unjustlydeprived the rightful owners of this place oftheir inheritance. Upon this, her wrath wasboundless. She disowned me as her son —disclaimed all maternal regard, and heaped uponmy head a frightful malediction, at the recollectionof which I still tremble. But I willspare you further details of this dreadful scene.To me it is most distressing; for however firmlyresolved I may be to pursue a line of conduct,which every sound principle within me dictates412 ROOKWOOD.as the correct one, yet I cannot be insensible tothe awful responsibility which I shall incur inbringing down a mother's curse upon my head,nor to the jeopardy in which her own excessiveviolence may place hers*"Mrs. Mowbray listened to Ranulph's explanationin haughty displeasure ; Eleanor withthrobbing, tearful interest ; Doctor Small, withmixed feelings of anger and astonishment.Lady Rosewood's conduct'' said the Doctor,is, you must forgive me, my dear Ranulph, forusing strong expressions, outrageous beyond allprecedent, and only excusable on the ground ofinsanity, to which I wish it were possible wecould attribute it. There is, however, too muchmethod in her madness to allow us to indulgeany such notion : she is shrewd, dangerous, anddesigning ; and since she has resolved to opposethis match, she will leave no means untried todoso. I scarcely know how to advise you underthe circumstances — that is, if my advice wereasked;'Which I scarcely think it is likely to be. Sir,"ROOKWOOD. 418said Mrs. Mowbray, coldly. " After what hasoccurred, / shall think it my duty to break offthis alliance, which I have never considered tobe so desirable that its rupture will occasion meaninstant's uneasiness."A plague on all these Rookwoods ! " mutteredSmall. " One would think all the prideof Lucifer were centered in their bosoms. But,Madam'' continued the benevolent Doctor,have you no consideration for the feelings ofyour daughter, or for those of one who is nodistant relation to you — your nephew ? Your son.Major Mowbray, is, if I mistake not, most eagerfor this union to take place between his sisterand his friend."My children have been accustomed to yieldimplicit obedience to my wishes," said Mrs.Mowbray; " and Major Mowbray, I am sure, willsee the propriety of the step I am about to take.I am content, at least, to abide by his opinion''Snubbed again !" mentally ejaculated the Doctor,with a shrug of despair. " It is uselessattempting to work upon such impracticablematerial."414 ROOKWOOD.Ranulph remained mute, in an attitude ofprofound melancholy. An eloquent interchangeof glances had passed between him and Eleanor,communicating to each the anxious state of theother's feelings.It was at this crisis that the door was suddenlyopened, and old Agnes, Lady Rosewood's agedattendant, rushed into the room, and sank uponher knees on the floor, her limbs shaking, herteeth chattering, and every feature expressive ofintense terror. Ranulph went instantly towardsher, to demand the cause of her alarm.No, let me pray," cried Agnes, as he tookher hand in the attempt to raise her — " let mepray, while there is yet time — let the worthyDoctor pray beside me. Pray for an overladensoul. Sir — pray heartily, as you would hope formercy yourself; ah! little know the righteous ofthe terrors of those that are beyond the pale ofmercy. The Lord pardon me my iniquities, andabsolve herHer ! whom do you mean ^"^ asked Ranulphin agitation. " You do not allude to mymother?"ROOKWOOD. 415You have no longer a mother, young man''said Agnes, solemnly.What ! '' exclaimed Ranulph, terror stricken ,is she dead''She is gone."Gone ! How ?" exclaimed all, their amazementincreasing each instant, at the terrorof the old woman, and the apparently terribleoccasion of it.Speak ! " exclaimed Ranulph ; " but whydo I loiter? my mother, perchance, is dying — letme go." But the old woman maintained herclutching grasp, which was strong and convulsive,as that of one struggling betwixt life anddeath. " It's no use, I tell you ; it's all over,"said she — " the dead are come — the dead arecome, and she is gone ""Gonel^Whither?"To the grave — to the tomb," said Agnes, inadeep and hollow tone, and with a look thatfroze Ranulph's soul. " Listen to me, Ranulph,my child, my nurseling — listen while I can speak.We were alone, your mother and I, after that scene416 ROOKWOOD.between you — after the dark denunciationsshe had heaped upon the dead, when Iheard a low and gasping kind of sob, andthere I saw your mother, staring wildly uponthe vacancy — as if she saw that which I darenot think of."What think you she beheld ? ^ askedRanulph, quaking with apprehension.'' That which had been your father's'' returnedAgnes, in a hollow tone. " Don''t doubtme. Sir — you'll find the truth of what I say,anon — I am sure he was there. There was athrilling speechless horror in the very sight ofher countenance that froze my old blood to iceto the ice in which 'tis now — ough — ough.Well, at length she rose, with her eyes still fixed,and passed through the panelled door, withouta word. She is gone ! ""What madness is this!" cried Ranulph.Let me go, woman."Go then," cried Agnes. " If you will notbelieve my words, search for her, and satisfyyourself. She is gone, I tell you — the roomtlOOKWOOD. 417was empty, all the rooms were empty — thepassage void — through the door she went —silently, silently — slow. But come, let us searchfor her throughout the house — come, come — '^'And she rushed out of the chamber, followedby Ranulph, Mrs. Mowbray, and Doctor Small,who were all eager to have some explanation ofthe distracted story of Agnes.Handassah followed Ranulph to the door,closed it after him, and then locked it withinside. This done, she walked back hastilytowards Eleanor, exclaiming, in a tone of exultation," You have parted with him for ever."T 5CHAPTER III.Card. — Now art thou come ? Thou look'st ghastly ;There sits in thy face some great determination,Mixed with some fear,Bos. — Thus it lightens into action :I am come to kill thee.Duchess of Malay.What mean you, girl ?" cried Eleanor,alarmed at her manner. " Why have youfastened the door ? Open it, I command you !''Command me V laughed Handassah, scornfully." What if I refuse your mandate ? whatif, in my turn, I bid you to obey me ? I neverowned but one mistress. If I have bowed myneck to you for a time, 'twas to fulfil her dyingwishes. If I have submitted to your control, itwas to accomplish what I have now accomplished.Your oath — remember your oath ; the hour iscome for its fulfilment*'Lockwood. 419Saying which, Handassah clapped her hands.A panel in the wall opened, and Luke stoodsuddenly before them. Silently, and with sterndeliberation, he strode towards Eleanor, andseizing one of her hands, drew her forciblytowards him. Eleanor resisted not ; she had notthe power; neither did she scream, for soextreme was her terror, that for the moment ittook away all power of utterance. Luke neitherstirred nor spoke, but, still maintaining hishold, gazed searchingly upon her features, whileEleanor, as if spell-bound, could not withdrawher eyes from his. Nothing more terribly impressivecould be conceived than Luke's wholeappearance. Harassed and exhausted by thelife he had recently led — deprived almost ofnatural rest — goaded by remorse, his framewas almost worn to the bone, while his countenance,once dark and swarthy, was nowblanched and colourless as Whitest marble.This pallid and death-like hue was, in allprobability, owing to the loss of blood which hehad sustained from the wound inflicted by the420 ROOKWOOfi.Major, with the stains of which his apparelwas dyed ; for though staunched, the effusionhad been sufficient to cause great faintness.His dark eyes blazed with their wonted fire — naythey looked darker and larger from his exceedingpaleness, and so much of intense mental andbodily suffering was imprinted upon his wholecountenance, that, despite its fierceness anddesperation, few could have regarded himwithout sympathy. Real desperation has somuch of agony in its character, that few canwitness it unmoved. His garb was not that inwhich the reader first beheld him, but a darksimple suit, corresponding more with his realrank in life, than his former peasant's attire ;but it was disordered by his recent conflict,and stained with bloody testimonials of therecent fray ; while his long sable curls, once hispride and ornament, now hung in intertangledelf locks, like a coil of wreathed water snakes.Even in her terror, as she dwelt upon his noblefeatures, Eleanor could not help admittingthat she beheld the undoubted descendant, andROOKWOOD. 4^1the living likeness of the handsomest and mostdistinguished of her house — the profligate andcriminal Sir Reginald. As her eye, mechanicallyfollowing this train of thought, wandered foran instant to the haughty portraiture of SirReginald, which formed part of the familypictures, and thence to those of his unfortunateLady, she was struck ^yiih the fancythat, by some terrible fatality, the tragichorrors of bye-gone days were to be againenacted in their persons, and that they werein some way strangely identified wth theirunfortunate progenitors. So forcibly was thisidea impressed upon her countenance, thatLuke, who had followed the direction of herglances, became instantly aware of it. Drawingher nearer to the portrait of the Lady Eleanor,he traced the resemblance in mute wonder ;thence, turning towards that of Sir Reginald,he proudly exclaimed : — " You doubted oncemy lineage, maiden — can you gaze on thosefeatures, which would almost seem to beareflexion of mine own, and longer hesitatewhose descendant I am ? I glory in my likesROOKWOOD.ness — there is a wild delight in setting humanemotions at nought, which he was said to feel —which I feel now. Within these halls I seem tobreathe an atmosphere congenial to me. I visitwhat I oft have visited in my dreams ; or as in astate of pre-existence. Methinks, as I gaze onthee, I could almost deem myself Sir Reginald,and thou his bride, the Lady Eleanor. Ourfates were parallel — she was united to herLord by ties of hatred — by an oath — a bridaloath I — so art thou to me. And she couldne'er escape him — could ne'er throw off herbondage — nor shalt thou. I claim the fulfilmentof thy oath — thou art miner''Never — never !"' shrieked Eleanor, strugglingto disengage herself. But Luke laughedat her feeble efforts. Handassah stood by, apassive spectatress of the scene, with her armsfolded upon her bosom.You refuse compliance !"' said Luke, scornfully." Have you no hopes of heaven, nofears of perdition, that you dare to violate yourvow ? Bethink you of the awful nature of thatobligation — of the life which was laid dov/n toROOKWOOD.purchase it — of the blood which will cry out forvengeance 'gainst the murderess, should youhesitate. By that blood-cemented sacrament —I claim you as my own. You are mine." Andhe dragged her towards the opening. Eleanoruttered a prolonged and terrific scream.Be silent, on your life — ^'' added he, searchingfor the dagger given to him by Alan Rosewood^ — when, as his hand sought the weapon, Eleanorescaped from his grasp, and fled towards the door;but Handassah had anticipated her intention.The key was withdrawn from the lock, and thewretched maiden vainly tried to open it.At this instant Turpin appeared at the slidingpanel.Quick — quick," cried he, impatiently —dispatch, in the devil's name — the house isalarmed — I hear young Ranulph's voice in thegallery."Ranulph !" shrieked Eleanor — " Then I amsaved." And she redoubled lier outcries forassistance.Luke again seized his victim. — Her hands4^4 ROOKWOOD.clutched so convulsively fast in her despairingenergy against the handle of the door, that hecould not tear her thence. By this time RanulphRosewood, who had caught her reiterated screamsfor help, was at the entrance. He heard herstruggles — he heard Luke's threats — his mockery^liis derisive laughter ; — but vainly, vainlydid he attempt to force it open. It was of thestrongest oak, and the bolts resisted all hisefforts. A board alone divided him from hismistress. He could hear her sobs and gasps —he saw, from the action of the handle, with whattenacity she clung to it ; and, stung to frenzyby the sight, he hurled himself against thesturdy plank — but all in vain. At length thehandle was still — there was a heavy fall uponthe floor — a stifled scream — and a sound as ofa body being dragged along. The thought wasmadness.To the panel — to the panels"* cried a voice(it was that of Turpin) from within.The panel ! ha ! '' echoed Ranulph, with asudden gleam of hope. " I may yet save her."ROOKWOOD. 425And he darted along the corridor with the swiftnessof thought.Luke meanwhile had for some minutes fruitlesslyexhausted all his force to drag Eleanorfrom the door. Despair gave her strength —she clutched at the door — but she felt herstrength failing her— her grasp was relaxing.And then the maddening thought, that she wouldbe shortly his— that he would slay her — whilethe idea that Ranulph was so near, and yetunable to protect her, added gall even to herbitterness. With savage delight Luke exultedin the lovers' tortures. He heard Ranulph'sineffectual attempts — he heard his groans — heheard their mutual cries. Inflamed by jealousy,he triumphed in his power of vengeance, andeven prolonged the torture which accident hadgiven him the means of inflicting. He stoodlike the inquisitor, who marks his victim's anguishon the rack, and calculates his powers offurther endurance. But he could no longerdally, even with this horrible gratification. Hiscompanion grew impatient. Eleanor's fair long496 ROOK WOOD.tresses had escaped from their confinement inthe struggle, and fell down her neck in disorder.Twining his fingers amidst its folds, Lukedragged her from her hold backwards; — and,incapable of further resistance, her strengthcompletely exhausted, the wretched girl fell tothe ground.Luke now raised her almost inanimate formin his arms, and had nigh reached the aperture,when a crash was heard in the panel opposite tothat by which he was about to escape, and communicatingwith a further apartment. It wasthrown open, and Ranulph Rosewood presentedhimself at the narrow partition. An exclamationof joy, that he was yet in time, escaped hislips ; and he was about to clear the partition ata bound, and to precipitate himself upon Luke,when, as suddenly as his own action, was theperson of the unfortunate Mr. Coates wedgedinto the ap-aperture.Traitor"' cried Ranulph, regarding Coateswith concentrated fury, '* dare you to opposeme — hence, or by heaven I will cut you down'"Lockwood. 427'Tis impossible," ejaculated the Attorney.For your own sake, Sir Ranulph — for mysake — I beg — I implore of you — not to attemptto pass this way — Try the other door."Ranulph said no more. He passed his swordthrough the body of the miserable Attorney,who, with a deep groan, fell. The only obstacleto his passage being thus removed, he at onceleaped into the room.The brothers were now confronted together,but little of brotherly love mingled with theglances which they threw upon each other.Ranulph's gentle, but withal enthusiastic temperament,had kindled, under his present excitement,like flax at the sudden approach of flame.He was wild with frenzy. Luke was calmer, buthis fury was deadly and inextinguishable. Themeeting was terrible on both sides.With one arm Luke enfolded Eleanor, withthe other he uplifted the dagger. Its point wastowards her bosom. Scowling grim defianceat Ranulph— he exclaimed, in a determined428 ROOKWOOD.tone — " Advance a footstep, and my daggerdescends into her heart."Ranulph hesitated, uncertain how to act;foaming with rage, and yet trembling withapprehension.Ranulph,'"* gasped Eleanor. " Life withoutthee were valueless — advance — avenge me*"But Ranulph still hesitated. He could not,by any act of his own, compromise Eleanor'ssafety.Luke saw his advantage, and was not slow toprofit by it. " You seal her destruction if youstir," said he.Villain," returned Ranulph, between hisground teeth, and with difficulty commandingsufficient coolness to speak with deliberation,you perceive your power ; but injure her, andnothing earthly shall protect you. Free her, andtake your life and liberty ; nay, reward if youwill — you cannot otherwise escape me."Escape you !" laughed Luke, disdainfully.Stand aside, and let me pass. Beware," addedROOK WOOD. 429he, sternly, " how you oppose me — I would nothave a brother's blood upon my soul""Nor I,"" cried Ranulph ; " but you passnot'' and he placed himself full in Luke'spath.Luke, however, steadily moved forward,holding Eleanor between himself and Ranulph,so as to shield his own person ; but fancying hesaw an opportunity of dealing a blow ^\athoutinjury to his mistress, the latter was aboutto hazard the thrust, when his arms were seizedbehind, and he was rendered powerless.Lost, lost," groaned he ; " she is lost to mefor ever ! ""' I fear that's but too true," replied Turpin,for it was the Highwayman whose grasp confinedRanulph.Must I see her borne away before my eyes ?^cried Ranulph. " Release me — set me free."Quite impossible at present," returned Dick.Mount and away, Sir Luke," continued he" never mind me — leave me to shift formyself''430 ROOKWOOD.Eleanor j'"* cried Ranulph, as she passed closeby his side.Ranulph," shrieked Eleanor with a loudscream, recalled to consciousness by his voice,*' farewell for ever.'"*Ay, for ever," responded Luke, triumphantly" you meet no more on earth."He was about to pass through the panel, whenEleanor exerted all her remaining strength inalast futile attempt at liberation. In the strugglea packet fell from his bosom.Handassah stooped to pick it up.From Sybil ?" exclaimed she, glancing at thesuperscription.Remember my promise to old Barbara,"roared Dick, who had some curiosity, as thereader knows, to learn what the package contained." The time is arrived — Eleanor is inyour power — in your presence."Give me the packet," said Luke ; and,added he, resigning Eleanor for the instant toHandassah's custody, " take the steel, and graspher firmly."Lockwood. 431Handassah, who, though slight of figure, wasof singular personal strength, twined her armsabout Miss Mowbray in such manner as topreclude all possibility of motion.Luke tore open the package. It was a box,carefully enclosed in several folds of linen, andlastly within a sheet of paper, on which wasinscribed these words :The Dower of Sybil.Hastily, and with much curiosity, Luke raisedthe lid of the box. It contained one long silkentress of blackest hair, curiously braided. It wasSybiPs. His first impulse was to cast it fromhim ; his next, reproachfully to raise it to hislips. He started as if a snake had stung him.At this moment, a loud clamour was heard inthe gallery. In the next, the door was assailedby violent strokes, evidently proceeding fromsome weighty instrument, impelled by theunited strength of several assailants.The voice of Turpin rose above the deafeningdin. " A bullet for the first who enters,"432 ROOK WOOD.shouted he — " Quick Sir Luke, and the prize issafe — away, and — ''''But as he seconded his exhortation with aglance at Luke, he broke off the half-utteredsentence, and started with horror and amazement.Ere the cause could be expressed, thedoor was burst open, and a crowd of domestics,headed by Major Mowbray and Titus Tyronerushed into the room.Nay, then the game's up," exclaimed Dick,I have done with Rookwood,'' and springingthrough the panel, he was seen no more.When the new comers first looked round,they could perceive only two figures besidesthemselves, those of the two lovers. Eleanorhaving sunk pale, exhausted, and almost senseless,into the arms of Ranulph. Presently,however, a ghastly object attracted their attention.All rushed towards it — all recoiled, assoon as they discovered that it was the lifelessbody of Luke Rosewood. His limbs were stiff,like those of a corpse which has for hours beensuch — this eyes protruded from their sockets —ROOKWOOD. 433his face was livid and blotched. All bespoke,with terrible certainty, the efficacy of the poison,and the full accomplishment of Barbara'srevenge.Handassah was gone. Probably she hadescaped ere Turpin fled. At all events, shewas heard of no more at Rosewood.It required but little to recall the senses ofEleanor. Shortly she revived, and as she gazedaround, and became conscious of her escape,she uttered exclamations of thanksgiving, andsank into the embraces of her brother.Meanwhile Mrs. Mowbray and Doctor Smallhad joined the assemblage.The worthy Doctor had been full of alarm,but his meditated condolences were nowchanged to congratulations, as he heard the particularsof the terrible scene that had occurred,and of Eleanor's singular and almost providentialdeliverance.After what has befallen, Madam'' said theDoctor to Mrs. Mowbray, slightly coughing,VOL. III. u434 ROOKWOOD.you can no longer raise any objections to acertain union, eh?"I will answer for my mother in thatparticular'' said Major Mowbray, steppingforward.She will answer for herself, my son""said Mrs. Mowbray. " The match has her fulland entire consent; but to what am I toattribute the unexpected happiness of yourreturn ?'^To a chain of singular circumstances''replied the Major, " which I will hereafterdetail to you. Suffice it to say, that but forthis gentleman's fortunate arrival, I mighthave been detained a prisoner, without parole,in a lone hut perhaps for days; and to add tomy distress, fully acquainted with the meditatedabduction of my sister. It was excessivelylucky for me, Mr. Tyrconnel, that you happenedto pass that way, and for poor Pater sonlikewise."Array, by my soul, Major, and you mayROOKWOOD. 435say that with safety, and it was particularlyfortunate that we stumbled upon the tits in thecellar, or we'd never have been here just in thenick of it. I begin to think we've lost allchance of taking Dick Turpin this time. He'sgot clane away."I am not sorry for his escape," said theMajor. " He's a brave fellow ; and I respectcourage wherever I find it, even, Sir, in ahighwayman."We shall not pause to describe the affectionatemeeting which now ensued between thebrother and sister — the congratulations uponEleanor's escape from peril, intermingled withthe tenderest embraces, and the warmest thanksoffered to Ranulph for his gallant service.She is your's, my dear boy," said the Major ;and though you are a Rook wood, and shebears the ill-fated name of Eleanor, I predictthat, contrary to the usual custom of our familiesin such cases, all your misfortunes have occurredbefore marriage."There is only one thing," said Small,486 ROOK WOOD.with a very peculiar expression, which mightalmost be construed into serio-comic could wesuspect the benevolent Doctor of any such waggery," which can possibly throw a shade overour present felicity. Lady Rosewood is notto be heard of""My poor mothers' said Ranulph, starting.Make yourself easy'' said the Doctor ; " Idoubt not we shall hear of her tomorrow. Myonly fear'' added he, half aside, " is that shemay return before'-' One other circumstance afflicts me," saidRanulph. " Poor Mr. Coates."What's that you say of Mr. Coates ?Sir Ranulph," exclaimed Titus.I fear he is killed," said Ranulph. " Letsome one search for the body.""Kilt!" echoed Titus. "Is it kilt he is?Ah ! ullagone^ and is it over with him entirely?Bring me to his remains."He will bring them to you himself," said theAttorney, stepping forward. " Luckily, SirRanulph," said the incurable punster, " it wasROOKWOOD. 437merely the outer coats that your sword passedthrough ; the inner remains uninjured, so thatyou did not act as my conveyancer to eternity —Fve as many lives as a cat — ha, ha ! "Ranulph welcomed the facetious man of lawwith no little satisfaction.We think it unnecessary to enter into muchfurther detail. Another chamber was preparedfor Eleanor's reception, to which she was almostimmediately transported. The remains of theonce fierce and haughty Luke, now stiff andstark, but still wearing, even in death, theirproud character, were placed upon the self-samebier, and covered with the self-same pall which,but a week ago, had furnished forth his father'sfuneral. And as the domestics crowded roundthe corpse, there was not one of them but commentedupon his startling resemblance to hisgrandsire. Sir Reginald; nor, amongst thesuperstitious, was the falling of the fatal boughforgotten.Tranquillity was at length restored at theHall. Throughout the night, and during the438 Lockwood.next day, Ranulph made every search for hismother, but no tidings could be learned of her.Seriously alarmed, he then caused more strictand general inquiry to be instituted, but withlike unsuccessful effect. It was not, indeed,till some years afterwards that her fate wasascertained.Her old handmaiden, Agnes, died raving, inthe course of the following day, declaring, uponher death-bed, that she was certain " Sir Piershad fetched away her mistress ;"' a notion whichprevailed pretty generally amongst the credulous,of whom there were not few to bo metwith at the Hall.CHAPTER IV.So now 'tis ended, like an old wife's story.Webster.Notwithstanding the obscurity which hungover the fate of Lady Rook wood, the celebrationof the nuptials of Sir Ranulph and Eleanorwas not long delayed ; the ceremony took placeat the parish church, and the worthy Vicarofficiated upon the occasion. It was a joyoussight to all who witnessed it, and not few werethey who did so, for the whole neighbourhoodwas bidden to the festival. The old avenuewas thronged with bright and beaming faces,rustic maidens deck'd out in ribbons of many-colouredsplendour, and stout youths in theirbest holiday trim ; nor was the lusty yeoman440 ROOKWOOD.and his buxom spouse — nor yet the patriarch ofthe village, nor prattling child, wanting. Eventhe ancestral rooks seemed to participate in theuniversal merriment, and returned, from theireyries, a hoarse greeting, like a lusty chorusof laughter to the frolic train. The churchyardpath was strewn with flowers — thechurch itself a complete garland. Never wasthere seen a blither wedding — the sun smiledupon the bride, accounted a fortunate omen,as dark lowering skies and stormy weatherhad, within the memory of the oldest ofthe tenantry, inauspiciously ushered in allformer espousals. The bride had recovered herbloom and beauty, while the melancholy whichhad seemingly settled for ever upon the openbrow of the bridegroom, had now given placeto a pensive shade, which only added interest tohis expressive features ; and, as in simple state,after the completion of the sacred rites, theyouthful pair walked arm in arm amongst theirthronging and admiring tenants towards thehall, many a fervent prayer was breathed thatROOK WOOD. '441the curse of the House of Rosewood might beaverted from their heads ; and, not to leave thereader in doubt upon the subject, we can addthat these aspirations were not in vain, but thatthe day which dawned so brightly, was one ofserene and unclouded beauty to its close.After the ceremonial, the day was devotedto festivity. Crowded with company, from itsample hall to its kitchen ingle, the old mansioncould scarce contain its numerous guests,while its walls resounded with hearty peals oflaughter, to which they had been long unaccustomed.The tables groaned beneath thelordly baron of beef — the weighty chine — thecastled pasty flanked on the one hand withneats' tongue, and on the other defended bya mountainous ham, an excellent piece deresistance— and every other substantia] applianceof ancient hospitality. Barrels ofmighty ale were broached, and their nut-browncontents widely distributed, and the health of thebride and bridegroom was enthusiastically drunkin the brimming wassail cup of spicy wine withu544)2 ROOKWOOD.floating toast. Titus Tyrconnel acted as masterof the ceremonies, and was, Mr. Coates said,quite in his element So much was heelated, that he ventured to cut some of his oldjokes upon the Vicar, and, strange to say, withoutincurring the resentment of Small.To retrace the darker course of our narrative,we must state that some weeks before thishappy event, had the remains of the unfortunateSir Luke Rosewood been gathered tothose of his fathers. The document whichattested his birth being found upon his person,the claims which were denied to him in life,were conceded in death; and he was interred,with all the pomp and peculiar solemnity properto one of the house, within the tomb of hisancestry.It was then that a discovery was made respectingAlan Rosewood, in order to explainwhich we must again revert to the night ofthe meditated engagement of Eleanor.After quitting his grandson in the avenue,Alan shaped his course among the fields in theLockwood. 448direction to the church. He sought his ownhumble, but now deserted dwelling. The doorhad been forced — some of its meagre furniturewas removed; and the dog, his sole companion,had fled. " Poor Mole !'' said he ; " thouhast found, I trust, a better master"' And havingpossessed himself of what he came in search,namely, a bunch of keys and his lantern,deposited in an out-of-the-way cupboard, whichhad escaped notice, he quickly departed.He was once more within the church-yard —once more upon that awful stage thereon hehad chosen to enact for a long season his latefantastical character; and he gazed upon thechurch tower, glistening in the moonshine — thegreen and undulating hillocks— the "chequeredcross-sticks'' the clustered head-stones — and theblack and portentous yew trees, as upon " oldfamiliar faces." He mused for a few momentsupon the scene, apparently with deep interest.He then walked beneath the shadow of one ofthe yews, chaunting an odd stanza or so of oneof his v.ild melodies, wrapped the while, itROOK WOOD.would seem, in affectionate contemplation of thesubject matter of his song :THE YEW.A noxious tree is the church-yard yew,As if from the dead its sap it drew * ;Dark are its branches, and dismal to see,Like plumes at Death's latest solemnity.Spectral and jagged, and black as the wingsWhich some spirit of ill o'er a sepulchre flings :Oh ! a terrible tree is the church-yard yew ; —Like it is nothing so ghastly to view.Yet this baleful tree hath a core so sound,Can nought so tough in the grove be found ;From it were fashioned brave English bows,The boast of our isle, and the dread of its foes.For our sturdy sires cut their stoutest stavesFrom the branch that hung o'er their fathers' graves;And though it be dreary and dismal to view,Staunch at the heart is the church-yard yew.His ditty concluded, Alan entered thechurch-yard, taking care to leave the doorslightly ajar, in order to facilitate his grandson'sentrance. For an instant, he lingered in theMetuenda que stuccoTaxus.Statius.ROOKWOOD. 445chancel. The full moonlight fell upon themonuments of his race ; and, directed by the fellinstinct of hate, Alan's eye rested upon thegilded entablature of his perfidious brother,Reginald, and muttering curses, " not loud, butdeeps"* he passed on. Having lighted hislantern, in no tranquil mood, he descendedinto the vault, observing a similar caution withrespect to the portal of the cemetery, which heleft partially unclosed, with the key in the lock.Here he resolved to abide Luke's coming. Thereader knows what probability there was of hisexpectations being realized.For awhile he paced the tomb, wrapped ingloomy meditation, and pondering, it mightbe, upon the result of Luke's expedition, and thefulfilment of his own dark schemes, scowlingfrom time to time, beneath his bent eyebrows,counting the grim array of coffins, and noticing,with something like satisfaction, that the shellwhich contained the remains of his daughter,had been restored to its former position. Hethen bethought him of Father Checkley's ROOKWOOD.night intrusion upon his conference with Luke,and their apprehension of a supernatural visitation,and his curiosity was stimulated toascertain by what means the priest had gainedadmission to the spot unperceived, and unheard.He resolved to sound the floor, and see whetherany secret entrance existed ; and hollowly anddully did the hard flagging return the strokeof his heel, as he pursued his scrutiny. Atlength the metallic ringing of an iron plate,immediately behind the marble effigy of SirRanulph, resolved the point. There it wasthat the priest had found access to the vault;but Alan's disappointment was excessive, whenhe discovered that this plate was fastened on theunderside, and all communication thence withthe church-yard, or to wherever else it mightconduct him, cut off" ; but the present was notthe season for further investigation, and tolerablypleased with the discovery he had alreadymade, he returned to his silent march aroundthe sepulchre.At length a sound, like the sudden shuttingLockwood. 447of the church door, broke upon the profoundstillness of the holy edifice. In thehush that succeeded, a footstep was distinctlyheard threading the aisle.He comes — he comes r exclaimed Alan,joyfully — adding, an instant after, in an alteredvoice — " but he comes alone'"The footstep drew near to the mouth of thevault — it was upon the stairs — Alan steppedforward to greet, as he supposed, hisgrandson, but started back in astonishmentand dismay, as he encountered, in his stead,Lady Rosewood. Alan retreated, while theLady advanced, swinging the iron door afterher, which closed with a tremendous clang.Approaching the statue of the first SirRanulph, she paused, and Alan then remarkedthe singular and terrible expression ofher eyes, which appeared to be fixed upon thestatue, or upon some invisible object near it.There was something in her whole attitude andmanner, calculated to impress the deepest terroron the beholder. And Alan gazed upon her with448 ROOK WOOD.an awe which momently increased. Lady Rook-wood'sbearing was as proud and erect as wehave formerly described it to have been — herbrow was as haughtily bent — her chiselled lip asdisdainfully curled, but the staring, changelesseye, and the deep-heaved sob, which occasionallyescaped her, betrayed how much she was underthe influence of mortal terror. Alan watched herin amazement. He knew not how the scene waslikely to terminate, nor what could have inducedher to visit this ghostly spot, at such an hour,and alone ; but he resolved to abide the issue insilence — profound as her own. After a time,however, his impatience got the better of hisfears and scruples, and he spoke.What doth Lady Rook wood in the abode ofthe dead?" asked he, at length.She started at the sound of his voice, but stillkept her eye fixed upon the vacancy.Hast thou not beckoned me hither, andam I not comes'' returned she, in a hollowtone. " And now thou ask est wherefore I amhere. I am here, because, as in thy life I fearedROOKWOOD. 449thee not, neither in death do I fear thee — I amhere because "What seest thou'" interrupted Peter, withill-suppressed terror.'* What see I — ha — ha — ^ shouted LadyRook wood, amidst discordant laughter — "thatwhich might appal a heart less stout thanmine — a figure anguish writhen, with veins thatglow as with a subtle and consuming flame.A substance yet a shadow, in thy livinglikeness — ha — frown if thou wilt, I can returnthy glances — "Where dost thou see this vision ?" demandedAlan."Where!" echoed Lady Rosewood, becomingfor the first time, sensible of thepresence of a stranger. " Ha — who art thouthat questions me ? — what art thou ? —speak !""No matter who or what I am,"''' returnedAlan. — " I ask thee what thou dost behold."Canst thou see nothing ?"Nothing," replied Alan.450 ROOKWOOD.Thou didst know Sir Piers Rosewood ?'^Is it he?" asked Alan, drawing nearher.It is he," replied Lady Rosewood ; " I havefollowed him hither, and I will follow himwhithersoever he leads me, were it to "What doth he now ?" asked Alan, " see'stthou him still?""The figure points to that sarcophagus."returned Lady Rosewood. "Canst raise upthe lid."No," replied Alan, " my strength will notavail to lift it."Yet let the trial be made," said Lady Rook-wood; " the figure points there still — my ownarm shall aid thee."Alan watched her in dumb wonder. Sheadvanced towards the marble monument, andbeckoned him to follow. Reluctantly did hecomply. Without any expectation of beingable to move the ponderous lid of the sarcophagus,at Lady Rook wood's renewed request, heapplied himself to raise it. What was hisROOKWOOD. 451surprise, when, beneath their united efforts,he found the ponderous slab slowly revolveupon its vast hinges, and with little furtherdifficulty, it was completely elevated ; thoughit still required the exertion of all Alan'sstrength to prop it open, and prevent its fallingback."What doth it contain'' asked LadyRook wood.A warrior's ashes'' returned Alan.There is a rusty dagger upon a fold offaded linen," cried Lady Rosewood, holdingdown the light.It is the weapon with which the first dameof the house of Rosewood was stabbed," saidAlan, with a grim smile.Which whoso graspcth in the tomb,Shall clutch until the hour of doom."So saith the rhyme. — Have you seen enough ? ""No," said Lady Rosewood, precipitatingherself into the marble coffin. " That weaponshall be mine."452 ROOKWOOD.Come forth — come forth'' cried Alan.My arm trembles — I cannot support the lid''I will have it, though I grasp it toeternity," shrieked Lady Rosewood, vainlyendeavouring to wrest away the dagger, whichwas fastened, together with the linen upon whichit lay, by some adhesive substance to the bottomof the shell.At this moment, Alan Rosewood happenedto cast his eye upward, and he then beheldwhat filled him with new terror. The axeof the sable statue was poised above its head,as in the act to strike him. Some secret machinery,it was evident, existed between thesarcophagus lid and this mysterious image — butinthe first impulse of his alarm, Alan abandonedhis hold of the slab, and it sunk slowly downwards.He uttered a loud cry as it moved.Lady Rosewood heard this cry — she raisedherself at the same moment — the dagger was inher hand — she pressed against the lid, but itsdownward force was too great to be withstood —ROOK WOOD. 453the light was within the sarcophagus, and Alancould discern her features — the expression wasterrible — she uttered one shriek — and the lidclosed for ever !Alan was in total darkness. The light hadbeen enclosed with Lady Rook wood. There wassomething so horrible in her probable fate, thateven he shuddered as he thought upon it. Exertingall his remaining strength, he essayed toraise the lid, but now it was more firmly closedthan ever. It defied all his power. Once, foran instant, he fancied that it yielded to hisstraining sinews, but it was only his handthat sliced upon the surface of the marble. Itwas fixed — immovable. The sides and lid rangwith the strokes which the unfortunate Ladybestowed upon them with the dagger's point,but these were not long heard. Presently, allwas still, the marble ceased to vibrate with herblows. Alan struck the lid with his knuckles,but no response was returned. All wassilent.He now turned his attention to his own454 ROOKWOOD,situation, which had become sufficiently alarming.An hour must have elapsed, yet Lukehad not arrived. The door of the vault wasclosed — the key was in the lock, and on theoutside. He was himself a prisoner within thetomb. What if Luke should not return?What if he were slain, as it might chance, in theenterprise? That thought flashed across hisbrain, like an electric shock. None knew ofhis retreat but his grandson. He might perishof famine, within this desolate vault.But he checked this notion as soon as it wasformed ; — it was too dreadful to be indulged in.A thousand circumstances might conspire todetain Luke. He was sure to come. Yet thesolitude — the darkness was awful, almost intolerable; — the dying and the dead around him.He dared not stir.Another hour — an age it seemed to him — hadpassed — still Luke came not. Horrible forebodingscrossed him — but he would not surrenderhimself to them. He rose, and crawled inthe direction, as he supposed, of the door — fearful^t-^^yZ. S^ruZkiJvo^^JCLockwood. 455even of the stealthy sound of his own footsteps.He reached it, and his heart once morethrobbed with hope — he bent his ear to thekey — he drew in his breath— he listened forany sound — but nothing was to be heard. Affroan had been almost music in his ears.Another hour was gone ! — He was now aprey to the most frightful apprehensions,agitated in turns by the wildest emotions ofrage and terror. He at one moment imaginedthat Luke had abandoned him, and heapedcurses upon his head — at the next, convincedthat he had fallen, he bewailed with equal bitternesshis grandsons fate and his own. Hepaced the tomb like one distracted. Hestamped upon the iron plate — he smote withhis hands upon the door — he shouted, andthe vault hollowly echoed his lamentations.But Time's sand ran on, and Luke had notarrived.Alan now abandoned himself wholly to despair.No longer could he anticipate his grandson'scoming — no longer hope for deliverance. His456 ROOKWOOD.fate was sealed. — Death awaited. — He mustanticipate his slow but inevitable stroke —enduring all the grinding horrors of starvation.The contemplation of such an end was madness,but he was forced to contemplate it now ; andso appalling did it appear to his imagination,that he half resolved to dash out his brainsagainst the walls of the sepulchre, and put anend at once to his tortures. And nothing, butadoubt whether he might not, by imperfectlyaccomplishing his purpose, increase his ownsuffering, prevented him fi'om putting thisdreadful idea into execution. His dagger wasgone; and he had no other weapon. Terrorsof a new kind now assailed him. The dead hefancied were bursting from their coffins, and hepeopled the darkness with grisly phantoms. Theywere around about him on each side — whirlingand rustling — gibbering, groaning — shrieking —laughing — and lamenting ! He was stunned —stifled — the air seemed to grow suffocating —pestilential — the wild laughter was redoubled —the horrible troop assailed him — they draggedROOKWOOD. 457him along the tomb — and amid their howls hefell, and became insensible.When he returned to himself, it was sometimebefore he could collect his scattered faculties;and when the agonizing consciousness ofhis terrible situation forced itself upon his mind,he had nigh relapsed into oblivion. He arose —he rushed towards the door — he knocked againstit with his knuckles till the blood streamed fromthem — he scratched against it with his nails tillthey where torn off by the roots — with immensefury he hurled himself against the iron frame —it was in vain. Again he had recourse to thetrap door. He searched for it — he found it.He laid himself upon the ground — there wasno interval of space in which he could even introducea finger's point — he beat it with hisclenched hand — she tore it with his teeth— hejumped upon it— he smote it with his heel — theiron returned a sullen sound.He again essayed the lid of the sarcophagus.Despair nerved his strength. He raised theslab a few inches — he shouted — screamed — butno answer was returned — and again the lid fell.VOL. III. X458 ROOKWOOD.She is dead !"" cried Alan. " Why havenot shared her fate ? But mine is to come —and such a death ! — ah, ah !" and, frenzied atthe thought, he again hurried to the door, andrenewed his fruitless attempts to escape, tillnature gave way, and he sank upon the floor,groaning and exhausted.Physical suffering now began to take theplace of his mental tortures. Parched and consumedas by a fierce internal fever, he wastormented by unappeasable thirst, of all humanills the most unendurable. His tongue was dryand dusty — his throat inflamed — his lips hadlost all moisture. He licked the humid floor —he sought to imbibe the nitrous drops from thewalls ; but instead of allaying his thirst, theyincreased it. He would have given the world,had he possessed it, for a draught of cold springwater. Oh, to have died with his lips uponsome bubbling fountain's marge — but to perishthus !Nor were the pangs of hunger wanting. Hehad to endure all the horrors of famine, as wellas the agonies of quenchless thirst.ROOKWOOD. 459In this dreadful state did three days andnights pass over Alan's fated head. Nor nightnor day had he. Time, with him, was onlymeasured by its duration, and that seemedinterminable. Each hour added only to hissuffering, and brought with it no relief. Duringthis period of prolonged misery, reason oftentottered on her throne. Sometimes he wasunder the influence of the wildest passions.He dragged coffins from their recesses— hurledthem upon the ground, striving to break themopen, and drag forth their loathsome contents.Upon other occasions, he would weep bitterlyand wildly ; and once — once only, did heattempt to pray, but he started from his kneeswith an echo of infernal laughter, as he deemed,ringing in his ears. Then, again, wovdd he calldown imprecations upon himself and his wholeline — trampling upon the pile of coffins he hadreared — and, lastly, more subdued, would hecreep to the boards that contained the body ofhis child, kissing them with a frantic outbreakof affection.460 ROOKWOOU.At length he became sensible of his approachingdissolution. To him the thought of deathmight well be terrible, but he quailed not beforeit, or rather seemed, in his latest moments, toresume all his wonted firmness of character.Gathering together his remaining strength, hedragged himself towards the niche wherein hisbrother was deposited, and placing his hand uponthe coffin, solemnly exclaimed — " My curse —my dying curse — be upon thee evermore !'"'Falling with his face upon the coffin, Alaninstantly expired. In this attitude were hisremains discovered.Our tale is told. Yet, perhaps, we may beallowed to add a few words respecting two ofthe subordinate characters of our drama (melodramawe ought to say), namely, Jerry Juniperand the Knight of Malta. What became of theCaper Merchant's son after his flight fromTilbury Wells we have never been able distinctlyto ascertain. Juniper, however, wouldseem to be a sort of wandering Jew, for certainit is, that somebody very like him is extant still.ROOKWOOD. 461and to be met with at Jerry's old haunts ; indeed,we have no doubt of encountering him at theensuing meetings of Ascot and Hampton.As regards the Knight of Malta — (Knight ofRoads ' Rhodes' he should have been) — we aresorry to state, that the career of the Ruffler wasterminated in a madhouse, and thus the poorKnight became, in reality, a Hospitaller !According to the custom observed in thoseestablishments, the Knight was deprived of hisluxuriant locks, and the loss of his beardrendered his case incurable; but in the meantimethe barber of the place made his fortuneby retailing the material of all theblack wigs he could collect to the impostor'sdupes.Such was the latest piece of intelligence thathas reached us, of the Arcli-hoaxer of Canterbury!Turpin (why disguise it?) was hanged atYork, in 1739. His firmness deserted him notat the last. When he mounted the ladder, hisleft leg trembled; he stamped it impatiently462 ROOKWOOD.down, and after a brief chat with the hangman,threw himself suddenly and resolutely from thesteps. His sufferings would appear to havebeen slight. The remains of the vagrant highwaymanfound a final resting place in thedesecrated church-yard of St. George, withoutthe Fisherman postern, a green and grassycemetery, but withal a melancholy one. A fewrecent tombs mark ovit the spots where some ofthe victims of the late pestilence have beeninterred ; but we have made vain search forTurpin's grave.The gyves by which he was fettered are stillshown at York Castle, and are of prodigiousweight and strength ; and though the Herculeanrobber is said to have moved in them with ease,the present turnkey was scarce able to lift theponderous irons. An old woman of the samecity has a lock of hair, said to have beenTurpin's, which she avouches her grandfathercut off from the body after the execution,and which the believers look upon with greatreverence. O rare Dick Turpin !BOOK WOOD. 463We shall perhaps be accused of dilating toomuch upon the character of the Highwayman,and we plead guilty to the charge ; but wefound it impossible to avoid running a little intoextremes. The subject, as Leigh Hunt wouldsay, " has run away with us."*' Our earliestassociations are connected with sunny scenesin Cheshire, said to have been haunted byTurpin ; and With one very dear to us (fromwhose lips, now alas silent, we have listenedto many stories of his exploits) ; — he was asort of hero. We have had a singular delightin recounting his feats, and hair-breadth escapes ;and if the reader derives only half so muchpleasure from the perusal of his adventures aswe have had in narrating them, our satisfactionwill be complete. Perhaps we may have placedhim in too favourable a point of view — and yetwe know not. As upon those of more important464 ROOKWOOD.personages, many doubts rest upon his history.Such as we conceive him to have been, have wedrawn him — hoping that the benevolent reader,upon finishing our work, will arrive at the sameconclusion ; and in the words of the quaintold Prologue to the Prince of Prigs' Revels,Thank that man,Can make each thief a complete Russian.THE END.LONDON :PRINTED BY T, BRETTELI Rl'PEKT STREET, Haymakers