RISE AND PROGRESSBRITISH POWER IN INDIA.VOL. 1.RISE AND PROGRESSOF ThBRITISH POWER IN INDIA.By peter AUBER, M.R.A.S.,LATE SECRETARY TO THE HONOURABLE THE COURT OF DIRECTORS OF THEEast-india COMPANY.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:Wm. H. ALLEN & CO.Booksellers to the Honourable the East India Company▲MBCalvin & BUDD, Pall-mall.1837.V •» fLONDON:Print hy J. L. Cox & Sows,75,QrMtQuMiiStr0«t.HENRY Mons SrffPKETO^V.)aprTOTHE KING'SMOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.SIRE,Under the protection of their Sovereignand Parliament, the East-india Companyhas been the instrument of acquiring thosevast possessions, declared by the Act of 1833,to be Your Majesty's Indian Territories.That measure suggested the preparation ofa Work which, divested of all commercialdetail, would comprise within moderateVIlimits, a narrative of the leading politicalevents connected with the Rise and Progressof the British Power in India.Your Majesty having graciously condescendedto countenance the attempt — the firstVolume is how humbly submitted to YourMajesty. It records the names, with an outlineof the services, of some of those eminentmen, whose advice in council and valour inthe field laid the foundation of the BritishEmpire in the EastThe Second Volume will commence withthe establishment of a System, which not onlygave permanence and stability to the East-indiaCompany, but enabled it to callforth the services of those illustrious Statesmenand Soldiers who raised the superstructureof that Empire, which still remains underthe government of the Company, and formsso stupendous and splendid a monument ofnational enterprize.vnAlthough the Company exercises no politicalpower in this country, it has evinced onall occasions of national contest or internalcommotion, an anxious desire to uphold theSovereign Authority, and has manifested themost devoted attachment to You Majesty'sRoyal House and Person.That the blessings of British Rule, may belongenjoyed and filly appreciated throughoutevery portion of the varied and widelyextended dominions under Your Majesty'smild and paternal sway, is the prayer ofYour Majesty'sMost dutiful andLoyal Subject,PETER AUBER.CONTENTS.PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.CHAPTER I.1600 to 1741. Page 1—46.Earls History of Hindostan.Native Powers.Settlement of the Portuguese.Rise of the Mahratta.Establishment of the East-india Company.Petition against the formation of the London Company.Union of the two under designation United East-indiaCompany.Early Settlements of the Company and other European Nations.Embassy from Calcutta to the Mogul at Delhi.Differences with the Nabob of Bengal.Early Instructions of the Directors to their Servants, and theirReplies from India.Defensive measures inculcated, and offensive to be avoided.X CONTENTS.CHAPTER II.1746 to 1760. Page *7— 76.Hostilities with the French on the Coast of Coromandel.Clive appointed a Writer, contemporary with Orme the Historian.Early Services of Clive under Lawrence.— He returns toEurope.Increase of the French power in India.CoL Clive appointed to Madras Council. — Proceeds via Bombay.Pirates subdued at Gloria.Cruelties of the Nabob at Calcutta. — Expedition thither underClive and Watson. — calcutta retaken. — council restored.Council remonstrate against Clive's powen^^^His reasons forretaining them. — Defeats the Nabob. — Operations againstthe French.Chandemagore surrenders.Nabob Seraje-ud-Dowlah deposed, and Meer Jaffier proclaimed.Clive acts as President.— court appoint him sole PresidentHostilities with the Shazada, who retreats from Patna*Jaghire granted to Col. Clive.Clive embarks for Europe. — arrives in England, and ia thankedby the Directors.Chapter III.1760 to 1766. Page 77—118.Mr. Vansittart succeeds Clive.Jabber Khan removed and Cossim Ally Khan succeeds asNabob.Burdwan^ Midnapore» and Chittagong acquired by Company.The Sfaaaada again advances towards Company's Provincesand is defeated.The Mogul murdered; the Shazada succeeds.Contents. XIDewanny declined.Difference iMi the Niibob ott account of inland IVide.lte.Massacre at Patna. — Cosdm deposed. — ameer Suffer againplaced on the Mnsnud.The Mogul and Vizier offer aid to the Company.President's view of aftdrs.The Mogol and Visiter hostile to the Compttiy .Major Munro takes the field-overturesfrom Mogul and Visiar rejected. — Latter defeated,flees to Allahabad.The Mogul Shah Alum joins Munro's any.— Treaty with theKing.Operations of the Vizier. — Death of Jailer Ally Khan. —Nazim-ood-Dowlah succeeds.Mr. Spencer succeeds Mr. Vansittart.French on the Coromandel CoastMasulipatam taken by Major Forde. — Various other Operations.Pondicherry surrenders.Hyderr appears in the field in rebellion against the King ofMysore.Madura surrenders.Northern Circles.Mahratta Powers and Bombay. — Hyderr in hostility with them.Hyderr's successful operations on the Malabar Coast.Coandl at Madras desire peace with him.CHAPTER IV,1765 to 1768. Page 119-206.Lord Clive appointed President and Commanders-chief inBengal. — Proceedings connected with tfaatraca0are««—Afrivelin India.Nil CONTENTS.Differences with his Council, as to Presents &c.Proceeds up the country, and concludes a Treaty with theVizier and Nabob.The Dewanny granted to the Company. — Court's Viewsthereon.y Opposition to Lord Clive. — His Lordship's views.— Intendedreturn to England.— Requested by the Court to remain.Political relations.Servants called by Lord Clive from Madras.Lord Clive proceeds up the country.Military Fund founded by Lord Clive.Military combination subdued.Congress at Chupra.Lord Clive returns to the Presidency.— Contemplated Measuresagainst Mahratta.y Abolition of the Inland Trade.Lord Clive returns to Europe Testimony of Council to hismerits.Shah Abdallah.— Sentiments of the King and Vizier towardsthe Company.Mr. Verelst succeeds as Governor.Mission to Nepaul fails.Proposition for obtaining Cuttack to form a chain of Company'sinfluence./ Court's desire to promote happiness of Natives.— Views as toOrissa and caution regarding Alliances with Indian Powers.French Influence.Review of the Powers in Hindostan. — The Mogul, Vizier,Rohillas, Jauts, Seeks.Conduct of the Vizier suspicious. — Deputation to him. — Court'sviews thereon.Differences with the French.Mogul determines to proceed to Delhi.Mr. Cartier succeeds to the Government.Mahrattass, their hostile demonstrations.CONTENTS. XlllCHAPTER V.1765 to 1769. Page 207—267.Earthen Circars* — Sunnuds obtained for them from the Mogul.Differences between the Nabob of the Camatic and Nizam.Bengal Council propose a Treaty with the Nizam which isconcluded.— Court's Remarks thereon.Hyderr's conduct leads to Hostilities with him.The Nizam vacillates : is disposed to join Hyderr, who entcrtthe Camatic.Operations against Hyderr, and Court's views thereon.Treaty with the Nizam. — Condemned by the Court.Fruitless Negotiations with Hyderr. — Embarrassments of MadrasCouncil who are forced to make a Treaty with Hyderrat the gates of Fort St. George.Connexion of Company with the Nabob of the Camatic.Court's views on Treaty with Hyderr.Circars taken under Company's management.Zemindar and Government Lands described.Litigious Proceedings of the Grand Jury at Madras.Operations against Hyderr by the Bombay Council.CHAPTER VL1769 to 1773. Page 268—885.Proceedings in Parliament following the grant of the Dewanny.Regulation of Ballot and Dividend.Supervisors nominated by Company.His Majesty's Government propose to arm the King's NavalOfficer with Powers as Plenipotentiary-differences thereon.—Sir John Lindsay appointed to command King's ships.Supervisors lost on their passage out.Court's Orders as to a Revenue STSTSH.-^Separation of Judicialand Revenue powers.XIV CONTENTS.Mahrattass take Delhi,— Project of the king to join them -, hisMajesty resolves on that step.Hyderr urges Company to join him against the Mahratta whoenter Mysore.The Nabob of the Carnatic destroy t^joiii the Rffahrattaa.— sirJohn Lindsay uit€iftrGS« Representation from Madras on ibisproceedings, and an repeat to the Whig item the Court.Sir Eyre Cortes powers disputed by the Council at Madras :that officer returns to England.Embarrassments of the Council r^^ani^ig Hyderr and Tanjore.Court's views thereon.Rajah of Tai^ote proceed s against some Mygars.Sir Robert Hariand reaches Madras as sueoesser to Sir JeanLindsay.— He supports the Nabob against the Company'sviews in his wish to inn a treaty with IJie Mahrattass.Differences between Sir Robert Hariand and the Council.Company's relations with the Nabob of the Camatic sid Rajahof Tanjore.Sir Robert Fletcher succeeds General Smith in command ofMadras Army. — Circumstances lead to his pleading hisprivilege as a Member of Parliament; is sent home.State of the Caustic. — mahratta defeat Hyderr, who makeslarge conquests on the Malabar coast.Operations against Broach.— Transactions at Poona.CHAPTER Vn.1772 to 1774. Page 886—412.Embarrassment of the Company's Finances.Parliamentary Committees appointed*Parliament prohibit the appointment of another Commission ofSupervisors.Mr. Wabb£N Hastings succeeds as President in Bengal ^ Hisearly services. — Mahomed Reza Can.— Revenue .XTments. — Duplicity of NundoomnrH-^neimiaQS of tiu Mar*Council determine toinclade Corah wigan tiM line of detoiiveoperatioiifl. — differences with Sir Robert Barfcer> the €OBi«mander of the Forces ; his Statement, and Mr. Hastings*Reply.Treaty with the Vizier.— Differences on that measure.Vizier contemplates operations Agiinflt Rohillas. — AppliM tothe Council to aid him, which is ultimately agreed to ; theTroops cross the Conmnassa and defeat Rohillas.Chapter VIII.177«tolT74. Page 418— 4S9.Revenue and Judicial System.Letter from the Teshoo Lame to the Qovemor-General.CHAPTER JX.1774 to 1775. Page 440— 604.The Parliamentary Inquiry terminates in the Regulating Act.A Govbbnor-Gbnbbal and four Councillors nominated;Mr. Hastings to be Governor-general.A Supreme Court of Judicature authorized.Court's instructions to Bengal.Differences in Council under the New Government. — RevenueSystem.— Rohilla War. — Mr. Hastings' Correspondence. —Resident at Lucknow. — Instructions to Commanding Officerwith the Vizier. — Mr. Hastings defends his conduct. —Court's views.Nundcomar prefers accusation against Mr. Hastings.XVI CONTENTS.Nundcomar tried and executed for forgery.Differences in Council. — Mr. Hastings accused of correspondencewith a proscribed native chief.Affairs of Ode.Court's views./CHAPTER X.1774 to 1779. Page 505— 671.Expedition from Bombay against Salsette.— Death of CommodoreWatson.Supreme Government call for Reports from Madras and Bombay,which Reports are forthwith made of affairs underthose presidencies.Treaty with Ragobah by Bombay Government disapproved inBengal.Col. Upton appointed to Poonahh from Bengal.— Mr. Hastingsdiffers with majority.Mr, Wynch removed from Madras.— Lord Pigot appointedGovernor.Lord Pigot arrested by majority of the Council.Admiral Sir Edward Hughes differs with Council.Bengal Government support the majority at Madras.New Revenue Settlement in Bengal. — Differences between Mr.Hastings General Clavering, and Mr. Francis.Court's views as to letting Lands. — They condemn conduct ofGovernor-general.Supposed resignation of Mr. Hastings. — Proceedings in Englandand in India in consequence. He disavows the act.Death of Sir John Clavering. — Sir Eyre Coote appointed Com-mander-in-chief.Supreme Council resolve on supporting Ragobah, and detach aForce to Bombay. — goddard's march and operations.Salt Monopoly resumed by Governor-general. — Chittagong. —The Mugs. — Major Kennel. — Cochin-china.yCONTENTS. XviiCHAPTER XL1779 to 1784. Page 572—647.Proceedings in Parliament — Difference between Lord North,Mr. Fox, and Mr. Burke, on the Company's Affairs.Embarrassed position of the Madras presidency.Sir Thomas Rumbold resigns, and Mr. Whitehill succeeds—both dismissed the service.Lord Macartney appointed Governor of Madras.Hostile disposition of Hyderrrr and the Nizam. — Hyderrrr overrunsthe Camatic.Sir Eyre Coote sent down from Bengal to oppose Hyderr.Acts passed to remedy defects of Supreme Court at Calcutta,and for an Agreement with the Company for one year.Sir Elijah Impey appointed Judge of the Sudder DewannyAdawlut.Camatic and Mahratta War.Affair of the Governor-general at Benares with Cheyte Sing.Differences in Council.Mr. Hastings appoints Major Scott his political agent inEngland.The Governor-general and the Vizier meet at Lunar.Intrigues c^ the Nabob of Arcot against Lord Macartney :his attempt to ruin Mr. Warburton.Parliamentary Reports from a Committee appointed to inquireinto the Camatic War, and Sir Elijah Impey's appointment.Resolutions founded on the Reports, including the recall of Mr.Hastings. — Proceedings of the Courts of Directors and Proprietorsthereon.Naval Engagements off Madras. — Peace with Mahrattass.Efforts to relieve the Camatic.Mr. Hastings addresses the Court— complains of reflectionsmade on him.VOL. I. bXVlll CONTENTS.Death of Hyderr. — Tippoo succeeds.Protracted Hostilities.Sir Eyre Coote, who had returned to Calcutta on aoooun|t of hishealth, offers to proceed again to Madras; embarks is chasedby the French, lands at Fort St. Greorge : his decease.Negotiations with Tippoo finally concluded by Treaty of Mangalore.Further Letters from Mr. Hastings in justification of his conduct.CHAPTER XII.1788 to 1184. Page 648— 675.Ministerial Changes in England.y Mr. Dundas's India Bill brought forward and rejected./ Mr. Fox's India Bill, supported by Mr. Burke ; its purport ;Discussions thereon; its rejection by the Lords. — King'sLetters to Mr. Pitt, who brings forward a Bill which isrejected by the Commons; after further proceedings Parliamentis dissolved.CHAPTER Xii1784 to 1786. Page 676 to 699.Supreme Council animadvert upon the Proceedings tof theMadras Grovemment^ and contemplate Suspension of hardMacartney.,Directors' views on Mr. Hastings's conduct as to Cheyte Sing —applaud the aid given by Governor-general to Madras.Mr. Hastings proceeds to Lucknow. — Disapproves Treaty withTippoo, and sends orders to the Madras Government* whichare disobeyed by casting vote of Lord Macartney.CONTENTS. XIXDirectors appointed Lord Macartney to succeed as Governor-general: apprehending that the Supreme Government mayhave suspended him, they confirm his appointment.Mr. Hastings' description of the Mogul's son, whom be met atLucknow. — Hia opinions as to Oude. — His intended Departure.• Mr. Shore on the Alienated Lands-He returns to England./ A new Revenue Settlement for one year.Mahratta Power extended.Committee of Revision on Public Establishments.Mr. Hastings delivers up the Keys of the Fort and Treasury. —Embarks on the Barrington, and sails on the 8th February.General Remarks on his position when in India.Mr. Hastings arrives in England ; is thanked by the Court.His Impeachment.The East India Company grant him an Annuity of £4.000.His Evidence before Parliament in 1813.— The House of Com-y mons rise on his withdrawing.His attachment to the Company and his Letter immediatelypreceding his Death.Mr. Burke's animosity to him.His Statue placed in the India House.Conducting Remarks.b2PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.MTHiLEpreparing^inthe year 1825, the 'Analysisof the Constitution of the East-india CompanyI experienced the want of a work treating progressivelyof the political events that had occurredin India, with a statement of the laws passed byParliament for the government of the Company'saffairs ; together with the views and opinions ofthe Home Authorities on the proceedings of theirservants abroad. 'There were numerous publications, referring todetached portions of lydia affairs. The Historyof British India by the Tate James Mill, Esq., wasthe first attempt to compass in one work thevarious subjects comprised in so extensive a field.It presents an instance of indefatigable perseverance,and exhibits the peculiar views of thegifted and lamented author. It is matter ofregret — a regret of which I know that gentlemanI himselfXXll Preliminary OBSERVATIONS.himself partook — that he had not an opportunity,when writing his history, which terminates in1805, of consulting the documents that subsequentlycame under his official cognizance andcare.In the course of my researches, amidst thevoluminous records at the India-house, I madevarious memoranda, with the intention when leisureoffered of preparing a work in the present form.The pressure of business preparatory to the discussionon the Charter in 1833, and the arrangementsconsequent on the passing of the Act, inorder to give effect to its provisions, which did notcome into operation until April 1834, completelyoccupied the attention of the whole establishment.The effects of the extraordinary change causedby the abandonment of all commercial operations,were felt in the great diminution of those duties,that had partaken of the combined character,heretofore sustained by the Company. Extensivereductions necessarily followed, some departmentsbeing wholly abolished, others partially reduced,and the entire establishment brought down to ascale that would ensure the largest saving, andat the same time provide for perfect efficiency.ThesePreliminary Observations. XXlllThese circumstances led to my assistant* proposing,under a sense of public duty, his retirementat the close of the year 1834. The same motiveimpelled me to propose my own retirement, witha view to a consolidation of offices, in December1835.I advert to these circumstances because an impressionhas arisen in connexion with the reductionsalluded to, that the idea thrown out in theoriginal Hints submitted by his Majesty's Ministersin February 1833, for reducing the number of theDirectors, might have been acted upon with advantageto the public interests. The idea was wiselyabandoned. There is no necessary connexion betweenthe number of the Court of Directors, andthe strength of the Home establishment. Were itpossible, which it most certainly is not, that halfthe present number of officers and clerks coulddischarge the duties which now fall upon them,still the twenty-four Directors ought to be inviolablymaintained : that number being based upona principle which should never be lost sight of;whileIllume Garter Esq., a most honourable public servant.His retirement, as wel as my own, was accompanied by that oftome old and valued servants in the department.XXIV PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.while the strength of the establishment oughtto be governed by the extent of duties it has toperform. The present number of the ExecutiveBody is essential to its independence, and forms asecurity against the successful exertion of politicalor other influence operating, to the prejudice ofthe great interests committed to its care.An objection has been taken to the choice of somany Directors from gentlemen who have servedin India, because they may have imbibed stronglocal prejudices. If the term local prejudice impliesthat those Directors have a feeling of attachment ,towards India and its population, it presents arecommendation ; the real difficulty is in removingprejudice against and in creating an interest inmatters relating to that country.If the term be used as implying narrowness ofviews, caused by supposed confinement to localduties in a distant part of the world, why shouldan effect be produced on minds engaged in Indiain forming revenue settlements or fixing thebounds of a province — in administering justiceamidst millions, or discharging the duties of apolitical Residency — in filling the office of aMember of Council, or that of Vice-president, —orPreliminary OBSERVATIONS. XXVor in taking a distinguished part as companionsin arms with those illustrious individuals whosenames are recorded in the history of their country,more than in that of parties who may be occupiedin England in the settlement of tithes or parishrates, in fixing the limits of a. turnpike trust, ordiscussing the merits of a railroad-bill ?Some reason might exist for the term, were allthe members who have served in India to bechosen exclusively from one presidency, and fromone particular branch of the service ; but, so farfrom this being the fact, selections are made fromall the three presidencies, and from every branch ofthe public service. Nor is the choice confined togentlemen only who have been in the service;the election has fallen on parties who have residedinlndia,but wholly unconnected with the service.*If any objection still remains, its force is neutralizedA recent instance presents itself in the case of the RightHon. Cutler Ferguson, who was a member of the Bar atCalcutta, and was chosen a Director, on his return to thiscountry, by the united suffrage of the Proprietors. Thatgentleman retired from the Direction much to the regret of allparties, on reassuming office with His Majesty's Ministers. Thelate Sir Hugh Inglis, Bart., had been in India, but not in theCompany's service. The present Director, Sir Robert Campbell,Barter is another instance.XXn PRELIMINARY Observationlived by the introduction of gentlemen of high characterpossessing extensive mercantile and financialexperience, having had no connexion withIndia. This is an advantage which offers additionalreason for maintaining the present number,and for continuing a system that secures thevarious qualifications now brought to bear indeciding questions of great public as well as ofpersonal interest.Nor can any idea be more erroneous than that theduties devolved upon the Court since the Act of1833 do not present sufficient matter to engagethe attention of so many members. With the exceptionof questions which involve great constitutionalchanges in the establishments of the UnitedKingdom, those which come under the reviewof the co-ordinate authorities forming the Homesystem, for governing India, are of a more extended,varied, and complicated nature than any thatgenerally occupy the attention of Parliament.Twenty-four Directors were not considered toomany when the Company had commercial affairsonly, and those of a very limited extent, to transact ;neither was that number thought excessive whenthe Company possessed only one-third of the territory.Seminary OBSERVATIONS. Xxviritory, of the army, and of Lie population, nowunder their control and government.The office of a Director of the East-india Companypresents one of the most honourable andinteresting positions in public life, and offersmatter to engage the highest range of talent andthe best powers of the mind, in a widely extendedsphere of duty, comprising political, military, revenue,judicial, financial, legislative, ecclesiastical,and commercial subjects, not confined withinnarrow limits, where one decision will apply tothe country at large, but calling for separatemeasures in distinct provinces, and different lawsfor a varying population in habits, manners, andcustoms.The office is not one of pecuniary reward, butit is one which yields its possessor the means ofan honourable provision for his family connexionsand friends, with the enviable gratification of beingenabled to confer obligations in quarters whereeducated and exemplary heads of large andamiable families have to contend with limitedfunds, and whose habits have precluded themfrom forming connexions to advance their familiesin the world. The children of the veteran soldierwithXXVHl PREUMINARY OBSERVATIONS.with honourable laurels, but scanty means — thewidow's son and the destitute orphan, have participatedin that patronage which, but for the maintenanceof the Court of Directors, might have beenapplied to the most unconstitutional purposes, andcertainly would never have reached those channelswhere it has been so philanthropically bestowed.The fact was admitted by Parliament during thediscussions on the Charter, and I speak from personalknowledge of numerous instances of the mostkind and generous acts of individual patronage.*AlthoughIn the year 1774, the following curious petition waspresented to the Directors:To the Honourable Court of Directors,*• Gentlemen : — I am a clergyman of Ely, in the county ofCambridge. I have a parcel of fine boys, but not cash to providefor them. My eldest son I intended for a pillar of theChurch, and with this view I gave him a suitable education atschool, and afterwards entered him at Cambridge, where hehas resided the usual time, and last Christmas took his degreeswith some reputation to himself. But I must at the same timeadd that he is more likely to kick a church down than to supportone : he is of a very eccentric genius He has no notionof restraint to ChapeUgates, Lectures, &c. &&, and when rebukedby his master, tutors, &c., for want of obedience to theirrules, &c., he treated them in the most contemptible light, as ifnot being gentlemen, and seemed to intimate that he shouldcall them to account as an affair of honour, &c. This soon disconcertedall my plans for him, and on talking with him theotherPREUMINARY OBSERVATIONS. XXIXAlthough the subject will be noticed when thepresent system comes under review at the close ofthe Second Volume of this work, I cannot refrainfrom adverting to one clause of the Act of the3d and 4th William IV. cap. 85, which has immediateother day asking him what road his honour would choose topursue in future life, he told me his plan was to go into theIndia service. Upon being interrogated whether he had anyreasonable expectation of a provision from that quarter helooked small and said no. Now gentlemen, I know no more ofyou than you do of me, and therefore it is not unlikely but thatyou will look upon me as chimerical a man as my son, inmaking this application to you : but you will remember that heis my son, and that reflection, I hope, will be deemed a sufficientapology. I want your advice, now ; therefore not knowingany individual amongst you, I apply to you as a body. If hewill suit your service and you can help me, do. He is nowabout twenty, near six feet high, well made, stout and veryactive, and as bold and intrepid as a lion. He is of a Welchextraction for many generations, and I think as my first-bornhe is not degenerated. If you like to look at him you shall seehim and judge for yourselves; you may leave word with yourclerk. I shall call again shortly to hear what you say, and aminthe mean time,Gentlemen,'• Black Bull Inn, « Yours, &c. in haste,*' Bishopsgate Street, (Signed) " Thomas Jones."3d March 1774."** Neb. If you like him I will equip him, Sic"One of the Members of the Direction gave the young man acadeiship.XXX Preliminary OBSERVATIONS.date reference to the civil patronage of the Company.I do not believe that it has yet been actedupon. Before the plan devised by the Marquisof Wellesley in 1800, for the establishment of theCalcutta College, there was no test required fromparties previously to their being appointed Writers.They simply produced a certificate that they hadbeen educated in writing and accounts, and weredesirous "of serving their Honours*' The samekind of petition was presented by Mr. Hastings,by Mr. Shore (afterwards Lord Teignmouth), bythe late Charles Grant, Esq., by Sir George Barlow,by the Honourable Mountstuart Elphinstone,and by distinguished members of the servicewho, after filling high posts in the governmentsabroad, are now devoting their valuable experienceto the same objects at home, in their placesas Directors. Whatever may have been thedemands of the public service, it must be admittedthat fit instruments were found to meetthose demands.The plan of Lord Wellesley was superseded bythe establishment of the East-india College inthis country, in the year 1805. By the Act of1813, each party, before his nomination as aWriter,Prebendary OBSERVATIONS. XxxiWriter, was required to pass four terms at theCollege.*That institution, and the regulations for itsgovernment, have afforded matter for repeateddiscussions, in the Court of Proprietors and elsewhere.In the year 1826, the East-india Collie wasnot adequate to supply the wants o( the publicservice. The Act of 7 Geo. IV. was accordinglypassed, which admitted of the nomination of partiesas Writers who should pass a given test beforefour examiners, two being appointed for that purposeby each of the Universities of Oxford andCambridge ; the ages of the candidates not toexceed that prescribed by the Acts of 1784 and1793,f viz. twenty-two years.The wants that called for the remedy havingbeen supplied, the Act expired, and the exclusivesystem of passing through the College was revertedto ; but to render it more palatable, and to give theservice of India all the benefit of general educationelsewhere, it was declared sufficient for aparty to have resided either one or two terms,instead53 Geo. III., cap. 155, sec. 46.t 33 Geo. III., cap. 52, sec. 60.XXXI I PREUMINARY OBSERVATIONS.instead of four, provided he passed the finalexamination. Some instances of valuable instruments,who had come from the Universities, beingappointed under the revised plan, have latelyoccurred.With these facts upon record, it is difficult toimagine what can have led to the introduction of the103d section, cap. 85, in the Act of the 3d and 4thof His present Majesty ; unless indeed its objectwas to render the civil patronage as little gratefulto the nominating parties as possible, if so, it willbe most effectually attained whenever the schemeshall come into operation. The general outlineof the Ministerial plan of 1833 was the result of acomprehensive and enlightened view of the vastsubject then brought forward ; but many of thedetails were framed in haste, and apparentlywithout due consideration of the effects that wouldfollow their adoption.The age of each of the candidates to fill onevacant nomination to the College is not to exceedtwenty-two years; but the Acts of 1784 and 1793provide that no party shall be appointed a writerwhose age exceeds twenty-two years. Residencetherefore at the College, under the new Act, isoutPreliminary OBSERVATIONS. XXXHlout of the question for a party of the extremeage admitted by that Act. At all events, thereis a discrepancy that requires correction. Againthe period of one month only is allowed to aDirector to find out four candidates, and this isto be done in the months of July and August, aperiod of the year of all others the least likely forcandidates to be found, and if they are not producedthe nomination falls to the Board ! Theremotest idea of imputing any sinister intentionwhen the plan was devised is utterly disclaimed,but the result is clear : for supposing thirty vacancies,the Directors in one month must be preparedwith 120 youths, who are ready to risquetheir academic reputation for thirty problematicalprizes.To avoid this, the Directors may send up ninetyyouths who may happen to be at home for theholidays from some of the seminaries in the country,to compete with thirty comparative veterans,and the Act would be complied with, while thereal intention would be entirely defeated.The plan prescribed by the Act is unattainablein principle, and would be open to intrigue andinjustice when put in practice. A proper test andVOL. I. c publicXXXiV PBEUmVART Observation.public examination seems all that is really requisiteto ensure well qualified servants.As the governing body in the India system, theDirectors have the origination of principle. Thisis a most important point. Their acts it is true,are subject to revision by the Board of Commissioners,but the Directors possess the means ofmaking the public judges of those acts throughthe medium of the Court of Proprietors, shouldextreme measures or differences of opinion rendersuch a proceeding expedient If the powers bothof the executive and constituent bodies are moicircumscribed by the late Act, they are still of acharacter to be applied with much force andeffect.If the past experience of their government betakenas an earnest for the future, there is amplewarrant to anticipate the most beneficial results.The testimony of that great man (whose serviceswill be hereafter noticed), when speakingof the Company's government, not from merereport but from long personal experience; at atime when the Company had the honour to numberhim amongst their sergeants, and who in thatcapacity set an example of the strictest subordination.PSEUBONASY Observations. XXXVnation, when the policy of a measure was opposedto his own conviction; — who exhibited entiredevotion to the public senricet virfaen personalinterest would have decided otherwise; — whoevinced a foresight as extraordinary in planningand devising measures and operations,as promptitude, energy, and success in carryingthem into execution ; — who laid down asystem for the management and conduct ofthe various branches of the public service,which simplified the most complicated andimportant matters, whilst the most minute andapparently unimportant were not forgotten; —who observed an extraordinary regularity in hispublic accounts, amidst unceasing engagements,requiring continued exertion both of body andmind ; — and whose acquaintance^with the generalaffairs and political relations of the Company wasnot less conspicuous than his military achievements,—this eminently competent eye-witnessdeclared, from what he saw at the time, andfrom what he had since seen, that it was one ofthe best and most purely administered governments,and one which had provided most effect2 tullyXxxvi PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.tully for the happiness of the people over whichit was placed,*Another gentleman then in office at the IndiaBoard, and now filling a high station in theCouncil of India, declared his astonishment atdiscovering the effects of a government and asystem of which he had formed a very differentopinion, fOne of the leading characteristics in thegovernment of the East India Company is from party or political feeling : it is desiredto observe the same spirit in this work. Afterall, the subject is so vast, that scarcely anyonework can give more than a brief connecteddetail. To aid the attention in taking a glanceat the history of India, from the commencementof hostilities with the French in 1745, the subsequentperiod may be divided into ten decades.AtParliamentary Debates July 1835. In the reference Ihave here made to the Duke of Wellington's services, I havestrictly confined mysdf to those rendered in India. Theyformed a true presage of his Grace's subsequent illustriouscareer.f Debate in the Onions on the second reading of the IndiaBill, lath of July 1883.VREMJMSNARY OBSERVATIONS. XXXVllAt the beginning of each, or within a very shorttime, some marked event took place :1745-6. The commencement of hostilities withthe French on the coast of Cororoandel.'*^1755-6. Theaffair of the Black-hole, and theexpe-edition to Calcutta under Clive and Watson. f1765. The acquisition of the Dewanny. J1774. The Regulating Act; a Governor-generalappointed, and a Supreme Court of Judicaturecreated1784. The establishment of the Board of Com-missions.1793. The renewal of the Charter ; the Board ofCommissioners placed upon a permanent footing,with salaries to the President and Commissioners.1804. The termination of the Marquis Wellesley'sbrilliant administration, including the fall ofSeringapatam, the expulsion of the French,and the subjugation of the Mahrattass.1814. The renewal of the Charter; the openingof the India trade ; the introduction of anEpiscopal establishment ; the commencementPage 47. f Page 54.X Page 146. § Page 442.XXXVlll Preliminary Observations.ment of the Marquis Hastings' administration,and Nipaul war.1824. The Burmese war.1834. The East-india Company relinquish commercialoperations ; surrender all their propertyto the Crown, and retain the governmentof India. The abolition of suttee andtermination of Lord William Bentinck's administration,I have purposely introduced, in the first chapter,some extracts to show the state of the Company'searly political relations. It must be remembered,that until the late great change, the East-indiaCompany possessed no other pecuniary meansthan what they derived from the combined resultof their territorial and commercial receipts. Inthe course of the national contests in whichGreat Britain was involved, the Company werefrequently much embarrassed. They obtainedat times unwilling aid from Parliament, at the instanceof the Minister who disputed their claimsto reimbursement for outlay on account of hisMajesty's Government, when the national exchequerwas severely pressed, and the Company'sexigenciesPBBUmNARY Observations. XXxhtexigencies most felt, there being no demandeither at home or abroad, for the produce intheir warehouses.These were the reasons why the Directors contendedfor the maintenance of the Company'sexclusive privileges in all their integrity. Hadconcessions been made, they felt that there wasno limit at which to stop, their sole dependencebeing on their own resources. India including theHome Establishment, with that of the Board ofCommissioners for the Affairs of India, has neverbeen a direct charge on England. Hence theorders to the governments abroad were sometimescouched in terms grating to minds unaccustomedto the tediousness of detail and formal minutiae ofa peaceful administration, '^ formed on a commercialbasis."The First Volume of this work refers to the earlyperiod of Indian history, and of the Company'sestablishment. It comprises the administration ofLord Cave, with the intermediate governments inBengal and at Madras and Bombay, and closeswith that of Mr. Hastings. Most of what relatesto Lord Clive's government had been preparedfrom the official documents before the life of hisLordshipXl * PREUBflNiHtY OBSERVATIONS.Lordship was published. I mention this, because Iam gratified to find that my views are generallysupported by those of the gallant and regrettedauthor of that work.The Second Volume will open with the Establishmentof the Board of Commissioners for theAffairs of India ; a measure which preserved theCompany's political existence, and tended tocheck, and gradually to eradicate the evils thathad arisen from the want of power on the partof the Executive Body to enforce obedience totheir orders.The important proceedings of the India Government,which gave effect to the revisions contemplatedby the Act of 1784, will be graduallydeveloped. The principles by which the SupremeCouncil were guided will be traced out, togetherwith the course of splendid achievements whichmarked the progress of the British power, underthe several eminent personages who presided inthe respective governments. The result exhibitsthe extraordinary fact that the Company, whoserepresentatives hesitated at one time to address aNabob of one of the provinces, now hold the GreatMogul himself as a pensioner upon those revenues,whichPRELIMINARY Observation xliwhich through their instrumentality have becomethe property of the British crown.* An Outlineof the Indian System as it exists under thealtered character of the Company, will likewisebe given.The scheme of his Majesty's Ministers was explainedand supported in an able and luminousexposition by the President of the Board, in February1833.t The Proprietors closed with theproposition, and accepted the revenues of Indiaas security for their capital, and payment ofthe dividend, on condition that the Companyretained the government. Of the competency ofIndia to sustain all the just demands upon herexchequer, no doubt is entertained : ^' a countrywith an increasing revenue of twenty two millions,a territory almost unlimited in extent, a soil richand fertile, and suited to every kind of produce,withA map of India is prefixed, in order to show the posses-nousacquired by the Company at the close of Mr. Hastings'government in 1784, as also the native states which existed assubstantive powers at that time.The Second Volume will contain a map prepared upon asimilar principle brought down to the present time ; also a mapexhibiting the routes of Steam Navigation with India.t The Right Hon. Chas. Grant, now Lord Glenelg.Xlii PftfiinnNAlY Observation.with a people capable of great improvement, andboth frugal and industrious."But the Proprietors must not forget that capitaland skill are the means, and judgment andenergy the qualifications essential to apply thosemeans in the mode best calculated to ensure theanticipated benefits.No endeavour should be omitted to awaken aninterest in a country, which has doubtless beenbrought under British dominion for higher endstitian mere pecuniary advantage, although instancesof the benefits derived in that point of viewmay be traced throughout the United Kingdom :for there is scarcely a county without residentfamilies who owe, either remotely or immediately,their fortune, or pecuniary means, to the establishmentof the East-india Company, and the acquisitionof India.If this work, which is almost wholly foundedon official records, shall in any degree answer thepurpose one of the objects I have had in encounteringthe labour of preparing it for publicationwill be attained. It may likewise prove an usefulintroduction to more extended researches by individualswho shall hereafter* enter the Company'sservice,Seminary OBSERVATIONS. xliiiservice, or to those who may resort to India forother purposes.As the attempt has been graciously countenancedby the Sovereign, I feel that I shall butmanifest the respect which I bear towards theCompany, by announcing to the Proprietors individuallythe progress of a work, the first volumeof which is now sent forth to the public.London, April 1837,/^r.RISE AND PROGRESSBRITISH POWER IN INDIA.CHAPTER I.In contemplating the History of India, abundant Early history.matter to awaken, if not to satisfy curiosity, as toits earliest condition and chronology, is to be foundin the works of those distinguished scholars andhistorians, who have presented the public withtheir valuable researches on the various kingdomsof Asia.Confining the retrospect to the limits withinwhich reference can be had to historical facts, itis impossible not to be most forcibly struck withthe extraordinary vicissitudes and revolutions towhich Hindostan has been subject. Governed foraseries of years by a Maharajah, or prince whoexercised supreme authority, and by various feudatorybut powerful native chiefs ; having a priest-vol.I. B hoodMahometan{ '. 2 V [ V: './ RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap I..*'; ' : 1j66&:assOfmng a lofty tone of morality, possessinggreat influence over the people, and acting ascounsellors to their rulers, the Hindoo power,notwithstanding the early invasion of Alexander,*., »u .^»«. remained comparatively secure until the irruptionirruption. ^f she Moslems, whose troops were led to the territorieson the Indus within the third century afterthe rise of that scourge of the human race, thefollowers of the prophet, whose flight from Mecca,Ad. 622, gives date to the Hijrah. In thirty-oneyears from that period, besides Arabia, the kingdomsof Persia, Egypt,. and Syria, were subjugatedby their arms, and in the year 673 they entered thecountry beyond the Oxus.The five great princes, who are represented tohave united their forces against the earliest invasions♦ <* I take it for granted that Alexander crossed the Indus(about S27 years before Christy according to Usher, and in themonth of May), at or near the place where the city of Attacknow stands : because, first, it appears to have been, in all ages,the pass on the Indus leading from the countries of Cabal andKandahar into India ; and this is strongly indicated by the circumstanceof Akbar's building the fortress of Attack to commandit. Mr, Fraser, in his history of Nadir Shah, says, ' thereis but one place where an army can conveniently be transported)the stream being so rapid in most parts. There is a castle commandingthat passage, called the castle of Attack.' Attacksthen, must stand on or near the site of the Taxila of Alexander.Taxila must necessarily have been very near the Indus, to allowof its being one hundred and twenty miles from the Hydaspes,or Coelum. See Pliny's Indian Itinerary, book vi." — MajorRennes Memoir of Hindostan.Chap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 3sions of Hindostan by the Mahomedans, were thoseof Lahore, Delhi, Ajmere, Kanouje, and CaHinjer,all included in Northern Hindostan.The more southern part was full of impregnablehills and castles, which were tenanted by the daringrace of Rajpoots- The multitude of these forts,built on lofty and almost perpendicular eminencesof rock or mountain, so common in India, affordssufficient evidence of the distractions which, inancient periods, prevailed amidst the endless contestsof ambitious chieftains.In the tenth century, three lines of Mahometanprinces arose, whose successors established themselvesin Hindostan.The first was that of the Gaznavideis, so calledfrom Gazna, the capital of a province in the neigh Lines of mb-boyhood of Kandahar. They continued from about princes.Ad. 1000 to 1157, when they were expelled fromtheir Indian conquests by the Gardes, from Gaur,a province to the north of Gazna. The Charadefrom Charm, the capital of their kingdom,succeeded ad. 1212 ; and they were defeated byGenghis Khan in 1221.During the whole of the Gaznavian dynasty, aswell as the dynasties of Gaur and Charm, Indiaboasted no supreme head. The dignity of Maharajahhad become merely nominal. He might takethe field, and was reverenced as. chief; but hepossessed no decisive power to control the differentfactions that had arisen and convulsed the country,B 2 the4 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE IChaf. I.the provinces having been partitioned among thesuperior line of rajahs who headed or ruled overthem. The insatiate invaders from the westernfrontiers, as long as their tyranny lasted, were thelords paramount of India. The tribute was regularlytransmitted to Gazna, or Gaur, by such ofthe Indian chieftains as desired peace, numerousarmies of Afghauns being ready to pour downupon any who might manifest resistance.Deccan in- The Deccan, or South Peninsula remainedin quiet subjection to its ancient chiefs of Indiandescent until 1293, when it was first invaded byAlla-ud-Deen, the Mahometan govemorof Hurrah,a country bordering on the Deccan, near EUich*poor.TiiBonr'fl con At the close of the fourteenth century, the celebratedTimour " planted the Tartarean standard onthe imperial towers of Delhi." On Returning tohis own country, he committed the government ofhis new conquests to two viceroys, Pir Mahometand Cheer Khan. The latter contested successfullyfor the sceptre. The Tartar governmenthaving become odious, both to the Mahometanchiefs and native princes of India, they emancipatedthemselves from its yoke in 1493, aboutwhich period the Specks invaded Great Bokhara,and constrained Baber, the descendant of Timour,to abdicate the throne of Tartary and seek refugeat Gazna. In this retirement he contemplatedthe invasion of Northern Hindostan and the conquestCHAr. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 5quest of Delhi. The Afghauns and the great rajahsof the country opposed his progress, but his valourand perseverance overcame every obstacle, and onthe 1st May 1526, Baber, a fugitive from his owncountry, ascended the Mogul throne, one hundred Emperorand thirty years after the conquest by Timour.Humaioon, son of Baber, carried his arms intoMalwa and Guzerat, where Sultan Bahadurreigned. The latter, in order to defeat the advanceof Humaioon, granted the port of Diu tothe Portuguese, in consideration of their aiding Portuguesehim against the invader. Here we perceive the "* **first footing obtained by an European power inIndia.Humaioon was subsequently driven to seeksafety in Lahore by a revolt of the Afghauns,which took place under There Khan, during theemperor's absence from Delhi. He died in 1556.His son, Akbar, then only fourteen years of age, Akbar.was proclaimed king by the chiefs who had accompaniedhis father to Lahore, and was crownedat Delhi in 1558. He raised Agra to great splendour,as a royal city, in 1670. During his reignBengal was reduced, siege was laid to Patna andAllahabad, Guzerat was subdued, Ahmedabad wasfortified, and the greater part of the Deccan, withthe kingdoms of Viziapore and Golconda, werebrought under his arms.Abel Fail, the soldier and historian, enjoyed Abu Phzhthe full confidence of Akbar, and took an activepartG RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.part in the operations in the Deccan. On therevolt of Selim, the emperor's son, Abel Failbeing summoned by Akbar to Delhi, was murderedwhilst on his way to obey the commands of hismaster.jehiungier. Selim proffered submission to his father, andsucceeded to the throne at the close of the year1605, by the title of Jehaungier. He also experiencedthe revolt of his eldest son, two of whosecompanions in the rebellion were condemned tosuffer death.* In 1607 the emperor marchedagainst Caubul. He reduced the refractoryAfghauns, and afterwards prosecuted the waragainst the Nizam and the Deccan.Shah Jehan, his son, succeeded him in 1628.An insurrection in the Deccan, under Lodi, anomrah of the highest distinction, called forth theexertions of the Emperor, who sent an army tooppose him, but at the same time offered terms ofpardon, which Lodi imprudently accepted. Hewas made governor of M alma, and subsequentlyinvited to the court at Delhi, where he was treatedwith great indignity. The apprehension of assassinationinduced him to flee from the court toMalwa. Having withstood the troops sent afterhimIt is stated that one wag sewn up in the raw hide of an ox,which as it contracted by the heat of the sun, caused suffocation; the other was sewn up in the hide of an ass but his friendshaving kept it moist by continually wetting it his life was preserved,and he was ultimately pardoned.Chas. I.] British POWER IN INDIA. 7him and obliged them to relinquish their pursuit,he traversed the provinces of Bahar and Oude onhis way to Golconda and ultimately reachedDowlatabad, where the Nizam received him withopen arms.This conduct of the Nizam gave the Emperoran opportunity* for which he had long sought, ofrenewing his efforts to bring the Deccan into completesubjection. The Sovereign of Bejapoor, theKing of Hyderabad and Talingana, and the Nizam,king of the Deccan, confederated in support ofLodi; but the arms of the Emperor prevailed,and Lodi was cut to pieces. The confederateswere ultimately reinstated in their possessions,upon condition of their acknowledging the Emperorand his successor to be lords paramount of theDeccan.Aurungzebe, the third son of Shah Jehan, Auningzcbc.although naturally ambitious, concealed his realcharacter and intentions under the assumedrigidity of a fakir. He was appointed to governthe Deccan in 1638. In 1658, through treacherytowards his two brothers and by imprisoning hisfather, he obtained the imperial throne. He madeconsiderable conquests in the Peninsula, andengaged in hostilities with the Mahrattass.The latter power arose in 1628, under Sevajee, disc of thewho m 1661 had made a conquest of the whole ofthe coast of the Concan, comprising the countryfrom Goa to Demaun. He died in 1680, and wassucceeded8 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr. I.succeeded by Sambajee, who having taken underhis protection the rebel son of Aurungzebe, thetroops of the latter proceeded against him. TheEmperor having obtained possession of his personby bribery, offered him his pardon if he wouldembrace the Mahometan religion. Sambajeeindignantly rejected the offer; upon which histongue was torn out. Still refusing to purchasemercy at the expense of his faith, the inhumanEmperor caused his heart to be cut out.Aurungzebe died in 1707. His conduct hadexasperated the Mahrattass, who, under their chiefSahojee, overran and plundered the greater partof Hindostan. In 1735 they obtained authorityCollect the to collect the clout, or fourth-part of the netrevenues of all the provinces of the empire,excepting that of Bengal. At the death of Sahojeein 1740, their territories extended from the WesternOcean to Orissa, and from Agra to the Camatic,being one thousand miles in length and sevenhundred wide. Their capital was Sattarah.There were two principal leaders : Ballojee, thePeishwa or vicegerent, who resided at Poona, waslooked upon as the chief; the other, RagojeeBoonslah, was the bukshi or commander-in-chief,who resided at NagpoOr in Berar. These twoparties divided the kingdom ; but the Ram Rajah,or Rajah of Sattarah, was considered the supremeprince, as he bestowed a khelat on the accessionof the Peishwa. Ballojee died in 1761, and wassucceededChap. I.] BRITISH Power IN INBU. 9succeeded by Mhaderao, mention of whom willbe found in the early political transactions of theCompany. Narrain Rao succeeded in 1773 : onhis death he was followed by Ragobah, his uncle,who was the cause of the protracted hostilitiesbetween the Bombay presidency and the Mahratta,which will be noticed hereafter.Ragojee Boonslah was succeeded by Janojee in1749 ; and Moodajee, the son of Janojee's youngerbrother, succeeded in 1776-Of the other Mahratta chiefs, some rose toeminence, and became formidable enemies to theBritish power.The first was Sin di a u . A part of the province scindiah.of Malwa, which had been separated from theMogul dominions about 1732, was awarded tohim by a grant from the Rajah of Sattarah, Oojeinbeing his capital.The second was Holkar, who likewise obtained Holkar.a considerable part of Malwa, his capital beingIndore. The province of Kandeish was partitionedbetween the Peishwa, Scindiah, andHolkar.The third chieftain was Futty Sing, generally ouicowur.called the (luicowar. He divided Guzerat withthe Peishwa.The fourth was Purser Blow, the Rajahof ColambreThe fifth was the Rastia family, long settledin the Concan.This10 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cur. I.This outline of the several native states, whenthe European nations opened an intercourse withthe East by sea, and formed establishments there,may serve as an introduction to a political narrativeBritish Power, of the rise and process of the British Powerin that quarter of the globe : a power which hasbeen more widely extended throughout the continentof India than any that preceded, whethernative or European.In connection with this fact it should be recollected,that the acquisition of our eastern posses-establishedby sons was uot effected by the collective forces ofCompany. " this uatiou, but by the East-india Company,who form the most extraordinary chartered bodythat has existed in any nation. They were incorporatedin the year 1600 by Queen Elizabeth, whohad supported the Dutch republic as a barrieragainst the House of Austria. England perceivedthe advantages which accrued both to Portugaland Holland by their trade with Asia round theCape, and became desirous to participate in thatlucrative traffic. Individual means or enterprizewere unequal to such an undertaking: ' theattempt could not be made but on a joint stock.'The London Company was accordingly formed,for the purpose of extending the commerce andnavigation of this country. They continuedwithout a rival until 1698, when the necessities ofthe state led to the formation of the EnglishCompany. The measure being proposed toParliament,Chap. I.] British POWER IN INDIA. 1 1Parliament, the London Company presentedthe following petition to the House of Commonsin support of their privileges*To the Hobble. the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,in Parliament assembled ;The humble Petition of the Governor and C<nnpanyof Merchants of London trading into the East-indies,in a Greneral Court assembled.Humbly Shewetfa :That your Petitioners have the sole trade to the East-indiesgranted them by several Charters of Queen Elizabeth,and other his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, and thoseCharters confirmed by his present Majesty, wherein hisMajesty's been graciously pleased to grant yourPetitionersthe said trade for twenty-one years, from November 1698,under many regulations, agreed upon by this HonourableHouse and to direct an additional subscription of <f 744,000to the stock for the better carrying on their trade, andmaking it more national and extensive, which regulationsare submitted unto, and the said <f 744,000 subscribed andpaid in by a great number of new adventurers, since whichsubscription your Petitioners have suffered very severely inthe loss of twelve ships, that would have produced here avery great sum of money.That your Petitioners, by reason of these losses, havereaped no benefit from their said subscription; and yethave paid ^85,443. Gs. 6d. in taxes for their stock duringthe war, besides the taxes for this year, £995,029. Miss. 4d.in customs ; since the said' subscription have also advancedamong themselves, after their losses, great sums of moneyfor carrying on their trade, and preserving the advantagethereof to the nation, and have likewise served his Majestyand the Gvemm^t on sundry occasions*That12 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.That your Petitioners did not doubt (their losses bywar and other the premises considered) but they shouldenjoy the benefit of their trade in time of peace ; whereasinstead thereof, they are informed, a proposal is given in toa Committee of this Honourable House, of a loan to bemade by persons not interested in the said Company, so asthey may have the sole trade to India, China, &c., exclusiveof all others ; which proposal tends to the utter destructionof your Petitioners right.And forasmuch as your Petitioners are in possession ofthe said trade, have a revenue at Fort St. George andBombay of about .£^,000 a-year, another at Fort St.David's of above <f 6,000 per annum, which are dailyincreasing, and large extent of lands in both places ; havealso above ^S,SOO a-year paid them by the Persians, andthe perpetual inheritance of Bombay and St. Helena, byseveral grants from the Crown of England ; have likewisedivers forts, settlements, and territories on the island ofSumatra, without which the pepper trade would be entirelylost to this nation ; have also a strong fortification inBengal, and several other factories (some of them fortified),buildings, settlements, privileges and immunities in manyplaces within the limits of their trade, all which are theirabsolute propriety, and have cost them immense sums ofmoney for the purchase and grants from Indian princes andothers, and for the strengthening, and other expensesthereof.— a8d May 1698.Notwithstanding this appeal, the necessities ofthe state were such that the New Company wasformed under the title of the English East-india.Company. They, however, found that they couldnot compete with experience, added to possessionsand capital, and at the recommendation of hisMajestyChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 13Majesty King William the Third, the two Companiesagreed to form one society, to be designated"The United Company of Merchants ofEngland trading to the East-indies."The Company consisted of all persons holding ashare in the capital stock, then amounting to£2,000,000. Every individual, whether male orfemale, possessing £500 stock, either in his or herown right or otherwise, was entitled to vote andto take part in discussions in the meeting of Proprietors,who when assembled were termed by thecharter a ** General Court of Proprietors'The Proprietors were to elect out of their body,every year, twenty-four members, each possessedof £2,000 stock, to be Directors of the Company.Thirteen members formed a quorum, and whenassembled for business were termed a "Court ofDirectors." By the charter four General Courtsare to be held in the year, each quarterly, Acommittee was to be chosen to frame by-laws forthe government of the Company, which laws havethe same force as those framed by Parliament,when not opposed to any existing Act,*In order to facilitate the transaction of the Company'saffairs, the charter empowered the Directors to form themselvesinto committees.Lv14 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chat. I.I61S. In the year 1616, the Company were confined,on the continent of India, to Surat and Amadavad,in the Mogul's dominions ; to Calicut, on the Malabarcoast ; and to Masulipatam^ on the Coromandelcoast.1625. In 1625, their agents at Bantam,* in Java, suggestedto the authorities in Europe the expediencyof directing their attention to the trade on the Coromandelcoast, and at the close of the season despatcheda vessel from Batavia to Masulipatamwith a cargo. They also fixed on a station atArragon, between Deplore and Publican. In 1638,the situation of Arragon being considered unfavourablefor increasing the Company's commerce,Mr. Day, one of the council at Masulipatam, selectedMadraspatam; the Nag of that districtSt ^eo having offered, provided the English would settlefirst settled, thcrc, to crcct a fort at his own cost, and to exemptthem from all customs on trade. So muchimportance was attached, to securing this position,that, without waiting for instructions from England,a fortification was commenced at the expense ofthe Company; the fort receiving the name ofFort St. George, the town retaining its originalappellation.1653. In 1653, Fort St. George was raised to the rankof a presidency ; and, on the application of theCompany,Bantam, at this early period, was one of the Company'sprincipal settlements to the eastward.Chap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDU. 15Company, in 1667, was incorporated by royalcharter from his Majesty King Charles ILThe island of Bombay, ceded by the crown of sunt andPortugal to King Charles II. , as a part of the maim.dowry of the Infanta Catherine, was, in 1688,granted by the King to the Company ; and, in1687, was constituted the chief seat of the Britishgovernment in India, all the other settlementsbeing declared subordinate to itAt the conclusion of the seventeenth century, i698.the English in Bengal were settled at Calcutta, ^^e^^^-the French at Chandemagore, and the Dutch at ^^^'Chinsurah, all situated on the river Hooghly.The Rajahs of the country surrounding those Bengal.settlements having revolted against the Mogulgovernment, and plundered several towns belongingto the Nabob of Bengal, the three Europeannations, for their own defence, immediately fortifiedtheir settlements. Aurungzebe, then Emperor,sent one of his grandsons to suppress the rebellion,and to superintend the provinces of Bengal, Bahar,and Orissa; through whom the English obtainedpermission, in 1698, to purchase from the Indianproprietors the villages of Sooth Nutty, Calcutta,and Govindpore, on which ground the city ofCalcutta now stands. A fort was ordered to bebuilt, and, in compliment to his Majesty KingWilliam III., it was denominated Fort William.In 1712, the Company having acquired severaladditional factories for the prosecution of theirtradeRISE AND PB06EESS OF THE[Chap. I.BCMGAL.1715-1745.trade, and expended large sums in maintainingtheir interests against the influence of the Dutch,petitioned parliament for an extension of theircommercial privileges. After considerable oppositionthe exclusive right of trade was continuedto them until 1733. In order to secure a greaterdegree of protection from the native powers, anembassy was despatched from Calcutta to theEmperor Ferrokshere at Delhi in 1715. It consistedof two of the most intelligent factors at thepresidency.The progress of the embassy presents a curious,specimen of diplomacy. The following extractis given from the reports made to the authoritiesat Calcutta, by the deputation to the Emperor,as the Mogul or King was then designated.Our last to your Honours, &c. was from Agra the 24thultimo, which place we left the same day. We passedthrough die country of the Jaats with success, not meetingwith much trouble, except that once in the night, roguescame on our camp, but being repulsed three times they leftus. We were met on the 8d July by Padre Stephensbringing two Seerpaws, which were received with the usualceremony by John Syrian and Cojah Surplus.The 4th, we arrived at Barrapoola, three coss from thecity, sending the Padre before to prepare our reception,that if possible we might visit the King the first day,even before we went to the house which was got, for us.Accordingly, the 7th in the morning we made our entrywith very good order, there being sent a munsubdar of2,000 munsub, with about SOO horse and peons to meet us,bringing likewise two elephants and flags. About themiddleChip. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 17middle of the city we were met by Synd Syllabus Caun beholder,and were by him conducted to the palace, wherewe waited till about twelve o'clock, till the King came out,before which time we met with Caundora Beholder, whoreceived us very civilly, assuring us of his protection andgood services. We prepared for our first present, viz, 100gold moeurs ; the table-clock set with precious stones ; theunioom^s horn ; the gold escritoire bought from TendsCaun ; the large piece of ambergris ; the flo, and chd-lunch manilla work ; and the map of the world : these,with the Honourable the Governors letter, were presented,every one holding something in his hand as usual. Consideringthe great pomp and state of the kings of Hindostan,we were very well received. On our arrival at ourhouse, we were entertained by Synd Syllabus Caun, sufficientboth for us and our people ; in the evening he visitedus again, and stayed about two hours. The great favourCaundora is in with the king, gives us hopes of success inthis undertaking ; he assures us of his protection, and saysthe king has promised us very great favours. We havereceived orders, first, to visit Caundora as our patron, afterwhich we shall be ordered to visit the grand Vizier, andother Omrahs. We would have avoided this if we could,fearing to disoblige the Vizier ; but finding it not feasible,rather than disoblige one who has been so serviceable, andby whose means we expect to obtain our desires, we complywith it,—Delhiy or Sha Jehanabady July Sih 1715.Your Honour, &c. was before informed that three daysafter our arrival at the city, the king left it under a pretenceof worshipping at a noted place, six coss from Delhi,but his real design was to get clear from the fort, where hethought himself not so free to command, which he might beby this journey, as appeared after. He went round thecity, eight or ten days, and the Omrahs petitioned him toVOL. I. t' return,18 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.return, it being an unseasonable time to go further: herefused to consent, sometimes saying he would go toLahore, and sometimes to Ajmere. We were startled atthis news, looking back on the risk and trouble of bringingthe present hither, although at the Hinges charge. How toremove it, or to pretend to enter on our negotiation withoutdelivering it, we could not tell ; but after due consideration,we concluded the best way was to deliver the present as fast aspossible, though the King was abroad ; and accordingly wecarried all the japan scrutinies, japan earthen and lacqueredware, fire-arms, and cutlery ware, with us to the camp,and presented it. The second day, we delivered in anote for four hundred pieces of broad cloth, ordinary ;the third day, another, for three hundred pieces aurora,and sixty pieces ordinary yellow : the following day, thefine reds, superfine scarlet, &c. after this, we returned tothe city to prepare what was behind, and brought with usto the camp five standing clocks, twelve looking-glasses,and the map fitted up, which were presented ; but after hisMajesty's perusal, the clocks were ordered to be sent backto us, to be taken care of till he returned to the city : thisorder hindered us from delivering any more goods. Sincethe King gave out he designed to proceed no farther thanabout forty coss from Delhi, to a noted place for worship,from whence he would immediately return, we concludedthat we ought to attend his Majesty, leaving Mr. Stephensonand Mr. Phillips to take care of the goods remainingin the city ; that we should give notice to the several Onu^hswe intend to present ; and afterwards, under the favour ofproceeding to commence our negotiation withal, in case theKing should exceed the designed journey, that then Mr.Stephenson might hire carriages, and bring the goods afterus. Pursuant to this consultation, we are now with hisMajesty, twenty coss from the city : we are preparing ourpetitionsChafe.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 19petitions to be delivered. God send they may meet withthe desired success.We have, from time to time on the way, and sinceour arrival there, desired sufficient supplies of money toenable us to go on with our business. It is impossible forus now to enlarge more on that head, but that it is certain,if we are not supplied, we shall be in no ways able to effectany thing at this court ; all that we can possibly do is toadvise your Honour, &c. of our pressing necessities. Wewere in hopes to supply our honourable masters with alarge sum from the private goods with us, but the King'sleaving the city, no merchant is to be had for them, sohitherto that method has been impracticable. — Twenty Cossfrom Ddhi, ^h August 1715.The Mogul had suffered under a long illness. Mr.Hamilton, an English physician, had attended him, whichcreated a strong feeling against us in the minds of thenatives. Mr. Hamilton advises that his constitution is somanifestly mended, that he hopes in a few days to effect aperfect cure. This affair has made no little noise in thiscourt, and although the Hinges doctors have made a greatstir, to edge Mr. Hamilton out, yet by the particularinfluence of his Majesty's favour, and our patrons assistance,thanks be to God, all has been carried on very even, andhis Majesty having made use of many and particularlyfavourable expressions to Coja Surpaud and Mr. Hamiltoncm this occasion, has given us such pleasing hopes thatmay fully recompense the delay that has been made hitherto.—2>«l&t,JViw. 8,1715.We wrote you the welcome news of the King's recovery.As a clear demonstration to the world he washed himselfthe 2Sd, and accordingly received the congratulations ofthe whole court. As a reward for Mr. Hamilton's carec 2 and20 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.and success, the King was pleased the Sots to give him inpublic, viz. a vest, a culgee set with precious stones, twodiamond rings, an elephant, horse, and 5,000 rupees,besides ordering, at the same time, all his small instrumentsto be made in gold, viz. gold buttons for coat, waistcoat,and breeches, set with jewels : the same day Coja Surpaudreceived an elephant and vest as a reward for his attendanceon this occasion. Monsieur Mar was to have received areward the same day with Mr. Hamilton ; but consideringit was not for the credit of our nation to have any onejoined with him, especially since he had no hand in thebusiness, we got his reward deferred till three days afterwards,when he had a vest, elephant, and 1,000 rupees; afavour purely owing to his Majesty'^s generosity, and becausehe was his servant.We have esteemed this a particular happiness, andhope it will prove ominous to the success of our affairs, itbeing the only thing that detained us hitherto from deliveringour general petition ; so pursuant to the orders we receivedfrom Caundora, the King's recovery was succeeded by thegiving in the remainder of our present (reserving a smallpart only till the ceremony of his marriage should be over),and then delivered our petition to Caundora, by his meansto be introduced to his Majesty. Synd Syllabus Caun,who has all along managed our affairs under Caundora,being at that instant and some time before much indisposed,we were obliged to carry it ourselves, without taking careto have his recommendation annexed. Since the delivery,Coja Surpaud has been frequently with Caundora, toremind him of introducing it to his Majesty, but hasalways been informed no business can go forward till thesolemnization of the King's wedding is over, when he haspromised a speedy despatch. All offices have been shut upforChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 2 1for some days, and all business in the kingdom must naturallysubside to this approaching ceremony ; so that wecannot repine at 1the delay. — Delhi, 1th Dec. 1715.A phirmaund, or royal grant, having been bekoauissued conferring additional privileges upon the ''^*^-Company, Calcutta was declared an independentpresidency, accountable only to the Directors athome.Jaffier Khan was at this time governor ofBengal, and subsequently obtained a grant ofBabar and Orissa. His conduct towards theEnglish was tyrannical and extortionate. Havingmanifested an indisposition to obey the ordersfrom the Mogul for the grants to the Company,the members of the embassy on their return toCossimbusar, addressed the Council at Calcuttain the following terms :We are entirely of your opinion that you ought not toacquiesce in Jafier Casu's refusing obedience to the Kingroyal orders, nor sit quiet under his disobedience of them :we never entertained such imaginations, but rather that heought to be compelled to it by such means as your Honour,&c. think best.You are sensible that no black servant in the countrydare speak with that peremptoriness to so great a man asAfter Can, as sometimes the nature of our affairs require,cm which consideration we ourselves went in person to him,and showed him the phirmaund, and demanded the free useof the mint as before advised. Mr. Feare disputed thepoint himself with Jafier Can in the Hindostan language,face to face, Ceram Can Dean and others beingpresent,22 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. I.present, with ten or a dozen Munsubdars and severalof the Mutsuddies, in a public court, who were all eyeand ear witnesses to the smart and warm replies Mr.Feare at last made him: the whole Durbar was surprised,and several whispered to Coja Ddaun with a seemingfear in what the dispute might end. Jaffer Canremained silent for some time, and then ordered beetle to bebrought, and despatched us with a few sweetening words,that we would rest satisfied he should not be our enemy,but see what was to he done, and the like, which is a customarycajole he uses to get rid of company he don't like, aswas plain he did not ours, for he never had so much said tohis face since he has been a Dean or Subah, nor does heusually give any one such an opportunity. Nothing that wasnecessary to be said or done remained, but giving the duhoy,which experience has taught us is of no value with JafferCan, who suffers nothing to be sent to court withoutbeing read and approved by him : those officers dare as weleat fire, as send anything unknown to him.Our Vacqueel, though an elderly man, and possibly notso brisk as some others, yet he has the character of theboldest Vacqueel in this Durbar; he once before did give theduhoy, and shall do it again, if your Honour, &c. please togive orders; but we crave leave to offer some reasons wehave against doing it at this juncture. — Coaatmbuxar^ \6thAugust 1717.We have wrote you already this day with our accounts,since which our broker (whom the Nabob^smutsuddy sentfor last night) is returned from the Durbar, and acquaintsus, that Dupnaran (whom we have lately obliged to be ourfriend) took him home to his house, and told him thephirmaund and personnes, which we formerly shewed theNabob, were then sent up to the King. If you have gotanother copy of them, he said, bring them to me. I havetalkedChap. I.J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 23talked to the Nabob (who is violently angry with you), butgive my service to your master, and tell him I have hopesto adjust your affairs, and will, if possibly it lies in mypower : not that I am sure of it, for the Nabob is a vileman, but let me have a copy of your grants, and Til trywhat is to be done.— Co9«if»6t£«ar, Nov. 21, 1717.The Directors wrote to the Bengal Presidency letter toonthe importance of attending to the revenues, sdFcSfjTio.and deprecated any extension of the Company'spossessions.Para. 6S. We come now to take notice of that whichwe must always have a due regard to, mz. the articles ofour revenue. We need not repeat the reasons; we haveoften mentioned them. The assurances you have given us,that you will, and still do, continue to enlarge our revenuesall you possibly can without oppression, and faithfullypromise your utmost endeavours, as well to augment themas diminish the expenses, excepting that of the military,which you would not lessen, are so many acceptable instancesof your care and zeal for our service. We can desire nomore, but to see these promising blossoms ripening intofruit. We would not have them enlarged by oppressingany, the poorest person ; and allow the reason you give forcontinuing your military, that it is the best argument youcan use for supporting our privileges and the trade, to bevery substantial ; the experience at Cossimbuzar, and forbringing down your goods, are pregnant instances of it,among many others.64. "Notwithstanding the doubts we had, whether itwould be our interest to have the thirty-eight towns, ifgranted, or whether they might not engage us in quarrelswith the Moors, if hereafter they should be resolved totake them away, when they found them to flourish, ofwhich24 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. I.Letter to which we wrote you to have your opinion ; we find bydd F^b^l9. P''"^' ^' y^^ ^y ^^^ would be of great advantage to usto have them. This we have discoursed Mr. Franklinupon, and of the necessary charge of soldiers to protectthem from, or keep off, insults ; and having well weighedthe expected profit on one side, and the trouble that onetime or other may be occasioned thereby on the other, wethink it best for us to have only so many of them (whenyou can purchase them) as lie contiguous to our threetowns above and below them, and those on the other sideof the river, within about the same extent of ground as thetowns when purchased reach on your side; and we areinclined only to have such of them as lie on or within abouttwo miles of the bank of the river, because if there shouldever be a necessity of defending them from the inroads ofsome neighbouring petty governor, our soldiers may notbe harassed by long marches to defend our bounds. Wesuppose, too, that when Jaffer Can, or any othergovernor, finds you desire only part of what you mightinsist on, he or they may be the easier to give their consent,and not pick future quarrels ; for as our business is irateit is not political for us to be encumbered with muchterritory. Mr. Franklin assures us, the ground on theother side of you would be of great service to us forrepairing our ships, because the river is not rapid there,and as we have said about the dock, that we should findbenefit if we could have a good one. We might also add,that if ever we should be forced to the necessity of it, oursettlement there would enable us to command the river ;but this is not to be so much as publicly hinted at, lestit alarm the government.The Court of Directors again, whilst theylooked to the confirmation of the phirmaunds,expressedChap. I.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 25expressed their indisposition to territorial acquisitions.Para. 57. By the letters and consultations before us, it General Setterappears that King Mahmud Shaw is likely to sit easy on 16 Feb. 1721.his throne, and not be troubled with competitors, orembarrassed by his officers, since the syads are cut off.That thereupon you cannot doubt that the subahshipofBengal will be soon settled, and Walter Can know whetherhe shall be continued or removed, and will bribe highto keep his post. That when you know who is subah, youwill endeavour to get possession of the phirmaund grants,being unwilling to launch out monies at uncertainties, as inall likelihood it would be during the unsettled posture ofaffairs in the empire, wherein we think you judged rightly,that Hyderr Cooly Caun, who is a great friend to theEnglish, is, by report, one of the king's greatest favourites :he plainly shewed himself so while subah at Surat, for itwas he who ordered us to be put into possession of thephirmaund privileges there. By all this we hope you willlay hold of the present opportunity to get the grantsconfirmed. First, that of the mint ; then such of thetowns as you shall judge proper, in pursuance of what wehave wrote you, and according to the paragraphs which youpromise to have regard unto. Remember , we are not fondof much territory f especially if it lies at a distance from you,or is not pretty near the water-side, nor indeed of any,unless you have a moral assurance it will contribute, directlyor in consequence, to our real benefit.The Company's representatives abroad had, atthis early period, directed their attention to theformation of roads, &c.Para. 76. The reasons given for making the new roads General Letteron the S.S.W. and E. to W. sides of your towns, and the i6%?b"i72i.benefit26 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chafe.General Letter benefit expected and arising thereby, as well to see throughle^Feb'^L y^^^ bounds into the country of the neighbouring Zemindar,who attacked you some time before, as to facilitate themarch of your soldiers when necessary to support yourutmost outwards, and prevent private robberies in the nightfrom rogues abroad, and that thereby the wind hath a freepassage into the town, and likely to contribute to its healthiness,carry their own commendations with them ; and wemust add, we look on it as a piece of good management inyou to lay hold of a fitting opportunity, to persuade yourinhabitants to agree to your making them, and they bearthe charge.The desire of the Directors was conveyed tothe Council in Bengal, that the young servantsshould be urged and encouraged to acquire aknowledge of the native languages.^Z^B^^^l^"^ Para. 82. We observe your want of writers. We sent16 Feb. 1721. you a sufficient supply the last season. Encourage themall to learn the country languages, which are sooner attainedby youth than men grown, because the memory is thenmore fitted to keep what they learn, and their tongues moreready and pliable to give the true accent in pronunciation.Besides, some men are so proud, they think it is like sendingthem again to school when they are put upon learning alanguage. Enquire at some set times what proficiency theyouths make therein, and awaken their ambition by representingto them, they will be the better qualified for achiefship in time, or to be employed at the aurungs.General Letter Para. BB. The accounts you give us of being pretty14 Feb. 1782. easy with the country government, notwithstanding the unsettledcondition of the country, is acceptable, and muchmore your proceedings in clearing Contoo, the Cossimbuzarbroker.Chap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 27broker, when seized by the Nabob, and your boats when General Letterstopped at the several chokes. These are so many new i4Feb"m2.proofs of the necessity of putting on a face of power andresolution, as we have often mentioned, to recover our privilegeswhen openly infringed, and softer methods andapplications for redress prove ineffectual, and that even thecountry government are afraid when you give them theduhoy in a prudent manner, and on well-grounded occasion.Yearly experience shews you they are always watching foropportunities to get money out of you, as in the disputeof your making the road for the benefit of your towns.Let it be your constant care (as hitherto by what appearsit has been), to give them no just handles if possible. Weneed not add (because it hath been often recommended toyou), that you continue to keep fair with the Highlygovernment, which, with a little prudence, may be done ata cheap rate, even your usual piscoshes. Be equally carefulto keep up a good understanding with the Nabob, so asgood words and a respectful behaviour, without paying toodear for it, will contribute. Is there no likelihood of contractinga friendship with one or more of his favourites, tomake your way to, sand the obtaining your requests from,him more easy ? Such things have been practised formerly,and particularly by President Eyes, who, by his intimacywith MirzaMudusfer, first obtained the grant of your towns.The effects resulting from the access of licensedand unlicensed parties into the interior, werenoticed from home.Para. 63. We understand some of the persons we have General Letterpermitted to reside free merchants in India, have suggested i4Feb"n22.that, by virtue of the license contained in their covenantsunder our common seal, they have an equal liberty withourselves to trade where and how they please : and thinkthemselves28 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.General Letter themselves no way accountable for mal-administration, or toli^F^°n^ ^ questioned by our Presidents and Councils (who are ourrepresentatives) when chargeable therewith. Give publicnotice to all with you, that if they persist in that opinion,they will find themselves mistaken, and that by a clause intheir covenants they are obliged to return for England wheneverwe shall see just cause. That you have our authorityto send them accordingly, whenever you find them actingcontrary to our general interest, or that of the English tradein India. As to such as are not under covenants, and thereforepresume they are no way accountable for their behaviourtowards us or the interest aforesaid ; do you take care to letthem know, that by the laws, no subject of his Majesty canstay in India without our leave, and therefore, as they arethere only during good behaviour, so you will let them continueno longer than they deserve it.64. Though we have laid down these rules on such generalterms, yet we add, that we will not have the Presidentand Council put them in practice so far as to send any toEngland, unless where the accusation is full, and as wellproved as the case can admit of, and the fault of a notoriousnature ; such as assisting our enemies or openly strikingat ofwr privileges or refusing to comply with the rules by usprescribed for the good government of our settlementswhere such person or persons shall be ; and this not byinferences only or strained constructions or interpretertons.To check extravagance, and to enforce obedienceto orders, the Directors wrote.Letter to Para. 19* We find an entry in your consultation of a7J^"?725 ^^^^ *"^ P*^** ^f horses bought for the President, Mr.Deane, charged to us as costing Rupees eleven hundred.We gave no order or leave for it, and thereby, we herebydirectChare] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 29direct that the money be repaid into our cash out of hiseffects, and that nothing of this nature be again introduced:if our servants will have such superfluities, let them payfor them.The state of the Mogul affairs led the Court tocaution the Council to be fully alive to the passingevents in which the Company's interests might becomeinvolved.The battle you mentioned to be fought by the Vizier, Letter towherein he was successful against the King's army, and 1 Dec 1735.killed the general Mombarras Can, his sons, and severalOmrahs, does in our opinion show that affairs in the Mogulsdominions are in the utmost confusion, and tend towardssome extraordinary crisis. Our advices from Fort St. Greorgesay, that the said Vizier, Chickens Can, was in the Metch-lepatam country, and from thence intended to march toBengal to enlarge his power. Time only must discover theevent of these troubles : in the interim keep a watchful eyeto preserve yourselves from danger, and keep up yourfriendship with the Highly government, which may be themore necessary in this critical juncture.The Directors announced to the governmentthat they had obtained his Majesty's RoyalCharter for a Mayor's Court at Calcutta.To enable us by virtue thereof to have our affairs in all Letter tothose places, and within the districts therein-mentioned, as 17 FeM726.also in all the subordinate factories in those presidencies,managed with greater authority than ever hitherto, weapplied to get the management of the civil affairs, asnear as we could, agreeable to the practice and methodsof the Mayor's Court at Fort St. George, which have continuedfor many years, as you will see in the said charter,of30 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.Letter to of which we send you, by the * Bridgewater,' an exemplifyFeb! ^26. fixation under the great seal of this kingdom.Various books of instruction for the proceedingsof the new court, were transmitted with thedespatch.18. If you apply heartily, as we earnestly recommendto you to endeavour, you will bring the Mayor's Court,though new with you at present, into use and good likingof all the people, for doubtless there doth arise among youat times some disputes in the matters of meum and tuunijand if you do exercise the other powers with prudence andjustice : and we must tell you it is greatly incumbent onyou so to do, for the very intimations of kings are commands,and if not obeyed, or their grants not thankfullyaccepted and made use of as they ought, may bring you aswell as us into a premunire.15. Be you particularly careful on your part, and let themayor and aldermen know that we also earnestly recommendto them, to check the first beginnings of any oppressions,exactions, misbehaviour towards any, or the least foul practiceof the attomies and other officers of the court ; keepthem all within due bounds of decorum, and discountenanceall attempts of prolonging of suits. In the instructions arecertain distances of times between one part of the processesand what next is to follow ; let the court curtail them asmuch as equitable may be, for justice may be rendered sourby delaying : the most expeditious it can be made in reasonis thereby the better.Jaffier Khan the Nabob of Bengal, died in 1725,and was succeeded by Sujah Khan, his son-in-law,who removed to Moorshedabad, accompanied bytwo omrahs, one of whom was Ally Verdy Khan.TheCiiAF. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 31The Court adverted to the event in the followingterms : —We find you seem to lament the death of your old Letter toNabob Jafier Can, and wish that he may be succeeded by 21 Feb. 1728.his son-in-law Sujah Can, who you say had on manyoccasions showed the English his friendship and favour.Wherefore, we are very glad to find by your's of the 28thof January, that he had been appointed and confirmed inthat high station, hoping that he will continue us hisfriendship and favour : so that we flatter ourselves that ouraffairs, under your care, will not be any ways prejudiced bythis change in your government.In 1729, Ally Verdy Khan was appointedgovernor of Bahar, and ultimately, through intrigueand treachery, proclaimed Nabob of Bengal,Bahar, and Orissa.The following orders to Bengal, explain the originof the appointment of a Council of nine Members,which continued until Parliament enteredupon an inquiry into the affairs of the Company.Para. 11. The badness of the goods sent us for two Letter toyears past, having not only raised a general clamour among 3 i>^.^31.the buyers, but also great uneasiness in the Proprietors ofthe Company's stock, and we being convinced that therehas been a culpable neglect in the management of ouraffairs by the unequal torment of the goods, deficiencies intheir lengths and breadths, and excessive high prices,together with the vast quantities of fine undeniable articlessent us, contrary to our orders, and having kept backgreat quantities of goods we wanted and ordered, andhave been employed for their private trade ; by the firstwe are great sufferers, and by the last we are deprived ofgreat32 RIS£ AND PROGRESS OF THE [Crap. I.Letter to great profits that we might naturally have expected, those3Dec?n31. ff^^ being greatly in demand; for these reasons, and tostrike terror to those that succeed, we have thought fit todismiss from our service six members. This extraordinarystep we have been obliged to take, in order to remedythese and any such like evils, and to clear our reputationsfrom the censure the world would otherwise throw upon us,that we connived at the bad actions of our servants, herebyconvincing mankind that we are not biassed with favour oraffection to any particular person whatsoever.12. By these ships we have sent a commission underour seal, constituting and appointing John Backhouse,Esq. to be President, with eight other members, for themanagement of all our affairs at Calcutta, and the factoriessubordinate thereto, hereby directing the military, and allunder our protection, to pay all due respect to such ordersas you shall think fit to make for our advantage or thebenefit of the place.IS. We persuade ourselves that you, the now Presidentand Council, having such an example of our just resentmentset before you, will, in your several stations, discharge thegreat trust reposed in you, by studying to advance theCompany^s interest by all possible means ; and as we areinformed that great mischiefs happen to our interest, aswell as to your own destruction, by the private trade ofIndia, as it is at present, and has for some years past beencarried on, to a much greater degree than it should havebeen, we reserve ourselves to give our opinion upon thathead by the latter ships.The Court then urge upon the Council theimportance of setting an example of economy.17. Among the rest of complaints from your place,is none of the least, the extravagant way of living, ofwhichChapel;] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 33which we shall enlarge more in our next letters ; at Letter tupresent we only recommend it very seriously to our new 3 e^JJ*^3|president, that he shews a good example of frugality, bykeying a decent retinue such as formerly was practised,for the dignity of his station ; and not fall into that fopperyof having a set of musick at his table, and a coach and six,with guards and running footmen, as we are informed isnow practised, not only by the president, but some ofinferior rank, and that he recommends the same to all thosethat shall be in lower stations, in order to check thisluxury.The pirate forces on the Malabar coast had seriouslyaffected the interests of the Company — thesuccessful efforts made by their servants to suppressAngria's power were urged as a ground forseeking favour at the hands of the Nabob, andeconomy was again pressed upon their attention.Par. 40. You are, no doubt, well apprized of the great charge Letter towe are, and have been at for a series of years, in order to 3/ janfn^kdepress and keep under the power of Angria's family uponthe Malabar coast, more especially of late, to prevent theirseizing upon the Scudded's territories, which if accomplished,would make them formidable to the highest degree to thewhole trade of India, both Moors and Europeans : this hasbeen attended with such desirable success, that their fleetshave been either blocked up in harbour, or hindered fromcommitting any considerable depredations, and our servantsat Fort St. George inform us, that the courtiers about theMogul have a very grateful sense of these our services tothe common good, and therefore, as you have frequentsquabbles with the Nabob at Muxadavad, and other greatmen about you, we are apt to think that, if proper measureswere taken by your vaequeel at court, an order might b^VOL. I. •* obtainedRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chat. I.Letter toBengal,31 Jan. 1734^Letter toBengal,23 Jan. 1735.Letter toBengal,12 Dec. 1735.obtained commanding the Nabob to use us better, and in amore friendly manner upon that account.41. We are highly pleased that the extravagant way ofliving which had obtained such deep rooting among you, isentirely laid aside. Whenever such a practice prevails in anyof our servants, we shall always suspect that we are thepaymasters in some shape or other, and it seldom fails ofbringing them to penury and want; we must, therefore,both for your sakes and our own, earnestly recommendfrugality as a cardinal virtue, and by a due regard to thesaid advice, we do not doubt but the diet and other allowancesfrom us will be amply sufficient to defray all necessaryexpenses, as Bengal is not only the cheapest part ofIndia to live in, but perhaps the most plentiful country inthe whole world.The Court desired to secure the people fromoppression, and they pointed out the necessity ofthe Council watching the growing influence of theFrench.65. Whenever encroachments are made by farmers orrenters, and the poor inhabitants are oppressed by them,contrary to the tenor of their coles, all such unwarrantableproceedings must be nipt in the bud. It plainly appears fromthe fifty-ninth paragraph, that they watch all opportunitiesto extend their power beyond legal bounds, and thereforeyou must have a constant eye over them, and whenever anyjust complaints are made against them by the partiesaggrieved, be sure to see justice done them, and by takingvigorous measures immediately, thereupon prevent any suchfoul practices being repeated.Now the French are settled at Patna, our chief andcouncil must double their diligence, and keep all theAssails they can true to our interest, and advance such ofthemChaps.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 35them as comply with their contracts sufficient sums of Letter tomoney to carry on their business, being cautious to make 12 B^^iss.as few bad debts as possible. We should esteem it anagreeable piece of service, if a yearns stock of pere beforehandlay always at Calcutta, and as such recommend it toyou, to use your utmost endeavours to accomplish it, providedit can be done without advancing the price, whichwhen obtained will answer very valuable purposes.In order to enforce a system of economy in allbranches of their establishment, the Directorsprescribed the form of an oath to be taken bytheir servants, binding them to abstain from allpecuniary dealings with the natives whilst theyheld an official station.Para. 17. For want of due regard to our orders, we have Letter toBengal,suffered many evils and much damage, most part of our 8 Feb. 1737.servants, as we have reason to believe, being fallen intoa dependence upon the black merchants and sheriffs withwhom our business is transacted, and therefore we order,that in the room of the present oath of fidelity, the followingoath shall be taken by all who continue in, or shall beadmitted as chief and of council at Calcutta, or any ofthe subordinate factories, and that none but such as do takethe said oath shall be deemed, either then or in future, qualifted to act in such stations in our service.I ^fl ^Or^j ido swear, that I will be true and faithfulto the United Company of Merchants of England tradingto the East Indies, and will duly and faithfully executeand discharge the trust reposed in me to the utmost of myskill and power, and that I am not now indebted to, norwill run in debt to or borrow of, directly or indirectly, allor any of the merchants, sheriffs, or other persons withwhom the said Company now hath made or may make anyV 2 contract,RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chas. I.Lettprto contract) nor of any other merchants, sheriffs, or other per-8 ivuMTir. 9onSf by their being security for me, either jointly or separately,above the sum of four thousand rupees in the whole,during my being in this council ; — So help me God.18. And in case at any time any one is found to beguilty of the breach of this oath, you are hereby directed toexpel him immediately from our service.The inhabitants having suffered from the effectsof a severe storm, the government came forwardto their relief, and a scarcity having arisen inBengal in the following year, the Directors approvedand sanctioned the measures adoptedby the government for alleviating the distresson both occasions.We approve of your relieving the inhabitants, on theirsuffering by the storm the loss of their dwellings and greatpart of their substance, and in forbearing to collect therevenues of the poor people in the town for some time.Letter to Para. 61. You did well in prohibiting the exportation of21 March] 739. rice on the scarcity; the welfare of the place, on all suchmelancholy occasions, must be first and principally regarded.62. We cannot but acquiesce, on so general a calamity,in your taking off the duty on all rice brought into thetown ; and approve of buying a parcel with our money, todeliver out in small parcels at the bazar rate.At this period Nizam-ul-Mulk, the soubahdarof the Deccan, became jealous of the Nabob AllyVerdy's increasing power in Bengal, and instigatedthe Mahrattass to demand the cloudy* or tribute,grantedride p'lge 8.Letter to13 Dec. 1738.Chap. I.] British POWER IN INDIA. 37granted them by the Mogul. They accordingly bengal.advanced in the two divisions of Poonahh and Berarto Burdwan, under the command of Bajee Rowand Ragojee Boonslah. The scourge occasionedby the irruption was dreadful. Commerce was ata stand throughout the provinces ; the poor affrightednatives fled in terror from their looms andtheir fields to the woods, where they either perishedfrom hunger, or fell an easy prey to the wild beastswith which the forests abounded. The inhabitantsof Calcutta, dreading a repetition of the calamities,obtained permission to dig a ditch round the city,to the extent of seven miles (the Company'sbounds), which was called the Mahratta Ditch.Ally Verdy succeeded, the following year, inobliging the Mahrattass to make a precipitateretreat : upon which occasion he was confirmedby the Mogul soubahdar of Bengal, Bahar, andOrissa, on condition of his remitting annually toDelhi a certain tribute.The measures taken by the Council to guardagainst the effects of a repetition of the Mahrattainvasion were sanctioned by the Directors.We entirely approve of the necessary precautions taken Letter toonthe Morattas^ invasion to prevent a surprise, by hiring 21 Maiciil7+3.a number of Lascars, forming the inhabitants into a militia,surveying the town, fortifications, guns, purchasing somesmall arms and the Uke ; the expense upon such an urgentoccasion we cheerfully acquiesce in, relying upon yourcare and frugality in disbursing our money on everyarticle.Para. 45.38 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. I.Letter to Para. 45. As the province is liable to the Morattas^7 May n46. incursions, we would have such additions made to our fortificationsas you upon the spot shall deem requisite for thesecurity of the settlements, putting us to no further expenseherein than is necessary.Among the various matters that arose in thecourse of the Company's government vv^as a questionas to what oaths should be administered toHeathens, or Indians, within their respectivejurisdictions. The Directors wrote to the governmentin Bengal :^en«r ^^T^' 26. Having from time to time consulted the most9 March 1747. eminent counsel upon the subject, we send you extracts fromthe opinions which have been already taken, and hope theywill be sufficient for your government.26. Mr. Browne, the Company^s standing counsel, in anopinion of his, says : —If the witness voluntarily takes the oath of his countryfrom the hands of a Brain, or in the pagodas, in orderto give a sanction to his testimony, before he comes to attesta fact, all that you can do is to afford a greater or lessshare of credit to his evidence, according to the solemnityand the nature of the oath taken, and the degree of reverencein which it is held by the Indians ; and from thismeasure, and the probability of fact testified, the Courtmust form a judgment upon the whole case according totheir real belief of the witness""Sir Dudley Rider, attorney-general, Sir John Strange,late solicitor-general, and Mr. Browne, in a joint opinion,say : —We think it safest for the Court to admit the evidenceof Heathen witnesses in such cases as have been usual sincetheChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 39the charter, and upon such oaths as are commonly taken by Leur tothem in case of evidence, according to their respective g^^^ehlW.religions ; but to be particularly careful not to oblige themto take such oaths as their customs render it infamous forthem to take''The same gentlemen, in answer to another question,say: —** We are of opinion the Court cannot compel the takingof the Pagoda oath, and if the Court, upon the party'srefusal to take, or should, without entering into the meritsof the cause, make a decree against the party, we apprehendit would be error, and a foundation for an appeal ; and ifthe Mayor's Court should endeavour by censure to compelthe party to take it, it will be a just ground of complaintagainst the Court as a misbehaviour in their ofSce."And the present Attorney and Solicitor-general, Mr.Browne and Mr. Browning, in a joint opinion, say : —If the Mayor's Court should insist on an Indian'sputting in his answer, or being sworn as a witness in amanner inconsistent . with the religion of his caste, it willbe proper to bring that matter before the Governor andCouncil by appeal."27. We expect these opinions will have that weight withthe Mayor's Court to induce them to accept the answersand evidence of the Gentooss, and other natives of India,upon such oaths as are commonly taken by them, and notto insist upon such as their customs render it infamous forthem to take.The Directors, in their instructions to their pre Madras.silence of Madras, cautioned the Council toavoid being involved in the troubles that hadarisen amongst the native powers on the Coast.They^:0 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.tMadras They Unwillingly consented to incur the heavycharges which the repair of the fortifications hadrendered necessary, they pressed the observanceof all possible economy, and desired that everyencouragement should be given to the nativepopulation to settle around the Company's propertyby just and humane government.Letter to Fort The troubles io the country round about you give butl^Dec^l*^ a dull prospect. Let it be your care to keep them as faroff yourselves as you can ; to give no occasion, as far as possiblyto be avoided, for quarrelling with you, and to be constantlyon your guard.50. The making no further present to the Nabob, andordering our people at Vizagapatam not to give any th ngwhen a large present is demanded, are both satisfactory.Every sum parted with is only a temptation to them toexpect and demand a greater, and ought never to be doneunless on an absolute necessity to prevent a worse mischief.62. For the reasons by you given, we permit you to rebuildyour silver Mint, taking care it be done substantially, andmade as useful as you can, but without the charge of ornaments; let frugality be used in the whole. The Powder-housewe also consent co be rebuilt, made useful and substantial.The East Curtain at Fort St. David's, and the coveringof the Garden-house and the Cudalore Factory, we shallallow of, depending on Mr. Pietas inspection, that both bedone with frugality and substantially performed. It is aprodigious sum our buildings there and at Fort St. Greorgehave cost us, so that every motion for laying out more soundsharsh.68. When we say such or such an article of expense shallnot exceed the sum limited by us, we do not thereby meanthat we are content it should be so much, as by the lettersbeforeChap. L] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 41before us you seem to apprehend when you refer to the LeuertoFortmonths you compared, but our general aim thereby is, that | Dec?17^.on no pretence it be higher, though as much lower as possible.59. But what is of the last importance to us is, that thebounds be filled with useful inhabitants, and the only wayto get and keep them is by a steady and constant, just andhumane government, doing right to every one, and not sufferingthe voice of oppression to be heard, or so much aswhispered in the streets. We hope Mr. Pitt has beencareful, and will continue and persevere therein, which willbe for his honour and our advantage. The increase of theinhabitants and of the revenues, and the lessening of theannual expense, will be to us the most convincing argumentsof his good management, especially if thereto be added (aswe expect) the due care of the investments.The Directors, in transmitting the charter forthe Mayor's Court, describe its constitution, andrecommended to that court —To have always as many of their members there in all Letter to Fortjudgments to be given by them as possible, not only for n^peM*^.the greater solemnity, but also for the more thorough siftingall matters that shall come before them ; to prevent, as far aspossible, the least mistake or error in the sentence given, asremembering they do therein act in the place of Godtowards the people ; and, according to the Scripture expression,*^ he that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in thefear of God''The financial difficulties of the Company are Letter to Fort11 1 « I 11 St. George,adverted to as the reason why they could not con e Feb. 1732.sent to lower the duties on the trade, and theCouncil were desired to take measures for inducingthe native weavers to settle at Madras.The42 RISE AND Progress OF THE LCiMr. I.The Court also expressed their satisfaction atthe measures taken by the President and Councilto give relief during the famine on the coast.Letter to Fort We entirely approve of your laying in a stock of rice,25 Oct. 1738. by making a large purchase with twenty-one thousand pagodasof our money, and are highly pleased that it wassuch an eminent relief to the inhabitants, as is set forth inboth your letters. You may be assured that our being nogainers thereby, in such a calamitous time, is by no meansdispleasing to us. A watchful eye was necessary that thosewho delivered it out did not charge more than the primecost. We hope a due care was taken in this importantrespect, although we don't find, after the first purchase wasmade in September, the rate fixed by any order of consultation,which we must say had been the regular method toprevent any of our servants, or black people in the warehouse,being knaves in grain as it is wittily expressed inyour letter.The Court desired full information regardingtheir European rivals, the French.Letter to Fort The most particular intelligence procurable concerning30 bec?*lTO7. those powerful competitors, the French, and their commerce,must annually be communicated to us, inserting the numberof ships, tonnage, imports and exports, with the situationof their affairs, and our other rivals in trade upon the coastof Coromandel.The incursions of the Mahrattass having beenseverely felt, the Court observed that,Letter to Fort The Mahrattass invading, overrunning, and plundering20 Jan. 1^1. the Coromandel coast, give us a most sensible and deepconcern, more especially as they came within our boundsand sent you a most insulting message, tacked to anenormousChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 43enormous and unheard-of demand, which you did well to Letter to Fortanswer from the mouths of our cannon, and thereupon to 20^an!°mi.put yourselves in the most defensible posture ; we hope thatlong before now the coast is well rid of them, and that thecountry powers have been roused to defend their subjectsproperty against all such formidable enemies in future;however that may be, you must by no means becometributary to, or suffer contributions to be levied upon us,either by the Moors or Mahrattass.The saaie principles guided the Directors in Bombay.their instructions to the presidency of Bombay.Peace with the Mahrattass — preparations for defensiveand not offensive measures — economy in therepair of fortifications, and limitation in the marineestablishment.Para.80. We shall now subjoin our sentiments on the con J-«"er toBombay,duct and management of our affairs at Bombay; after 16 Feb. 1741.hearing all persons who could give us any information ofthat presidency, or the state of affairs under it.82. You will see how much we approve of your measuresin making peace with the Mahrattass, at the same time weperceive if it had not been for our express orders, you wouldnot have judged so well for our interests, by being overcomewith your false fears.83. This may intimate to you how acceptable it wouldhave been to us, had you pursued the same measures withrespect to all other Indian powers.85. We must also remark here our dissatisfaction at youremploying none of our Council in the important transactionswith the Mahrattass and others, for notwithstandingany pretended superior capacities in those you did employ,we do not reckon military men proper judges of theseaffairs. But rather that they have a strong bias in theirmindsi44 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.1741. minds by warlike notions which incline them to measuresas are quite contrary to the true interest of a TradingSociety, and not only so, but also to propagate and impressothers with notions adapted to promote such ends : fromwhence is it else possible, that such principles should springas you are possessed of, particularly that all our credit isgone, because we don't make that figure upon the coast asmay make all people afraid of us, if they meddle with any,though they do not belong to us.86. So far indeed we will grant that it is prudent tosuspect them, and to be upon your guard, but there is agreat deal of difference in point of charges, betwixt a defensiveand offensive state of war, which latter must alwaysbe the case while we live in open war ; besides thecontinuing in such a state, compels our enemies to increasetheir forces, and makes them by degrees to become formidable.And what is the end of all ? why, we have a great dealto lose, and they have nothing of any value that you cantake from them.87. We are sensible how much you have been out in yourcalculate of the charge you are putting us to. This mattershould have been entered upon with more caution andjudgment, for although we are very willing to be at thecharge of fortifying all our settlements in order to secureboth ours and the inhabitants' property living under ourprotection, yet this should be undertaken in a reasonableand practicable manner. Whether your works are such wearetold there is some reason to doubt.88. In the third resolution you will see that we are utterlyaverse to the keeping up such a marine force as you require.We are unanimously of opinion, the force we now allow youis sufficient for your safety and our purpose, which in shortis our own defence, and no farther.TheChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 45The present chapter may be viewed as intro '74^'-doctor to this work. [ It presents little to interestthe general reader, but when connected with theextraordinary fact, that these limited settlementswith a few hundred men are now the principal presidenciesof an empire containing one hundredmillion of native subjects yielding a tribute ofmore than three millions annually to Great British , )possessing an army of 200,000* rank and file, andthat in its acquisition history records the brilliantachievements of our most illustrious soldiersand distinguished statesmen there is scarcely anEnglishman who must not feel desirous of someinformation, as to the progressive steps by whichsuch vast possessions have been obtained. ^ Aknowledge of the facts may also dissipate someof the unfavorable impressions which have beenmore or less imbibed, regarding the East-indiaCompany, whose character has been gathered fromParliamentary documents prepared for a givenpurpose, rather than from a fair and candid statementof events as they arose.A brief reference has been made to theearly history of Hindostan, and to those stateswhich arose on the dismemberment of the Mogulpower. The settlement of the first Europeanson the continent of India ; the incorporation ofthe East-india Company in 1600 ; the establishmentIn 1826, the army consisted of 276,000.46 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.'741. banishment of a rival corporation ; the petitionof the original Company to Parliament againstthe measure, and the ultimate union of both companieshave been adverted to. Extracts havebeen given from the orders and instructions ofthe Court of Directors to their servants at thisearly period of the United Company, in the exactterms in which they were conveyed to India.Although quaintly expressed, they evince soundsense, and a shrewd knowledge of human nature.They repudiate the idea of the Company desiringto acquire territorial possessions : they also manifesta laudable anxiety to foster and protect thenatives ; to infuse a spirit of economy in the publicexpenditure; and that justice should be impartiallyand duly administered.Chap. 11.1 British POWER IN INDIA. / 47CHAPTER II.The East-india Company were now to contendwith their most powerful European rival forpolitical supremacy in India.Having advanced one million at three per cent,for the use of the public in 1744, the exclusivetrade was continued to them until 1780. Withthe exception of their commercial concerns, andthe treaty concluded by their representatives atBombay with the Mahrattass in July 1739,* inorder to preserve their respective rights in issuingpasses, &c., few matters of moment occurreduntil the year 1746, when the effects of the unionbetween France and Spain, which occasioned hostilitiesin Europe, and involved Great Britain, weresoon felt in India. England had suffered so severelyboth by sea and land, that great dissensionswere caused throughout the country; but nosooner did the French attempt to aid the Pretender,whoThis treaty consisted of fourteen articles, and was executedin July 17S9, between Mr. Law, governor of Bombay, onbehalf of the Company, and Bajee Rao^ the first minister of themost serene Sou Rajah. — Vide Treaties and Engagements withthe Native Princes, &c. printed m 1812, p. 477.1746-1755.48 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.who had landed on the western coast of Scotlandin July 1745, (encouraged as they had been by thesupporter; of the civil war,) than all differenceswere forgotten in the united energies of the peopleto support the crown, and oppose the influence ofthe French councils.Hostilities in India commenced between theFrench and English forces on the coast of Coromandel.The former fitted out an expedition atMadras cap Pondicherry, besieged, and took Madras; an event^'"'"^ that entailed a loss of £180,000 on the Company.The enemy had so superior a fleet that the Companypetitioned the crown to strengthen the Britishnaval force in India. In announcing the result,the Directors wrote :Letter to P&TSL 3. Upon our strenuous application His Majesty'^^"^-47 hath been graciously pleased to send a strong squadron ofmen of war, under the command of the honourable Rear-admiralBoscawen, with these our ships whereon this letteris sent.7. In case Rear Admiral Boscawen, or the commander inchief of His Majesty's forces, should require your assistancein attacking the enemy any where near you, we herebyorder you to give it him to the utmost of your power, andto put under his command what military, marine, or otherforce you can possibly procure or spare consistent with thesafety of your place.The Court animadverted upon the apparent wantof firmness on the part of the Bengal governmentin not supporting the Company's interests againstthose of the French, whose success at MadrashadChap.II.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. • 49had filled the Council at Calcutta with fear for nes.their own safety.Para. 2. It is plain from the apprehension you was under letter to theon the loss of Madras, lest the French should destroy you Fort wiiiUm,next, that you neither thought your own strength, though ^^^ *^* unsupportedat that time by six of His Majesty's ships, northe neutrality cf the ooimtry a prescient security, and youat all times stand so much in awe of the country governmentthat they easily and shamefully raise immense contributionsupon you at the Company's expense, though almost alwaysunder pretence of abuses in carrying on private trade.6.rif you do not prevail upon the Nabob to acquiesce inyour setting about the works and fortifications withoutmolestation, you are to let him know in a proper manner.You have our orders to make Calcutta as secure as you can /against the French, or any other European enemy ; and thatif he obstructs you in following those orders you are forbidto issue any money for trade, and must do the best you cantofulfil them. ) Tell him that you shall be sorry to beobliged to take such measures as may be ruinous to hisrevenues and the trade of the country in general ; and youmay add, the King of England having the protection of theCompany greatly at heart, as they may perceive by thestrong force he hath sent to the East-indies to meet theFrench, His Majesty will support the Company in whateverthey think fit to do for their future security; forthough a peace is now making with France, no one knowshow long it may last, and when war is broke out it is alwaystoo late to make fortifications strong enough to make defenceagainst an enterprising enemy ; as appears from whathappened at Madras, where strong works were erecting, butcould not be half finished before the French attacked andtook the place.VOL. I. K Madras50 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. II.1748. Madras was restored to the Company by theMadre jj.gg^jy ^f ^^ i^ Chapelle; and the Directorsappointed an engineer-general for the purpose ofsuperintending, and where necessary, in constructingfortifications both at Madras and Calcutta.The French, under Dupleix, took part in thecontentions of two rival native chiefs, who respectivelyclaimed the nabobship of the Carnatic.The point in dispute was, whether Mahomed Alishould be acknowledged Nabob. His pretensionswere supported by the English, and opposed bythe French. In order to terminate the hostilitiesin which we had been engaged during a series ofyears, a negotiation between M. Dupleix aodMr. Saunders took place at Fort St. George, in1754; January 1754. The negotiation was broken off,and matters were taken up by the governmentsof the two nations in Europe — Lord Holinessnegotiating for the English, and M. Daveleur onthe part of the French : the Duke of Newcastleand the French ambassador, the Due deMirepoix, sharing in the conference and decisionswhen necessary. The little knowledgepossessed by the parties in Europe, as to Indianaffairs, rendering it utterly impossible for them toadopt any definitive arrangement, M. Godeheu wassent out to supersede M. Dupleix in the governmentof all the French possessions in India, andarrived at Pondicherry in August 1754. On the11th October, a suspension of arms was agreedupon ;Chat. II.] BRITISH POWER IK INDIA. 5 1upon ; and, on the 23d December, a provisional i754.treaty, subject to confirmation in Europe, was Madresigned at Pondicherry. By that treaty, MahomedAli was left Nabob of the Camatic.During the above-mentioned operations Captain(afterwards Lord) Clive first displayed thoseextraordinary talents, which were so successfullyexerted in laying the foundation of ourIndian empire. It is a singular coincidence, thatthe soldier who achieved such conquests, and thehistorian who recorded those achievements, wereboth appointed Writers by the Court of Directors ciive appoint. 1 . T^ ed a Writer.on the same day, vtz. the 16th December 1742 ;Clive for Madras, and Orme for Bengal. Clivereached Madras in 1743. He appears to have hada strong predilection for a military life, for whichhe soon abandoned the civil service. He held therank of ensign under Major Lawrence in 1747.The Court of Directors, in their letter to Madrasof the 4th December 1747, alluding to the captureof that settlement, wrote : " Be sure to encourageEnsign Clive in his martial pursuits, according tohis merit : any improvement he shall make thereinshall be duly regarded by us." Again, on the24th January 1763, adverting to the favourablechange in their affairs on the coast, and to theservices of Major Lawrence, they observed :*' And here it is but justice to express the greatregard we have for the merit of Captain Clive,to whose courage and conduct the late favourableE 2 turn52 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.nd4u turn in affairs has been greatly owing, and he mayMaiming. be assured of our having a just sense of his services."After a series of gallant exploits, amongwhich the siege of Arcot stood most prominent,he returned to England, on account of his health,in October 1753. He received the thanks of theCourt of Directors, with other marks of their approbation.At this period, the Directors pressed moststrongly upon the attention of his Majesty'sministers, the great increase that had taken placein the French power in India. They pointed outthe intelligence contained in their last advices fromIndia, by which it appeared the French Commissionerswere pursuing measures that would inevitablybring the whole of the Company's tradeand their settlements on the coast of Coromandelunder French influence. The Company representedthat they had exerted themselves in sendingout men and military stores, and that theyintended to send a further force and to exertthemselves as far as a trading company could, butthey felt it to be a duty which they owed to thepublic and themselves, to lay the facts before ministers,in order that the same might be madeknown to the King.In March 1755, the Court having appointedColonel Clive a member of the Madras council,he embarked with his family for India on boardthe Streatham. He first reached Bombay, arrivingatChat. II.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 53at the period when the pirate forces of Angria,* nse.which had overpowered many merchant vessels, Bombay,received a severe check by a fleet under CommodoreJames, the commander of the Company's Pitch sub-shipsof war in India. The Council at that presidencywere encouraged to follow up the successof the commodore by attempting a decisive blowagainst Gheria, the principal station of the pirates.A considerable fleet belonging to his Majesty,accompanied by Commodore James with the Company'sships, the troops on board being commandedby Colonel Clive, accordingly stood into the river inFebruary 1766, and burnt the whole of the enemy's i756 7.fleet, compelling the garrison to surrender.By the treaty of the 12th October, which immediatelyfollowed these transactions, f Bancoand various villages were ceded by the Mahrattassto the Company in exchange for Gheria ; it beingagreed that the Dutch should never be permittedto settle in the Mahratta dominions. Variousarrangements were also entered into with sundryRajahs on the Malabar coast, conferring certainprivileges of trade ; and in 1759 a phirmaund wasobtained from the Mogul, granting the governmentof Surat to the Company.In Bengal Seraje-ud-Dowlah had succeeded bengal.bis grandfather. Ally Verdy. He was of a cruel, cneitittofvindictive, and sullen disposition, of profligatehabitsFide^BgeSB. f Tide printed Treaties54 AISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.1756. habits, and entertained strong feelings of dislikeBiKGAt. to the English. It was during his governmentthat the massacre in the Black Hole at Calcuttatook place; one hundred and forty-six persons,including Mr. Howell, the governor of FortWilliam, being incarcerated, in an intenselysultry night in the month of June, in a dungeonnot twenty feet square — of whom not more thantwenty-three came out alive the ensuing morning.Mr. Howell was himself amongst the survivors ;notwithstanding the shock which his constitutionreceived, he returned to England, and lived tothe age of ninety.The Nabob, after that event, having evacuatedCalcutta, a deputation was despatched to Madras,to solicit immediate and effectual succour: itclive lent with reached Fort St. George on the 5th August.* Ato Calcutta?" detachment of nine hundred Europeans, withfifteen hundred sepoys, under the command ofColonel Clive, was immediately despatched toBengal, accompanied by Admiral Watson, with asquadron then fortunately in th roads, consistingof the Kent, sixty*four (the Admiral's) ; theCumberland,Among the troops selected in the first instance, was theregiment commanded by Colonel Aldercom^ a kings officer,who declined serving milder Clive or even to admit of his troopsembarking for Calcutta, although before leaving England in1754, he applied to the Court of Directors for additional pay,when they resolved that his troops should be paid the same asthe Company's troops, the Company paying the difference. —Court Papers, 27tk Judy 1754.CflAF.II.l British POW£R IN INDIA. 55Cumberland, seventy, on enrich Admiral Pocock '756.hoisted his flag ; the Tiger, sixty ; Salisbury, fifty; B"o^^Bridgewater, twenty; and a fire-ship; togetherwith transports for the troops. On the 27thDecember, all the ships and vessels had arrivedat Multa, and the next afternoon anchored tenmiles below the fort at Budge-Budge, whichAdmiral Watson determined to attack the followingmorning. An ambuscade was planned to interceptthe retreat of the garrison. It was directed byColonel Clive in person, and proved the preludeto more serious operations. The Mogul generalhaving marched from Calcutta to aid the garrisonat Budge-Budge, with fifteen hundred horse andtwo thousand foot, an engagement took place.Monica Chund, the native commander, was obligedto retreat with his troops to Hooghly, and fromthence to the Nabob of Moorshedabad. On the2d January 1757, at nine in the morning, the ^''57.Kent and Tiger anchored before the gates of FortWilliam, the batteries of which were silenced byeleven, the fort was shortly evacuated, and adetachment under Captain Coote took possession, Calicutwith loud acclamations ; the British colours beingonce more hoisted on the ramparts. Mr. Drake and ^^torel.the former members of council were, the followingday, solemnly reinstated by Admiral Watson.*TheAt a General Court, the 2l8t December 1757.— « Resolved,Hat the thanks of this General Court be given to Vice AdmiralWatson,56 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. 1 1.1757. The orders given to the Admiral and ColonelBelgae q,j^^ ^Jj^j^ ^j^^y jg£j Madras were, to obtain fullreparation of all injuries, and eventually to attackthe tyrant in his capital. The Council on the8th January, advised theCourtof Directors of therecapture of Calcutta, and, on the 31st, of theciiws powers, success against Hooghly . In the latter despatch,they adverted to the instructions from the Presidentat Fort St. Greorge, directing that Colonel Clive,as commander of all the forces, might be furnishedwith plans for a treaty with the Nabob, havingplaced four lacs of rupees at his command, andempowered him to deviate from the whole orpart of such plans, should he consider them to beinconsistent with the Company's interests.The Council at Calcutta appeared to view withstrong feelings of jealousy the position in whichCouncil It Clive stood towards them by virtue of those^toi^e**" instructions. They remarked, in their letter tothe Directors, that '' the authority the SelectCommittee at Fort St. George have assumed, inappointing Colonel Clive commander-in-chief ofthe forces in Bengal, is so unaccountable, that wecannot avoid taking notice of it as an encroachmentof the rights and trusts invested in us."Notwithstanding the important services Clive hadalreadyWatson and to Vice Admiral Pocock, for their eminent andsignal services to the Company." — 'resolved, That the thanksof this General Court be given to Lieut-Colonel Robert Clivefor his eminent and signal services to this Company."Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 57already rendered, and the probability of the 1767.Nabob's advancing towards Calcutta, the Council b«koal.added, ** we have required of Colonel Clive torecede from the independent powers given himby the Select Committee, but he has refused tosurrender that authority ; we must therefore leaveit to you. Honourable Sirs, to take notice of soinjurious a conduct in your servants on the coast."It had been arranged that Clive should returnto Madras, when the service on which he had beensent was completed. It is fully apparent that he clive explains, , , • , the reason forintended to have acted upon that arrangement, and retaining hishe only departed from it in order to secure the ^"^^^more important interests of the Company in Bengal.He wrote to the Court, on the 1st February,dated in camp near Calcutta, of the measureswhich he had adopted for placing the presidencyin a proper state of defence. He alluded to theposture of affairs at Madras with M. Bussy, andobserved, '* All circumstances concur to make mewish a speedy accommodation in this province,both with the Nabob and the French, and it is myardent desire to be enabled to embark for the coastthis month, with some of the troops ; but it ishardly to be expected that matters will be sufficientlysettled to admit of it. I am so sensibleof the consequence the trade of this province isof to the Company, that I think I ought not, onany account, to draw off part of the troops whilea fair prospect remains of a speedy and advantageous58 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.1757. gaseous conclusion of affairs, either by force of armsBgMQAL. Qf a treaty." Adverting to the powers which hepossessed, and to the circumstance that the Councilhad left the negotiations to be transacted bythe admiral and himself, he stated, ** All propositionsthe Council at Calcutta make will be attendedto ; and, for my part, you may be assured that,notwithstanding my independent command, I shallendeavour to maintain a perfect harmony withthem, and act throughout with their participation.They thought proper, some time ago, to demandasurrender of my commission as commander-in-chief,and that I would put myself under theirorders. While I looked upon myself as obligedto refuse, in justice to those who had entrustedme with such powers, I represented that I hadno intentions of making use of any independentpowers, unless they induced me to it by necessity,for we had but one common interest to pursue,which was that of the Company, and as long asthat was kept in view, they would always find meready to follow their instructions."Colonel Clive's communication appears to havebeen governed by a just sense of the position inwhich he was placed, and to have manifested everydisposition to act in harmony with the Council,who felt aggrieved at their power having beenset aside. At such a juncture, all personal feelingshould have been waived for the commongood, especially in favour of an officer who hadevincedChap. II.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 59evinced qualifications admirably calculated to 1757.meet great emergencies, and whose foresight, bengal.even on the occasion in question, appears tohave given him a just claim to the confidencewhich had been reposed in him.Two days after the despatch of the foregoing Nabob ads*^ 00 dances withletter to the Directors, intelligence was received *>" «™y ^® Calcutta.at the Presidency, that the Nabob, on learningthe fate of Hooghly, was highly exasperated,and had quitted his capital, marching at thehead of his forces towards Calcutta. On the3d February, he offered to restore the settlementsand to make reparation ; while, at the same time,the van of his army appeared in sight, passingtowards Calcutta, immediately without reach ofthe cannon of the battery to the eastward.Coja Patras, the Armenian who brought theletter containing the offer, declared that the Nabobwould wait at Lunge until the conferencewas over. Two gentlemen were accordingly deputedto meet him, and to carry an assurance ofthe satisfaction with which his pacific intentions hadbeen received. The Nabob had nevertheless proceededon to Dum-Dum : the deputation immediatelyfollowed, and only came up with him inthe town of Calcutta. On pointing out to himhis departure from what had been arranged, andexpostulating against his army remaining in thevicinity of the Presidency, he haughtily refusedto withdraw his forces.ColonelRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. 11.1757.BzXflAL.Treaty withthe Nabob.Colonel Clive, perceiving that he was merelyattempting to amuse him with overtures; consideringalso the state of concision in whichCalcutta had already been plunged by the Nabob'spresence; and foreseeing the fatal consequencesthat would ensue from the entrance ofhis forces into the town, determined, notwithstandingthe small number of troops he couldcollect, to attack the enemy the following morningbefore daybreak. The morning was foggy. Clivepenetrated the enemy's camp, and for two hoursdid great execution ; but the fog not clearing off,he was unable to follow up his advantages. Onthe 6th February, the Nabob removed to Dumdum,where a treaty was concluded, by which heratified all the privileges which the English hadenjoyed, and engaged to make restitution of theirvarious settlements at Calcutta, Cossimbuzar, andDacca, with their money and effects. They werelikewise permitted to fortify Calcutta. Perwan-nags were granted for freedom of trade, andprivileges to the Company's dustucks,* and theywere allowed to erect a Mint at Calcutta.Intelligence was at this time received that theAfghans had defeated the Mogul, that theirleader had seized the government, assuming thetitle of Aliud Shah, orders having been givenfor coins, in the province of Bengal, to be struckinFide Printed Treaties, pages 1 to 6.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 6 1in the name of the new Emperor, and that the 1757.Nabob was advancing to his frontier to make Bengal.an alliance with his neighbour, the Nabob ofLucknow, sometimes called Oipdy for their mutualsupport in the then disturbed state of theempire.There were strong reasons to believe that the French iiwti-gBtc the Nabob.French had instilled into the mind of the Nabobfeelings of jealousy towards the English. Offersof neutrality had been made to them, at the <5om- ^^^^^^tenement of the operations against the Nabob,to which they gave no reply. Colonel Clive intendedto have attacked Chandemagore, but abstained,the Nabob having declared that it wouldbe a violation of the treaty so lately concluded.A request was shortly afterwards received fromthe Governor of Chandemagore, for a neutralitywithin the Granges to which, at the instance ofthe Council, Clive assented. He announced the cnvecontem-- -, plates return-resultto the Court of Directors on the 22d re- ing to Madras.february, and stated, " All operations, therefore,are now over, and I may hope, in a few days, totake my passage for the coast, with the satisfactionof having left your affairs well re-established,and a general tranquillity in the provinces."Scarcely had this despatch been sent off for operationsEurope, when it was found that the proposed IS^ch. *neutrality with the French had not been confirmedby the authorities at Pondicherry, and that theFrench were still intriguing with the Nabob.Clive,62 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. If.iTsr. Clive, in communication with Admiral Watson,Bekoal. accordingly determined to attack Chandernagore :it being ascertained that the Nabob would notinterfere, and that we were at liberty to act as wepleased towards our European rivals. On the 13thMarch, the fort was summoned : no answer beingreceived the western battery was attacked thefollowing morning. Various operations were red on until the 23d, when it surrendered. TheGovernor and Council of Chandernagore wereremoved to Chinsura.The Council being apprised that the Dutch notonly harboured the French prisoners who hadescaped, but also furnished them with money,guides, and even arms, Clive summoned all theFrench on parole to repair to his camp, and insistedthat the late Governor and Council ofChandernagore should remove to Calcutta. Theremainder of the French were required to reside atChandernagore, or any where to the south ofChinsura.*Nabob's offa fcw days after this occurrence, intelligence wascent and people , '' ^ ^oppose his go received by Clive, then at the presidency, that completely disgustedhis principal officers, who, with a great majority ofhis people, were strongly opposed to his retainingthe government of Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa ;theyLetter to the Court from Colonel Clive, camp near Chandernagore,16th April 1757.vehementChap. II.] BIUTiaH POWER IN INDIA. 63they desired to know whether the Council would ns?.aid in the restoration of Jaffier Ally Khan, who b«wa».had also sent an agent to ascertain their feelingstowards himself. It was apparent that the Nabobhad become decidedly inimical to the interests of Nabob inimuthe English. He had espoused and protected EnglishM. Law and his party after the reduction ofChaademagore ; and it was also discovered thathe was in correspondence with M. Bussy on thecoast, to whom he had made considerable presents,with an invitation to march towards Bengal. He ReaaoiMwhyhad not acted up to his treaty with the Company, ^lS^1n^"ihis army was hostile to him, and it was clear ^*"^ <*«p«««^that, whether we took part or not in favour ofMeer Jaffier, a revolution would ensue for thepurpose of deposing Seraje-ud-Dowlah, whilstour abstaining from all interference might, in thepeculiar situation we then stood, place the interestsof the Company in a very questionable position.Under these circumstances, with the meansalso of making their own terms with Jaffier, andobtaining some satisfaction for the inhabitants ofCalcutta, in order to relieve them from theirheavy losses in the capture, besides establishingthe tranquillity of the country, and cutting off theinfluence of the French, the Council unanimouslyresolved to support the views of Jaffier Ally Khan.The terms of a treaty were accordingly drawnout, and a deputation appointed to wait upon him.The articles were discussed, agreed to, and signedon64 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. 11.1757. on the 19th May.* By this treaty Jaffier agreed toBsKOAL. pay the Company a crore of rupees for their lossesin the capture of Calcutta, and to grant compensationto the English inhabitants for their loss intheir plundered effects. All the land lying to thesouth of Calcutta, as far as Calpee, was to beunder the zemindar of the Company, with otherpossessions.Various additional circumstances arose, whichconfirmed the report of Seraje-ud-Dowlah beingin communication with M. Bussy. The marchof the Company's troops was pressingly urgedtowards Moorshedabad, in support of Meer Gaffer.Colonel Clare proceeded on the 13th June,with all his forces, amounting to only 1,000Europeans and 2,000 sepoy, with eight pieces ofcannon. On the 18th, he took the fort of Cutwa;on the 22d, in the evening, the army crossed theriver ; and on the 23d June, the battle of Plasseytook place. The most decisive victory was obtained,by the prudence and valour of ColonelClive, over the Nabob ; his army being dispersed,and he himself obliged to seek safety in flight fromMoorshedabad. Meer Jaffier was in waiting atthat city to receive Clive; who, after the firstsalutations were over, led him to the musnud;and, placing him upon it, made obeisance to himas lord of the three provinces of Bengal, Bahar,and♦ Fide VrintedTreatieB, pages 6 to 23.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 65and Orissa, presenting, at the same time, a plate 1757.of gold coin. All the omrahs then present like b«koatwise paid their homage and presented gold, MeerJaffier being afterwards publicly proclaimed asNabob.Intelligence having reached the Directors, inthe month of July 1757, of the recapture ofCalcutta, they determined to issue a new commissionof government. The Court disapproved ofthe authority assumed by the Madras council, onthe original deputation of Colonel Clive to Bengal, ^'^^tifih^"but resolved, notwithstanding the sentiments of the ^ *«. ^2''*™-^ ment in BengalCouncil at Calcutta being opposed to his indep^n- ^i^^ court^ ^^ » ^ of Directors.dent powers, to name Clive (if in Bengal) at thehead of it. '* Should he have returned to hisstation on the coast of Coromandel, as there wasreason to believe would be the case, then theother parties" named were to take their respectivestations and rank.In the month of September following, theDirectors received a letter from Colonel Clive,dated the 22d of February, intimating that " hehoped, in a few days, to take his passage forMadras, leaving all in tranquillity in Bengal"*TheThis is corroborated by a letter which Colonel Clive addressedto the Select Committee at Fort St. George, and bythe application which he made to Admiral Watson, to place athis disposal a twenty-gun brig to take such troops as were leftto Madras, he intending to follow immediately the Nabob's engagementshad been concluded, as the admiral and fleet wereVOL. T. F "^*66 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.1757. The Court, on the 11th November, accordinglycomml^^ revoked their commission of the 3d August provokedon ceding, and appointed those gentlemen membersposed depart who, thcv concluded, would be at Calcutta. Thetare,custom which had prevailed was to be adhered to,viz. the three senior members taking the chaireach successively for four months ; and a SelectCommittee, consisting of five of the members, wasappointed to transact the affairs with the countrygovernments, and to preserve secret such of theirproceedings as they might judge expedient.councUatCai- These orders arrived at Calcutta in June 1758 ;cii to'teke on the 26th of which month, the Council resolved,Presidents in the pccuHar state of affairs which detainedColonel Clive in Bengal, to request him to takeupon himself the office of permanent President.Clive signified his assent to the Council in thefollowing terms, viz.1758. "' Though I think I have cause to be dissatisfiedwith the Court of Directors, for laying me asideCave accepts ^ » j oit, but express their new form of government, without anyses diflsatisfiic- ' ^ ''tion at having reason assigned, after having named me as headbeen excludedby the Court, of the General Committee in the letter of the 3dAugust last, yet, animated by the noble exampleofnot to sail for the coast till much later in the year. These points,though apparently trifling, are material, to shew that it was notasystematic course of predetermined conquest by which he wasactuated, but that one circumstance arose after another, whichled, to the series of extraordinary and important events in whichhe so signally distinguished himself.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 67of public spirit which you have set me, I have de intermixedto waive all private considerations whereBengal.the general good is concerned ; and as there is nodoubt that the government of a single person, involvedas we are now with the country powers,must have infinite advantages over the complicatedform of government established from home,I shall from that motive (though both my healthand private concerns strongly require my returningto Europe) accept the offer you have doneme the honour to make me, till such time as ouremployers have appointed a president in the usualform."It appears to have escaped Clive's recollection,that the Court had every reason to concludehe had returned to Madras, and thatthey were also ignorant of the circumstanceswhich led to the battle of Plassey, as wellas of the victory and its results. When, however,the intelligence of his retention in Bengal, Court leammgand of his subsequent proceedings, became known mainedinBen-t r -n ^ appointto the Directors, in the month of February J 758, him sole President*they anticipated the resolution of the BengalCouncil ; for on the 8th of March they appointedhim, in consideration of his eminent and repeatedservices, to be sole President and Governor of FortWilliam, in case it should suit his health and convenienceto remain in India; adding, 'colonelClive, as governor, is, of course, to be added tothe Select Committee appointed by our letter ofF 2 " theRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IT.1758.Bengal.Clive thanksthe Court fortheir nominationof him.Supply oftroops fromBengal toMadras.the 11th November, of which he is to be the chiefand presiding member."These orders were issued and despatched fromEngland three months before the resolution of theCouncil at Calcutta was passed, appointing Clivepresident.It was doubtless in ignorance of these facts, thatOrme and Scrafton imbibed the notion, that theHome authorities manifested neglect towards Cliveon the occasion in question. Whatever feelingsmight have been raised in Livers mind, they appearto have been fully effaced by the receipt of theCourt's orders of March, which he acknowledgedfrom Calcutta in the following terms:* ** Wordscan but poorly express the sentiments of my hearton receipt of your general address. Please to accept,in return, all that the most lively gratitude canoffer, and be assured my utmost endeavours shall beexerted in the service of those, who have done morejustice to my merits than they can pretend to deserve."M. Bussy, the commander of the French forceson the coast, was involved in considerable difficultieswith the principal Rajah of Golconda, whohad sent letters to Colonel Clive, requesting theCompany's aid. An expedition was despatchedat the instance of Clive from Calcutta, in themonth of October, under Colonel Forde, consistingLetter from Colonel Clive to the Court of Directors, 30tbDecember 1758.Bengal.CuAF. IIJ BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 69ing of 600 Europeans, artillery included, and 2,000 nss.sepoy, on board the Company's ships ; Mr. Johnson,a Company's servant, being previously sent tothe coast to prepare for the arrival of the troops.In urging a supply of troops from Europe, asnecessary to secure the great acquisitions already count ummade, the Council observed, *' though matters are ^^^^^^^perfectly quiet at present, 'tis hard to say how ^o«>p«-long the calm will last ; and such is the nature ofthis country and government, that the only certainexpedient of securing their friendship is, by keepingup such a force as will render it unsafe for themto break with us, and the large addition of territoryyou have acquired by the late treaty hasafforded the means of paying the troops. *'In December, the Council again urged on theCourt of Directors the absolute necessity of sendinga sufficient force, " in order to fix the greatrevolution that has been here brought about intheir favour."In this infant state of the Company's politicalpower, it is difficult to conceive the obstacleswhich they had to surmount in supplying the necessarysuccours to enable their servants to maintaintheir ground, amidst the jealousy and oppositionof European and native enemies.Owing to the war in Germany, and to theextended operations in North America, the Courtof Directors could scarcely obtain any recruits.*ThroughThe records of the Company bear ample testimony to theanxiety manifested by the Court of Directors to meet the70 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cbap. IL1758. Through the special interposition of the Duke ofB^KGAi. Marlborough, then Master-general of the Ordnance,the Court were enabled to secure threeofficers from the Royal Regiment of Artillery, toaid in fortifying the settlements against any futureattacks. ^In reply to the remonstrances contained in subsequentdespatches, in consequence of what theCouncil at Calcutta conceived to be the inattentionon the part of the Court of Directors to theirearnest requests for troops, the Court remarked :* —Had not his Majesty been graciously pleased to ordera large military reinforcement to proceed to India thisseason, yours, as well as the presidencies of Fort St. Georgeand Bombay, would have been unavoidably supplied bythe Company in a very short degree : for so long as thedemand for the national service subsists, it has been, andwill be, almost impossible, notwithstanding our outmostefforts, to raise a number of recruits nearly adequate towhat our service requires.The great number of forces granted by his Majesty,including those of this year, will enable us to give you agarrison of 2,000 Europeans during the war ; but, uponMr. Livers sensible and judicious plan, the forces of ourpresidencies, at least of Madras and Bengal, will be incommon aiding each other, as the different situation ofaffairsrepeated requisitions from Bengal for aid both in troops andmilitary stares. It was during the operations from 1758 to1764, that the first Lord Amherst, unde of the present Earl,80. highly distinguished himself as Commander-in-chief of theBritish forces.Letter to Bengal, April 1760.Chat. 1 1.] British POWER IN INDIA* 71IBengal.affairs may demand. Under such a well-concerted union, nse.your garrison may at times be more numerous, or often nomore than prudence may deem necessary for your protectionagainst the natives, as happened when you determined uponthat noble step of sending Colonel Forde to Mazulipatam.However, thus circumstanced and cemented, you will be asecurity to each other, and in all human probability out ofthe reach of danger. The forces that went abroad lastyear and are now destined for India, will demonstrate thatyour employers labour incessantly to strengthen and protecttheir settlements, the glorious successes at home havingambled the Grovemment to grant us large succours, and wemust gratefully confess the Ministry's care of this Company.The many remonstrances in almost every letter, would havebeen spared, if you had reflected properly on our cruel anddangerous situation ; our mercantile concerns always givingplace to men and stores, when we could possibly obtainthem ; ever distressed for tonnage, as we carry abroad forthe Grovemment seldom less than 1,000 tons annually,exclusive of their men and baggage. The heavy decorateincurred by ships detained by accident or otherwise inIndia; the immense expenses at Madras, with very scantyreturns ; your own charges very great, those of Bombaybeyond all bounds; our settlements in Sumatra, at thesame time, requiring large sums to put them in some stateof security against enemies and dangerous neighbours ; ifthese considerations had been duly weighed, your injuriousinsinuations of being neglected must have been turnedinto praise, that your employers could do so much undersuch untoward circumstances. We ourselves look backwith wonder at the difficulties we have surmounted, andwhich, with our contracted capital, must have been impossible,if the Proprietors, generously and without a munnur,had not consented to reduce their dividend 25 per cent. ;butBengal.72 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.MSb. but with all our economy and care, unless our servantsstudiously attend to lessen their charges and increase ouradvantages, the burthen will be too great for us to bearmuch longer.We agree with you, that there must always be a respectableforce kept up in Bengal, to secure our noble, and, wehope, improving acquisitions, and to guard against themachinations of our treacherous neighbours, who havealready begun to shew themselves; we are determinedthat the fixed garrison at Calcutta shall not be less than1,500 Europeans (the blacks at your own discretion); andwith such a force, we apprehend, you will always influenceand govern the affairs of Bengal.The public papers have lately had an article, importingthat they write from Paris that the Comte D^ Artois, LeBarrier, and La Diligente frigates, were to sail the firstfair wind from Orient for Asia, and were to be joined byfive or six other ships from different ports on the coast ;and by private intelligence we further hear, that the regimentDe Cambyses, one of the oldest and most completebattalions in France, was embarking on the said ships withthe utmost expedition, in hopes of reaching Indies beforeour troops could arrive.We flatter ourselves, notwithstanding the expedition theFrench are using in fitting out this armament, that notonly the first embarkation of our troops will reach Indiabefore the enemy, but likewise the second, which are nowproceeding on the Bengal ships, and that his Majesty'sships will have also joined Mr. Pocock, so that we are notin pain on account of this further effcHt of the enemy.In December 1768, Colonel Clive, adverting tothe probability of his quitting India in the earlypart of the following year, wrote to the Court:"AfterCuAF. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 73'* After the battle of Plassey, I thought my com- commissionof commander-in-chief would have ended ^there, and that I might have returned to the coast, cuve sand from thence to England ; but when intestine mu ^"' ^troubles arose, and the situation of your affairsrequired my remaining up the country, I did nothesitate to give my services where so justly due."In consequence of the large increase of theCompany's forces, and the encouragement whichwas given by their European opponents to thedesertion of their men, an Act was passed whichempowered-them to hold courts-martial for thepunishment of mutiny and desertion.*Tranquillity prevailed in India ; but as JaffierKhan, the Nabob, was advanced in years, theCouncil observed, *that it was impossible to sayhow long such a state of affairs might continue.His son is cruel, and every day's experienceteaches us, that Mussulman will remain no longertrue to their engagements than when a successfulopportunity may offer to the contrary." Thetruth of this observation was fully established inthe early part of the following year.M. Law had been traversing the country as faras Delhi, with the view of engaging the interest ofthe king in his favour. In February 1769, the 1759.Company were opposed to the Shazada, (the title ^?h the*'given ^^"^The 9 Geo. 11.^ which remained in force until the ConsolidatingAct of 1823, 4 Geo. IV. &81.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THEIChaf. ILJ75aBengal.lie Sbazadaretreats fromPatna.given to the king's eldest son), who had fled fromhis father's court, and being joined by Law advancedtowards Patna. In order to arrest theprogress of the prince and to support the Nabob,whose affairs, from his unfavourable position withhis zemindars and the arrears of pay due to histroops were involved in great embarrassment.Colonel Clive took the field.* He marched withthe utmost expedition to relieve Patna, whichcity, as well as the province of Bahar, was indanger. The Shazada had arrived at the riverGaramnassa, which divides the countries of Oudeand Bahar. dive's operations were successful.The Shazada was compelled to retreat, the affairsin the provinces being brought to a satisfactorytermination.In the month of August, the Dutch havingmanifested a disposition to increase their influenceby the introduction of a considerable number ofEuropean troops at Ghinsura, Clive, in communicationIn the (}oiincir8 letter to the Secret Committee of the Courtof Directors, dated Fort William, 19th March 1759, it is said:"The President had a meeting with the Nabob the 9th instant,and after laying before him in the strongest manner the discontentand disaffection of his jemautdars, and representinghis treacherous behaviour towards them and non-payment of hispeople, motives which had encouraged the king's son to thispresent attempt, the most advisable measures were concertedfor the success of the expedition ; one of his principal jemaut-tars, Cossim Ally Can, set out for Salad to take the commandof such part of the forces as were arrived there, withwhich he was to proceed directly for Paths'Chas. II.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA* 75cation with the Nabob, detached a force under 1759.Colonel Forde against them, and at the same time b.^^^^^attacked their shipping, which had advanced upthe river Both operations were successful ; thepower of the Dutch was so reduced, that theyagreed to an arrangement, by which they were tobear all the charges that had been incurred in thecourse of the operations. In December, the Directorswere advised of the grant of a jaghire toColonel Clive in the following terms : " TheMogul having conferred on Colonel Clive thehonour of a munsubdarry, the subah of these provinces,from a sense of the very eminent servicesrendered him by Colonel Clive, particularly on hislate expedition to the northward, has thoughtproper to present him with the annual rent ofthose lands which were before paid to himselfagreeable to treaty. This will be more particularlyexplained to you by a copy of theNabob's phirmaund for this grant, entered afterour consultations of the 6th September ; in consequenceof which we have paid to Colonel Clivewhat was before paid the subah, and shall continuein future to account with him instead of theGovernment"*Colonel Clive embarked from Calcutta for.Europe in February 1760, and reached Portsmouthin• The perwaimah or grant was sent down by Mr. Hastingsthen at Moradabaug, to the Council at Calcutta 5th Sept. 1759.(fide Consultations.)RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[CHAr. ir.1760.Bengal.Clive proceedsto England.in July. On the 16th of that month he waitedupon the Court of Directors, when he receivedfrom their Chairman the expression of their*' unanimous thanks for his many eminent andunparalleled services'*In September following, the Proprietors marked their senseof Colonel Clive's services by a public resolution of thanks tohim, Admiral Pocock^ and Colonel Lawrence. They also resolvedunanimously. That the Chairman and Deputy Chairman,when they wait upon Vice-admiral Pocock, Colonel Clive, andColonel Lawrence, will desire those gentlemen to give theirconsent that their portraits or statues be taken in order to beplaced in some conspicuous parts of this house, that their eminentand signal services to this Company may be ever had inremembrance. .Chas. III.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 77CHAPTER III.1760.Mr. Howell acted as president of the Congenialcil in Bengal until the arrival of Mr. Vansittart a^S^^d?^'"'from Madras on the 27th July, who had beenap- ^'^»*^«"^'pointed by the Court successor to Col. Clive.Mr. Vansittart bad scarcely assumed the officeof president before the province of Bengal wasinvolved in another revolution. Its internal ad ^^^^ ^"y ^Khan deposed.ministration had been so wretchedly conducted byJaffier Ally Khan, that the Council concurred inhis removal. He was succeeded by his son-in* Khan, bis son-law,Cossim Ally Khan. needs.'From the terms in which the event was announcedto the Court of Directors, they had everyreason to conclude that the result would placetheir possessions in a state of permanent security.Besides a confirmation of the treaty with MeerJaffier and the payment of the balance of his debt,possession was acquired of the countries of Burden,Midnapore, and Chittagong, in full right, to Acquisitions bybe managed as the Council might judge best for ^™p""^-the interest of the Company. Other importantpoints were enumerated, and the Council added »-We78 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1760. '* We shall at present defer entering upon a detailBtHGAL ^^ *^^ prodigious benefit of these concessions."Referring to a narrative prepared by Mr. Vansittart,they observed that it was a document whichmight be esteemed ** a perfect manifestation sentto the world of the propriety of the measures wehave pursued, and of our adherence to the goodof the kingdom"*In January following, Mr. Vansittart addressedthe Court as to the state in which he found affairsin Calcutta, and the circumstances which led toCossim Ally Khan being placed on the mus-nut.I found, as I suspected, great difficulties to struggle with,from the general confusion and disaffection of the country,and the very low state of the Company's treasury. One orthe other of these resolutions was immediately necessary —either to drop our connexions with the country governmentand withdraw our assistance : or to insist on more ample,as well as more certain provision for the support of theCompany's expense. The first was dangerous and dishonourable,as it would have given up the country and theNabob a prey to a multitude of enemies. The other alternativewil resolved on.A favourable opportunity offered of procuring for theCompany a cession of the districts of Burdwan, Midnapore,and Chittagong, and an agreement was entered into withallpossible regard to our alliance with the Nabob. In itsconsequences, however it was the cause of his resigning thesubadaree• President and Council to the Court of Directors 10thNovember 1760.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 79subadaree and retiring to Calcutta. This change happened {jeo,without the least disturbance or a man hurt. The oldNabob was received in Calcutta with all the honours due to B**^^^*his rank, and resides there with ease and security. TheCompany are in possession of the noble territory ceded tothem, and we are in a condition of opposing, nay, in a fairwayof getting the better of all our enemies.I know, however, that there are many who, led, some byignorance but more by prejudice, strive to overlook thenecessity of the resolutions taken, the manner and circumstancesof their execution, and the advantages procured forthe Company, and endeavour to represent the measures as apremeditated breach of treaties, and the consequences as .hurtful to the Company, insinuating always that the SelectCommittee, who unanimously resolved on this plan, andparticularly myself, had interested views.The same motives have been attributed, moreor less, to each succeeding government, which hasfound extended measures terminating in new acquisitionsessential to the support of the Britishinterests in India.In the month of December, the Shazada again shazada againapproached Bahar, where the Council determined ^Tcom'to adopt vigorous measures for the purpose of 5*"c^e8. a'Sldeffectually expelling him from the borders of defeaTJd*^^*^that province. A considerable force, under thecommand of Major Carnac, completely defeatedhim on the 15th January, on the banks of the i^ei.Servan, M. Law, with his detachment and guns,being taken prisoner.* ShortlyMr. Warren Hastings was at this time called from to assist the president in his correspondence with thecountry government.so RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cigar. III.1761. Shortly after these events, the death of theBBMaAL. king, by the hand of his vizier, Ghazee-ood-Deen,^^^ opened the way for the Shazada to establish his^haMdaBuc right to the throne. This prince, to whom wehad so lately been opposed, now joined the Englishforces. Since his defeat, he had remained almostalone in the neighbourhood of Patna, and cameover without any positive engagement. He was,however, assured that his person would be heldsacred, and that he should be maintained in asuitable manner as long as he might remain withthe Company's forces.The Abdallees,* previous to their retiring fromDelhi, declared the Shazada king, by the nameof Shah Alum. The Mahrattass, from whom hehad chiefly to expect, opposition, on account oftheir connexion with the vizier, had been so muchweakened through their last defeat by the Abdal-lees, and so torn by divisions in their own government,as to be incapable of making any considerableefforts. Shuja Dowlas, the Nabob of Oude,whose territories then extended from the Caratsto within a short distance of Delhi, hadadvanced as far as Benares to meet the king andattend him to his capital.The Bengal Council were averse to engage inan expedition that was to carry the troops so faras Delhi, particularly at a period when the contemplatedA tribe of Afghans.Chas. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 81tempted expedition from Madras, against the i76i-French islands, had deprived them of the aid of B«««At.additional forces from the coast. They neverthelessfelt that delay might materially injure a cause,which, if supported, would ultimately tend to thesecurity and tranquillity of the Company's provinces.They accordingly authorized Colonel Coote,then at Patna, to advise the king to proceed tojoin Shuja Dowlas ; and to assure him, that if heshould think it necessary to carry a detachment ofour troops to Delhi, they should be sent to himimmediately after the rains.Intelligence having been received by the Courtof Directors of these proceedings, they wrote inthe following terms to Bengal :* " If your endeavoursfor settling the Shazada upon the throne ofhis ancestors could be carried into execution withoutrisk to the Company and at a moderate expense,it may secure him in our interest, and be the meansof settling the peace and quiet of the kingdom ;but, as a transaction of this kind depends uponmany circumstances and unforeseen events, andyou have most probably already embarked in thisundertaking, we are entirely at a loss to give youany directions, or even our sentiments thereupon,in any other than these general terms : that wehope you have acted, and will act, with the utmostcaution, and on considering all circumstances,withSOth September 1761.VOL. I. G82 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChaf. III.176L nth that prudence and attention which an affairBxKOAL. ^f g^^ij ^ serious and important nature requires.** This is the third revolution in Bengal, whereinthe very being of the Company has been, and fromtheir consequences may still be, at stake. Youradvancing Jaffier Ally Can to the subahship, inthe room of Suraja Dowlas, was undoubtedly anecessary measure, as well for the good of thecountry in general as the interest of the Companyin particular : your afterwards deposing JaffierAlly Can, and settling Cossim Ally Can in hisroom, we hope was done also with the same view.Upon this presumption and confidence, that noother motives whatsoever had any influence uponyou, we must look upon the measures pursuedupon this occasion to be unavoidable. At the sametime, we cannot help observing, that it is to thegreat regard the Company have always had to afaithful observance of their agreements, that theyacquired, and have hitherto preserved, a reputationwith the natives of India : we could havewished, therefore, the situation of affairs wouldhave admitted keeping terms with Jaffier AllyCan, that even the least handle for a pretencemight not have offered to prejudiced people tomake use of, to throw any reflections upon thistransaction."The king did not wait for the troops, but proceededtowards Delhi accompanied by MajorCamac,Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 83Camac, who was deputed to escort him to the i76i.borders of the provinces. The Nabob of Oude ^^^^^who had been constituted by the king his vizier,supplied him with considerable pecuniary aid.His majesty, on the application of Major Compromisedto grant sunnuds for the Company'sprivileges and possessions in Bengal, whenevera proper tribute should be remitted. *the kingalso offered to confer on the Company the dewan Deane^ * " offered to thenee of Bengal, on condition of their being answer company, butable for the royal revenues;" but as the Council councu.were sensible that their acceptance of the postwould cause jealousy and ill-will between themand the Nabob, they thought it more prudentto decline it. This determination was fully approvedby the Court of Directors, " If we cansecure our present possessions and privileges inBengal, preserve the peace of the province andthe Nabob in the government, and prevent theborders from being invaded or disturbed bythe neighbouring rajahs or other powers, weshall be fully satisfied, and think our forcesjudiciously employed in answering these principalpoints : for we are by no means desirous ofmaking further acquisitions, or engaging ourforces in very distant projects, unless the mostabsolute necessity should require it, to answer oneor other of the political views afore-mentioned.Your refusal of the dewannee of Bengal, offeredby the king, was certainly right, and we are wellG 2 satisfiedBI8E AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1761.BXVOAL.1768.Differencesanticipatedwith theNabob.satisfied with the just and prudent reasons yougive for declining that offer."The Council had at this time reason to believe'' that some busy persons had been attempting tofoment jealousies between them and the Nabob,Cossim Ally Can, who continued in Bahar."In order to discover the authors, and to preservetranquillity, Mr. Hastings was deputed to waitupon the Nabob. Mr. Amyatt and some other ofthe members of the Council proposed that theinstructions to Mr. Hastings should contain aclause authorizing him to demand of the Nabobthe twenty lacs of rupees, which it was assertedhad been offered by him when the treaty wasmade, as a present to the gentlemen of the SelectCommittee. Mr. Vansittart refused to concur inthis demand. It was nevertheless made, but wasrejected by the Nabob, who declared that he hadfulfilled the terms of the treaty, and that he placedfull confidence in the Company, on whom heentirely depended. The Directors, on being acquaintedwith the circumstance, stated that theywere at a loss to comprehend upon what groundsthe majority of the Council, contrary to the remonstrancesmade by the President, could venture toauthorize Mr. Hastings to demand of the Nabobtwenty lacs of rupees, upon the bare pretencethat he had made an offer of the sum to Mr. Vansittartand the Select Committee, at the time ofmaking the treaty for his accession, which hadibeerx\Chap. IIL] British POWER IN INDIA. 85been then so properly and so honourably refused. 176«.We rejoice (observed the Court) at the just and Bwgal.spirited refusal he gave to that unwarrantabledemand."Circumstances having arisen to induce the Pre 17^3.sident to visit the Nabob, he proceeded to Mon Presidentcheer, where the subject of the disputes between Nabob.the Company's gomastahs and the officers ofgovernment was attempted to be arranged. Itwas apparent that the Company's officers, out ofreach of immediate inspection, had exercised analmost absolute authority, under the sanction ofthe English name, carrying on their business byviolent and inequitable means, and refusing topay any duties. The President felt that the iKifetencesonKing's phirmaunds were never intended to enable mind tnuie.the English to engross the whole inland trade ofthe country, to the prejudice of the natives, andhe accordingly made such a settlement with theNabob as appeared reasonable.The native officers belonging to the Nabobpresumed upon these concessions, and greatlyabused the authority with which they wereinvested, being guilty of such violence and oppressionas to call for some restraining power.Various representations were made to the Nabob,and suggestions offered for the purpose of effectingan amicable arrangement : but he refused toaccedeLetter to Bengal, ISth May 176S.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbav. III.176S.BSXOAL.Deputationappointed toprevent a rupturewith theNabob.Nabob seizessome arms atPatna.Measures contemplatedinevent of arupture.accede to any of the propositions, or to makesatisfaction for the injury inflicted by his officers*complaints of which were received by the Councilfrom all quarters. It was at last intimated to himby the Council, that a perseverance in refusing allredress would inevitably lead to an open rupture.To prevent, if possible, things coming to extremities,a deputation, consisting of Messrs. Amyattand Hay, was sent to the Nabob, for the purposeof explaining more fully the various points indispute. They set out from Moorshedabad on the25th April, and reached Mongheer on the 12thMay. The Nabob received them with the usualformalities ; but their representations provedwholly unavailing. The Nabob demanded thatour troops should be withdrawn from Patna toMongheer, and he seized five hundred stand ofarms, sent for their use, until his demand had beencomplied with.These circumstances being made known to theCouncil at Calcutta, the majority determinedupon a course of proceeding in case of a rupture,and sent orders to the Chief and Council at Patna,in such an event, to take possession of that city,provided they thought themselves strong enough,and if not, they were to take a secure positionuntil supported by the arrival of troops ; for whichpurpose, Major Adams would be ordered forthwithfrom Calcutta.On the 11th June, the intelligence from thedeputationChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 87deputation at Patna left no room to doubt that nes.hostilities would take place. On their delivering ^'■^o^^-a letter from the President to the Nabob, representingthe unlawfulness of seizing the arms, andthat we could not withdraw our troops from Patnaon the footing of a preliminary demand, the Nabobdeclared " there was war ;" adding, that he knewMr. Ellis, the chief of Patna, was his avowedenemy, and would employ the troops to the detrimentof his affairs. Whatever might be chargedto the Nabob's indisposition to come to terms ofaccommodation, it is clear that the opinion of theCourt of Directors was strongly adverse to theconduct of Mr. Ellis and other servants, in thematter of the inland trade, as they were dismissedthe service by orders from home when these circumstancesbecame known.On the 20th June, the several members of theCouncil submitted their views as to a future planof government, should a revolution take place.Intelligence was shortly received, that the de Deputationpotation, passing the river by Moorshedabad, on NabobwdeLtheir return to Calcutta, were fired upon by ordersfrom the Nabob. Mr. Amyatt, who had been atthe head of the deputation, was with many otherskilled, and the rest taken prisoners.Previously to this catastrophe, accounts had Attempt toreached Mr. Ellis at Patna, that the Nabob was Mr^Eiiis andetermined upon hostilities. That gentleman, in ^ *"'conjunction with Captain Corsairs, immediatelyplannedRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Goat. III.BKKflAL.Meer Cousindeposed, andJftfflerAUyKhanagitounited tothermuscat.Enemy defeated.planned an attack upon the M(^l guard, for thepurpose of seizing the city. Early on the 26thJune, they were in entire possession for four hours :but the project failed, through the sepoy havingdispersed for the purpose of plundering. TheNabob's governor regained the city, the Englishwere routed, and Mr. Ellis, Mr. Washington, andmany other gentlemen, taken prisoners. Whenthe council at Calcutta were apprized of theseevents, they determined on deposing Meer Cossim.On the 7th July 1763, Jaffier Khan, who had beenresiding at Calcutta since the accession of his son-in-law,was proclaimed, and war declared againstCossim, who retired towards Mongheer.Meer Jaffier set out to join the army, afterconcluding a treaty on the 10th July, ratifyingformer privileges, and agreeing to maintain agiven number of troops, a resident from theGovernor and Council was to reside with him,and a person on his part at Calcutta, to holdcommunication with the Governor and Council.*On the 19th July, Major Adams engagedthe enemy, and took the fort of Cutwa. On the2d August, a very severe battle took place nearSooty. The stand which the enemy made was'uncommon for native troops, having been engagedfor nearly four hours." The siege of was commenced on the 29th August, andcontinuedPrinted treaties, page 32.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 89continued to the 5th September, when the assault ites.took place with little loss, and the fort surrendered. ^^^^^Having exerted every endeavour to preserve ofrentoin-the lives of the English gentlemen who were in spare tbTiiyesthe possession of Cossim, Major Adams offered rejected.''^" 'the latter permission to retire from Mongheer toRotas, whither he had moved his family and effects,if he would release his prisoners.The offer was of no avail : the army accordinglypushed on to Mongheer, which they took on the1 th October ; and here they learned, that MeerCossim had caused all the English to be murderedthrough the instrumentality of Sumroo, a renegadeFrench soldier, and that Cossim had fled toPatna. Thither the English force hastened, andtook it by storm on the 6th November.During the operations against the Nabob, the Inlandking and Shuja Dowlas advanced with their army proffer aid towithin a day's march of Benares, and sent a detach tnwpsT^"^ ^ment, under one of their principal officers, to thatcity. Shuja Dowlas Mrrote to Jaffier Ally Khanand the President, and likewise to Major Adams,that he was coming with an intention of assistingour arms against Cossim. He received no encouragementto fulfil his intentions, being informedthat our forces were more than sufficient to defeatall our enemies : and all that we desired was hissecuring Cossim, should he make his flight in thatdirection.Mr. Vansittart addressed the Court regarding the Presidentsf A*i*^' view of affairs.hostilities90 BI8E AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.176a hostilities with the Nabob, before he had receivedBmoal. t[|g accounts of the massacre : "I have been disappointedin my hopes of the country's remainingin tranquillity, until your pleasure concerning thedemands made by the Council upon the Nabobcould be known.'' Mutual jealousies and suspicions had gainedso much strength, that not a day passed, afterMessrs. Amyatt and Hay had opened their commissionto the Nabob, without some aggravationof the disputes. Mr. Ellis, whom I have neverscrupled to call the head of the party which heformed the moment of his arrival in Bengal, andhas carefully nourished ever since, had at thistime a sure majority in the Council, and I endeavouredin vain to restrain the violence of theirmeasures. Himself, by his station in Patna, hadit daily in his power to create animosities betweenthe Nabob's people and ours, and by hisrepresentations to the Board, of designs which Ibelieve never existed, having got into his handsan authority to act as he pleased, in a very fewdays after he began the war by the attack of thecity of Patna."Mr. Vansittart took no part in the revolution.As long as he remained, he resolved to supportJaffier Khan in the government, with the samesteadiness as he had Cossim ; 'for it was thestation, and not the person," he regarded asconnected with the Company's interests. He,nevertheless,CHAr. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 91nevertheless, apprehended that the advanced age i^oaof the Nabob, his infirmities, and a habit of indo B«iiaAt.hence, would prevent his taking the necessarymeasures for regulating the several branches ofhis government.The President then offered various suggestions,which he thought calculated to place the inlandtrade upon a proper footing, and pointed out remediesfor preventing a recurrence of the controversiesthat had arisen in the Council, " whichhad occasioned great detriment, expense, and lossof reputation."By a subsequent letter to the Secret Committee Defects of Tx . *®" which hadof the Court of Directors, dated m December, it led to these1 I . .1 proceedingsappeared the system was such, that it was with pointed out.great difficulty a friendship could be maintainedwith any Nabob ; that our connexions in thecountry were so extended by the pursuit of private-tradethrough a number of new channels, in distantparts of the country, and the authority of ouragents was so overgrown by the influence theyderived from the English name, that the Nabob'sfounders and collectors could not exercise theduties of their offices, where any English agentor gomastah, or any merchant or inhabitant ofthe country dealing with them, was concerned.These circumstances occasioned continual complaintsfrom the Nabob, couched in terms similarto those which had been used by his predecessor,MeerCossim.OnRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IILI70&Bbvoal.Meer Couim■eeki refugewithShiqaDowlas.On the other hand, if full powers were given tothe Nabob's officers, nine out of ten abused it,totally obstructing the business of the Englishgomastahs. Thus the two governments werecontinually clashing.*^ It was impossible for a friendship to subsistlong; upon the whole, therefore (observed Mr.Vansittart), I must give it as my opinion, thatour connexions in this country are at present ona point where they cannot stand; they are eithertoo great or too little''There was much truth in this observation. Itwas impossible for us to recede without abandoningthe acquisitions we had already made : it wasequally apparent, that we could not maintain theposition we had taken without extending thoseacquisitions.The same remark will be found to apply withincreased force, as the causes are traced whichled to the progressive enlargement of our Indianpossessions, until they reached the limits, formingthe natural boundaries of that vast empire, which,by a series of extraordinary events, is now subjectedto the British rule.Meer Cossim, unable to make any further standagainst our troops, fled into the territories ofShuja Dowlas. The Vizier, notwithstanding hisprofession of aid, and the expectation of theCouncil that he would have made Cossim prisoner,suffered him to proceed without interruptionthroughChap. II1.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 93through Benares and Allahabad, to the banks of nea.the Jumna, where the king and vizier were b»»»a«-encamped, by whom he was favourably received.The Directors expressed their earnest desire thatMr.Yansittart, who had intimated his intention toquit the presidency, should continue until peacewas established, as they reposed the most perfectconfidence in his ability, discretion, and attention.They also pointed out the impressions whichweighed with them in taking a favourable view ofthe conduct of Cossim, and of those which wereadverse to MeerJaffier, whose incapacity, cruelty,and perfidy, had been so fully experienced.There is, besides, an obvious impropriety insettingup, pulling down, and again restoring, thesame man, which cannot fail to be represented tothe disadvantage of the Company"*Shuja Dowlas, being desirous of entering intoan engagement with the Company, was informedthat no treaty or alliance of friendship would beentered into with him, until Meer Cossim wasdelivered up, or brought to justice for his cruelty.The king and the vizier, manifested determined King and shi^ahostility towards the English. In March, they toEngUtb.moved with considerable bodies of horse and foot 1764.to Benares, crossed the Ganges, and marchedto the Caramnassa. Major Camac, who hadadvanced to the banks of the Soane, not havingCourt's Letter to Bengal, February 1764.94 Re AND PROGRESS OF THE chap. III.1763. ing a sufficient force of cavalry, fell back uponBbkoal. Patna, to secure supplies. The enemy, encouragedby this movement, advanced from theSoane on the 3d May, and, in different bodies,attacked our army from nine in the morning tillnear sunset ; but, finding themselves repulsed inevery quarter, they drew off. On the 23d, ShujaDowlas re-crossed the Soane.A reinforcement, consisting of his Majesty'sMajor Munro 89th regiment, arrived from Bombay in June,***** under Major (afterwards Sir Hector) Munro. Thatofficer, in virtue of his rank in the King's service,became commander-in-chief of the armyin Bengal.He immediately prepared to take the field. Theenemy made various overtures; but none thatcould be relied upon ; nor could the Council treatfor peace without running the risk of encouragingShuja Dowlas in his hostile intentions, by givinghim too high an opinion of his own strength.The government, therefore, continued to insistupon his retiring out of the limits of the provinces,and delivering up Sumroo, who was the executionerof the massacre at Patna, hoping that, byforcing him to accede to such terms, the superiorityof the Company's arms would be sufficientlyestablished, to deter the other chiefs of Hindostanfrom any attempt to invade our territories.Mr. Vansittart quitted Calcutta in November1764, being succeeded by Mr. Spencer.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 95The king, Shah Alum, although he had accom- i76i.panted Shuja Dowlas in his expedition in May, Bkhoauprofessed his disapprobation of the measure, overtures fromWhen the Nabob, Meer Jaffier, came down to w^^^Calcutta, in the month of September, he hadwith him Shatab Roy, who was formerly employedin negotiations between the Council and the king,then the Shazada. Shatab Roy brought lettersfrom the king and Shuja Dowlas, expressive of adesire to enter into a friendly negotiation. TheCouncil felt that no reliance was to be placed onthe sincerity of the vizier, who entirely ruled theking ; they therefore determined that Major Munroshould pursue the most vigorous measures, andattack the enemy the first opportunity.It must here be remarked, in justice to Munro,that the army, which he found in a state ofmutiny on his arrival in June, had, by his determinedand vigilant conduct, been brought backto a comparative state of discipline; but not untila battalion of sepoy, who had marched off withtheir arms, were secured, twenty-seven of whomwere tried by a court-martial and executed, accordingto their sentence, the battalion beingbroke with infamy.*AfterThis mutinous spirit was traced to the revolt which hadoccurred on the filth February and had been occasioned by theerroneous impression that there was an intention of stoppingthe donation promised by the Nabob. It was attributed to abody of Frenchmen, consisting of 150^ who had entered theCompany's army.96 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CBAr. III.1764. After great exertions, the briny crossed theBsNOAL. Ganges above the Soane, and took post on thebank of that river, from whence it marched towardsthe enemy, who remained with their wholeforce at Buxar. A general engagement took placevizier defeated on the 23d of October, Our troops rained a mostand flees to , , i . . o. i ,AUahaUd. Complete and decisive victory. Six thousand ofthe enemy were left dead on the field of battle,one hundred and fifty pieces of cannon being captured.Shuja Dowlas fled towards Allahabad. Theking and Bent Bahadur, the principal officer ofShuja Dowlas, were at Benares ; they made overturesto know what terms would be accepted.They were informed, "the delivery of Sumroo,and the retention by us of the country as far asBenares, to defray the charge of the war." Thiscession was required, to convince all the nativepowers of the success of our arms in a war unjustlycommenced against us, more than for any revenuewhich it might yield. *ewe do not,"observed the Council, "wish to extend our connexionsbeyond what may appear necessary forsecuring the future tranquillity of these provinces,which is the first object of our consideration."toau'^SiJ^ The proffered terms were rejected by Shujarejectedbyhim. Dowlas.The king joins The king, who had been kept in a state ofMajor Munro fl ® ^*™»y- bondage by the vizier, being once more master ofhis actions, joined the army under Major Munro,whoChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 97who entered upon a negotiation, according to in- no*.instructions from the Council at Calcutta, with ^'^«^^his Majesty, as to the charge of the war and thecession of the country as far as Benares, whichwas to have been made by the vizier ShujaDowlas. A phirmaund was executed by the king,on the 29th December 1764, assigning the countryof Ghazeepore and the rest of the zemindar of Treaty withj^ . the king.Rajah Bulwunt Sig, the Companyengafging to shah Aim.put the king in possession of Allahabad and the *rest of the countries belonging to the JNizamut ofShuja Dowlas.* Munro proceeded towards Aliahabad, but failed in reducing that fortress throughthe ill-conduct of the sepoy, who were seizedwith a sudden panic, and fell back at the assault.The vizier attempted to get into his rear, for operations ofthe vizier.the purpose of cutting off communication with hisboats and carrying off the king. The attemptwas unsuccessful. Munro converted the siegeinto a blockade, and returned with the remainderof the troops to Benares.The vizier, after this movement having advancedtowards Munro, the latter withdrew thetroops before Allahabad, in the hope of bringingthe vizier to action. In this he was disappointed;the two armies remained nearly stationary from Decembertill 1764 February in the following yearsDuring♦ Printed Treaties, page 37.f Major Munro returned, at this period, with part of his regimentto England. The President and Council on the occasionVOL. 1. HRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1765.Bengal.Death of NabobJaffier AllyKhan, andsuccession ofNazim-ood-Dowlas.During this interval. Sir Robert Fletcher succeededto the command. An engagement shortlyfollowed. Allahabad and Chunagur surrenderedon the 11 th February, when Shuja Dowlas continuedhis retreat towards Lucknow. His affairswere in great disorder, and his people disaffected;but he made no further overtures. The Councildetermined to pursue their view of expellinghim, and putting the king in possession of thecountry.Jaffier Ally Khan died on the 5th February, andwas succeeded by his eldest son, Nazim-ood-Dowlas, then only sixteen years of age. The conductof his affairs was, at the instance of theCouncil at Calcutta, confided to Mahomet RezaKhan, the Nabob of Dacca, Nazim-ood-Dowlabeing apprized that he held the government bythe influence and authority of the Company.The views of the president, Mr. Spencer, andhis Council, being directed to the establishment ofthe Company's authority as paramount to everyother, the Nabob was discharged from maintainingany troops for the protection of the provinces,those of the Company being substituted : he wasto make no application for sunnuds but throughthe President and Council ; nor to engage anyEuropeanof his departure, strongly recommended to the Court of Directorsto procure for his eminent services some special mark ofhis Sovereign's favour.Chas. III.] British POWER IN INDIA. 99European in his service, and was to dismiss any its.who might be with him. It was observed, that b«"oal.as Meer Jaffier had been appointed and raisedto the soubahdarry by the Company's forces, andhad been supported in it by their influence alone,the Council could not allow that any right ofsuccession or the nomination could rest withhim or his family, till their acquiescence andconfirmation had been obtained. The same forcethat was employed to raise the father, wasto be called forth to support the son. ^' If,"observed the Council, 'this does not give ussome right to a nomination, thrice already assumed,we know not what can." The native govehement had been almost subverted. Differentparties adhered to a different sovereign, thoughall joined in oppressing the man whom the Councilconsidered as such : and they naturally ask,'* shall we, who have lost so many lives in supportof privileges heretofore held by grants fromDelhi, but held only by our arms, yield up ourauthority in Bengal, and sacrifice, at once, allwe have been contending for? To admit theking's right of confirming, while we support aman by force in the Nizamutut, would be thegrossest absurdity. If we look, we shall find theyhave been forcibly obtained. The oppression andviolence of the Government in 1756, forced usinto a share of their affairs, very contrary to ourinclination; and as we alone, whatever glossingH 2 we100 Riser AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.iTfia. we may put upon it, support the present govem-BcvoAu ment in the family against the king's inclination,having been in arms against the king himself insupport of it, we consider that we have as good aright to take as large a share as will answer ourprincipal ends, ' security to our trade and possessions,'as any other people, who are as muchusurpers as we : and there is no doubt we havemore influence to obtain the sunnuds, if we choose,than any other people whatever"*The king, in virtue of the treaty of December,had gone to reside at Allahabad. The Council,after taking steps to put him in possession of ShujaDowlas's country, and making such arrangementsas would enable him to maintain himself withoutfurther aid, determined to withdraw to the frontierof the Company's provinces.The war with Shuja Dowlas had been one notof choice, but of necessity. It was wished to haveretained him as a barrier between the Companyand the other powers, even after the battle ofBuxar ; but, as he continued obstinate, the onlyalternative was to set the authority of the kingagainst him, in order to convince the empire atlarge, that the Council were determined not to destroythe Mussulman power, as had been artfullyinsinuated. In all their proceedings, the Council^' did not lose sight of the reluctance expressedbySecret Consultations, 90th February 1768.Chap. III.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA: Joelby the Court of Directors to new expeditions or nes.distant acquisitions"* BkkoauShuja Dowlas had retired from Lucknow, andleft the province of Oude to seek refuge and cdamongst the Rohillas.On the coast of Coromandel, the siege ^759.of Fort St. George by the French was raised in ^JTAnawc^.February 1759, by the appearance of the Englishfleet oflF Madras and the force under Major Bretton.Masulipatam was taken by Major Forde;but the attempt against the French settlement ofPondicherry was unsuccessful, and M. Tally laidsiege to Trichinopoly. His progress was, however,checked by the operations of Colonel Coote,who invested and took Wandewash. M. Tally,alive to the importance of Wandewash, madeevery effort to recover it. A long and obstinateengagement took place, in which the French werecompletely defeated. General Bussy and . manyother officers being made prisoners by ColonelCoote, who followed up his victory by the capturesof Chittaput and Arcot.During these operations on shore. AdmiralPocock defeated the fleet of M. D'Ache, althoughgreatly superior in ships and guns. The engagementwas extremely severe, eight of the Englii^bshipsVide letter from Mr. Spencer to the Court, 14th March,1765,hoi ;/: =*. : • > base hip) .pjbooREss of the [Chas. hi.Various foittcaptured*^'^^* ships having at one period withstood the fire of^^'**^* the whole of the French fleet, consisting of sixteenships. The arrival of Admiral Cornish, whojoined Admiral Pocock, gave the English a decidedsuperiority in the Indian seas.The army, after the surrender of Arcot, movedtowards Pondicherry, to cut off supplies, whileAdmiral Cornish blockaded it by sea. The districtof Trincomalee was reduced by CaptainSmith. On the 5th March, Permacoil surrenderedto Colonel Coote, Arrival to Colonel Mon-sonand Admiral Cornish on the 5th April, andChellumbrum to Colonel Monson on the 12th.On the same day. Colonel Coote took Valour,where the camp was formed previously to operationsagainst Pondicherry; for which purpose,a large supply of gunpowder had been sent fromBengal and Bombay, accompanied by three companiesof the king's artillery from the latter presidency.The Mahrattass had gained a considerablevictory over Malabar Jung, who ceded to themdistricts of the value of sixty lacs of rupees, andthe fort of Dowlatabad, at that time the strongestin the country. M. Bussy and other Frenchprisoners on parole, at Pondicherry, were orderedto Madras, as several of them had borne arms byMeasures to order of M. Tally. Considerable apprehensionpromote the •' **siege of Pondering entertained that the Mahrattass would enterthe province and demand the shout, and, if joinedby the Mysoreans and the French, that theywouldChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDU. 103would impede the designs against Pondicherry, neo.a member of the Council was deputed, for the Madeai.purpose of inducing them to refrain from advancingtowards the Camatic. In the monthof September, the President, Governor Pigot,accompanied by Colonel Coote, visited AdmiralSteevens on board the Norfolk and, after muchsolicitation, obtained his consent to the marines ofthe squadron being landed, to aid the troops inpreventing supplies being thrown into Pondicherry.During the preparation for attackingAriancopang, orders were received from Bengalfor divesting Colonel Coote of the command, andplacing it in the hands of Colonel Monson. Thelatter officer, in an attack on the enemy's outposts,having had both the bones of his leg broken by ashot, recommended that Colonel Coote should coioneiMon-son wounded.adam receive the command. It was some days, coioneicootehowever, before Coote would consent to return to and.the camp, having made preparations to proceedto Bengal. The French blew up Ariancopang, Ariancopangand retreated to Pondicherry . The marines being the French.re-embarked by the desire of Admiral Steevens,he sailed in October with the greater part of hisfleet to Trincomalee, leaving five of his ships toprevent the enemy affording aid by sea.The king (as he was then styled) of Mysorehaving supported the French, a diversion was madeinto his country, and the fort of Caroor taken byCaptain Smith. It was supposed to have beentheRUE AND Progress OF THE [Chat. III.1761.idea the first instance of any European troops havingMadam advanced so far west inland. The king subsequentlyaddressed letters of friendship to the Presidentand to the Nabob of the Carnatic, statingHyderrrr Niigue. that it was his prime minister Hyderrrr Naigue, whohad rebelled against him and sent his troops toassist the French. It appears to be the firstmention of Hyderr, who became so formidable anenemy to the Company, both in his own personand that of his adopted successor.The President, Mr. Pigot, having received aninvitation from Colonel Coote, who thought hispresence might be necessary in the event of thereduction of Pondicherry, proceeded in the shipLord Mansfield, on the 7th January, and joinedthe army on the 9th. On the 10th, a battery wasopened against the north-west bastion of the town :on the 13th, another within five hundred yards ofthe walls. On the 15th, deputies came to ColonelCoote, with offers to surrender the place : on the17th, the fort and citadel were delivered up, andthe English colours hoisted. The siege lastedeight months, during which the garrison sufferedgreat distress. The Nabob had presented ten lacsof rupees to the Mahrattass, to prevent their enteringthe Carnatic during the operations. Theysuffered a severe defeat in a general engagementwith the Patans, which checked their growingpower^-a power, it was observed, that would havespread through the country, '* considering the*' progressPondicherrysurrenders.Patans defeatthe Mahrattass.Chap. III.] BfilTISH POWER IN INDIA. 105*' progress they had made of late years'* In the i76i.month of February, Hyderr was in open rebellion Madras.against his master, the king of Mysore. ^J^®^ '" 'colonelCoote was to return to Bengal in March. ?>« ^'^e ^^ Mysore.Colonel Monson being sufficiently recovered toassume the command until General Lawrencearrived from England as commander-in-chief. InOctober, the Council stated that Malabar Jung andthe other contending parties had solicited assistance,offering phirmaunds, which they declined ;adding, *' we are not desirous of grasping at morethan can be held'' Vellore surrendered to theNabob on the 26th December.In April, various refractory Polygars were re- neg.duce, and the Council mediated between theNabob and the king of Mysore for a settlement ofthe former's demand. An expedition against Ma Expedition tovilla sailed on the 29th July from Madras. ^"'"^*-In September, the Council advised the Court of neaintelligence received from Bengal, as to the measuresthen in progress against Cossim Ally Khan,and stated : '' Private advices place it to too muchviolence on both sides." Governor Pigot returnedto England in the month of November, when Mr.Drake succeeded to the chair.The treaty of peace with France having reached 1764. 'the Council, they observed, that the French could Peace witht t . . n France.only bantam troops by obtammg grants of country,♦ Letter from Madras, March 1761.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. III.17e3LMaouls.Madura surrender.1765.Northern Circle.Aid proposedto HusseinAlly in NorthernCigars.try, and this they might easily do from the Nizamas the treaty did not preclude it.Mr. Pale succeeded, under the Court's appointment,as governor, on the 4th May.In October, the fort of Madura, situated amidstthe refractory Polygars, and s^iust which operationshad been commenced in the early part of theyear, surrendered to Major Campbell.The acquisition of the Northern Circars had becomean object of considerable importance. TheCouncil, apprehensive that, if the Company obtainedpossession, it might embroil either the Bengalgovernment or themselves with the Mahrattass,proposed to rent them of .the Nizam, in order tosecure them from falling into the hands of theFrench, as M. Law, formerly so conspicuous aparty in Bengal, had reached India under thetreaty of peace, and proceeded to Pondicherry.Various disputes arose as to the rights of theFrench under the treaty, and the Council dweltstrongly upon the desire M. Law had manifestedto acquire all the privileges which he contendedthe treaty secured to them.The Nizam wished that assistance should begiven to Hussain Ally, to whom he had grantedsunnuds for the Northern Circars to enable him toreduce them to subjection. '' A'S the Carnaticappeared to be secure, except from the junctionof the Mahrattass, Nizam Ally, and Hyderr, andthat with some European power," which theCouncilChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 107Council considered very unlikely, they agreed toassist Hussain Ally. Shortly after the troops forthis purpose were in motion, intelligence was receivedthat the Nizam had advanced in force tomake demands on the Nabob. The troops wererecalled to oppose him, should he advance beyondCuddapah. In the month of March, he slowlyapproached the hills near Tripetty, with 4,000horse and 10,000 sepoy ; but when he ascertainedthe force that would be opposed to him he retired,and sent a friendly letter to the President, with apresent of an elephant. The troops accordinglyproceeded, in fulfilment of the original determination,to aid Hussain Aby.Since the Destruction of the Pirates neo.at Gheria, by the forces under Commodore James Bombay.and Colonel Clive in 1756, the Council at Bombayhad been principally engaged in prosecutingthe Company's commercial affairs at Gombroon,and in the Persian Gulf; also through Bussorahwith Persia, and in Canara and Malabar. InFebruary, 1760, they sent a deputation to Poonahh,under an impression that the Mahrattass were Mahnttas.treating with the French. Nannah, the headof the Mahrattass, disavowed any such intention.He died in the month of June, 1761, when it was i76i.believed that the Brahmin interest, which hadgiven great disgust to the people in general,would cease. Mr. Whitehill was deputed toPoonahh108 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. III.1761. Poonahh, to condole with Mbaderao on the deathBombay, of whig father, whose widow had retired to the hills,with all her family and effects. Mhaderao soughtaid from the Company against the Nizam ; but theCouncil declined to interfere, further than to preservehim from ruin, and to effect an accommodationwith the Nizam.The Bengal government were of opinion, thatthe state of affairs consequent upon the deathof Nannah, presented a favourable moment for ageneral attack against the Mahratta power, as thepresence of some of their bodies, on the bordersof the Company's provinces in Bengal, had beenproductive of much expense and annoyance. TheCouncil at Bombay pointed out that the M mahrattaon the frontiers of Bengal acted independently ofthose at Poonahh ; and although they felt the importanceof reducing their power, yet, in theiropinion, the period was not arrived when the attemptcould be made with any prospect of success./ Ragobah had taken upon himself the principaldirection of the affairs at Poonahh, since the deathof Nannah, and there was reason to believe thathe had proceeded to join the Nizam. The governmentdetermined, therefore, to avoid all interfere^ hence with their affairs as much as possible,rea In May, 1763, Hitter Ally, or HvderRiseofHydcr Naigue,* began to attract attention. He hadalready• Vide page 104Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 109already taken Bednore and advanced into Canara* i763.Mangalore submitted to him, and afterwards Bombay.Onore. His object was to bring the whole of theforts on the sea-coast into subjection ; at thesame time professing an anxious desire to keep ongood terms with the Company, permitting them,under treaty of the 27th May, to erect a factoryat Onore and to enjoy various privileges of trade.*He made an application to the Council for asupply of 7,000 stand of arms ; they acceded onlyto the extent of 500 stand, apprehensive that acomplete refusal might create a misunderstanding*In March of this year, they permitted him to ne*.purchase some cannon, and to build a fighting vesselat Bombay, under the impression that hemight check the Mahrattass and other freebooterson the coast. The Mahrattass, fearing his power,abstained from any movement. The Council re-marked that Hyderr promised to become a veryformidable enemy, unless he should be cut off,which his enterprizing spirit rendered very probable,as his projects for extending his authority hadcaused him many enemies. His successes havingdeprived the Mahrattass of the chout in part of theBednore country, they attacked him, and gainedadvantages over him in various engagements. Heapplied to the Nizam, and also to the Council atBombay, for succour. The latter declined takingany• Printed Treaties, page 618.1 10 S1B& AMB PBOeRSSB OP THE [Chap. III.1701 any part, unless satisfied that their interferenceBombay, ^g^j essential to promote the Company's interests.In November, Hyderr was so pressed by theMahratta then within five miles of his campthat he applied for aid to the Company's agentat Tellicherry^ expressing, at the same time, hisintention of making the whole of the Malabarpowers tributary. The chief at Tellicherry expostulatedwith him against such an attemptrepresenting that, the Company being on terms offriendship with most of the native powers on thecoast, they could not remain neuter, unless heguaranteed full security for the Company's interests.In December, he made applicationthrough the agent at Onore, for aid, both for himselfand the Nizam, in troops, stores, and guns,agreeing to defray every charge, and to grant theCompany all the pepper trade on the coast. TheCouncil, feeling it equally important to avoidgiving umbrage to the Mahrattass, and to preventtheir subduing the Bednore and Soondah countries,resolved to supply Hyderr with four hundredstand of arms and one hundred barrels of gunpowder.The Directors disapproved of the dispositionmanifested to support Hyderr, and remarked,that a man of his aspiring genius, supposinghim to continue for any time, is more likelyto become a formidable enemy than a friend.Letter to Notwithstanding all these striking circumstances, you22 Match 1765. have added to your mismanagement by supplying him witharmsCv^r. III.] BBinSH POWER IN INDIA. Illanne, buying cannon for him, and allowing him to build yj^^ships at Bombay. Bombay.These transactions render it extremely necessary thatwe should be informed of the history of Hyderr Naigue, orHyderr Ally Can, in which your advices hitherto havebeen very deficient ; you are, therefore, hereby directed tosend us, by the first conveyances, an account of his rise,what particular countries he possesses, by what means he isbetx>me so powerful, his genius and character, and everyother material circumstance necessary for our information.In the forgoing part of this letter, we forbad yoursupplying any of the country powers with muskets, whichwe again, and positively, direct be strictly adhered to, unlessto the king of Travancore, for the reasons there mentioned.Cannon we absolutely forbid you supplying any oneof the country powers with ; and should not have thoughtthere ever would have been a necessity for this, it appearingso remarkably inconsistent with our interest and policy.We also positively forbid your supplying the countrypowers with any other warlike stores whatsoever, or bywhatever name they are distinguished (the king of Travancoreexcepted, as observed in other parts of this letter) ;and we do the same with respect to all kinds of marinestores, unless upon very extraordinary occasions, and forwhich we shall expect you to give us, in the fullest and mostexplicit manner, your reasons for the necessity of any compliance.With regard to building ships at Bombay for any o£these people, it can never be for our interest, whatever it mayfor individuals, and, consequently, we positively forbid itsbeing done in future.In January, an expedition was undertaken for m^^the purpose of subduing the Malwa pirates, whenthe1 12 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. III.1765. the fort of Raree, in the Southern Concan, wasBombay. captured.Hyderrrr pressed The Mahrattass having driven Hyderrrr to great^ ' extremities, the Council at Bombay felt that thewhole of the Company's privileges on the coastmight fall a sacrifice, in the event of their furtherprogress. The resident accordingly addressed aletter to Mhaderao and Ragobah, pointing out theprivileges granted by Hyderr to the Company, andstating that they could not sit down tame spectators,and see him deprived of the means of continuingthem . It was proposed that the Council shoulduse their best offices to mediate between them andHyderr. The proposition was accepted, and termswere agreed to,* which ended in a peace, leavingHyderr in possession of the provinces of Bednoreand Soondah.Hyderr extends This arrangement had scarcely been concluded,when Hyderr effected the reduction of the greaterpart of the country on the coast. He then directedhis course towards Calicut, which having captured,he entered the Colastria dominions with 30,000men, under the pretence of collecting two lacs ofpagodas, stated to be due to the Bednore government,and attempted to pass the king of Cotiote'scountry. The spirit of aggrandizement which hemanifested, led the Council to direct their agentat Onore to withhold from him all further supplyof• The 25th April 1765.Chap. ITL] BRITISH POM^ER IN INDIA. 113of fire-arms. lu May, the Council were apprised ^'^^•that the king of Travancore had applied for aid to ^o*""^"^-the Dutch, in case Hyderr should invade his territory; but that his chief reliance was on the Company,to whom he was prepared to transfer the3,000 candies of pepper, at the same price atwhich it was taken at by the Dutch, providedthe Company would supply him with warlikestores, and defend his kingdom, he defrayingthe expense of such aid.The depredations of Hyderr were extensive andindiscriminate. At Rhandeterra, the Moors struckand destroyed the English colours, which wereflying there. Ally Rajah appearing to be activein these operations, a detachment was sent againsthim. Hyderr disavowed all intention of actinghostilely towards the Company : his declarationappeared deserving of credit, from the fact that,at the moment of his operations against the severalpetty native states, he sent his only ship of warto Bombay, to refit, which it was not likely hewould have done, had he been in a state ofhostility with the English. The Council tookmeasures for opposing him, in the event of hisattacking the Company's property; and, in the -month of April, advised the Madras Presidencyof the whole of their proceedings and futureintentions, requesting them to co-operate, shouldcircumstances lead to a rupture.The Council at Madras were anxious that every council at•^ Madras df-voL. I. I means1 14 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LCbaf. Hi.1766. means should be adopted to avert a collision withBoMSAT. Hyderr. They were apprehensive, if hostilities tooktain peJce"witib place, that the whole of the country would be^ ^'' involved ; and as he had the command of allthe passes leading into the Nabob's country, hemight, with ease, send his cavalry forward, anddo great mischief, before effectual measures couldbe taken against him. They likewise consideredthat he presented an important check to the powof the Mahrattass.* Another reason which inducedthem to urge the maintenance of a good understandingwas, the grant to the Company of thecircars by the Mogul. Nizam Ally was indisposedto admit the Company's authority; and, shouldhe join with Hyderr, the Council felt that it wouldpresent a serious obstacle to the Company's establishingtheir power in those countries.In consequence of these representations, thePresident at Bombay addressed a letter to Hyderr,on the 1 th July, adverting to the friendship andregard which he professed for the Company, andpointing out how totally inconsistent his wholecourse of conduct was with such a feeling. Inorder to place his relations towards the Companyon a clear footing, the President transmitted fourteenarticles, as the basis for a treaty of peace andfirm friendship to be agreed to by him. Thefirst declared, that '' there shall be peace andfriendshipConsultations, June 176G.Cbat. III.} BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 115friendship for ever ;*' — the second, that the said ideaNabob has lately conquered the sea-coast from ^«»^^'Cape Ramo north, to Penny south, &c. ; theNabob to repay the Company what was owing tothem by the Rajahs of the countries of which hehad taken possession; facilities of trade to besecured ; pepper to be supplied ; and provisiontrade that he should not form a treaty with anyEuropean power, contrary to the interests of theC<»Eipany ; nor was he to attack any power inalliance with them, more particularly the Nabobof Arcot. He was to send a list of articles hewiped to be supplied with.The answer from Hyderr was dated the 28thSeptember, and received on the 9th November atBombay. The articles were completely alteredby him ; the first commencing, " Thanks be toGod, I have subdued the coast of Malabar fromthe Cape of Ramo to Penny. Since there is sofirm a friendship between the Honourable Companyand this state, how can my people join withthe Honourable Company's enemies? As thereis a fair friendship between the Honourable Company-and this Circarr, they shall always receivemore compliments than others." The thirteentharticle provided that, whenever the HonourableCompany might want troops, he would furnishthem with ten or fifteen thousand ; and, on thecontrary, they were to furnish him, when his enemiesrendered it necessary. He was to haveI 2 annually.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1766.Bombay.Character ofHyderr.annually, from the Company, a supply of threeor four thousand muskets.The following is an extract from Hyderr's letterto the President : — " I have received your honour'sesteemed letter ; thanks be to God, there is noseparation or difference between your honour, theHonourable Company, and the Circarr, and it ismy desire that our friendships may be firm, andincrease daily more and more. Mahomed AllyCan, of Arcot, has also an intention, throughthe persuasion of low people, to have some disputeswitt me : but I also take notice of it, outof regard to your honour. Ally Rajah, althougha well-wisher of your Honourable Company, theAirs preserve a great enmity with, and consequentlyinform the chief of Tellicherry manythings against him, which unjustly occasion himto be disgusted with him. I have also, in consequenceof your letter, sent the articles I am inwant of, and desire your honour will order it tobe drawn out accordingly, and sent to me underyour seal. I am now in want of the muskets,and, therefore, desire your honour will order topermit me annually to purchase from the HonourableCompany three or four thousand new Englishmuskets, and what gunpowder I may want. Iam very glad to observe the offer made me of theHonourable Company's assistance, which is consistentwith our friendship."The Council at Bombay, in accordance with thedesireChas. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 1 17desire expressed by the Court of Directors, sent J766.home an account of the rise, connexions, and Combat.situation of Hyderr. This paper appears to havebeen mislaid. Colonel Wiles, in his 'HistoricalSketches of the South of India,* gives an accountof Hyderr, of whom he speaks in the followingterms:*' An unknown volunteer in this obscure service(the reduction of Bangalore to the house ofMysore) was destined in after-times to becomethe head of a mighty empire ; to establish areputation in arms, which, fairly viewing thescene on which he moved, and the instrumentshe was able to employ, has seldom been exceeded,and to threaten, with no ideal terrors, the extinctionof the British power in India."This statement accords with a paper in thepossession of the late Colonel Mckenzie, thesurveyor-general of Bengal, which representedHyderr to have been the son of Futty Nail, asoldier in the service of the Nabob of Sirpy, inthe year 1728, who fell at the same time with hismaster in an action with a Patau chief, namedRei Mahomet, sent by Nizam ul Mule, thensoubhadar of the Deccan, against the Nabob.Hyderr Nail was then about ten years old. Hebecame a party in the hostilities which arose outof the contentions in 1750 for the Nabobship ofthe Camatic, where he commanded a considerablebody of troops raised through his own means.In1 18 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1706. In 1754 he appears to have been engaged againstBombay. ^Jj^ Poligars near Trichinopoly, and for his servicesreceived a considerable present from the rajah.In 1760 he recovered Bangalore from a Mahrattaforce which blockaded it, in the expectation thatit might be added to the possessions already ac-^quire by them in the country of Mysore.CiAF. IV.] BSingH POWBE IN INDIA. 1 1 9CHAPTER IV.The state of affairs in India, as announced to 1765.the Home Authorities at the commencement of b«>*<»^»-1764, led to the appointment of Lord Clive* aspresident and commander-in-chief, which measurewas communicated to the Council of Bengalin the following terms : — " The General Court Lord awe «p-of Proprietors having, on account of the critical dSLTwd^^m-situation of the Company's affairs in Bengal, Sl^*' ""requested Lord Clive to take upon him the stationof president, and the command of the Company'smilitary forces there, his Lordship has beenappointed president and governor accordingly, asmentioned in the preceding part of this letter.The intention of the General Court, in desiringLord Clive to go to Bengal, was, that by his Lordship'scharacter and influence, peace and tranquillitymight be the easier restored and established inthat subahship. In order, therefore, to answerthese purposes in a manner that we apprehendmay prove most effectual, we have thought propertoColonel Clive had been raised to the peerage in March1762, by the title of Lord Clive, Baron of Plassey, in Ireland.120 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. IV.1765. to appoint a committee on this occasion, consistingB.KOAL. ^f jjjg Lordship, Mr, W. B. Sumner, Brigadier-generalCamac, also Messrs. Harry Verelst andFrancis Sykes, to whom we do hereby give fullpowers to pursue whatever means they shall judgemost proper to attain those desirable ends ; buthowever, in all cases where it can be done conveniently,the Council at large is to be consulted bythe said Committee, though the power of determiningis to be in that Committee alone. Wefurther direct, that, as soon as peace and tranquillityare restored and established in the subah-shipof Bengal, then the said extraordinary powersare immediately to cease, and the said Committeebe dissolved"*The proceedings which led to the nominationof Lord Clive as president and commander-in-chief,in 1764, are calculated to throw light uponpoints that gave to his Lordship's character an appearanceof pertinacity, which the facts will tendin a great measure to explain. Considerable misapprehensionalso appears to have existed as tothe conduct and motives of the Courts of Directorsand Proprietors at that time.In the early part of January 1764, the Court ofDirectors had resolved to remove Mr. Amyatt andothers from the Company's service, in consequenceof the uns justifiable course they had pursued towardstheLetter from the Court of Directors to Bengal, the 1st June1764.Chap. IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 121the Nabob, in the conduct of the internal trade.* 1765.They had also appointed Mr. Vansittart president »«*«*!-and governor, and Mr. Spencer, who was theseventh in council at Bombay, second member ofthe council at Calcutta, and successor to Mr. Vansittart.On the 4th February, nearly three weedsubsequent to those appointments,«advices were receivedby the Lapwing from Madras, dated 3dSeptember, 1763, which conveyed the first intelligenceof an actual rupture with Meer Cossim,the death of Mr. Amyatt at Moorshedabad, andthe failure of Mr. Ellis in his attempt to gainpossession of the city of Patna. The latter gentlemanwould have been removed from the service,by the Court's orders of May 1763, whichorders had not been received in Bengal when theabove-mentioned occurrence took place.The attention of the Proprietors and the publicwas drawn to those advices, their substance beingstated in an anonymous advertisement, issued onthe 8th February, and published in the papers byorder of the Chairman. A special General Courtwas called on the 27th February, at the requisitionof nine proprietors, for the purpose of consideringthe state of affairs in India. They metagain on the 29th February, and on the 1st and12th March. At these several Courts, all the proceedingstouching the various revolutions in India,down• Vide p. 87.122 BIM AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. IV,1765. down to the last elevation of Meer Jailer, includesBwoAb jjjg ^]^^ despatch of the 3d September, were read.It was then moved, to refer lack the appointmentof Mr. Spencer for the consideration of theCourt of Directors: but the General Court adjournedwithout coming to any decision on thequestion. On the 12th March, another SpecialCourt was held, at the requisition of nine proprietors,at which it was resolved, ** that it is the desireof the Greneral Court, that Lord Clive be requestedto take upon him the station of president of bengaland the command of the Company's militaryforces there."His Lordship, who was present, intimated,*^ that if the Court of Directors were as well disposedtowards him as he was towards them, heshould have no objection to the service ; but tillhe found such a disposition, he desired to be excusedfrom coming to any resolution'* A letterwas addressed to Lord Clive from the Court ofDirectors, on the 16th March, transmitting a copyof the General Court's resolution, and acquaintinghim that they were unanimous in assuring htm,that they would most cheerfully concur in takingthe steps necessary to carry the resolution of theGeneral Court into effect, and in preparing everyconvenience for his passage. His Lordship'sreply to the official communication, through theSecretary, was dated the 17th. *' I have receivedyour letter enclosing a copy of the resolution oftheChap. IV.l British OWES IN INDIil. 123the last General Court I must desire you will iwkreturn the Directors my thanks, for their offers of b«"«^preparing every convenience for my passage'The letters were communicated to a GeneralCourt cm the 2 1st March, when the Proprietorsdesired to know from Lord Clive, who Mrs present,whether he was disposed to declare hisimmediate acceptance of the stations. His Lordshipreplied, that ** he would give his answer assoon as the next election of Directors should bedetermined." A motion was then made, *' thatLord Clive declining to accept immediately theservice proposed to him by the General Court, the %Court of Directors be desired to make the properarrangements, in the present critical situation ofthe Company's affairs' After a debate thereon,it appeared to be the sense of the Court, thatevery objection Lord Clive might have to hisacceptance of the Company's service should beremoved. His Lordship having declared that'^ he could not accept the service if the DeputyChairman remained in the lead of the Direction,"that gentleman repeatedly expressed the greatestinclination to co-operate, in the most honourableand friendly manner. Lord Clive then signifiedthat he would declare his final resolution in a fewdays which he was desirous of being indulgedwith. On the 28th March, his Lordship addressedthe following letter to the Court of Directors : —*' Gentlemen : — It was agreed at the last General1 24 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1765 oral Court of Proprietors, that I should have a fewBixoAL. ^g^yg jq consider and determine concerning theterms upon which I would accept of the requestof the preceding Court of Proprietors, to take uponme the direction of their affairs in Bengal.although I thought I had sufficiently explainedmyself on that head at the time the proposalwas made, yet, as there seemed to be adisposition in many of the gentlemen of the Courtfor whom I have the highest respect, that a reconciliationshould take place between Mr. Sullivanand me, so that this gentleman might still conductthe affairs at home, and that I might neverthelessventure, without fear of my reputation,abroad, I thought the respect which was due tothose Proprietors, the duty I owe to myself, andthe regard T shall ever feel for the interest of theCompany, all called upon me, in the strongestmanner, once more to revolve in my mind thepossibility of such an union, consistent with theServices T would endeavour to render the Company,and consistent with that attention which isdue to my own honour.** This I have endeavoured to do in the coolestand most dispassionate manner, after laying asideevery prejudice, and judging only from the constantexperience of things.*upon the whole, I still continue to be ofopinion, that, in case the Proprietors think it fortheir advantage that Mr. Sulivan should remainatCbap.1V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 125at the head of the Direction (or, as he was pleased nsSbto term it himself, should continue him in the lead Bimauof their affairs), I cannot accept their service:but in case the Proprietors should not think itnecessary to continue Mr. Sulivan in such authority,I am willing and ready to accept their service,even supposing the next advices shouldpronounce their affairs in Bengal to be in as desperatea condition as ever they were in the timeof Suraja Dowlas.Should a Direction be settled with whom Ican possibly co-operate, every thing will be easilyadjusted, since I have no interested views in goingabroad.At the same time, I never desired, or evenwished, to name a Direction, as some industriouslyspread abroad ; I only object to one man havingthe lead in the Company's affairs, in whom I haveso often and publicly declared I never can placeany confidence, and who, in my opinion, hasacted, and does continue to act, upon principlesdiametrically opposite to the true interest of theEast-india Company.I have the honour to be, with great respect,gentlemen, your most obedient humble servant,(Signed) '' Clive,"'* Berkeley Square,March 28th, 1764-"No answer was returned to his Lordship's letter.The annual election took place on the 12thApril ;1 26 USB AND PSOOBEW OF THE [CsAr. JV.1705. April ; new Chairs being chosen on the 13th, Mr.BiNOAi- Sulivan returned into the body of the Court. Onthe 18th, a letter was addressed to Lord Clivefrom the Court, through their Secretary, desiringhis Lordship to signify his determination as to proceedingto India, and that be would favour theChairs with a conference on the following morning.In consequence of such communication.Lord Clive repaired to the India House on the19th, and being desirous of explaining himself tothe Court, he was introduced. After acknowledgingthat he felt bound in honour to accept theinvitation of the General Court, he declared thathe had no interested views therein, but that hissole object was that of serving the Company. Heexpressed his sentiments generally as to thepolitical, commercial, and military affairs of theCompany, he stated that he could not proceed ifMr. Spencer continued in Bengal, as such measurewould be the occasion of several of theCouncil resigning the service ; and that he alsoapprehended there would be great impropriety inhis proceeding to India whilst the law-suit relatingto his jaghire was depending.On the 27th, his Lordship having stated that heshould be ready to take upon himself the government,although his offer as to the jaghire shouldnot be agreed to ; addressed the Court at considerablelength, submitting various suggestions,which he conceived would tend to promote theCompany'sCvAP.IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 127Company's interests. The Court of Directors ivw.on that day rescinded the nomination of Mr. Brmoai.Spencer as second in council, and re-appointedhim to Bombay.On time 30th April, Lord Clive was sworn in aspresident of Fort William and commander-in-chiefof the Ccwoipany's forces there. On the 5th Maythe General Court resolved to grant to his Lordshipthe proceeds of the jaghire for ten years ;it was also resolved that covenants should beentered into by the Company's servants not toreceive gifts, presents, or rewards in India. Theorders prohibiting presents, and desiring covenantsto be entered into, were opened and recorded bythe Council at Calcutta, on the 24th January1765. Jaffier Ally Khan died on the 5th Februaryfollowing, when Nazim-ood-Dowlah, theNabob from whom the members of the Councilwere charged, on Lord Clive s arrival, with havingreceived the present of twenty lacs, succeededto the musnud.The Committee of Correspondence having beenappointed to confer with Lord Clive on the varioussuggestions he had made, and to report theiropinions to the Court, the Committee, on the25th May 1764, recommended, '' that, in orderto restore peace and tranquillity in Bengal, fullpowers be given to our president and governorLord Clive, Mr. Sjiimner, General Camac, Messrs.Verelst and Sykes, to pursue whatever meansthey128 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat, IV.1765. they judge most proper to attain the same ; butBbnoal. ^j^^^^ when it can be done conveniently, they areto consult the Council at large. However, whenthose desirable objects are obtained, the saidextraordinary powers are immediately to cease,"The Court of Directors adopted the recommendationof the Committee on the same day,and, as already shewn, it formed part of the instructionsto the President and Council at Calcutta.Such were the facts connected with Lord Clive'sappointment. It has however been stated that,'' during the military and political transactionswhich so intensely engaged their servants inIndia, the Courts of Directors and Proprietorsremained for several years rather quiet spectatorsand warm expectants, than keen and troublesomecontrollers.*when they had been agitated for a while,however, by the reports of mismanagement whichwere mutually transmitted to them by Vansittartand his opponents, and, at last, when they werealarmed by the news of a war actually kindledwith the Nabob, of the massacre of so many oftheir servants, and the extensive spirit of mutinyamong the troops, their sense of danger rousedthem to some acts of authority. Though Clivehad quitted India with an act of insult towardshis employers, which they had highly resented ;though the Directors had disputed and withheldpaymentCras. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 129payment of the proceeds of his jaghire, for which ^'^^'^^he had commenced a suit against them in the ^■"°^'-Court of Chancery; he was now proposed forgovernor, as the only man capable of retrievingtheir disordered and desperate affairs. Onlythirteen Directors, however, were found, after aviolent contest, to vote for his appointment, whileit was still opposed by eleven. Yet the highpowers which he demanded, as indispensable forthe arduous services necessary to be performed,though strongly opposed, were also finally conferred.He was invested with the powers ofcommander-in-chief, president, and governor, inBengal, and together with four gentlemen, namedby the Directors, was to form a Select Committee,empowered to act by their own authority, as oftenas they deemed it expedient, without consultingthe Council or being subject to its control."With regard to the first clause of the passage,the Company's records shew, that both the Courtsof Directors and Proprietors watched with muchsolicitude the progress of affairs in India. Thereis nothing which authorizes the inference, thatthey were at that period 'swarm expectants,"(it is presumed) either of new acquisitions orexorbitant gains. They desired the means ofmeeting the heavy expenditure which the operationsin that country had entailed upon the Company.They advised and directed, where adviceand direction could be safely given ; and althoughVOL. I. K they130 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.J765. they wisely abstained " from controlling any measureswhich the exigency of circumstances mighthave called for on the part of the Council, theycommunicated their sentiments and wishes thereonto their servants'Indeed, the principles which governed the Courtat that early period of the Company's politicalhistory, present an extraordinary coincidence withthose expressed by the Court, only in the monthof January 1 835 : —** Long experience, as well as reflection, hasconvinced the Court of Directors, that, under thevery imperfect knowledge which can here beattained of all the circumstances connected with,and bearing upon, public arrangements and operationsof the government in India, ther are fewcases in which precise and peremptory rules oughtto be prescribed. The course which they havefollowed, as the only safe and salutary one, hasbeen, to be copious and minute in instructionsand observations, both as regards the principles tobe acted upon, and the application to be made ofthem in particular circumstances : but to be verysparing in orders and rules, which leave not alatitude to those on the spot, who alone are competentto frame their measures in such a manneras to adapt them to circumstances which here mayhave been only partially known."So far from the Court having been arousedto acts of authority by the news of actual hostilitiesCmat.IV.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 131ties with the Nabob — by the massacre of so many i765.of their servants — and by the extensive spirit of Bengal.mutiny among the troops, it has been seen thatthey had exercised those acts of authority beforeany such news had reached England. That thedeath of Mr. Amyatt was not known to the Courtuntil three weeks after he had been removed fromthe service ; the account of the massacre did notarrive until three months, and that of the mutinyuntil six months, after the appointment of LordClive ; and instead of its having been consideredan extensive m«tfaiy, the Court of Directors, onthe 11th October, 1764, caused the followingnotice to be issued through the daily papers:'* We can with good authority assure the public,that although, by the last advices from Bengal(7th February), the East-india Company wereinformed there had been a mutiny among thetroops, instigated and encouraged by some Frenchsoldiers, about one hundred and fifty in number,who had enlisted in the Company's service, yetthe same, at the time of despatching those advices,was quelled, without the loss or desertionof a single European, except those Frenchmenabove-mentioned." The appointment of LordClive was that of the Court of Proprietors, andnot of the Court of Directors. With regard to thehigh powers stated to have been "demanded,"it would be inferred from the statement that theyformed one of the stipulations under which hisK 2 Lordship132 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cray. IV.1765. Lordship accepted the oflSce of president ; 'as he was sworn in on the 30th April, and it wasnot until the 25th May that the recommendationof the Committee of Correspondence alreadynoticed, which was agreed to in personal communicationwith, and not in consequence of anydemand from his Lordship, was adopted by themajority of the Court. It was on that occasionthat the eleven Directors dissented not from his appointmentbut from the resolution conferring suchpowers on the Select Committee, which was toconsist of four members besides his Lordship ;and so far from the act conferring such powersbeing unusual, the principle had obtained, ofappointing a Select Committee to act irrespectiveof the Council, since February, 1766.In the instance of the expedition to Madrasunder Colonel Forde, in 1758, the Select Committeeacted under such powers, as appears by theConsultations of the 21st August in that year.In the instance of Mr. Vansittart, in February1764, only three months preceding the propositionfor conferring the powers in question on LordClive and the Committee, full powers had beengiven by the Court to Mr. Vansittart "withauthority to pursue whatever means he judgedmost proper to attain the object. He was in allcases, where it could be done conveniently, toconsult the Council at large, or at least the SelectCommittee, though the power of determining wasto be in him alone "LordCuAT. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 133Lord Clive arrived at Calcutta and took his 1765.seat as President, on the 3d May. One of the ®""^'"first measures of the Select Committee was thesuppression of the internal trade, which had beenthe cause of such serious and frequent disputes.In accordance with the opinion of the SelectCommittee, an order was issued in Council, onthe 20th May, requiring all European agents employedin the different parts of the country torepair to the presidency by the 1st August. Theattention of the Council was also drawn by thePresident to a representation from the Nabob,that, since his father's death, a distribution hadbeen made of twenty lacs by Mahomet RezaKhan, for the purpose of maintaining him in hisstation, and that members of the Council hadparticipated in the gifts. Mr. Leycester, one ofthe members of the Council, recorded a minuteexplanatory of the course he had followed. Onthe 7th June, the subject of receiving presents Presents ac-fromthe country government and its officers, membew^ofcontrary to the orders from home, and to the ""covenants required to be entered into by theservants of the Company, being brought underdiscussion by the proceedings of the Select Committee,Mr. Johnstonee, a member of the Council,desired that the question, ** whether the acceptanceof all presents is improper?" might be put toeach member of the Board. Of the eight memberspresent, including the President, four gave adecided or qualified opinion in favour of receivingpresents ;134 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. IV.1765. presents; and four, including the President, wereBkxoal. opposed to their receipt.*The♦ Extract Bengal Consultations 7th June, 1765 : —Mr. Burnett is of opinion *' That such presents may bereceived or not according to particular circumstances ; that theNabob had a right to dispose of his own property, and that thepresents* on the occasion in question, might with great proprietybe received'*Mr. Leicester : " That where they are not the price ofservices, they may very properly be received."Mr. SvKBs : *' That present at all times from the Nabob orhis officers are very improper, as tending to the prejudice ofthe Company's interests*'Mr. Johnstonee : *' That where they are not the price ofunworthy services, and no trust is betrayed for them, the acceptanceof them is no way improper ; and, in the present case, asbeing previous to the execution [but not the receipt of the orders']of the deed of covenant, as warrantable as in time past by anywho had received them."Mr. Verelst is of opinion, <' That the receiving of presents,at a time the Board are doing their duty in supporting thegovernment, and in the interest of the Company, is highlyimproper ; and the more so in the present instance, since he isinformed that the Company's orders and covenants were receivedin Calcutta before, the tender of them'*Mr. Pleyel agrees in the opinion given by Mr. Leycester.Mr. Sumner is of opinion, << That the acceptance of presentsafter the receipt of the Company's orders to the contrary, andthe covenants, is very improper."The President : 'that no presents whatever ought to havebeen accepted after the receipt of the covenants, except in themanner specified therein."Mr. Leicester recorded, on the 11th June, a minute, ofwhich the following is an extract. It is a singular document,and presents a curious specimen of reasoning in support of hisviews: —«' When♦ Fide page 127.Chas. IV.] British POWER IN INDIA. 135The following extract from a minute recorded i?^-by Mr. Johnstonee in Council, on the 17th June,evinces a strong party spirit, as well as a jealousfeeling towards Lord Clive and the Select Committee,and affords some clue to the reasons whichdoubtless operated on the mind of his Lordship,in pressing for the removal of Mr. Spencer fromCouncil.*'* It seems the aim of the (Select) Committeeto render the proceedings of the late President andCouncil, if possible, obnoxious, instead of strivingto promote the cordiality so much to be wished.To'when the Company interests were altogether secured,and the orders of the Board fully executed, it is very truethat I accepted a present from the Nabob. I never made asecret of it, as the custom of this country on such occasions,well known to every body, sanctifies the acceptance; andwhere presents have not been esteemed the price of improperservices, I never heard a reflection cast on those who did receivethem. It has always been my opinion, that, in a country notunder the most absolute tyranny, every man's property was athis own disposal, and every one was at liberty to accept whatwas offered without fear or compulsion, the same not being aconsideration for improper services. The adopting oppositemaxims is contrary to the known practice of those who havegone before us ; and though absolute orders, with a penaltyannexed, may make the receiving presents improper and inconvenient,yet they cannot alter the rectitude of the act itself;and I will venture to appeal to the common sentiments ofmankind, which, I am persuaded, will condemn that man as avery absurd one, who, having an opportunity of obtaining acomfortable maintenance for no dishonourable sacrifice, shoulddecline the occasion*'rude page 126.1 36 Bite Abed Progress OF THE [CHAr. IV.i7«5. To what causes must we attribute this temper ofBwoAi ^j^^ Committee ? One would almost think theywere piqued to find the interest of the Companyso well secured before their arrival; only theymust know that their coming at all was doubtful,and the gentlemen who had felt the defects of theformer treaty, were full as well qualified to remedythem in the new one, and have no doubt theirmasters will approve their services. I have beardthat the Governor has expressed much chagrin,that the affair of his jaghire has been settled accordingto his agreement with the Companywithout his interposition, though a better opportunitycould not have occurred to get it done.Mr. Spencer, than whose merit none stands in afairer light with the Company, was, if I may socall him, ike darling of that 'party which in Englandopposed Lord Clive and the gentlemen of theCommittee. Any attack of him or his measure, isan attack on the party who espoused him ; andthough I would not assert that any such sentimentsinfluenced any member of the Board, yet I cannothelp being surprised at the uncommon neglect anddisregard shewn to Mr. Spencer by Lord Clive."Lord Clive recorded a minute on the 24thJune, as to the jaghire, which had been so broadlyadverted to by Mr. Johnstonee. His Lordship didnot shrink from boldly maintaining what he conceivedto be his just rights, from the earliest momentthe point became mattervof dispute untiltheCHAr. IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 137the final settlement of the question : — ** As to it^s^the recrimination of my having formerly received Bbxoai.a present from Meer Jaffier, which Mr. Johnstoneewould establish as a precedent to be followed byevery body, he is not ignorant that it was givento me in a military capacity only, as a reward forreal services rendered to the Nabob at a very dangerouscrisis ; nor was that reward ever stipulated,required, or expected by me, or with my knowledge.Be it also remembered, that what Ireceived in consequence of the battle of Plassey,was the only present I ever did receive, althoughI remained, during the space of nearly three yearsafterwards. President of the Council, and at thehead of a victorious army. Let the impartial worlddetermine, whether those who have succeeded mewith inferior pretensions, and even in inferior stations,have conducted themselves with equal proprietyor moderation It is unnecessary for me todwell longer upon the subject of my own conduct,having long ago published every particular relatingto it, and having long ago had the satisfaction ofseeing it approved by my employers. If all Mr.Johnstonee's transactions will bear the test as wellas mine, he will no doubt receive as honourabletestimonials of public approbation as I did. Thegentleman has heard, it seems, that I expressedsome chagrin in finding that the confirmation ofthe jaghire to the Company on the expiration oftenyears, or at my death, had been obtained (attempted.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THELCbaf. IV.1765.Necessity forpowers of SelectCommittee.tempted, I suppose he would have said, for it isnot yet obtained) without my interposition. Asthis part of Mr. Johnstonee's minute happens to beafact, I will do him the justice to acknowledgeit. I have not scrupled to say, and I still continueof opinion, that the late President and Councilwere officious in applying for the confirmation.The Court of Directors, in their letter of the 1stJune last, expressly say, that they need give noother directions relative to that business, than thatthe Council shall co-operate with me in effectingit; and that, in case of my death, then the Presidentand Council for the time being shall solicitfor, and use their best endeavours to obtain, thegrant, in as effectual a manner as if I had beenliving to co-operate with them. These being theorders, the only orders, they received, and theopportunity they so much dwell on being of noimportance, I cannot help repeating, that theapplication which the gentlemen thought fit tomake to the Nabob was officious, and stronglyintimated either a distrust of my intentions tocomplete the agreement I had entered into, or aninclination to deprive me of that small testimonyof my attachment to the Company."Nothing could more strongly prove the necessityfor his Lordship being armed with the powers thathad been conferred upon him and the other membersof the Select Committee, than the proceedingswhich have been so fully noticed. A referencetoCiiAF. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 139to the documents is essential, in order to place i765.the facts before the reader, and to enable him to b«mcaiform a correct opinion as to the conduct of LordClive, in the various peculiar and difficult positionsin which he was placed.*On the receipt of Mr. Leycester's minute, andthe other proceedings, the Court wrote as follows :'* In the thirtieth paragraph of our letter of the19th February last, we expressed our surprise thatthe covenants were not executed, nor any noticetaken of them ; judge, then, what we feel onlearning, from Mr. Leycester's minute on Consultation,11th June, 1766, that they never wereintended to be executed ; and we presume hespeaks not only his own sentiments, but the sentimentsof his colleagues, when he says, thecovenants were rather the effects of party than thecool sentiments of his masters, and that it wasprobable parties would unite in abolishing covenantsthat could only injure individuals, and dotheBefore the Directors had received intelligence of the proceedingsin Council and the minute of Mr. Leicester theywrote to Bengal on the 19th February, 1766:— << We cannotavoid taking notice, that the late President and Council neitheracknowledged the receipt of the covenants relative to the receivingpresents from the country government, nor have they takenthe least notice of them. We hope there is no further meaningin this neglect than the deferring it till Lord Lives arrival ;yet when we consider the total disregard of our most solemnorders on the most important subjects we know not where theirdisobedience wil stop."140 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1765. the Company no service. If our servants presumebbmoau tjjug to call in question our most direct and positiveorders, enforced, too, by the general voice ofthe whole body of Proprietors, it is time for us toexert the authority vested in us, and to do justiceto the injured natives, to our own honour, and tothe national character.** The proceedings of the Select Committee havelaid open to us a most complicated scene of corruption.** Neither can we admit, that the vast sumsobtained on this occasion were by any means freegifts ; the dependent situation of the Soubah isitself a refutation of the plea ; and his letter toLord Clive and the Select Committee, with theconcurrent testimonies of the Seats, and MahmudReza Can, together with the depositions of theseveral people examined in this matter, amount tothe clearest proofs that they were exacted fromthe several parties as the terms of the protectiongranted them ; and, lastly, we shall say a wordor two to what those gentlemen vainly imaginemakes strong in their defence, that no interest wassacrificed to obtain them.'the Company was engaged in a war which,as far as we can judge, cost them from ten totwelve lacs per month, for which the Nabob hadstipulated to pay no more than five lacs per month,and even that fell in arrears ; the Nabob was atthis time pressed for payment of the remainingthirtyCbap.IY.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 141thirty lacs for restitution, besides other unlawful nes.demands on him. It cannot surely be pleaded ^^^^^that, under these circumstances of the Soubahand the Company, no interest of the Companywas sacrificed to obtain them ! We think these gentlemensacrificed their own honour, the interestand honour of the Company, and of the nation.** We are sorry to see some of the gentlemenhave thought fit to justify their breach of trust bya breach of order, in pleading the covenants werenot executed, therefore not obligatory. But sototally do we differ from them, that we think themnot only guilty of a breach of those particular covenants,but also of the general covenants, whichwere entered into before these last were found sonecessary.*' The cavils and opposition of several of themembers of the Council to the powers and conductof our Select Committee, appear most evidentlyto have been calculated to screen and obstruct theinquiries into and detection of their misbehaviour ;but we are satisfied you have had the real interestof the Company constantly in your view, in allyour researches into the general corruption andrapacity of our servants, with the spirit and disinterestednesswhich do you honour, and merit ourapprobation." *TenLetter to Bengal, 17th May, 1766.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chaf.IV.i7«& Ten servants, including Mr. Spencer, were .missed the Company's service.Shuja Dowlasdefeated.Surrenders tothe British Oo-TenementShuja Dowlas, having found means to engageMulier, a considerable Mahratta chief, in hisalliance, made formidable preparations to penetratea second time * into the Nabob's dominions.The measures pursued by Brigadier-general Carnac,who had assumed the command of the army,prevented a junction of the numerous forces destinedfor the invasion, and averted the consequencesof a ruinous war, which must have beensupported through another campaign. Havingreason to believe that their intention was to fallupon Sir Robert Fletcher, who commanded aseparate corps in the Corah district, the generalby forced marches united his troops with thoseof Sir Robert, and, on the 3d May, comingup with the enemy, completely defeated them.The Mahrattass retired with precipitation towardsthe Jumna, where they took up a position, whencethey intended, if possible, to re-enter the districtof Corah. The general attacked them again onthe 22d, and obliged them to retire to the hills.The Vizier, Shuja Dowlas, having intimated adesire to throw himself upon the generosity of theBritish Government, was received with the respectwhich was considered due to his rank.It• rMfepage9S.Cha^.IV.] BRITISH power in INDU. 143It appeared to the Council, that a peace with nes.the Vizier was the immediate object to be attained. , ®'*!?^^'' laird Clive pro-lordClive accordingly quitted Calcutta on the ceedsupUieo ./ * country and24th June, to conclude a treaty; for which pur conctadM*. treaty with thepose, his Lordship was furnished by the Council vizier andwith the following instructions : — '* Experiencehaving shewn, that an influence maintained byforce of arms i^ destructive of that commercialspirit which we ought to promote, ruinous to theCompany, and oppressive to the country, weearnestly recommend to your Lordship, that youwill exert your utmost endeavours to conciliatethe affections of the country powers, to removeany jealousy they may entertain of our unboundedambition and to convince them we ain not at conquestand dominion, but security in carrying ona free trade, equally beneficial to them and to us.With this view, policy requires that our demandsbe moderate and equitable, and that we avoidevery appearance of an inclination to enlarge ourterritorial possessions. The sacrifice of conquests,which we must hold on a very precarious tenure,and at an expense more than equivalent to theirrevenues, is of little consequence to us ; yet willsuch restitutions impress them with a high opinionof our generosity and justice. For these reasons,we think Sbuja Dowlas should be reinstated in thefull possession of all his dominions, with suchlimitations only as he must see are evidently calculatedfor our mutual benefit. We would declinein144 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChaf. IV.1765. insisting upon any terms that must prove irksomeBxMOAL. ^^ jjjg jj^jgj^ spirit, and imply a suspicion of hissincerity. Retaining possession of any of hisstrongholds may possibly be deemed a necessarypledge of his fidelity.' For our parts, we wouldrather consider it as the source of future contentionand an unnecessary burthen to the Companyunless it be one day proposed to resume thethought of extending their dominions : a measurevery opposite to the sentiments in which we leftthe Court of Directors."In accordance with these instructions, his Lordshipand General Camac concluded a treaty ofpeace with Shuja Dowlas and the Nabob, on the16th August, at Allahabad.* Whatever reasonableexpectations the Council entertained that thistreaty would secure their friendship and fidelity,and render the public tranquillity permanent, itwas the commencement of a connexion which hasbeen a fruitful source of discussion to the presentday.The Nabob was extremely averse to the establishmentof factories in his dominions, as hejustly considered, from past experience, that theywould lay the foundation of a future rupture, andprove the only thing that could possibly disturbour amity. The word factories was omitted inthe treaty ; but without relinquishing the right,should it be found expedient, after mature deliberation,Fuse Printed Treaties.Chaf.1V.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 145ration, to enforce it, the Council stated that 1^5-they could foresee no benefit to arise to the Com- ^'^^^^any from maintaining settlements at so vast adistance from the presidency, whatever advantagesmight accrue to their servants. The prospectwas so remote, while the expenses were socertain, the risk so evident, and the disputes itmight occasion so probable, that they were ofopinion the factory lately established at Benaresought immediately to be withdrawn. They consideredthe limits of the Nabob's dominions sufficientto answer all purposes, and that they oughtto constitute the boundaries, not only of all theCompany's territories, possessions, and influence,but of their' commerce also. " Grasping at morewould endanger the safety of the revenues, andthe well-founded power which they enjoyed,without the hope of obtaining an adequate advantage."A sufficient provision was secured for the supportof the king's honour, and dignity, withoutdanger of his becoming a future incumbrance.Twenty-six lacs yearly were granted to him onthe revenues of Bengal, an income far more considerablethan he ever before enjoyed. The SelectCommittee then announced, that, *' in gratitudefor this instance of our attention to his interest, hismajesty has been pleased to bestow on the Companythe most important grants ever yet obtainedby any European state from the Mogul CourtVOL. I. L BesidesRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IV.1765.Bengal.Dewannygranted to theCompany.Besides confining to the Company all their formerpossessions and securing to them the reversionin perpetuity of Lord Clive's jaghire, hehas conferred on them the Dewanny of Bengal,Bahar, and Orissa, and, ratified in thestrongest terms an agreement we proposed concludingwith the Nabob, if the king's consentcould be procured"* Another article stipulatedthat Shuja Dowlas should pay the Company fiftylacs of rupees, by way of indemnification for thecharges incurred by the war. The surrender ofCossim, Sumroo, and the deserters, was utterlyout of his power. The former had sought shelterin the Rohillah country, and the latter under theprotection of the Jauts. It was agreed that theyshould never meet encouragement or assistancefrom Shuja Dowlas, or be again admitted into hiscountry. A sanguine hope was entertained thatthe treaty of peace would be lasting, and ourfrontiers in that quarter perfectly secure againstforeign invasions.The Select Committee then observed : " Thetime now approaches, when we may be able todetermine, with some degree of certainty, whetherour remaining as merchants, subjected to thejurisdiction, encroachments, and insults of thecountry government, or the supporting your privilegesand possessions by the sword, are likelyto♦ Letter from the Select Committee, 30th September, 1766.Cbap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN Ina. 147to prove most beneficial to the Company. What nes.ever may be the consequence, certain it is that, B^^**-after having once begun and proceeded to suchlengths, we have been forced to go on from stepto step, until your whole possessions were put tothe risk by every revolution effected and everybattle fought. To apply a remedy to those evils,by giving stability and permanency to yourgovernment, is now, and has been, the constantobject of the serious attention of your SelectCommittee."These remarks justly point out a state of things Beneficial re-flowing from the progress of events so self-evil pated.dent, that they require no comment. It has beencharged upon Lord Clive, that he had planned orcontemplated the acquisition of the Dewannywhen at Madras, on his passage out. It shouldnot be forgotten that the Dewanny of Bengal hadbeen offered to the Company in 1761.* His lordshipdenied the justice of the charge. But sofarfrom attaching any thing like criminality tothe idea, had it been entertained by Lord Clive,it must have been clear to any one who hadwatched the course of things, that it was themost likely measure to prevent a recurrence ofthose disputes and disagreements with the Nabob,which had so frequently occurred and had been sostrongly condemned. The Select Committee themselvesFide page 47.liBISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IV.1765.Bro A L.Courts viewson acquiringthe Dewanny.selves seem to have felt such to be the case, inwriting to the Court :^' The perpetual struggles for superiority betweenthe nabobs and your agents, together withthe recent proofs before us of notorious and avowedcorruption, have rendered us unanimously of opinion,after the most mature deliberation, that noother method could be suggested of laying the axeto the root of all these evils, than that of obtainingthe Dewanny of Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa forthe Company. By establishing the power of theGreat Mogul, we have likewise established hisrights ; and his majesty, from principles of gratitude,equity, and policy, has thought proper tobestow this important employment on the Company,the nature of which is, the collecting all therevenues, and after defraying the expenses of thearmy, and allowing a sufficient fund for the supportof the Nizamutut, to remit the remainder toDelhi, or wherever the king shall reside or direct."The Directors expressed their sentiments onthis event in the following terms:* "We comenow to consider the great and important affair ofthe Dewanny. When we consider that the barrierof the country government was entirely brokedown, and every Englishman throughout thecountry armed with an authority that owned nosuperior, and exercising his power to the oppression• Letter to Bengal, 17th May, 1766.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 149sion of the helpless native, who knew not whom 1765.to obey, at such a crisis, we cannot hesitate to *cal.approve your obtaining the Dewanny for theCompany.'* We must now turn our attention to render ouracquisitions as permanent as human wisdom canmake them. This permanency, we apprehend,can be found only in the simplicity of the execution.We observe the account you give of theoiBce and power of the king's Dewan in formertimes was — the collecting of all the revenues, andafter defraying the expenses of the army, and allowinga sufficient fund for the support of theNizamutut, to remit the remainder to Delhi. Thisdescription of it is not the office we wish to execute; the experience we have already had, in theprovince of Burdwan, convinces us how unfit anEnglishman is to conduct the collection of therevenues, and follow the subtle native through allhis arts to conceal the real value of his country,to perplex and to elude the payments. We thereforeentirely approve of your preserving the ancientform of government, in the upholding the dignityof the Soubah.We conceive the office of Dewan should beexercised only in superintending the collection anddisposal of the revenues, which office, thoughvested in the Company, should officially be executedby our resident at the durbar, under thecontrol of the Governor and Select Committee,thefile AND Progress OF THELCiiAr. IV.1705.BSNOAUOpposition toLord Clive.the ordinary bounds of which control should extendto nothing beyond the superintending thecollection of the revenues and the receiving themoney from the Nabob's treasury to that of theDewannah, or the Company.*' The resident at the durbar, being constantlyon the spot, cannot be long a stranger to anyabuses in the government, and is always armedwith power to remedy them. It will be bis dutyto stand between the administration and the encroachmentsalways to be apprehended from theagents of the Company's servants, which mustfirst be known to him ; and we rely on his fidelityto the Company to check all such encroachments,and to prevent the oppression of the natives. Wewould have his correspondence to be carried onwith the Select Committee through the channelof the president. He should keep a diary of allhis transactions. His correspondence with thenatives must be publicly conducted; copies ofall his letters sent and received be transmittedmonthly to the presidency, with duplicates andtriplicates, to be transmitted home, in our generalpacket, by every ship*' This was the introductionof the system of recorded check, which hassince prevailed in conducting the home administrationof the India government.After Lord Clive had returned to the presidency,various questions arose, which involved agreat difference of opinion, and a spirit of oppositionCuAr. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 151tion was evinced towards his Lordship, which ren nes.tered it absolutely necessary either that he should b»*«^"-adopt strong and decided measures for maintainingthe authority with which he was invested, or atonce relinquish the government.The latter course would have left the interestsof the Company to parties who had evinced acontempt for all authority, and a determination topromote their own interests at any cost. His His Lordship'*Lordship stated that the series of excesses whichhe had pointed out were not confined to the civilservice, but the thirst after riches was daily promotingthe ruin of the army. He dwelt upon theencroachment of the military upon the civil jurisdiction,and their attempt to be independent ofthe civil authority, and observed, *' the wholearmy should be subordinate to the civil power,and it is the indispensable duty of the Governorand Council to keep them so. If at any time theyshould struggle for superiority, the Governor andCouncil must strenuously exert themselves, evermindful that they are the trustees for the Companyin this settlement, and the guardians of publicproperty under a civil institution'*After touching upon various other points connectedwith the state of the public affairs in India,his Lordship adverted to his contemplated returnto England in the ensuing year.** Calcutta, 30th September, 1766: — Permit His intendedme now to remind you, that I have a large family England!whoRISE AND PltOGRESS OF THEtC«AF. IV.1765.BxircuL.Requested bythe Court toremain*who stand in need of a father s protection ; thatI sacrifice my health, and hazard my fortune, withmy life, by continuing in this climate. The firstgreat purposes of my appointment are perfectlyanswered ; peace is restored, and my engagementto procure for the Company the reversion of myjaghire is completed in the fullest manner, sinceit is not only confirmed by the present Nabob,but by the Great MoguL I now only wait to beinformed whether my conduct thus far be approvedof, and whether the whole or any part ofthe regulations I have had the honour to lay beforeyou are conformable to your ideas of the reformationnecessary to be established. If they meetwith your approbation, I doubt not you will immediatelyempower me, in conjunction with theSelect Committee, to finish the business so successfullybegun, which may easily be effectedbefore the end of the ensuing year, when I amdetermined to return to Europe, and hope toacquaint you, in person, with the accomplishmentof every wish you can form for the prosperity ofyour affairs in Bengal." In May, 1766, the Courtof Directors sent an overland despatch, on learningthe intention of Lord Clive to quit India, andrequested his continuance in the government:"The stability of your Lordship's plan," theyobserved, with respect to our possessions andrevenues, the peace of the country, and effectinga thorough reformation in the excessive abusesandCbaf.IV.] BlUTISH POWER IN INDIA. 153and negligence of our servants require time, care, Bexqauand ability to accomplish ; we cannot, therefore, *^^but be under great concern at the notice yourLordship has given us of your intention to leaveBengal the end of this year. But as the interestof the Company depends upon your Lordship'sperfecting what you have laid so good a foundationfor, it is our earnest and unanimous request, thatyou will continue another season in Bengal ; thedoing which will further add to the honour andreputation your Lordship has already most deservedlyacquired, and will lay a lasting obligationupon the Company. This request is of so muchconsequence, that we have thought it necessary tosend it overland, to be forwarded to Bengal bywayof Bussorah, as it may probably come to yourhand before the arrival of the Mercury packet,which we are using our endeavours to get awayin about a fortnight ; by which we shall send oursentiments, observations, and directions, upon theseveral advices received by the Admiral Steevens, asfully as so short a time will admit of."The Select Committee being of opinion, that Northern cheapeninga communication between the NorthernCircars and Bengal would prove mutually advantageousto the presidencies of Fort St. Georgeand Bengal they determined to embrace the favourableopportunity, which the feeble conditionof the Mahrattass afforded, to carry the measureinto execution; for which purpose they 'setonBISE AND Progress OF THE[C«AJP. IV.1765.BSKOAL.Political relations.OD foot a negociation with their chief' proposingthat he should cede to the Company the northernparts of Orissa, now in his possession, upon ourpaying a certain stipulated annual revenue. Butwhatever his determination might he, it was resolvednot to attempt gaining the advantage byviolence or force of arms.The political relations of the Government appearedto be in a satisfactory state. Sbuja Dowlaswas disposed to cultivate our friendship, andadhere strictly to the conditions of the late treaty.Colonel Smith's brigade was stationed at Allahabadand Benares, to secure the king and vizieragainst the invasions of the Mahrattass, until theyhad fully re-established themselves, and completedthe payment of the stipulated indemnification tothe Company. The king's visionary projects, ofseating himself, with the Company's assistance,on the throne of his ancestors, and proceeding toDelhi, his capital, appeared *' to have vanished"before the Select Committee's remonstrances;and they hoped that he was at length convincedthat, without our aid, the scheme was impracticable.On this point, it was remarked, in theletter to the Court, ** we are certain it never canbe your interest to extend the influence of yourarms to so great a distance from your presentpossessions and the seat of your governments'*PeaceLetter from Bengal, dated Slst January 1706.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 155Peace being happily restored to the provinces, 1766.the Select Committee stated, " it would be their b«»«^'-study to preserve and prolong those advantageswhich had already begun to be experienced."-To supply the places of two members of the ^S*^^^**Council who had resigned, of one who had beensuspended, and of three who had evinced a totalunfitness for the station, and in consideration ofthe extreme youth of most of the other servants,the Select Committee determined to call in theassistance of four meritorious servants from Madras,until the pleasure of the Court of Directorsshould be known The proceeding occasionedgreat dissatisfaction amongst the Bengal servants,and led to an association against the proceedingsof the committee, and an agreement not to visit oraccept invitations from the Governor. ** Howeverpuerile, it is the fact," observed his Lordship.The same spirit prevailed against all but onemember of the Select Committee. The secretaryto the Council, being at the head of the association,was suspended.After entering into these details, and pointingout the remedies which his Lordship consideredessential to be introduced in the general systemof the service, he stated it to be his intention, sosoon as the ships were despatched, and the gentlemenwho were expected from Madras shouldhaveThe Court of Directors approved and confirmed this step.166 BI8E AND Progress OF THE [Chaf.IV.i7» have arrived, to proceed up the country, for theBemqax. purpose of supervising in person the Company'saffairs.Lord aise pro. Lord Clive, accompanied by General Camac,needs up the i^ •/country. accordingly, left the presidency at the close ofMarch.On the 8th April, his Lordship addressed aletter to the Council, dated at Moostejeyl, statingthat, as the receipt of a legacy did not appear tobe prohibited by the new covenants, he had receivedfrom the Begum, wife of the late NabobMeer Jailer, an obligation for the sum of five lacsof rupees, which was bequeathed to him by theNabob, a few hours before his death, in the presenceof many witnesses, whose attestations wouldbe forwarded, to be laid before the Board. HisLordship added, that he should immediately paythe amount into the Company's treasury, to formFomaUon of a fund, the interest of which to be applied by wayfund. of pension to officers, non-commissioned officers,and private men, disqualified by wounds, ordisease, or length of service, from further duty,and likewise to their widows who might be left indistressed circumstances.The Council were unanimously of opinion, thatthe receipt of the legacy was in no way prohibitedby the new covenants, and expressed the livelysense they entertained of his Lordship's ^ generousand well-placed donationsThis actor generosity, for so it was terrified bytheChap IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 157the Court of Directors as well as by the Council "ee.abroad, has not escaped severe animadversion. ^"""^Although the legacy was left by Meer Jaffier toLord Clive during his Lordship's passage to India,in February, 1765, it has been alleged, that itwas the act of Jaffier's son, Nujeem-ool-Dowla,and that it not only partook of the characterof a present, but was another instance of theacquisitions of Lord Clive, which came subsequently"to view, and had, it may thereforebe supposed, been previously and purposely concealed.The despatch from Bengal, announcing thedonation, was received by the Court on the 19thJune, 1767. Doubts having arisen whether, underthe covenants, his Lordship could legally acceptthe bequest, the subject was brought under theconsideration of the law-officers of the Companyand the Crown, by some of whom it was maintained,that his Lordship bad a clear and legalright to it. To put all doubts at rest, the Courtof Directors, on the 2d August, 1767, unanimously narresolved, 'that his Lordship be empowered toaccept of the said legacy or donation, and they dohighly approve of his Lordship's generosity inbestowing the said legacy of five lacs in so usefula charity ; and they hereby consent and agree toaccept of the trust of the said fund, and vnll givedirections that the same be carried into executionin legal and proper form."OnSis AND Progress OF THE[Chap. IV.17MBnraACDouble battreduced.On the 6th April, 1770, the Committee of theMilitary Fund was appointed, to carry into effecta deed of agreement between his Lordship and theCompany. The sum given by Lord Clive was£62,833/ to which the successor of Meer Jaffieradded £37,700, together with the further sum of£24,128, being the interest from the Company, ateight per cent., on the cash notes granted on thetwo first-mentioned sums.It is stated, ** to this ambiguous transaction theinstitution at Poplar owes its foundation." Theinstitution at Poplar was founded by the oldEast-india Company, in 1627, under the designationof ** Poplar Hospital'' for the purposeof relieving persons who had been employedin their Maritime Service. The regulations bywhich it was governed were revised in 1681, 1768,and 1813.Poplar Hospital and Lord Clive's Fund areseparate institutions, the former' having existedone hundred and twenty-seven years before LordClive's Fund was formed, and the sources fromwhence each derives its pecuniary means of supportbeing quite distinct.The order of the Court of Directors for the reductionof double batta had been carried intoeffect in January.* Representations against thatmeasure,General Letter to Bengal, the eth March, 1763 :— Thereduction of your military expenses, and particularly of yourfield-allowances, was, and is still, an object most worthy of your8eriou5Chap. IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 159measure, couched in moderate terms, were sent i7«6.in from the subalterns, and a memorial was pre **'^^seated from the officers of the first brigade to theCouncil. There was no apparent initiation on thepart of the officers, and there was every reasonto conclude that the army would remain satisfieduntil the whole subject had been brought beforethe Court of Directors for their re-consideration.The Council remarked that, conscious of the necessityflonotts attention. The extraordinary allowance of doable batt18 what we cannot pass over without some animadversions thereon*** The allowance of doable batt is not only entirely new toOS, but no reasons are given why of late it should be deemedmore necessary than it was heretofore. We must observe, thatyour compliance therewith is founded on an estimate whichappears to us of a very extraordinary nature, with regard tothe great number of servants said to be necessary in the field ;to the alleged dearness of provisions, which we have reason tobelieve is greater on the coast of Coromandel than in Bengal ;and also to the unprecedented expense for wearing apparel."Again,Military Later to Bengal, the l^ June, 1764 :— " We gaveyou our sentiments so fully upon the exorbitant military expensesat your presidency in our letter of the 9th March, 1763,that we have now only most positively to enforce the orderstherein given, for your taking every opportunity to reduce themwithin the most frugal bounds the general good of the servicewill admit of. But with respect to the double batt, however,we as positively order, that immediately upon the receipt hereof,half of it be struck off, that is to say, all our military are tohave single batt only, in the same maimer as is allowed at ourpresidency of Fort St. George, and even this single batt wemost earnestly recommend it to you to reduce whenever circumstanceswill admit of it."RISE AND P800BESS OF THE[Chaf.IV.BWKQAUMilitary oom-Lord CUve'ameasures insubduing itnecessity which existed for a reduction of the militaryexpenses, they were determined to see theorders strictly obeyed ; at the same time, '* untilthe charges incurred on account of servants, horses,and the necessary equipage of the field in the climateof India, were diminished by some regulation,the allowance of a subaltern would scarcelymaintain him in the station of a gentleman'*During Lord, dive's stay at Moorshedabad, hereceived, on the 29th April, intelligence that ageneral combination had taken place among allranks of the army under the degree of a fieldofficer, with a determination to distress the Governmentby throwing up their commissions on agiven day.His Lordship resolved to proceed at once toMonghir, where the first battalion lay in cantonments.He wrote to the Council, recommendingthat all should be put to risk rather than sufferthe authority of Government to be insulted ; andthat he felt the saving of the half batt to be quitea secondary consideration, when compared withthe danger to be apprehended from yielding tothe menaces of so mutinous an association.One hundred and thirty officers had alreadysubscribed to the association, and engaged to raisea fund, not only for the maintenance and supportof those who should suffer, but also to enable themto purchase commissions in the king's service inEngland.AnCtfAF. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 161An army making its own terms was so alarming 1766.a circumstance, that the Council fully concurred Bengal.in his Lordship's views, and resolved by everymeans to crush such a mutinous spirit in its birthat all hazards. Orders were given to accept allthe resignations which might be sent in, and theparties who tendered them were to be sent downto Calcutta within twenty-four hours.Intelligence was shortly after received that theofficers of the 2d and 3d brigades intended to resignon the 1st June. The firmness of the Councilwas not to be shaken ; they resolved to persevere inenforcing the orders, and requisitions were immediatelydespatched to Madras and Bombay fortroops. The field officers and men remained firm.Reinforcements having arrived, reflection succeededto folly and madness, the officers beganto see the absurdity of their conduct in its truelight ; "jealousy and reproach took place in theircouncils— individuals separated themselves fromthe cause — and the offenders almost to a mansubmissively acknowledged their error, and prayedto be re-admitted to the service."It appeared that the combination had, in pointof fact, commenced in January, and at a timewhen the disaffection amongst the civilians wasat its height, many of^hom, there was every reasonto believe, had joined in instigating the revolt.From subsequent inquiry, it was found thatLieutenant-colonel Sir Robert Fletcher himselfVOL. 1. M hadRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IV.1706.BehoauCongreuatCfattpnuhad promoted the association ; he was accordinglyplaced in arrest and ordered to be tried by a court-martial,by whose sentence he was cashiered, andwas sent by the Movement to England in November.During Lord Clive's residence in Bahar, a congresswas held at Chupra, at which his Lordship,General Camac, Shuja Dowlas, and the king's minister,assisted. The foundation was there laidfor a proposed treaty between the Company, thevizier, and the Taut and Rohilla chiefs, for theirmutual defence and security against all attemptsof the Mahrattass to invade their several dominions.His Lordship and General Camac, from a considerationof the little advantage the Companycould derive from such distant allies, left thematter to be arranged by Shuja Dowlas, with anunderstanding that he was not to conclude anythingnor enter into any absolute engagements,** without having previously acquainted the Presidentwith every proposal, and obtained his approbation"*Shuja Dowlas was represented to have fully dischargedall the engagements he had entered intoby treaty with the Company.Deputies from the Mahratta chiefs had alsoattended at Chupra, wits others. It appearedthat the Mahratta forces were assembled at therequisition♦ JjeiieT, Select Committee, 8th September, 1766,Cajirv IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 163requisition of the king, and upon the positive as nee.durance which he gave, that an English army Bwoal.would join them for the purpose of escorting himto Delhi. The king had attempted by every artificeand persuasion, to succeed in his favouritescheme of proceeding to Delhi, which the Councilwere satisfied would terminate '' in his own ruin,and in destroying the peace of the whole empire."In order to watch the movements of the Mahratta,troops were stationed on the frontiers tocover the Bahar provinces.Lord Clive and General Camac returned to Cal Lord cure re-turnfl to thecotta the 30th July, on which occasion, the Count Presidency.cil addressed a latter to his Lordship, expressiveof their satisfaction at the success which hadattended his measures, offering him their congratulations'' on the happy issue of that prudenceand firmness, which had been so vigorously exertedin reducing the military servants to disciplineand to obedience"*The Nabob Nujeem-ool-Dowla died in May,and, leaving no issue, was succeeded by hisbrother, Syoof-ool-Dowla : a circumstance, itwas observed, which, 'had it occurred formerly,might have produced important consequencesin the provinces, but at that time exhibitedmerely the change of persons in theNizamutut."TheConsultations, 30th July.M 2RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IV.176aBXNOAL.Contemplatedmeasuresagainst theMahrattass.Lord C]iye*shealth obligeslii to returnto Europe.The Council, being informed, by advices fromMadras, that all the differences with Nizam Allywere likely to be removed, contemplated a planof operations with the presidencies of Fort St.George and Bombay, which would effectuallyprevent their being molested in future by theMahrattass, by obliging that power to confine theirwhole attention to the preservation of their ownpossessions. The Council observed : ** At present,they are the only power who can excitedisturbances in Bengal ; nor have we any thingfurther to apprehend, than a mere temporaryinterruption to our collections from them : hence,with our well-disciplined and numerous army, wemay bid defiance to the most powerful force ofthe country that can be assembled in the field*The Council advised the Court, in a despatchof the 28th November, that Lord Clive's healthhad for some time past prevented his attending topublic business, and that he had retired to Baronet,in the hope that a change of air would effect hisspeedy recovery.On the 12th December, his Lordship acknowledgedthe receipt of the Court's despatches ofMay, expressing their desire that he should continuein the government :*' I have had the honour to receive your lettersof the 2d and 17th May, earnestly requesting mycontinuance in the government another year. Myfamily concerns and parliamentary interests, importantChap. IV.] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA. 165portant as they are, should not make me hesitate 1766.to comply with a request which does me so much B"^^^honour, if the situation of your affairs demandedmy longer service, or if the reasons which suggestedto you the desire of my remaining herewere actually now existing. The very weak condition,however, to which a severe bilious disorderhas reduced me, requires my immediate return toEurope. It is now a month since I have been inso deplorable a state of health, as to be whollyunable to attend to business; and it is past adoubt, that I cannot survive the malignity of thisclimate another year. Thus, useless as I am becometo the Company, and without the least prosepet of recovery in Bengal, I cannot doubt youwill concur with me in the opinion, of the absolutenecessity of returning to my native country.*' The faithful view which I will now lay beforeyou of the situation of your affairs will, moreover,convince you, that the consequences, of which youare apprehensive after my departure, cannot in allhuman probability happen, and that every materialobject of my expedition is fully accomplished."His Lordship then stated, that a Committee of Geneni suteInspection had been appointed, for examininginto every department, and for carrying into effectregulations for the general conduct of affairs.The spirit of opposition and extravagance hadbeen subdued — a dangerous mutiny effectuallyquelled, and an example made of the ringleadersstability166 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV,1766. — stability had been given to the army by newBuaAi. articles of service — the conduct of the Counciltovirards Shuja Dowlas, in restoring him all his dominions,after he had been reduced by conquestto the very lowest ebb of fortune — the regularpayment to the king of the tribute, which hadnever been paid to former M<^ls, excepting inthe plentitude of power and authority — the paymentof the clout to the Mahrattass, and the influencewhich the invariable success of our arms hadproduced— all combined to place the interests andpower of the Company on a firm and advantageousbasis, and, at the same time, to convince thenative states ^Uhat our ambition extends notbeyond the maintenance of our present possessions,and that one of our first principles of governmentis justice."Such being the true state of the case, '' to whatpurpose should I continue longer in a climate,which would certainly prove fatal to me atthe end of another year? I could not leaveyour concerns in better hands, nor on a moreprosperous footing; and you may be assured, Ishall at all times be equally ready, in England asin India, to give every instance of my zeal for theCompany's interests, in gratitude to a servicewhence I derive my fortune and my honours'inquit trade. The unwarrantable and licentious manner inwhich the inland trade had been carried on by theCompany's servants, led the Court of Directors toissueCMAr.lV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 167issue positive orders, in February, 1764, that from nee.their receipt in India, a final and effectual end Bsxoal.should be put to the inland trade in salt, betel-nut,and tobacco, and in all other articles whatsoever,produced and consumed in the country. Thereceipt of these orders were acknowledged by theCouncil in their letter of the 27th September, inwhich they stated that the Nabob had been prevailedupon to come down to Calcutta, for thepurpose, among other points, of framing regulationsfor the inland trade.The Directors in their general letter to theCouncil,* stated, that they had such entire confidencein Lord Clive's great ability and good intentions,that they had no doubt he would be ableto carry into effect measures for correcting thesystem of private trade. They addressed a letterto Lord Clive personally, f in which they trustedthat the state of affairs would admit of his attentionbeing immediately directed to the regulationof the trade in salt, betel-nut, and tobacco, so asto prevent the confusion and oppression that hadsprung from the abuses practised in late years ;intimating, at the same time, that his Lordshipmight depend upon the Court's support. Theplan proposed by the Select Committee consistedof an exclusive company, composed of the three Abolition offirst classes of the covenanted servants, in whom companywas• February, 1765. f Ail* 1765.168 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuff. IV.i7tf6. was to be vested the right of trading in salt, j^ut^ jijjjj tobacco, upon paying a certain duty.The management was committed to Mr. Sumner,and it was observed : ** If the plan, therefore,should prove so fortunate as to meet the Court sapprobation, the merit was chiefly due to thatgentleman, who spared no pains to acquire athorough insight into the subject; at the sametime that he discharged the duties of the presidencyduring Lord Clive's absence'The Court disapproved of the plan, and observed: *' Much has been urged by our servantsat different times in favour of the right to thistrade, which we have always treated as a mostabsurd claim. The words of the phirmaund are :Whatever goods the English Company shallbring, or carry, &c., are duty free.' To supposethat the court of Delhi could mean by these wordsa monopoly of the necessaries of life over their ownsubjects, is such an absurdity, that we shall notlose time or words in trying to refute it.With respect to the Company, it is neitherconsistent with their honour nor their dignity topromote such an exclusive trade, as it is now moreimmediately our interest and duty to protect andcherish the inhabitants, and to give them no occasionto look on every Englishman as their nationalenemy, a sentiment we think such a monopolywould necessarily suggest. We cannot, therefore,approve the plan you have sent us, for trading insalt.Chas. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 16&salt, betel-nut, and tobacco, or admit of this trade 1766.in any shape whatever, and do hereby confirm our ***o^*former orders for its entire abolition.'and here we must enjoin you to have parti court's desireocular regard and attention to the good of the interests of*natives, whose interest and welfare are now become ^^ '"''^«*-our primary care ; and we earnestly recommendit to you, that you take the most effectual methodsto prevent these great necessaries of life frombeing monopolized by the rich and great amongstthemselves, and, by that means, the poor andindigent becoming liable to those grievances andexactions, which we mean to prevent our ownpeople from being guilty of."The Council, on the Court's orders, offered thefollowing observations : —•'We now come to speak of your instructionsrelative to the inland trade ^ which you very justlyconsider as the foundation of all the bloodshed,massacres, and confusion, which have happenedof late years in Bengal. Your orders are positive,and, therefore, our obedience shall be implicit.Accordingly, you will observe in our proceedings, Abolition ofthat the .yocie^yfor conducting this branch of traffic !»it,"betei.nut?stands absolutely abolished on the 1 st day of September *"nejct. The contract for the present year beingformed, and large advances made, it was impossible,without ruin to individuals and confusionto the public, to fix an earlier date for the executionof your orders.'• But170 Rear AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbat. IV.1766. «' But, although our duty obliges us to pay theBuiaAi. gtric^^t obedience to your peremptory orders forabolishing a trade to which you express so strongan aversion, the same duty requires we shouldfreely offer our sentiments upon a subject, in whichwe think your immediate interest, the good of theservice, and the public welfare, are deeply concerned.The Honourable Court of Directors,and, indeed, the whole body of Proprietors, foundit necessary to restrain, by covenants, their civiland military servants from receiving those advantagesto which they had for many years beenaccustomed. It is likewise proposed, in orderthat you may enjoy the real fruits of your lateacquisitions, to make such an increase of investment,particularly in silk, as will effectuallydeprive your servants of the usual benefits arisingfrom private trade. Farther, that the revenuesmay not be injured in any degree, they are prohibitedfrom lending money at a higher interestthan twelve per cent, per annum ; and a trade bysea, in the manufactures of the country, beingthe only remaining channel for the exertion ofindustry, that, likewise, is choked up by thoseshoals of free-merchants annually imported ; who,being encumbered with no public business, norconfined to residence in Bengal, can carry on afree trade with every port in India, to much greateradvantage than your servants.'' Taking all these circumstances into consideration;Chap. IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 171deration ; reflecting also upon the great increase I'W-of luxury in late years, in consequence of the ^*»«^'-sudden influx of wealth, and that it will not bepracticable, for a time, to reduce the charges ofliving to the present means of supporting thosecharges; we adopted, in consequence of yourmission, the plan of a regulated and restrictedinland trade, as the best method of rewardingfaithful services, the surest means to excite zealandthe fairest mode of carrying on a beneficialtrade, without relinquishing all the advantageswe have hitherto received, or subjecting thenatives to those encroachments on their naturalrights, of which they have with too much reasoncomplained.^* Our letter by the Camden, and proceedingsby the Cruttenden, will explain to you the regulationsin the original plan of the society, whichtook place in the month of September last. Underthese regulations, the trade can scarce be consideredin the odious light of a monopoly, since wearerather the agents for manufacturing the salt,than the proprietors of the trade. It is sold inCalcutta to the natives only, and to the utterexclusion of all Europeans, at an easier rate thanit could ever be produced when under the managementof the Government, before we were admittedto any participation. The natives transport it toall the different parts of the country, under suchlimitations, that it must reach the hands of theconsumer172 - RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CHAr. IV.1766. consumer at a stated and moderate price. Hereby,BsNOAv jjjg people sensibly feel the justice and lenity ofour government; and your servants, who haveattained the highest stations, after a course ofmany years spent in this unfavourable climate,reap the reward of their services, and enjoy themeans of securing that independence to whichthey have so equitable a claim.We are now directed totally to renounce allshare in, and benefit arising from, this trade. Itmust be made over to the natives. The governmentmust, of course, come into possession ; norcan it be carried on otherwise than upon theancient footing of farming it out to ministers,officers, favourites, and dependents on the government,who will rear immense fortunes upon theoppression and ruin of the public, in despite of ourutmost influence and endeavours. These are atpresent our suspicions : time alone can verify ourconjectures. You, no doubt, will maturely considerhow far it is probable men will continuehonest against all the seductions of private interest ;and whether it may not be necessary to strengthenthe ties of that duty expected from your servants,by the lighter bonds of gratitude for the affluencewhich they enjoy during the time of their servitude,and the independency they ought to securebefore the close of their labours."Sre hoi^L^rt '^^^ Court of Directors, anticipating the positivewill ability of his Lordship's being enabled to continueinChas. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 173in the government, addressed him, on the 4th i767.March, 1767, on the general receipts of the Pre Bekqal.silence.Without the great receipts from the Dewannee,the Company must have been very considerablesufferers this year, by being disappointed ofa great part of the investment. Most of themoney collected, as well as the sums borrowed,were, we observe, applied towards carryingon the war, and there remained no resources,but such as the wealth of our servants mightafford in return for bills on us, which we couldnot conveniently have paid, had the sum beenvery large. The amount of the expenses for 1765so far surpasses every idea we had conceived of it,that we are amazed, but hope your Lordship willbe able to reduce them within the compass youhave flattered yourself.Firmly persuaded, as we are, that every stepbeyond the Caramnassa, except in a defensivewar, will lead to the irretrievable ruin of our affairs,it is with great pleasure we observe your strongopposition to every measure that tends to themarching our troops with the King to Delhi.** We are much pleased to see that the obtainingthe execution of the treaty from Shuja Dowlas isone of the objects of your Lordship's and GeneralCamac's expedition to the northward. We areanxious to have this measure effected, that thebrigade at Illiabad may be recalled, and thepowers1 74 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. IV.1707. powers of Hindostan convinced we have no furtherBtiroAu object than to maintain the tranquillity of theBengal pnvinoefli.** We read with extreme regret your Lordship'sintentions to leave Bengal the ensuing season; themore so, as an infirm state of health, and the disagreeablecircumstances that have attended youradministration, are the occasions of it. We do notwonder that the difficulties you had to encounter,from the interested opposition of almost the wholebody of our servants, should have impaired yourhealth ; but we observe with pleasure, your public-spiritedmeasures meet with no further oppositionfrom the Council, since the Madras gentlemenhave taken their seats at the Board.* We hopethis will relieve your Lordship from your extremeapplication, and promote your recovery. We assureourselves, too, it will be some pleasure to you tosee that your conduct has had our approbationand firmest support. We can add nothing thatwill more strongly shew the sense we entertain ofit and of your services, than to repeat our earnestrequest that you will continue another year in thegovernment, to perfect the plan your Lordship hasso judiciously formed, and prosecuted with somuch zeal and spirit Your Lordship will excuseour pressing this point so earnestly, when weassure you how essential we deem it to thepermanencyndeptige 155.Cras. IV.] BBinSU POWER IN INDIA. 175permanency of our impairs. We need not point i767.out how much yet remains to attain that end. The Bihgal.military seem hardly yet reconciled to that systemof economy, without which it is plain no revenuecould suffice for the growing expenses of thearmy." His Lordship's health, however, did notpermit of his extending his period of service inIndia.He quitted Bengal in the Britannia, on the 29thJanuary 1767. The Council announced his departurein the following terms : '^ Lord Clive has Lord airefound his health so much impaired by his late ^"'*' ' ^severe indisposition, that he is under the necessityof returning to Island by the first opportunity,and takes his passage on board the Britannia. Wecannot but regard it as a very happy circumstance,that, at such a juncture, your affairs here havebeen restored to so Favourable a situation, by theplan which his Lordship had adopted, and hadpursued with so much steadiness and perseverance."Greneral Camac returned on board thesame ship to England.On the 17th July, 1767, Lord Clive was intro AniTesipduce to the Court of Directors, when the Chair Rmires theman, in the name of the Court, expressed their SSc^rt'smost sincere and hearty congratulations to him on Sufem^this arrival in his native country, after having exceededthe Court s most sanguine expectations,not only in the very eminent services he hadrendered the Company, by his wise and judiciousadministration176 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE Char. IV.1767. administration of their affairs, during his residenceBbmoal. j^ Bengal, but also by that most prudent andwell-formed plan be had digested for the regulationof the conduct of the Select Committee ; andthat it was impossible by force of words to representto his Lordship the high sense of gratitudethe Court entertained for the constant attentiongiven by his Lordship to the Company's interests.On the 23d September, the General Court, inconsiderationof the important services renderedto the Company by Lord Clive, recommended to,and authorized, the Court of Directors to make agrant, under the Company's seal, to his lordship,and his personal representatives, of a further termof ten years on his jaghire. The indenture grantingthe same was approved and engrossed in Octoberfollowing.Mr. Verelst succeeded Lord Clive in the government.The Council, in their despatch to the Court, ofFebruary, alluding to the state of the Company'sinterests in Bengal, observed :councirstes- ** We should be wanting in the just praises oftimon to Lord . . .,^,clive's merits. succor merit, and m gratitude for the essentialservices performed by Lord Clive, if we failed toacknowledge that, to the prudence and vigour ofhis administration, you are chiefly to ascribe thepresent flourishing condition of your affairs. Firmand indefatigable in his pursuits, he joined, to theweight of personal character, a zeal for your service.Chas. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 177vice, and a knowledge of your interests, which 1767could not but insure success." BEHCAt.They then drew a comparison between the state comparison ofof the country on his Lordship's arrival, in 1765, countiyVhen^and that in which he left it on his departure for nvJdMd^whl^nEngland, in January, 1767 : '"^ *^We beheld a Presidency divided, headstrongand licentious ; a government without nerves ; atreasury without money, and a service withoutsubordination, discipline, or public spirit. We mayadd that, amidst a general stagnation of usefulindustry and of licensed commerce, individualswere accumulating immense riches, which they hadravished from the insulted prince and his helplesspeople, who groaned under the united pressure ofdiscontent, poverty, and oppression.•* Such was the condition of this presidency andof these provinces. Your present situation neednot be described. The liberal supplies to China,the state of your treasury, of your investment, ofthe service, and of the whole country, declare itto be the strongest contrast to what it was.** We repeat," added the Committee, ** what wehave already declared to Lord Olive, that no motive,no consideration, shall ever induce us todepart from that system of politics which has beenrecommended to us by precept and example, unlesssome very extraordinary event and unforeseenchange should occur in the posture of your affairs."One of the Company's covenanted servants, andVOL. I. N all]78 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE Chafe IV.1707. all the officers who had subscribed an address toBivoAL. gj^ Robert Fletcher, after he had been cashieredby sentence of a court-martial, were dismissed bythe Council from the Company's service.Shah Abdaiiab. j^ t^^ month of March, the Council, having receivedundoubted intelligence of the advance ofShah Abdallah towards Delhi, (supposed to beinstigated by Cossim Ally Khan,) took measuresto support the King and Shuja Dowlas, againstwhose territories the expedition was intended tohave been ultimately directed. They felt that itwas impossible to remain inactive spectators of aninvasion which threatened to overwhelm the politicalsystem of all India. Nothing but the Company'sinfluence prevented the King from makingundue submission. Their demonstrations had thedesired effect. Abdallah returned to Lahore,having compromised, for the sum of twenty-fivelacs, his demands on the native powers. In hisretreat, he experienced great obstructions fromthe Seiks, who were stated to be his irreconcilableenemies.The plan of the Council had been one of defence.They purposely avoided making propositionsto the Jauts, the Rohillas, or the Mahrattass,that they might stand clear from all troublesomeengagements, considering the Company's security'' to consist in the continuance of the balance ofpower, which it was their great object to maintainin India."TheChap. IV.]BRITISH POWER IN INDIA.The many unforeseen dangers and sudden irrup- i7«7.tons, to which the Company's possessions in Bengal ^■*«^'-were continually exposed, induced the Council topress for the completion of the military establishmentproposed by Lord Clive.* 'that beingmaintained, the Company's revenues and possessionswould be defended against the most considerablepowers of the country'*The Mahratta leaders, Ragout Rao and Jano- Mahmttaa.see, the chief of Nagpore, having reconciled theirdifferences, the expectation of acquiring Cuttackwas rendered hopeless,* and led to a suspicionthat a junction would take place between theSoubah, Hyderr, and the Mahrattass, against Bengal; but as affairs were in a state of tranquillity,the Council resolved to give every possible aidto the Madras Presidency, in the hope that thepower of Hyderr might be reduced.The King and Shuja Dowlas Mere represented to Sentiments ofbe " more united to us, both by inclination and vrzier"towardsinterest." Sensible that the security of their pos *^* Company.sessions, as well as the degree of considerationthey held in the empire, depended upon our friendship,they were desirous to govern their conductby principles the most likely to promote an amicableunderstanding with the Company. Thethird brigade was stationed with them, at theirrequest, and a detachment from the second brigadehadLetter to Court, lOth April, 1767.N 2180 . RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1767. had crossed the Caramnassa, with the view of .porting that the Council felt to be the basis ofthe Company's alliance with the King and theNabob, they agreeing to defray all extra charges :so that the Company incurred no extraordinaryexpense by the motion of these troops beyond thelimits of the provinces. Chunagurwas garrisonedby the Company's forces. The Council added :"it is nevertheless our intention to recall all yourforces, and punctuality observe your directions,whenever the disturbances which now prevailamong the neighbouring powers will not endangerour own safety."The Jauts. Jcwahcr Sing, the chief of the Jauts, was at thehead of an army, endeavouring to recover the territoryof which he had been dispossessed by theMahrattass, He entered the Rohilla country, andadvanced within a few miles of the King s dominions.Colonel Smith was directed to remainwith the third brigade until his intentions weremore fully developed.The Council received, in the month of April, apressing invitation from the Rajah of Nepaul, foraid against the Rajah of GoorcuUah, * by whomhe had been deprived of his country, and shut upin his capital. Although they felt that such amilitary enterprize was foreign to the system ofpolitics by which they proposed to regulate theirconduct,Now known as the Gomorrah Rajah,Chas. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 181conduct they determined, after much deliberatestion, to send an expedition to Nepaul in support bengal.of the Rajah, between whose country and that of Expedition toBahar an advantageous trade had been carried on, ^^*" 'and a considerable quantity of gold imported intoBengal. It was observed, that the vicinity ofNepaul to the Better country, which was in quietpossession of the Vizier, would bring additionalcommercial advantages ; so that the Council entertainedvery flattering prospects of the issue of anexpedition, of which ** they hoped to send home agood account at the close of the season." *Their anticipations were not realized. CaptainKinloch, who had been entrusted with thecommand, found it necessary to apply for reinforcements,without which he did not expect tosucceed. This requisition occurring at the momentwhen the aid was required in support of the ^^lon!^^^'operations against Hyderr, the. expedition wasrecalled. Part of the lands belonging to theGoorcullah Rajah, bordering on the Better country,both rich and fertile, were kept to indemnifythe charge already incurred.The Mahratta chief, Janojee, in demanding the Proposed ces*^ sion of Cut-clout,which had been regularly paid during the tack.latter part of Livery Khan's government, manifesteda desire to treat for the cession of Cuttackto the Company. The President had several conferences• Letter, 25t»i September, 1767.Ri£ AND Progress OF THEICha». IV.176aChain of Company'sinfluence.Revenue inBabar.Cortes viewsas to policyabroad.To promotehappiness ofthe natives.terence with Janojee's vakeel. Id conjunction withMahomed Bea Khan, who had arrived at the Presidency.The annual payment, for the cession andthe clouts it was proposed to fix at sixteen lacs,to be accounted for from the time the Companytook charge of the Denny. An arrangementwas prepared, but never finally acted upon. Theobject of the Council was to form a complete chainof the Company's influence and dominion, fromthe banks of the Caramnassa to the extremity ofthe Coast of Coromandel.In noticing the state of the revenues in Bahar,the Council remarked upon the small balancewhich was irrecoverable ; and pointed out the greatadvantages anticipated from the tour of inspectionand examination by the Company's servantsselected for that duty '' in Bahar, and in theDinagepore and Pumea countries." The Zemindarwere stated to have been guilty of frauds, embezzlements,and even crimes of an atrocious character.The Court of Directors communicated to theCouncil at Calcutta their sentiments on the leadingpoints in the advices from Bengal. They enjoinedthe Council : —** Not to increase the revenues by any waywhich may oppress the inhabitants, whose happinessand prosperity we are desirous of cultivatingupon every occasion, as it is upon their affectionsand confidence the permanency of our possessionswill greatly depend.NeverChaf.IV.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 183'' Never to extend your possessions beyond their its.present bounds. Kefp'^^wnNever to engage in a inarch to Delhi, nor presentbound*.enter into an offensive war, unless urged to it inpursuance of our treaty with the King and ShujaDowlas for the preservation of their dominions;and whenever called upon to march any troops forthat purpose, to have Allahabad, Chunar, or somefortification, put in our possession.'* If these rules are strictly adhered to, we shallflatter ourselves our power and advantages inBengal will obtain that permanency we have solong laboured at.** We have paid much attention to your nego- As to obtaining. - 1. , , , Oriwa from thecitations With Janojee for setting the clout on the Mabnttas.terms agreed between the Mahrattass and LiveryKhan. We think it both equity and sound policyto pay them their choui, and shall much approveit, if it can be done on the terms you mention, oftheir ceding to us their possessions in Orissa,which would join our Bengal possessions to theCircars, and would afford us the means of preventingany hostile attempts of an European enemywho might land in that part of Orissa.'' From what appears in your proceedings, we caution as tothink we discern too great an aptness to concedes lodl^p^wmraces or alliances with the Indian powers: onwhich occasion, we must give it you as a generalsentiment, that perfidy is too much the characteristicof Indian princes, for us to rely on any securitywith184 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Car. IV.nas. with them. But should you enter into a treaty toBengal. ^^^ '^^ conceit with them in the field, one of ourprincipal officers is to command the whole : a preeminenceour own security and our superior militaryskill will entitle us to.TroopuBtAWm- *' As all our views and expectations are confinedwithin the Caramnassa, we are impatient tohear our troops are recalled from Allahabad.'* As it seems not impossible that Shuja Dowlasmay undertake to escort the King to Delhi, it becomesnecessary we should give you our idea ofthe proper conduct to be held on that occasion,which entirely coincides with Lord Clive's opinionin his letter to the Select Committee, that tomarch any part of our army on such an expeditionmight bring on the total ruin of our affairs ; andwe add, that, should you be persuaded into sorash and dangerous a measure, we shall deem youresponsible for all the consequences ; and as sucha measure would be attended with the greatestdanger to our affairs, be assured we shall be extremelyjealous of every one high in our service,civil or military, who shews a tendency to suchan expedition.** The only precautions we would recommendagainst Shuja Dowlas's military progress, are, toprevent Europeans as much as possible from engagingin his service, and to be very watchful thatno cannon, fire-arms, or artillery stores, find theirway by the Ganges into his dominions.*' EveryChap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 185*' Every method must be tried to get Monsieur j768.Gentil, and every European, from his country, Bsno^i-observing to use therein such means as shall nothurt the dignity or independency of Shuja Dowlas,or leave room for the French to construe them asviolations of the friendship between the twocrowns"*"As we look with a favourable eye on everyattempt for the extension of commerce, we do notdisapprove the expedition to N^j^aul, and aresorry it failed of success. You died right not torenew the expedition till the state of your forceswould better admit of it, and to hold in jour possessionlands taken from the Gomorrah Rajah, asan indemnification for the expenses we had beenput to ; and they may be of use, should it hereafterbe thought proper to renew the attempt, andwe hope their amount has answered your expectations."fThe extent of the French forces in the Indian French infuseswas brought to the notice of the Court by ^^^'the Council, who stated that ten ships were expectedfrom France, seven of which, the Frenchalleged, were either to be sold or to remain inIndia. Four thousand of his most Christian Majesty'stroops were at the islands, and more wereanticipated. '* So alarming a force, at a place fromwhence♦ Letter to Bengal, 16th March, 1768.t Letter to Bengal, 11th November, 1768.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chas. IV.1708.BSKQAL.Review of thepowers of Hindostan.whence it is very difficult to procure the least informationof their designs has induced us to havea very vigilant eye over our fortifications. It requiresno great depth of judgment to foresee, thatthe assembling such a number of forces at theFrench islands can bode no good to your settlementsin India. Nor are we without apprehensions,that, whenever the French are in a conditionto cope with our nation in Europe, they will makesome attempt on India : and even this may happenprevious to a declaration of war, as, from thesituation of the islands, they are masters of theirown time and operations' A similar impressioneras entertained by the Council at Madras.The following outline gives the position ofthe Company, towards the different powersof Hindostan, by whom the public tranquillitymight have been essentially disturbed at thatperiod.The first great cause of British security was attributedto the general indigence of the Mogul empire,produced in a great measure by the invasionof Nadir Shah,* which gave a mortal blow to theovergrown wealth and arrogance of the Omrahs ;but its effects were not immediately felt beyond thecapital. The irruption of the Mahrattass ensued.Their undistinguishing rapine plunged cities andcountries on the south side of the Ganges, fromnear♦ In 1739.Chap. IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 187near the frontier of Bahar on the east, to Sirhind neaon the north and west, into misery and distress, b™"^*-The expedition of Shah Abdallah followed: hisoperations were principally confined to the Punjab,yet the vast sums he levied were felt severelythroughout the country. The decrease of specieproduced a decay of trade and a diminution ofcultivation. Although that cause was somewhatmitigated in the Company's provinces by the importationof bullion, yet in Benares and Mirzapore,the fact appeared to be beyond dispute. Thefinancial means of the several powers being verylimited, new-levies were made by each, whenhostilities against any were contemplated, the diebeing cast on a single campaign ; their resourcesnot admitting of their maintaining a second. Thecircumstance which tended to the security of theCompany, was the discordancy of the principles,views, and interests of those neighbouring powers.The majority of the princes of Hindostan had The Nativeno natural right in the countries which they pos ^"^ ^sessed. In the general wreck of the monarchy,every man seized what fortune threw in his way,and was rather studious to maintain it than tograsp at more* Hence the principal disturbanceswere to be traced to the Mahrattass, the Seiks,and Shah Abdallah, whose views were extendedmore to plunder than territorial acquisitions.Thus situated, it was in the poWer of the Company,with a watchful and active administration,toRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[CaIV.The King ofDelhi.176S. to hold the general balance of Hindostan, andBxHOAL. QYush any combination. Allahabad was pointedout as the key of the surrounding territories. Itsvicinity to the several countries of Shuja Dowlas,the Rohillas, Jauts, and Mahrattass, accordinglydetermined the Council to retain a brigade out ofthe Company's provinces.The King, Shah Alum, retained little of the authorityor dominions of his ancestors, but what hederived from the Company.shiija Dowii. Shuja Dowlas was the next ally of the Company ;and, if gratitude could bind any man, the Companyhad the strongest hold upon him. His dominions,excepting the zemindar of Bulwunt Sing, wereon the north of the Ganges, and extended to thehills. He was considered well fitted to accomplishthe Company's main point, of maintaining themselvesas the umpires of Hindostan, rather than anenemy who, from his strength or situation, couldoccasion them any uneasiness or trouble.The Rohilla chiefs held districts immediatelycontiguous to those of the King and Shuja Dowlas.The principal ones were Ahmed Khan Punish,Hafez Raiment Khan, and ?Jijib-ul-Dowla, besidesseveral of less importance, such as Dunedy Khan,Surdar Khan, &c. Though all were independentof each other, yet they derived their power fromone stock, being of one tribe, that of Ally MahometKhan. Their joint forces were estimated ateighty thousand effective horse and foot. TheirnativeRobillas.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 189native hardiness, their dexterity with the sword, ncs.their skill in the use of war-rockets, ranked them b*"®^"-in higher estimation than the ordinary Hindostantroops, and they were looked upon as a risingpower.The territories of Ahmed Khan Punish immediatelybordered on the Corah country, Furrucka-bad being the capital. The possessions of HafezRaiment Khan joined the western limits of ShujaDowlas's dominions ; they laid entirely on the northside of the Ganges, except Etawah and one or twoother straggling pergunnahs. Those of Nijib-ul-Dowlas were bounded by Sirhind on the west, and,beginning on the Jumna, seven coss east of Delhi,swept across the peninsula, to the northward ofthe Ganges, so as to join Hafez Khan's andDunedy Khan's western frontiers.The dominions of Jewaher Sing, or the country Jaats.of the Jauts, extended in the peninsula from Agra,to within a few coss of Delhi on the west, and nearto Etawah on the east. They possessed threeforts, then deemed impregnable, and were in thereceipt of a revenue of nearly two crores.Jewaher Sing was at war with Maharaja MadhuSing, who possessed a large tract of country southwestof Delhi, and a revenue of a crore of rupees.Few could compare with Madhu Sing for theantiquity of his family, or the fame of his ancestors.His subjects were chiefly Rajpoots, bornto war ; the cultivators of his lands in time ofpeace,RISE AND Progress OF THE[Cfaf. IV.17«.BSNOAL.Seiks.Conduct of theVrsier supplciouB.peace, and their undaunted defenders in the field.Proud of their ancient glory, they disdained to fly,and rushed with intrepidity to certain death orvictory. It was stated, that, in a late engagementwith the Jauts, their horse rode up through thefire of ninety pieces of cannon and all the musketryof the sepoy, till they came to swords, and,though thrice repulsed, renewed the attack, andwere ultimately successful.The Seiks' country commenced as far west asSirhind. Their distance was thought to render italmost needless to mention them. Their rise wasmost extraordinary, from the lowest ebb of nationalweakness to a respectable power: their tribe,originally not more than ten thousand, amountingto eighty thousand fit for arms, possessing all thefertile country between Sirhind and Attok. Theirpower to repel or even to ruin an invader, wasevinced in Shah Abdallah's expedition.Such is the outline of the powers, exclusive ofthe Mahrattass, with which the Company had todeal at that period. In Bengal, a maintenance ofa good understanding with the whole, was consideredto be the wisest coarse of policy ; and theCompany's united force and means, the best preservativeof peace.Suspicions had been excited, at the commencementof this year, regarding the views and intentionsof the Vizier. In the months of July andAugust, reports reached the Council that he hadmadeCbiLF.IV.] BHinSH POWER IN INDIA. 191made great progress in the new levies of troops ; ^'^^that he had invited auxiliaries into his servicewhen tranquillity seemed to reign throughout theempire; that he was forming connexions withforeign powers, and had established a foundry,which already supplied him with a great quantityof cannon for field service ; and his '* amazingimprovement in making small arms' by no meansinferior to the best imported into India, combinedto impress the Council with the necessity of arrivingat some degree of certainty as to his futuredesigns.The line of policy to be observed towards ShnjaDowlas was brought under the consideration of theSelect Committee at the close of July.No difference of opinion existed as to the necessityof some decided measures being taken tocurb the ambitious spirit of the Vizier. His objectwas to obtain possession of the provinces ofCorah and Allahabad. In order to gain overColonel Smith, in promoting its attainment, hevisited that officer in the early part of the yearat Allahabad, and 'proffered him four lacs ofrupees in ready money, and to swear secresyon the Alcoran, if he would aid in its accomplish*ment"*At an interview which Colonel Smith had subsequentlywith the King, his Majesty stated withemotion,Secret Consultations, 3d August, 1768.1{)2 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. IV.176a emotion, that the Vizier had applied to him forBxNOAL. ^jjg same purpose, but without success; adding,'' it should seem Shuja Dowlas did not wish him tohave an habitation of his own on the face of theearth."Colonel Smith animadverted upon the delaywhich had occurred in adopting measures againstShuja Dowlas. The President considered that nomaterial inconvenience had arisen from delay, andon the 3d August recorded a minute, in which heproposed that the Vizier should be required, in thepresence of the King, to reduce his forces withina given number, and that his Majesty's injunctionsshould be previously ensured to the same effect.Colonel Smith was opposed to the President'splan. From the knowledge which he had, bothof the King and the Vizier, he apprehended thata war would prove the unavoidable consequence ;for, if the King should require of Shuja Dowlasto disband any part of his forces, his haughty dispositionwould induce him to treat such orderswith contempt, or he might answer, as JewaherSing had lately answered to an order of the King,*' that when his Majesty shall regulate the twenty-twoSoubahs of this empire, he will not be amongthe latest to shew obedience." Colonel Smithsuggested, that a letter might be so framed as topress upon the Vizier, in friendly but forcibleterms, the views and opinions of the Council, andthat an embassy should accompany it, which hehadChas. IV.J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 1 93had no doubt would effectually accomplish their i768.desire : he likewise proposed, that the second Bengal.brigade should move to the Caramnassa.After much discussion, and also differences of Deputation tothe Vizier.opinion as to the powers assumed by ColonelSmith in his military capacity, the Select Committeeresolved, on the 17th August, to addresstwo letters to the Vizier, and appointed a deputation,consisting of Mr. Cartier and ColonelSmith, members of the Select Committee, andMr. Claude Russell, member of council, to proceedto the Vizier at Allahabad.The first letter stated that the Council urged areduction of his forces, in order that all apprehensionsas to the maintenance of a good understandingbetween him and the Company mightbe removed. The second letter was to be presentedin the event of the first failing to gain theVizier's consent to the proposed reduction, afterthe King's commands had been issued to him forthat purpose.To alleviate the odium he might incur from adiminution of his forces, it was proposed thatthe supernumeraries should be tendered as recruitsto the Company's brigades. Nothing wasto be omitted which might lead to an amicableadjustment. They were likewise instructed to representto the King and Shuja Dowlas, the necessityof providing a fund for the payment of thetroops at Allahabad, and to suggest, that two orVOL. I. o three194 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. IV.iTMw three circles belonging to the Soubah of AUaha-BniML. \^^^ Qf which the Hindooput Rajah had possessedhimself, should be obtained for that purpose.DcptitBtioii 10 The deputation reached Benares on the 17thNovember. The Vizier arrived there the followingday, having declined the meeting at Allahabad.At the first conference, Shuja Dowlas manifestedevery disposition to fall in with the viewsof the deputation ; but at the next and subsequentinterviews he evinced a totally different feeling.He enlarged on the state of his troops in formertimes ; he insisted that he was not restricted toany particular number ; that he had in no shapeinfringed the last treaty, and that it was surprisingit should now be thought necessary to limit hisforces. The same demand he observed might, withequal justice, be made on the Rohillas. The deputation,finding all expostulation vain, deliveredthe Committee's letter to the Vizier. After muchdiscussion, he declared, with firmness, that henever would willingly reduce his force below35,000 men, of which 8,000 should be horse.The low state of the Company's treasury, thearrears due to the troops, the situation of affairson the coast, where success depended on suppliesfrom Bengal, and the tenour of the Court's orders,made the Council most anxious to avoid all riskof a war, which might be hazarded by imposingconditions "too mortifying for his haughtyspirit." They therefore consented to the 35,000menCar. IV.] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA. I^men being retained ; but stipulated the varia n6&0U8 bodies of which that force should consist. b*noa^To this the Vizier would not accede. The sepoywere fixed at 7,000 only ; he insisted upon 10,000.Having arranged for the regular troops, he [proposedthat the irregulars, together with the modeof discipline, should be left to his option, and intimatedhis intention to go down to Calcutta, unlessthe point was conceded.The tone assumed by the Vizier induced the Negotiation•^ with Vizier.deputation to break off the negotiation, and toannounce their intention to proceed to the royalpresence on the ensuing morning. This intimationhad the desired effect, Shuja Dowlas sent amessage the following day to the deputation, whendeparting for Allahabad, stating that he was afraidthey *shad not rightly understood him." Thedeputation replied through Captain Harper, whocame from the Vizier, that unless he acquiescedin what they had proposed, a further meetingwas needless, and that they should persevere intheir resolution to proceed to Allahabad. Thiscommunication produced a concession on thepart of the Vizier to the modified terms. Anagreement was drawn out and signed on the lathNovember, confirming the former treaty, and stipulatingthat he should not entertain a greaternumber than 35,000 men, of which 10,000 wereto be cavalry ; ten battalions of sepoy ; the Nujibregiment, 5,000, with matchlocks, to remain alwayso 2 at196 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. IV.176a at its then establishment ; five hundred for theBxKOAL. artillery, and that number never to be exceeded ;the remaining 9,500 were to be irregulars, neitherto be clothed, armed, or disciplined, *' after themanner of English sepoy." So long as the Vizieradhered to these articles, no matter was to beintroduced in addition to what had been nowagreed to. The arrangement was fully approvedby the Council at Calcutta, who passed a resolutionof thanks, on the 25th January, to the deputationfor their services. The Nabob accompaniedthe deputies to Allahabad, and was received inthe royal presence in quality of Vizier.The views of the Directors on the proceedingsof the Council were despatched to Bengal in thefollowing year.Court's view ** We have constantly enjoined you to avoidhlgiM toSh^a every measure that might lead you into further^^^*'' connexions, and have recommended you to useyour utmost endeavour to keep peace in Bengaland with the neighbouring powers ; and you, onyour part, have not been wanting in assurances ofyour resolution to conform to these our wishes.*' Yet, in the very instructions which you havegiven to the deputies sent up to Shuja Dowlas withprofessions of friendship, you have inserted anarticle, which will not only give fresh cause ofjealousy to Shuja Dowlas, but engages you likewisein disputes with other powers still moredistant."WeChap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 197We mean the article whereby they are di 1768.reeled to apply to the King for a grant of two or b»»<»authree circles, which belonged, you say, originallyto the Eliabad province, but were unlawfully possessed,some time since, by the Hindooput Rajah.Is it our business to inquire into the rights ofthe Hindooput Rajah, and the usurpations he mayhave made upon others ? And, supposing the factto be proved, does such an injustice on his partgive us any claim to the disputed districts ?'* If the districts in question belong to the Elia-badprovince, they are apart of Shuja Dowlas's undoubtedinheritance ; and supposing him to waivebis right, you cannot send a man nor a gun fordefence of these new acquisitions without passingthrough his country, which will be a perpetualsource of dispute and complaint.*' Nor does the mischief stop here. The Rajah, who, by all accounts, is rich, willnaturally endeavour to form alliances, to defendhimself against this unexpected attack of theEnglish. Then you will say your honour is engaged,and the army is to be led against otherpowers still more distant.** You say nothing in your letters of this veryessential article of your instructions to the deputies"*** In several of our letters, since we have beenengagedLetter to Bengal, 11th May, 1769.198 USE ANB Progress OF THE [€«▲». iV.17681 engaged as principals in the politics of India, and®""^^ particularly during the last two or three years, wehave given it as our opinion, that the most prudentsystem we could pursue, and the most likely tobe attended with a permanent security to our possessions,would be to incline to those few chiefs ofHindostan, ^o yet preserve an independence ofthe Mahratta power, and are in a condition to strugglewith them ; for so long as they are able tokeep up that struggle, the acquisitions of theCompany will run the less risk of disturbance.'' The Rohillas, the Jauts, the Nabob of theDeccan, the Nabob of Oude, and the Mysorechief, have each in their turn kept the Mahrattassin action, and we wish them still to be able to doit; it is, therefore, with great concern we see thewar continuing with Hyderr Naigue, and a probabilityof a rupture with Shuja Dowlas andNizam Ally. In such wars, we have everythingto lose, and nothing to gain : for, supposing ouroperations be attended with the utmost success,and our enemies reduced to our mercy, we canonly wish to see them restored to the conditionfrom which they set out ; that is, to such a degreeof force and independence as may enable themstill to keep up the contest with the Mahrattass andwith each other. It would give us therefore, thegreatest satisfaction to hear that matters are accommodated,both at Bengal and on the coast :and in case such a happy event shall have takenplace.CsAF.iV.] BBinSH POWBB IN INDIA* 199place, you will do your utmost to preserve the n<i9.tranquillity"* ®««*^-In July, 1769, the proceedings of the French ^!?^''?1 ^led to a belief that they meditated some move «tciMuui«iiiument against the Company's settlements. Underthe plea of repairing a drain round the town ofCbandemagore, to prevent the effects of inundations,which it was represented had proved fatalto the inhabitants, they carried the works to suchan extent as to create strong suspicions. A field-officerwas accordingly deputed from Calcutta, inapublic capacity, for the purpose of examiningand reporting upon the state of the works. Theresult satisfied the Council that their suspicionswere too well founded. The proceeding was aninfraction of the eleventh article of the Treaty ofParis ; .and having remonstrated ineffectually,they required that the works should be destroyed.The French not only refused compliance with therequisition, but carried them on with more vigour ;in consequence of which, the Council gave peremptoryorders for their demolition. This, andsubsequent acts regarding the French in Bengal,gave rise to representations from the French Courtto that of St. James's. The arrangements projectedfor adjusting the differences will be foundto have involved the Company^s representatives inseriousLetter to Bengal, SOth June, 176^t Letter to Bengal from the Coxirt of Directors, 27th June1770:200 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. IV.1769. serious discussions, with the accredited agent onBehoal. |Jj3 pg^rt af the Crown.Mogul deter she President, when at Bauleah, in the monthmines to proceedto Delhi, of May, received a letter from the Mogul, announcinghis determination to proceed forthwithto Delhi, with the troops of his Vizier, in order totake possession of the throne and dominions of hisancestors, and applying for the aid of two battalionsof sepoy and some field-pieces, agreeablyto an alleged promise of Lord Clive, whenever heshould march towards his capital. The Councilconsidered the intended requisition favourable toCouncil resolve the recall of the forces from Allahabad. Haviuff,to aid his views. /* t rottherefore, deliberated on the orders of the Court,they determined to grant the King the aid whichhe requested. At the moment when the enterprizewas to be commenced, the King's minister,Munerah-ud-Dowlah, on returning from the royaldurbar, was accosted within the precincts of thepalace by his majesty's guards, who, in a tumultuousmanner, demanded an increase of pay andthe arrears then due. The reply of the Nabobbeing1770 :~'' His Majesty has constituted Sir John Lindsay hisplenipotentiary for examining into the supposed infractions ofthe late treaty of peace, you will afford him the necessary informationand assistance whereby he may be enabled to answerthe complaints of the French plenipotentiary, to justify yourconduct, and to defend those rights of the British Crownwhich were obtained by express stipulation in the Treaty ofParis and which appear to have been invaded by the proceedingsof the French at Chandemagore."CBAr. IV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 201being unsatisfactory, one of the inferior officers 1769.drew his sword, with an intent to destroy him, and ^^^<^^would have effected his purpose, but for a faithfulCoffee, who exposed his own life to save that ofthe Nabob ; the latter escaped, but six of his followersfell a sacrifice. The King sent for GeneralSmith : on enquiry, it did not appear that anyarrears were due, and there was strong reason tobelieve it to be a design formed by some people ofrank to destroy the Nabob. Munerah-ud-Dowlashortly after retired from the Court, with the permissionof the King, and resided at Patna.At the same time, three of the best battalions Vizier*Btrooi5in Shuja Dowlas's service took up arms againsthim. They were repelled, and a severe examplewas made by the Vizier, who conducted himselfwith great energy. The event lessened his confidencein his troops, and . tended to reconcilehim to the reduction to which he had beenconstrained to submit. Upon being urged to dis yizier*s appealmiss from his presence M. Gentil, in accordance m. Gratiswith the promise which he had made to the Council,he stated, *' that if it was insisted upon, heshould comply ; but that, at a time when thehand of adversity was upon him, when all thosewhom he had clothed and fed forsook him, whenhe was abandoned by his own countrymen and bythose of the same religion, this man, who was astranger, of a different nation and different religion,forgot him not, but partook of his misfortunes.BISE AND PSOOBB88 OF THE [Ciuvw IT.Mogul defersproceeding toDelhi.tunes. What a reflection will it then be uponme, if I am obliged to chase this man from mydominions! Assure the English chiefs, that Iwill be responsible that he shall never do anythingto their prejudice ; the moment I discoversuch intention, he loses my friendship : at thesame time, I will consider it as a mark of theirs, ifthey will not urge the performance of my promiseconcerning him'' The Council abstained fromurging the performance of the promise* Circumstancesarose which cast a doubt upon the sincerityof the Vizier's declaration, but the resultproved that it was made in good faith. The Viziersubsequently declared to the Company's officercommanding their troops, that should hostilitiescommence between the French and English, heshould feel it unbecoming in him to entertain anyman who was the enemy of our nation. He desiredthat this resolution might not be communicatedto the Council, as he was determined totake such a course without any requisition on theirpart, in order that he might have the merit of it.These occurrences led the King to postpone hismovement towards Delhi. The Company's troopswere withdrawn, by the month of September, fromAllahabad. The Council stated : '* Nothing butthe obligations to support our national faith, or toprovide for the actual supply of these provinces,shall induce us to march" your troops beyond theCaramnassa."BrigadierCar. IV.] BSmSH POWER IN INDIA. 203Brigadier General Smith resigned in November, i769.being succeeded in the command of the forces ^^^^^^by Brigadier General Sir Robert Barker. In De ^'- ^^^J o succeeds tomember, Mr. Verelst relinquished the President's Mr. persist.chair to Mr. Cartier.The Vizier, notwithstanding his former hatred shut* oowia^ reinstated mof Munerah-ud-Dowla, now earnestly entreated the Mogul'sconfidence.the King to reinstate him in his councils. Hismotives for so doing were not very apparent. Itwas surmised that, by removing all suspicion, hethought that he should the better secure his ownsupremacy : if such was the fact his dissimulationattained his object. The King was inexorablein his determination not to recall the Nabob;upon which Shuja Dowlas repaired to the presence,embraced the lucky moment, and was investedwith every honour and authority, both nominaland real. This unexpected reconciliation betweenthe King and the Vizier, received additionalstrength from the marriage which wasshortly to be celebrated between one of the royalprinces and his Excellency's daughter. Munerah-ud-Dowla had invariably opposed the expeditionto Delhi. The King, by the confidence which henow reposed in Shuja Dowlas, placed himselfentirely in his hands.At this period, Cossim Ally Khan* emerged from cousin Abythe obscurity in which he had so long remained,and♦ Vide page 92.204 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1769. and became once more an actor on the politicalBmoal. stage of Hindostan. It was stated, that the Raneeof Gohud bad invited him to reside at Gwalior,as a place better fitted for his schemes than thecountry of the Rohillas. A Mahratta army washovering between the country of the Rajpoots andJauts, and a large body of Seiks was in the neighbourhoodof Paniput; Nujib-ud-Dowla was inthe field, and the divisions amongst the Jautsgrew more inveterate. This state of things necessarilyobliged the Council to keep a watchful eyeon the course of events. Although the movementsof Cossim terminated without any importantresult, it appeared that the King, who was themere puppet of the Vizier, had been in correspondencewith him, and that his Majesty's regaintowards the Company had evidently diminished.The Nabob of Bengal, Syoof-ud-Dowla, died inMarch, of the small-pox, which raged with greatviolence at Moorshedabad. He was succeededby his younger brother, Maborek-ud-Dowla, aboutten years of age. Rajah Bulwunt Sing diedat Benares on the 23d August, and was succeededby his son Chest Sing.1770. The Mahrattass were at this time the cause ofhStite"<femon- serious apprehension to the Council. From theirforces having continued so long a period on theborders of the country of the Rajpoots, it wassupposed that they were satiated with plunder,and would have retreated, as usual, on the commencementstation.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDU. 205tenement of the hot weather, and repass the Meritobudda. Instead of such a course, they pursued Bkwoal.their conquests. The whole of the territories ofthe Jauts to the south of the Jumna, and betweenthat river and the Ganges, submitted to their arms,excepting the forts of Deep and Agra, which, itwas stated, they never could hope to possess, butby voluntary submission or treachery : a circumstancethat would, at all events, present a checkto their progress. The treasure deposited in theseforts was supposed to amount to many crores, andall that was wanted to apply it with effect was amore able and more resolute leader of the Jautsthan Null Sing. Amidst the whole of the movements,the Mahrattass did not manifest any hostiledesigns against the Company's provinces : butaproject was formed for the purpose of raising upa new king, in opposition to Shah Alum, who wasconsidered a prisoner in the hands of the Company: but to this project even two of the Mahrattagenerals refused their concurrence. The Kingevinced apprehensions of the Mahrattass, whilstthe conduct of the Vizier was not free from suspicion; as at the moment that the Mahrattasswere threatening his frontier, and when he oughtto have been prepared to oppose their progress, hewas amusing himself in hunting in a distant partof his dominions.The conduct of the French, notwithstanding theanxious desire evinced by the Council to avoiddisputes.RISE AND PBOOSBS8 Or THE[Car. tV.1710.BuiOAL.Calcutta militia.M isrion toNepauldisputes, continued to give rise to frequent altercations; the former magnifying matters of littlemoment into affairs of consequence, for the foundationof disputes between the two courts inEurope. As a preparation against any attempts,a militia was formed at Calcutta, composed of theCompany's civil servants and the European inhabitants*A naval force was likewise sent from England,to protect the British interests, the whole expenseof such aid being borne by the Company.The Directors having expressed a desire to learn,whether a trade could be opened with Nepaul ;and, if cloth and other commodities might notfind their way to Tibet, Lass, and the westernparts of China : the Council deputed Mr. Logan,of the medical service (who had, on a former occasion,accompanied Captain Kinloch,* and wasperfect master of the language), to prosecute theinquiry, and furnished him with the necessarycredentials to assist him in what they termed a'* hazardous enterprize."The affairs of Bengal having been brought downfrom Lord Clive's appointment in 1765, to theperiod when the Special commission of supervisionwas determined upon by the Company, theproceedings of the two Presidencies of Madras andBombay will be given for the same term, and willcomprise the measures in which his Lordship andhis successors took part regarding those two settlements.• Fide page 181.Gain. v.] MUtnBH Power IN INDIA. 207CHAPTER V.The Councils, of Calcutta and Madras, had nes.pressed upon the attention of the Home authors m^»»^»*ties, the importance of establishing a permanentinfluence in the Northern Circars. The resumes Northerntion by the French of their possessions in India,under the treaty of peace, led the President ofFort St. George to suggest to Lord Clive the expediencyof obtaining from the Mogul sunnudsfor the circles of Rajahmundry, Eure, Musta-phanagur, Chicacole, and Condavir or Gunter.The circles formed an appendage to the Soubahof the Deccan. Malabar Jung, in 1752, gave Con-david,on the south side of the Kistna, to theFrench East-india Company, as a perpetual jag-hire; and soon after ceded to them the other townnorth of that river, for the maintenance of thetroops in the immediate service of M. Bussy.When Colonel Forde took Masulipatam, and putan end to the authority of the French in the Deccan,all the five circles were restored to the Sou-bah,who consented, at the same time, that thefamily of Vizeramrauze should continue in themanagement208 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Crap. V.1785. management of the Chicacole circar, as a rewardMadras, for fidelity and attachment to the Company.The Circarr of Condavir, or Guntoor, was alsoconferred as a jaghire on Bazalet Jung thirdbrother of Malabar Jung, from which he stillreceived an annual tribute. The other circleshad been put under the management of differentpersons. In 1762, they were offered as ajaghire to the Company, on the same terms asthey had been formerly held by the French ; butas those terms involved the sending assistanceinto the Deccan, it was considered too onerous anobligation, and the offer was declined. HussainAlly acted as the ambassador from the Nizam.From the failure of his mission, he fell into disgrace: but, through the aid of the Nabob of theCamatic, and the advance of a considerable sumof money, he effected terms, and procured for himselfthe management of those countries, and atthe request of the-nizam was joined* by a detachmentof the Company's troops, in expectationof re-establishing a proper government. Thezemindar never accounted with any of his managersunless compelled by force, and the countryhad been generally plundered by the strongest ofthe contending parties. Hussain Ally, supportedby the Company, though with a very small force,got possession of the circles of Rajahmundry,and♦ Fide page 107.Chas. v.] BBtTtSH POWER IS INDIA. 209Lore, and Mustaphanagur : having engaged to i765.put the Company in possession of them, whenever Madras.required, a reasonable maintenance being securedto him should that event take place.On the 14th October, the Council at Madras sunnudsforadvised the Directors, that Lord Clive had, at ta^ed"fh>m thethe instance of Mr. Palk, the President at Fort **"*St. George, obtained sunnuds from the Mogulfor the five Northern Circars, and a confirmationof the jaghire granted by the Nabob to the Company.It was judged prudent to defer taking immediatepossession of them, as the Council werenot aware how far they might be required to sendaid in troops to Bengal. The revenues of theCircars, for the next year, had been anticipatedby Hussain Ally, to enable him to make good hispayments to the Soubah, and support his troops;but the possession of the sunnuds was important,the French being thereby prevented from gettinga footing in them.The Nizam having marched to Berar, GeneralCaillaud was appointed to command the troops :he proceeded in January, and took possession ofthe Bessoara Pass. The sunnuds, or grants, werepublished at Masulipatam the 3d of March, andreceived there with general satisfaction. The fortof Condapilly, which in a great measure securedthe pass into the Circars, was carried by assault,on the 7th March. The Council determined totake the countries immediately into their ownVOL. I. p hands,RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Cmaf. V.1765.Maoilm.Deferencebetween theNizamNabob.hands, to receive from the zemindar the outstandingbalances, and to use every means fordischarging Hussain Ally's troops.In April, the Directors were advised of themeasures adopted for establishing the Company'sauthority in the Circars, and of the difficultyof prevailing on the Nabob of the Camatic toremain on terms with Hyderr, who had madesuch extensive conquests on the Malabar coast.*ras an instance of the Mysoreans sincerity,"the Council stated, '' Hyderr has consented tosurrender to the Nabob the fort of Milpaddy,which guards a pass to the westward of Thine-welly,and was given into the Mysore hands byMortis Ally, about the time of the surrenderofVellore."The proceedings of the Madras governmentcreated considerable alarm in the mind of theNizam, who looked upon the Nabob as the cause.To remove this impression, the Council suggestedthat the Nabob should despatch a proper person tosatisfy the Nizam that he had not the least concernin the transaction. The party deputed was in-USTthe strutted to assure him, that the Council desiredto remain on the most friendly terms, that theirviews extended no further than the possession ofthe Circars, and in order to settle the treaty morereadily, they contemplated negotiating it throughthe Nabob. Before the party had set out, theNabob received a letter from the Nizam, and onealsoC:iAP.V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 21 1also from his Dewan, upbraiding him for not hav i766.ing endeavoured to prevent the Council taking Madras.possession of the Circars^ and recommending himto prevail on them to withdraw their troops.It appeared that the Soubah* was in great wantof funds and that his principal dependence was onHyderr Ally, to whom he had made overtures forassistance. The Council felt that he could notgive them much trouble as Hyder^s vakeel was atthe same moment soliciting the alliance of theCompany. Under these circumstances, theyjudged it best that the Nabob's messenger shouldproceed, as originally intended to the Nizam.The latter was deaf to every proposition whichwore the least appearance of coming through orfrom the Nabob. The Council, alive to the importanceof securing the Nizam, not only withreference to the growing power of Hyderr and hisgreat wealth, but also the Mahrattass and the preservationof a communication with Bengal, resolvedto instruct General Caillaud and Mr. Smithto proceed to Hyderabad, to put the Nizam incompletepossession of their motives and intentionsregarding the Circars, and their propositionfor a treaty with him. At this period, the Councilreceived a communication from the Select Committeein Bengal, and the President another fromLord♦ The Soubah and Nizam is the same party, although the twodesignations may be used indiscriminately.p2RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. V.176&Mackay.Council inBengal proposean alliancewith theNizam.IVeafjwiththe Nimis.Lord Clive containing a plan for an alliance withthe Nizam, and offering to join the Madras forcewith one entire brigade, in assisting him to settlehis government, and to carry into effect a planwhich Lord Clive had contemplated on his arrivalin India, of regaining possession of Cuttack, situatedbetween Ganjam and Balasore, in order tomake the junction of the two presidencies complete.The proposition appeared well calculated t6preserve the Company's possessions and the wholecountry in peace, and at the same time to form abarrier against the invasions of the Mahrattass,both as regarded Bengal and the Carnatic. Theaid which Lord Clive suggested should be profferedto the Nizam, as an inducement for his fallinginto the views of the Council, consisted oftwo hundred infantry, one hundred artillery, andthree battalions of sepoy. The Council apprizedthe Bombay Presidency of the measures in contemplation,and remarked, "it is in your powerto oblige both the Mahrattass and Mysoreans toattend to their own concerns."The treaty, which consisted of fourteen articles,was signed at Hyderabad on the 12th November.It was termed one of alliance and friendship betweenthe Company and the Nizam. The Company,in consideration of the grant of the Circars,engaged to have a body of troops ready to settlethe affairs of his Highness's government in everythingChap, v.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 213thing that was right and proper, but with liberty i766.to withdraw them, should the state of affairs, or Madras-thoseof the Camatic, render it necessary. Wheneverthe troops were not supplied by the Company,or required by the Nizam, the latter was toreceive from the Company nine lacs per annum.The Chicacole circa was to be reduced as soon haspossible : that of Mustaphanagur having beengiven by the Nizam to his brother, Bazalet Jung,as a jaghire, the Company were not to take possessionof it until his death ; but should he occasiondisturbance in the circa, then the Companywere to have it in their power to assume it. Thediamond mines were to remain in the possessionof the Nizam. The fort of Condapilly was to begarrisoned by the Company's troops, a killedbeing maintained therein on the part of the NizamThe most material clause of the treaty was thatwhich provided for an indefinite support in troopsto the Nizam. Upon this point the Council statedthat, in the course of the negociation. General Cail-laud had discovered that the Soubah was absolutelydetermined, in the event of his concludinga treaty, to proceed against Hyderr, for whichpurpose he had engaged the service of the Mahratta,and stipulated that the Council should cooperatewith him in the undertaking.The view of the Directors on this transaction was observationcommunicated to Bengal the 25th March 17G8. Directors onWe have taken the negociations and treaty "**^^'with2 1 4 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cst. V.1766. with the Soubah of the Deccan into oar most se-madras.j.jQ^g consideration, and are much alarmed at thestate of your affairs by your last advices. Theexamination into your proceedings has led to areview of all that has passed on the business ofthe Circars, from your first entertaining the ideaof obtaining possession of them.•• The exclusion of the French from the Circarshas been our principal view in obtaining them »but we have ever shewn a repugnance to the holdingthem on the terms of assisting the Soubah withour troops, and such, too, have been your constantsentiments, until 1766.•* In your letter of the 2d of October, 1761,paragraph 18, your system was, to suffer the contendingparties in the Deccan to weaken themselves,and not to grasp at more than you could hold.'' In the following year, the Soubah, distressedby his war with the Mahrattass, consents to yourholding the Circars, on your agreeing to pay himhalf the revenues of them ; but be revokes thegrant the moment his danger from the Mahrattassceases. In 1764, he is disposed to grant them, oncondition of your keeping up a body of troops inthe manner the French did ; but when sou foundit would require so great a force as seven hundredinfantry, a company of artillery, and three thousandsepoy, besides a proper force in the Circars,you reject the terms, as inadequate to the expenseand danger that may be incurred by them.'^ TheCher. v.] British POWER IN INDIA. 2 15The growing greatness of Hyderr Ally was nee.but a weak pretence for a junction with the Sou Madrasbah. We do not conceive you really thought hisarmy, or any country troops in Hindostan, couldendanger the Camatic in a defensive war; buthad you entertained such an apprehension, thewhole of our experience in the country wars showshow much danger, difficulty, and expense, andhow little assistance, is to be derived from anycountry alliance in a general action, more especiallywith the Soubah's army, the most undisciplinedrabble of all.** Upon the same principle, we disapprove Lorddive's ideas of a general alliance against theMahratta powers, and look for safety and successin our own force only, and their divisions.'ewe perceive Lord Clive's opinion has hadgreat weight ; but had that been your guide, youwould never have concluded the treaty on theterms you have; for in his Lordship's letter toMr. Palk, of the 1 th August, he says, he thinkstwo hundred infantry, a company of artillery, andthree battalions of sepoy, sufficient to answer thepurpose of supporting the Soubah**< In your conduct in the negociations with theSoubah, there is a yielding temper throughout thewhole negociation, which implies a want of firmnessin your negociator.'^ The general alliance with the Soubah andMahrattass produced the effect we always shallexpect216 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE * [Chap. V.1766. expect from alliances among powers uncontrolledMadras. |jy t{jg jg^^ Qf nations, or any principle to establishgood faith among them.** The Mahrattass, instead of being reduced, arelike to be aggrandized, by their conquest of theMysore dominions, which brings them so muchnearer to the Camatic. The Soubah's weaknessand indigence seem beyond all relief; and HyderrAlly, if less formidable to the Soubah and theMahrattass, is more likely to be an enemy to us,and to embrace every opportunity of disturbingthe Carnatic.'* Should the Circars continue in our possession,it must be observed as a general rule, thatno European is to interfere in the collection ofthe revenues, further than to receive the rentsfrom Hussain Ally, or the rajahs who held thedistricts, and are to account to the chiefs of Masu-lipatam or Vizagapatam, as you shall direct :neither are they to interfere in the management orthe government of the country, farther than tocheck the renter if guilty of any grievous oppression.*' Before we leave the subject, we must observeto you, that we think it very extraordinary thewhole negociation with the Soubah should havebeen conducted by a military officer, unaccompaniedby a civil servant. When Mr. Pybus'sillness was known, another should have been immediatelyappointed, for it is highly displeasing tous.Chas. v.] * BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 2 1 7US, and contrary to our orders, that a military officecer should be alone employed in negociations of . ^^'**^'-our commercial or political interest."It has already been seen that the conduct ofHyderr, on the Malabar coast, led the Council atBombay to apprehend a rupture between him andthe Company.At Madras, nothing more was heard of him ^f'^J^Jj."^until the month of July, when he informed theCouncil that he had sent for his vakeel. This circumstancecreated suspicion, it being at the sametime confidently reported, that he had solicited andand received from the Nizam a sunnud for theCamatic. This was in a degree confirmed by hishaving suddenly quitted his conquests on theMalabar coast, and proceeded to Seringapatam,where, it was stated, he had placed a child uponthe throne, and then posted his army at Coimbatore,near the confines of Caroor.* Notwithstandingthese movements, the Council were assuredby a vakeel from Hyderr, that he desired nothingmore than to live in perfect friendship with theCompany, and for this purpose he requested anEnglish gentleman might be sent to him to settleterms. JAr. Boucher, a member of the Council,was deputed for the purpose, and set out with thevakeel. When he reached Arcot, he was desiredtoThis is explained by the report which had reached the BombayCouncil, of his having adopted the son of Chunda Said.2 1 8 BISE AMD PROGRESS OP THE * [Chap. V.1766. to wait for answers from Hyderr reading the placeMadam. of their interview. He was afterwards informedthat Hyderr bad ordered the vakeel to go to himalone. Mr. Boucher returned to Madras, andreported to the Council that the vakeel, on quittinghim, had stated that he had received a letterfrom his master disapproving of an English gentlemancoming to him.^.TL'^S!!.'^- The Council considered the whole conduct ofmines on Iiosti-'H^eT'^ Hyderr to be very questionable. When they reflectedupon his immense conquests, his greatriches, and the power which he had established,added to his pride and ambition, they felt that noopportunity should be lost to reduce that powerwithin its ancient and proper bounds, and tocheck the intentions of a man, who, by his violenceand oppression, had rendered himself obnoxiousto all the country governments, and dangerousto the peace and tranquillity of the Carnatic.They therefore, viewed the resolutiontaken by the Nizam to be a very important circumstance,*and resolved to assist him with sucha force as would insure success, and at the sametime satisfy the Nizam of the sincerity of theirintentions. Information of the bearing of theNizam towards Hyderr was despatched to Bombay,that the President and the Council theremight take the necessary measures for securingthe♦ Fide page 213,Chap, v.] * BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 219the Company's possessions on that side, and be 1708.prepared to make use of their forces in the event Madras.of a rupture, in which case they concluded thatmany of the powers of the Malabar coast wouldbe ready to embrace the opportunity of recoveringtheir ancient possessions.Having reason to believe that the treaty with circuit.the Nizam had been concluded, the Council, inNovember, required Sitteramrauze, who had beenbackward with his kiss, to state whether he wouldsubmit to the Company's government by keepingup his agreement. The situation of Vizagapatam,in the midst of the Chicacole circa, being wellcalculated to preserve the country in obedience,the Council contemplated placing it in a state ofsecurity against any country enemy. They originallyintended to have taken the other circlesinto their own management, but, under the adviceof General Caillaud, they judged it better to conelude an agreement with Hussain Ally, to rentthem for a term of years. The Pittapore Rajah,one of the zemindar of the Rajahmundry district,*' being unwilling to submit to the reasonable demandsof Hussain Ally," the Council determinedto send a force beyond that stipulated to be paidfor, in order to reduce the zemindar to obedience.They advised the Court of Directors of the whole i767.of the foregoing measures, in their despatch of the22d January. On the 20th of that month, ColonelSmith had an audience of the Nizam, in camp nearHyderabad,BIS£ AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chas. V.Madras.Vacillatingconduct of theSoulwh.Soubah disposedto joinhinder.Hyderabad when he proposed moving to thebanks of the Kistna, where he expected the Company'stroops. The whole joined the Nizam onthe 19th. In the month of March, the Council,believing that Hyderr had been using means to inducethe Soubah '' to make up matters' and thatthe latter had been in communication with theMahrattass, attempted, but without success, to discoverwhether such was the fact. In order tostrengthen the hands of Colonel Smith, Mr. Boucherwas sent to join in the endeavour to bringthe Nizam to a determination. They were at thesame time obliged to march a force into the Maduraand Tinnevelly districts, to subdue some refractoryPolygars, who not only defied the Nabob's managers,but had defeated a small body of militarysent against them. After much negociation, theNabob consented to discharge the whole of the** useless . rabble," of which his troops consisted,and to depend entirely upon the Company 's forcesfor the defence and security of his possessions.The Nizam continued not only to act with indecision,but even treated the Company's commandersand troops with disregard. In the interim,the Mahrattass settled their affairs with Hyderr, andit soon became apparent that a negociation was inprogress between Hyderr and the Nizam, the latterwavering only as to the amount which he Vas toreceive for breaking with the Company.These events present a true picture of easternintrigueCuAf. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 221intrigue and deception. A few weeks had scarcely 1767.elapsed since the Soubah had been resolute in Maori.adopting measures to reduce Hyderr's power, andnow he is found forming an alliance with that ambitiouschief, and abusing his connexion with theCompany.The greater portion of the Company's force wasaccordingly withdrawn, with the consent of theNizam, who engaged to remit the two lacs on accountof the Chicacole circa, and likewise togive to the Company and their troops one-fifth ofthe money collected from Hyderr. The negociationwith Hyderr was continued from May t6the close of June, when the Nizam's Dewan gavea sunnud to the Company for the remission onaccount of the Chicacole circa, and bills for afifth of what Hyderr was to pay. These proceed Enter* thekings were unjust concluded, when reports reached uieiy. *^ ^the Council, that the Nizam with hostile intentionswas entering the Camatic. In July, all doubtswere removed upon this point. His army, insteadof marching northward, advanced towards Bangalore,and from thence to Oapatavady. At the closeof the month, Hyderr crossed the river near Seringapatamand proceeded to Bangalore, where, onthe 16th August, his main body was joined by theNizam. '^The Council caused all their troops to be forth Measurewith collected and placed under Colonel Smith. ^"^ "^•'•Aid was requested from Bengal to secure the Circles,222 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. V.1767. cars, and the Council at Bombay were called uponMadras. ^ ^^ ^^^^^ y^^^ exertions iu assisting the designsagainst Hyderr, whose power it was felt, sooner orlater, must be reduced, as the only means ofgiving peace to the Camattc tad securing theCompany's possessions. The Council observed :;'' It is not only his troublesome disposition andambitious views now that we have to apprehend,but that he may at a favourable opportunity, or insome future war, take the French by the hand, tore-establish their affairs, — which cannot fail to beof the worst consequence to your possessions onthe coast He has money to pay them, and theycan spare and assemble troops at the islands, andit is reported that he has already made proposalsby despatches to the French king or Company inEurope"*The soubise On the 26th September, the joint forces of theand Hyderr directed.Soubah and Hyderr were defeated by ColonelSmith, who pursued them till within eight milesof the road from Trinomallee to Changama. Sixtypieces of cannon were taken. The want of cavalryprevented his more effectually following up thevictory. During the operations, a body of Hyderr'siiyder'9 hone horse found mcaiis to advance to Country Plain.dnw. They plundered St. Thom6 and the whole of theadjacent villages, carrying off several of the inhabitants,without the Council being able to affordthem♦ Letter to Court, 21st September, 1767.Chas. Vel BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 223them succour. The Council represented : *' The ncr.continual reinforcements we had sent to camp Madras.had reduced our garrison so low, we were obligedto confine our attention entirely to the preservationof the Fort and the Black Town, for whichpurpose it was necessary to arm ukl the Company'scivil servants the European inhabitants,Armenians ad Portuguese." The detachmentsof the enemy consisted of three or four thousandcavalry and continued in the bounds until the29th September, when they moved off. TheCouncil added: *ras it is uncertain when thetroubles we are engaged in will end, and as wemust in the course of the war expect to havemany Europeans sick, we must earnestly requestyou to send out as large reinforcements as possible."This despatch reached the Court by theHector on the 22d April, 1768. It was acknowledgedin the following terms :-—'' The alarming state of our affairs under your cortes viewsconduct, regarding the military operations against nonst^n^'the Soubah of the Deccan, joined with Hyderr ^ "'Ally, and the measures in agitation with the Mahrattain consequence thereof, requiring our mostimmediate consideration, we have therefore determinedon this overland conveyance by the way ofBussorah, as the most expeditious way of givingour sentiments to you on those important subjects.f* In our separate letter of the 25th March, wegave224 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat.V.1767. gave you our sentiments very fully on your treatyMaseai. ^ijj^ jIj^ Soubah of the Deccan.'^ After having for successive years given it asyour opinion, confirmed by our approbation, thatmaintaining an army for the support of the Soubahof the Deccan was endangering the Carnatic, andwould tend to involve us in wars, and distant andexpensive operations, and the grant of the Circarswas not to be accepted on such terms, you at onceengage in that support, and send an army superiorto that which, in the year 1764, you declaredwould endanger your own safety.'the quick succession of important events inIndian wars puts it out of our power to direct yourmeasures. We can only give you the outlines ofthat system which we judge most conducive to givepermanency and tranquillity to our possessions.*' We should have hoped that the experience ofwhat has passed in Bengal would have suggestedthe proper conduct to you : we mean, when ourservants, after the battle of Buxar, projected theextirpation of Shuja Dowlas from his dominions,and the giving them up to the King. Lord Clivesoon discerned, the King would have been unableto maintain them, and that it would have brokendown the strongest barriers against the Mahrattassand the northern powers, and therefore wisely restoredShuja Dowlas to his dominions.* Such, too,should be your conduct with respect to the NizamandVade page 143.Chap. V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. * 225and Hyderr Ally, neither of whom it is our interest i767.should be totally crushed. Madras.*the Dewanny of Bengal » Bahar, and Orissa, Extent of thewith the possessions we hold in those provinces, as to temtonaiare the utmost limits of our views on that side of p**^*"®"**India. On the coast, the protection of the Carnaticand the possession of the Circars, free from allengagements to support the Soubah of the Deccan,or even without the Circars, preserving only influenceenough over any country power who mayhold them, to keep the French from settling inthem ; and, on the Bombay side, the dependenciesthereon, the possessions of Salsette, Bassein,and the castle of Surat. The protection of theseis easily within, the reach of our power, and maymutually support each other, without any countryalliance whatever. If we pass these bounds, weshall be led on from one acquisition to another, tillwe shall find no security but in the subjection ofthe whole, which, by dividing your force, wouldlose us the whole, and end in our extirpation fromHindostan**' Much has been^^rote from you and from ourservants at Bengal, on the necessity of checkingthe Mahratta, which may in some degree be proper; but it i^ not for the Company to take the partof umpires of Hindostan. If it had not been forthe imprudent measures you have taken, the countrypowers would have formed a balance of poweramong themselVes, and their divisions would haveVOL. I. Q left226 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chapel."^''- left you in peace ; but if at any time^thc thirst forplunder should urge the Mahratta to invade ourpossessions, they can be checked only by carryingthe war into their own country. It is with thisView that we last year sent out field-officers to ourpresidency at Bombay, and put their military forceon a respectable footing ; and when once the Mahrattaunderstand that to be our plan, we havereason to think they will not wantonly attack us.Offensive wa «' You will observe by the whole tenour of theseand further •<> .question to be despatches, that our views are not to enter itooffensive wars in India, or to make further acquisitionsbeyond our present possessions. We do notwish to enter into any engagements which may beproductive of enormous expenses, and which areseldom calculated to promote the Company's essentialinterests. On the contrary, we wish to seethepresent Indian powers remain as a checkone upon another, without our interfering ; therefore,we recommend to you, so soon as possible, tobring about a peace upon terms of the most perfectmoderation on the part of the Company, and whenmade, to adhere to it upon all future occasions,except when the Company's possessions are actuallyattacked ; and not to be provoked by freshdisturbances of the country powers to enter intonew wars"*The troops were ordered into cantonments during• Court's Letter, dated the Iste May, 176aCmaf. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 227ing the rainy season ; preparations being made for ne?.resuming the field as soon as the weather would m*»**»-permit. The enemy took advantage of this stepand invested Veniambaddy, of which they got possessionon the 8th November, and then laid siegeto Amboor. The Council ordered the troops to OpmtioiMassemble immediately at Vellore, to preserve the "**""' ^* ^''important fortress of Amboor, and to prevent theenemy from again penetrating into the Carnatic.Colonel Smith obliged them to withdraw fromAmboor in December, and shortly after defeatedthem ; Hyderr proceeding to Covrapatam, where hefortified his camp. Colonel Smith followed, butabstained, in consequence of Hyderr's strong positionand the want of provisions, from again attackinghim. Hyderr, in order to cut ois an expectedconvoy, put himself at the head of a select bodyof troops, and on the 20th December marched toSingarapettah, in the hope of intercepting it. ColonelSmith immediately detached Major Fitzgeraldwith some black cavalry and two companies ofgrenadiers. He fell in with and defeated Hyderr,who retired to Tingra Cottahh, and ultimately toBangalore, leaving garrisons in all the forts in thevalley. Tingra Cottahh surrendered on the 12thFebruary to Colonel Wood, who advanced againstDaraporam, into which place Hyderr had thrownsix hundred of his best sepoy. The garrisonstood a storm, in which they suffered greatly,Covrapatam surrendered to Colonel Smith on theq2 23dRISE AND Prioress OF THE[Chap. V.176^.Madrai.-Nizam desiresterms of accommodation.Treaty withSouUali.23d February. The troops under Colonel Woodproceeded to reduce Salem and Astor, the possessionof which it was felt would greatly tend tothe security of the Camatic to the southward.Various other operations followed, which openedthe road to Hyderabad. This circumstance,together with the success of the troops in otherparts, induced the Nizam to desire terms of accommodation;and that the Council would send aperson to him for the purpose. This was declined,on the ground that he was the aggressor ; and itwas insisted, as a preliminary, that he shouldwithdraw entirely from Hyderr, and send hisDewanwith proposals to Madras. After some hesitationhe sent Ruccum-ud-Dowla to the Presidency onthe 9th February. The negociation terminated inatreaty of peace between the Company, the Nizam,and the Nabob, on the 1st March. The Circarswere ceded to the Company, the Nizam acknowledgingthe validity of the phirmaund from theMogul. The Company agreed to pay him annuallythe sum stipulated by the former treaty,excepting the two lacs on account of the Chicacolecirca, which the Nizam gave up. The sum to bepaid him yearly was five lacs of rupees, out ofwhich he agreed that the expenses of the war,about twenty-five lacs, should be deducted, at therate of three lacs per annum. Care was taken soto word the treaty, that the payment of this sumshould not appear to be by virtue of the Company'sholdingChap, v.]BRITISH POWER IN INOU.holding the Circars from the Nizam, but only in nee.consideration of the friendship existing between Madras.them. The Guntoor circa was left in the handsof Bazalet Jung, as in the treaty of Hyderabad.£entire possession of the fort of Condapilly, withthe jaghire dependent on it, was given up to theCompany. Hyderr was publicly denounced by theNizam as a rebel and an usurper, with whomno correspondence was to be maintained. TheNizam promised to assign and make over to theCompany all his right and title to the denny ofthe Mysore country. The Nabob of the Carnaticwas included in the treaty, ** as well with the viewof preventing the Soubah from molesting the Carnatic,as to hinder the Nabob from having anyhopes towards the Deccan"*Operations were carried on against Hyderr. On opemtionsrar.the 20th March, Salem surrendered to Colonel Hyde""^"*^Wood.Intelligence having reached Madras of the ex proceedings,. . n 1 T» -I I ' 1 ¥T 1 » *' Bombaypetition fitted out at Bombay j to attack Hyderrrr s against Hyderrrr.settlements on the coast, Colonel Wood wasordered to proceed towards Sattiamungulum, togain possession of a fort which had been latelybuilt by Hyderr, and secure an entrance into theCoimbatore country, and at the same time open acommunication with the Malabar coast, to affordaidLetter to Court, 1st March, 1768.t Vide page 264.230 RISE AND PBOGB£S8 OF THE [Chap. V.no aid to the expedition from Bombay, against whichWADEAi. |.jj^ Council apprehended Hyderr would direct hisattention.The fort of Kistnagherry, which had beeninvested by Colonel Smith in the month of Februarydid not capitulate till the 2d May, theenemy having a few days previously made a vigorousbut unsuccessful effort, with a body of twothousand horse, one thousand sepoy, and sixhundred peons, to throw in provisions.Hyderr had shewn himself a very formidableenemy, and convinced the Council of Madras that,from his increase of power, he would prove a dangerousneighbour. They had reason to believethat he was in treaty with the French, who hadbeen collecting a force at the islands, of thirtycompanies of one hundred men each, amongstHyderr evinces which were many artificers of all kinds. He hadcome totenDi. intimated a desire that his vakeel might be receivedat Madras. The Council declined, unless thevakeel was furnished with the conditions proposedas the basis for a negociation. They felt that thecountry powers would be apprehensive of joiningthe Company^s interests, if they were liable to becast off, without a clear understanding as to theposition in which they would be placed towardsthose against whom they might have acted. Theyalso considered it essential to lessen the powerof Hyderr ; but had little reason to believe that hewould sacrifice either power or ambition to allayanyCap. v.] BHinSU POWER IN INDIA. 231any apprehensions. They observed that they nes.had a barrier to obtain to the Carnatic, their ex MAoaAi.penses to recover, and an extension of privilegesand possessions to acquire for Bombay. Withthese views, they determined to pursue vigorousmeasures, in order to obtain a footing in Mysorebefore the rainy season obliged them to suspendoperations.To promote these ends, two, members of the Pieid^epuUeiBoard were nominated, in the character of field ^^^^ 'deputies to proceed to camp, who, with ColonelSmith, were to act as a Committee, and to determinesuch measures with the Nabob as might beessential, without awaiting the decision of theCouncil at Madras, if the delay was likely to bedetrimental to the public service. They werealso to assist the Nabob in settling the countrythat might be acquired* to superintend all themeasures, and to keep the charges within all possiblebounds. The state of their finances was atthis time most embarrassing. As very limited aidcould be expected from Bengal, part of themoney intended for the China investment waswithheld.*In the course of the operations, cavalry was Financial em-indispensable,to enable the troops to follow up "^^^ 'the advantages, as well as to oppose with effectthat arm of the enemy. The want of such forcewas• Letter to Court, 1 th May 1768.232 BISfi AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap V."^- was severely felt. Vencatagherry surrendered toColonel Campbell on the 16th June, and Muliava-Success against *Hyderr. keel on the 28th ; from thence he proceeded toSour, where he was joined by the remainder ofthe army. 1that place surrendered on the 1 th,and Amicable on the 13th July. These fortsformed a complete chain from Vellore to Bangalore,and their possession secured an uninterruptedcommunication. These successful operations ledthe Council to resolve on an attempt against Bangalore,which they deemed of the greater moment,from a report that the Nizam had a design of breakingwith the Company, and that a negociation wasactually on foot between him and the M mahratta.Hyderr also had a vakeel with the Nizam, andRuccum-ud-Dowla, who had the principal sharein concluding the treaty between the Companyand the Nizam, was in disgrace, and it was re-% ported that the latter and Mhaderao proposed, assoon as the rains was over, to attack the Nabob'sand the Company's possessions.The views entertained by the Court of Directors,and the course of policy which it appearedto them the Council should have followed, werecommunicated to Madras, and a Select Committeewas nominated to carry into effect theirinstructions regarding the affairs under that presidency.Court of Di. «* In whatever light we view the 10th article ofrectors con ^SliTtife^sTu '^ your treaty with the Soubah, we see nothing but**^' weaknessCuAF. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 233weakness, danger, and instability to our affairs. ^'^^The Nabob Mahomed Ally, though highly es ^^"^'•teemed by us for the sincerity of his attachment,and the long and faithful union of interest thathas subsisted between him and the Company, isuniversally known to be a man of no resources inhimself, and, consequently, the whole burthen ofdefending and supporting him in the Mysorecountry must fall upon us ; with this disadvantage,that by deviating from the original purpose of restoringto every one his right, you lose all thenatural interest of the country, there remainingno inducement for any one to join you : thus weshould have a barrier to maintain at an immensedistance from Fort St. George, and the Mahrattassfor our neighbours.The situation you were in, when the Egtnonisailed, was precisely that in which a peace seemedattainable on eligible terms. You were then inpossession of all the chain of hills and forts, to formastrong barrier for the Camatic, and we makeno doubt but that Hyderr Ally's repeated defeatswould have induced him to pay a large sum ofmoney for the expense of the war; and there itmight have been closed with propriety.^^ Instead of pursuing pacific measures withHyderr Ally, as we think you ought to havedone knowing, as you did, our sentiments withrespect to extending our territories, you havebrought' us into such a labyrinth, of difficulties,that234 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Craw, V.nea that we do not see how we shall be extricatedMais. from them.^* But if it should have happened when theseadvices reach you, that Hyderr Ally should beextirpated, and it should not be inconsistent withany engagements you may have entered into, ourwish would be, to have restored to the ancientRajahs, and powers to whom they belonged, theseveral districts and countries taken from HyderrAlly, after reserving to us the passes and fortswhich serve as a barrier between Mysore and theCamatic. Such a step must demonstrate to allthe Indian powers with whom we are connected,that we mean to distribute to every man his own,and by a just, mild, and prudent conduct towardsthem, to evince that conquests and plunder arenot the objects of our pursuit; but that we meanto confine ourselves to the branches of our commercialinterest! and the benefit of such revenuesas have been granted to us by Mahomed Ally.** When we reflect on the vast length of country,from the northern parts of Chicacole, to thesouthern districts of Madura and Tinnevelly ; thenumber of garrisons to be maintained, and thewild independence of most of the Rajahs andPoligars, from whom nothing can be collected butby a standing force, we regret our having everpassed the boundaries of the Camatic, even forthe possession of the Circars ; for we have greatdoubts whether the charges will not always exceedtheChap. V.] British POWER IN INDIA. 235the collections, and apprehend many ill cones i7Gaquinces from so great a division of our forces. ^AoaAfcThe preservation of the advantages we hold inthe Bengal provinces, is the great object of ourattention"*Upon principles of policy, we wish for apeace with Hyderr Naigue, whenever it can beobtained upon the most moderate terms ; for ourpolicy is to avoid every thing that tends to theincrease of the Mahratta power, which is evidentlythe misfortune of this war; for you are reduced tothe necessity of being yourselves the proposers ofnew provinces to be added to the dominion of theMahrattass, already possessed of half the Mogulempire.'* Whether the Mahrattass have accepted or notof your offer, certain it is, they will make the mostuse they can of the embroils of others. It is bythis conduct they have arrived to their presentdegree of power ; and our best policy is to checktheir growth by every opportunity, or at least toavoid lending our own force to their aggrandizement,which we certainly do, as often as weengage in wars with the few remaining chiefs ofIndia, who are yet capable of coping with them.'* Nizam Ally and Hyderr Naigue are two ofthose chiefs, and it is our tie interest to preservea good understanding with them. We do notmean» Letter to Madras, 17th March, 1769.236 Rise AND Progress OF THE [Chap. V.i7eB. mean by this, that, after the long and expensiveMadras. ^^ wych you have been most unfortunatelyengaged in, you should yield to Hyderr Naigue,and accept of dishonourable terms ; but, wheneverhe shews a disposition to peace, we would haveyou meet him half-way ; and if a reasonable compensationcan be obtained for our expenses, wedesire no increase of territory, nor fresh grantsand privileges of any kind.*' We have possessions enough in Bengal andthe Camatic to yield all the advantages theCompany expect. What we want is, attentionin our servants to their improvement and goodmanagement, and a time of peace and leisureto establish plans of economy and frugality,both in our own affairs and those of the Nabobof Arcot, whose debts and embarrassments willhave no end, till he confines his views to theCamatic."* Subsequent events will prove howtruly the Court's prognostications were fulfilled.The difficulty of obtaining monthly supplies tocarry on the war, induced the Council to recommendto the Committee to make a vigorous effortat once against Bangalore. This measure wasdefeated by intelligence from Bombay. The Councilat that presidency had promptly answered thecall made upon them from Madras, for the purposeLetter to Madras, 30th June, 1769.Chap. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 237pose of attacking Hyderr's possessions.* Manna;? nos.lore was taken on the 1st March, and Onore sur Madras.rendered on the 25tb; but their operations against against BangsAlly Rajah were ineffectual, owing to theirbeing disappointed in the promised aid fconi the•' Malabars." Their attempt to induce the Mah- g^imuL^*rattas to. take part against Hyderr, also failed ; andan agent from Mhaderao laid claim to the Bednoreand Soondah countries, and to such part of Mysoreas might be taken. This was peremptorily refusedby the President of Bombay; but he was empoweredby the Council to stipulate, that if theislands of Salsette and Bassein,t with the severaldistricts and revenues dependent upon each respectively; also Caranjah and the Mahrattass'share of the revenue of Surat were relinquishedto the Company, the Mahrattass should be securedin their usual clout from the various governmentsand countries of the former rajahs on thecoast,• Tu/ff page 222,f The Court of Directors, in a despatch to the BombayGovernment in 1768, expressed their desire to obtain grants ofboth places:—'the intimation you gave to our President and Council ofFort St. George, to use their endeavours with the Mahrattass toobtain a grant of Salsette and Bassein to us, we highly approveof; and we now recommend to you, in the strongest manner, touse your endeavours, upon every occasion that may offer, toobtain these places, which we should esteem a valuableacquisition. We cannot directly point out the mode of doingit, but rather wish they could be obtained by purchase thanwar.238 RISE AND PR06SB88 OF THE [Chap. V.176B coast, who were to be reinstated in their possessions.*The discussions terminated without any satisfactoryresult. The Council were advised thatthe enemy had appeared on the coast, and thatMangalore and Onore had been evacuated by theCompany's forces with great precipitation, a partyof the sick and some field-pieces falling into thehands of Hyderr, who returned immediately toSr««t^ Hyder- Bangalore. The views of the Council of Madras,notwithstanding these reverses, were still directedto the reduction of that fortress. The troops underColonels Smith and Wood were ordered to uniteand encamp near Onscotah, until the necessarysupplies were collected for carrying on the siege.Before the junction of Colonel Wood, and thearrival of the heavy guns and stores, Hyderr formedHyderr retail a design of Surprising the camp of Morarirow,about half-a-mile on the right of ours, on the 23dAugust. He attacked it at night, with six thousandhorse and a battalion of sepoy. Morarirow,with great presence of mind, ordered his men notto mount, by which they had greatly the advantageof the enemy among the tents, and soonobliged them to retire with considerable loss.Colonel Wood, having joined Colonel Smith atBoodicotah, on the 6th September, endeavouredto bring Hyderr, who was encamped eight milesnorthLetter, April, 1768.ate.CiiAi^. v.] BBinSH POWER IN INDIA. 239north of that place, to action : he retreated too intrepidlyfor their force to come up with him. Per- ^AORAt.ceiling that he was followed by only one bodyof troops, he surprised and took Malavagal.Colonel Wood immediately went to its relief, andattempted to recover the fort on the hill byescalade, but without success. Hyderr's attemptto throw in a fresh body of troops, on the 26thSeptember, brought on a general action, whichlasted from eleven in the morning till sunset, whenhe retreated, leaving Colonel Wood master of thefield. He retired to Chicamogloor, and, on hisway, made an effort to take the fort of Burgoswhich he abandoned on the approachof our troops. The Council, having ascertained ^rioiirw?th^from Bombay that he had made overtures for a "y^*'-negociation through the president there, despatcheda communication to Mr. Hornby, the President,suggesting that he should inform Hyderr,that the Council at Madras were not averse topeace, and that proposals would be received.Colonel Smith, who had advanced with his divisionof the army in pursuit of Hyderr, near ,received a message from him, desiring toknow whether he would grant him a peace. Hewas informed in reply, that, if he had anythingto propose, he should freely open his mind;Hyderr desired some person might be sent tohim. Colonel Smith despatched his Dubash, theonly person he had with him, to whom Hyderrsaid.240 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr. V.)76a said, '' he was sensible he could not oppose his inM>DEA«. ^jj^ field, neither would he attempt it, but that hecould give us much trouble ; and as he was forcedto quit his own country, he was determined toenter the Camatic, and do all the mischief hecould, and, if reasonable terms were refused him,he would come to .the gates of Madras to makepeace."The Dubash felt that he could make noanswer. To another party sent by Colonel Smith,on the return of the Dubash, Hyderr stated, " hewas determined not to return to Bangalore ; thathe had left it well provided to the chance of war ;that it was possible we might take it in a month,but he should have Seringapatam and Biddenoreremaining, and that, rather than lose all, he wouldcall in the Mahrattass." He also deputed a personof consequence to the field deputies, by whomsuch moderate terms were proposed, that, had hebeen sincerely desirous of peace, he would haveacceded to them ; but he abruptly broke off thenegociation. The Council were satisfied his objecthad been to gain time, and to give him an opportunityof drawing off the several powers, bypublicly announcing that peace had been con*eluded.Apprehensions being entertained, that Shadeswould advance beyond the Kistna and joinHyderr, the Bombay Council despatched a Residentto Poonahh, to draw off his attention. Thesincerity of the Soubah was again doubted, as hehadCigar V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 241had also sent an agent to Mhaderao. Every i769.attempt was accordingly resolved upon by the Madba*.Madras Council to distress Hyderr, both on theMalabar coast and in the Coimbatore country.The Council at Bombay, from a desire expressedby the Directors for peace, had abstained fromfurther operations.Such were the difficulties and embarrassments Mr. Bromewith which the Madras Council were surrounded, ^h! ^^ ^^and so great were their apprehensions as to theMahrattass, that Mr. Brome, who had been appointedResident at Poonahh, was authorized topropose a junction with Mhaderao, to enable himto conquer the Bednore country, although theCouncil were quite alive to the great increase ofpower that the Mahrattass would derive from thatconquest.*The mission of Mr. Brome was of no avail.The unfortunate situation of the Company onthe Malabar coast, arising from their conquestshaving been abandoned, and the weak stateof the garrison at Bombay, of which Mhaderaowas fully informed, left that chieftain free fromany apprehension as to the Company's powerbeing exerted to his prejudice. These circumstances,together with a large sum of money paidhim by Hyderr, and the pressing entreaty of theNizam (notwithstanding the solemn engagementsofLetter to the Court, 16th November 1768,VOL. I. RRISE AND Progress OP THE[Chas. V.MadaiA«Mutiny atCoimbfttore.of the latter to the Company), that he would joinHyderr, led to the conclusion of a treaty betweenMbaderao and the Nizam ; by which, the latter,in lieu of the forts of Author, Nagore, and ,made over to him by Ragobah, was toreceive the forts of Autem and Botany, with ajaghire of twelve lacs of rupees, to be paid out ofthe country of Darood, to make up the differenceof the revenues arising from the forts which heceded : he agreeing to join the Mahrattass inassisting Hyderr against the Company and theNabob. At the date of this transaction (2d December1768), the following letter was receivedby the Council of Madras from Mhaderao :'* As the firmness and strength of your friendshipis known to every one to be superior in thoserespects even to the wall of Alexander, it is neediestto pretend to enter into any discussions of it. Inconsiderationthereof I have sent my Vakeel, who'will advise you of some matters which I have entrustedto him."On the 28th November, Hyderr's troops forcedthe Guzelhetty pass : Captain Andrews, who-commanded,was killed in the defence. A fewdays afterwards, the garrison of Coimbatore mutinied; they put to death both the commandingofficer and paymaster, and then delivered up thefort to the enemy. This event created so great apanic in the other garrisons, that some were immediatelyabandoned, and the rest surrenderedwithoutChap. V.] BRlTtSH POWER IN INDIA. 243without opposition. On the 5th December, Colo nes.nel Lang took the command of the army, relieving Madras.Colonel Wood, who had been ordered to the Presidency,to explain the course he had pursuedafter Hyderr's movement towards Sour, the resultof which had produced great despondencyboth in the troops and their commander.Hyderr repossessed himself of the several forts Haters sue-southof the valley, excepting Kistnagherry. He *****detached parties of his horse, plundering, burning,and laying waste the province of Trichinopolyand the southern countries. The fort of Trichinopolywas only saved by the arrival of MajorFitzgerald in the neighbourhood. The ravagescommitted by Hyderr's horse were great, the wantof cavalry rendering it utterly impossible to checkthem. In fact, the country as far north as Gingerwas destroyed, some of the straggling partiesadvancing to Chingleput. During the whole ofJanuary, the forces under Major Fitzgerald weremarching and counteracting, in order to watch,and if possible to stop, the progress of theenemyOn the 12th February, a correspondence was neo.renewed with Hyderr, on the subject of peace. Inreply to a letter from Major Fitzgerald, he expresseda desire to terminate the war, and thatan officer might be sent, to whom he could openhis mind, promising at the same time to put anend to the ravages committed by his horse. MajorR 2 Fitzgeraldi244 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. V.1769. Fitzgerald deputed Captain Brooke, who, by Hysj^r's permission, took down in writing the conversationthat passed, which led th Council to believethat he was really inclined to come to terms.*A proposition was made, on the part of the Council,for a truce of forty days ; Hyderr would onlyconsent to twelve days. The terms he prescribedbeing inadmissible, preparations were made towatch his motions. He was at this time in communicationwith M. Law, at Pondicherry, whichthe French were busy in fortifying, under pretenceof security against the Native powers. TheHy«iCT correct following copy of a letter from Hyderr to M. Lawm"i1w!^* was discovered : — ** It is a long time since I hadthe pleasure of receiving any letters from you advisingof your health, the news of these parts, andthat of the French in Europe. Considering thefriendship and regard which the French Companyand the girders of their king in Europe bear tome,I am very glad to hear of the increase of theirhappiness and.: power, also of your health. Youhave, doubtless heard from others the repeatedvictories which, by the blessing of God, haveattended the Circarr's troops ; also the defeat ofthe English, and my laying waste the Trichinopoly,Arcot, &c. countries. My victoriousarmies are now gone towards Madras, near towhich place they will proceed ; when you willcertainlyMadras Consultations January 1769.Chap. V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 245certainly send to me a person of distinction, to i'^^^-inform me as well of certain affairs of your count Madras.try of Europe as these parts ; and till then, beconstant in writing me very particular letters,advising of the above matters, the situation ofaffairs in Europe, the English sea-ports and theirgirders ; all which will be the means of increasingour friendship and regard. From Shah Mahomed,a servant of my court, whom I now send, you willbe informed of my friendship. What can I saymore"*Experience having shewn, that it was impossi- want ofable to obtain any decisive advantage without a mcmey'"^body of horse, a communication took place withthe Nabob of the Carnatic as to the best means ofprocuring that species of force. The distress ofthe Council was so great for want of money, thata stop was put to the investment on the coast, allfurther advances being interdicted : notwithstandingthese extreme measures for relief, they statedthat, they *' knew not where to find resources forcarrying on the war for more than four monthslonger*' They applied to the King of Tanjorefor a body of cavalry ; but Hyderr had alreadydespatched part of his force to the frontiers ofTanjore, and obliged the king to pay a sum ofmoney, and to furnish a quantity of provisions, tosave his country from being laid waste. It beingimpossible to bring the war to a conclusion withoutCountry Correspondence, 1769.246 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Car. V.i76». out cavalry, Morarirow engaged to complete hishorse to three thousand ; the Nabob was to furnishfour thousand more, which, with the fifteenhundred he already possessed, and about five hundredthe Polygars could supply, would form onthe whole a respectable body.Causes of pro The Couucil ascribed the protraction of the warto the three following causes : a divided power —the want of cavalry — and the want of money.They remarked, that the forces in the field wereunder the Company's servants, but the means ofmaintaining them were principally obtained fromthe Nabob, who was very jealous of control, especiallysince our attainment of the Dewanny inBengal, which led him to infer that the sameresult would follow at Madras. They did nothesitate to declare their opinion, that either thewhole management of the Camatic must remainin his hands or that of the Company ; and thatif the revenues of the Camatic were free andunencumbered, they might well afford to maintaina respectable body of cavalry, besides one ofinfantry ; but under the existing embarrassmentsof the Nabob, it appeared to be impracticable.As to money, they had never been able to calculatea reasonable dependence on more than couldmeet three or four months of ordinary charges.The Nabob, at length perceiving Diis danger, andthe indispensable necessity of a body of cavalry,engaged to procure both the cavalry and themeans.CflAr. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 247means.* Great doubts were entertained as to his i769.fulfilling his engagement; had not large sup ^^^^^^'^plies been furnished from Bengal, the affairs atMadras must long before have sunk under theburthen. These considerations led the Councilto urge the expediency of a sum being alwaysreserved at each of the presidencies to meet theextraordinary charges of war, in case the ordinaryrevenues should fails The incursions of Hyderrdetermined the Council to fortify the Black Town,for which purpose a contract was entered intowith Mr. Paul Benfield, in March.Hyderr, finding himself much pressed by theforce under Colonel Smith, near Chingleput,returned suddenly to the southward, and on the18th March, encamped on the Red Hills, nearPondicherry. Colonel Smith marched to Wandewash,where he was obliged to wait some days,to put his army in a condition to pursue the enemy.On the 26th, the Council received intelligence cyder ad.from Chingleput, that Hyderr's horse had appeared d!l»r '^near that place, and at twelve at night, the signalagreed upon was made at the Mount. On the29th, in the morning, several parties of horseappeared within the bounds of Madras, and itwas ascertained from a spy, that Hyderr, withmore of his horse, but without guns or infantry,was* This measure was the foundation of that portion of theCarnatic debt commonly called the " Cavalry Loan."t Letter, 8th March 1769.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[CHAr. V.1769.Madras.Letter fromHyderr.was on the other side of St. Thine. About sixo'clock in the evening, Hyderr addressed a letterto the President on the subject of a peace :** After the arrival of Mr. Andrews, and thecommencement of the negociation of peace, inperson as well as by letter, a means of establishinga friendship between us took place. I thereforeaddressed a letter to you, by a ,on the 13th March, in answer to one yousent me, and lay encamped near Balepore ; when.Colonel Smith arriving near my army, by continualmarches, with a design to attack me, I wasunder a necessity to move. Just at which time, Ireceived your letter of the 17th, by the said ,advising of your intention to send Mr.Andrews again to me, in a day or two ; for whichreason, I encamped within three or four coss ofCuddalore, in expectation of his arrival Thelaying waste of that place would not have been sodifficult a task; but still I declined it, out ofregard to the friendship between us, as it wouldprejudice the trust that is usually put in sea-ports.Mr. Andrews, however, delaying his coming forsome time, and Colonel Smith, notwithstandingthe negociation of peace being on foot, again arrivingwithin two or three coss of my army, with thesame design as before, I immediately decamped ;and with a view to settle a lasting peace, thesoonest possible, am arrived at the Mount. Myregard to our friendship, and the intercourse oflettersCuAF.V.l BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 249letters which has passed between us, made me j^^gdecline coming to blows with the Colonel ; and Masks.the same consideration has made me entirelyforbid the burning the villages, and seizing thecattle : on which heads, I have given proper ordersthroughout my army, I now write this, therefore,to desire you will send to me Mr. Dupre, who is awise sirdar and one of the councillors, and withwhom, moreover, I have maintained a correspondencesince the first arrival of Mr. Andrews. Tohim 1 shall impart my thoughts respecting theestablishing a peace and sincere friendship betweenus, which, having fully understood, he mayreturn and acquaint you with ; in which case, thatfoundation of a lasting peace, which we are bothdesirous of, will be established. In case of anydelay therein, I am not to be blamed: let mehope, therefore, that you will send the said gentlemanwith all possible expedition. Entertainno apprehensions whatever, but be pleased tosend him with a contented heart. For furtherparticulars relative to my friendship, I refer youto the said Nizamuddeen. May your happinessalways increase !"*The President replied to Hyderr Ally Khan : —"By Nizamuddeen Ashamed, I have just now receivedyour letter from the Mount, the friendlycontents of which give me great pleasure, as youstill express your good inclination to restore peace,andCountry Correspondence, 1769.250 Rise AND PSOOBESS OP TBE [Cap. V.1709. and desire that I will send Mr. I^pr6 to you farMackay. ^^^^ purpose. That gentleman will set out fromhence tomorrow morning early, to visit you ; andI hope all our differences will soon be adjusted toour mutual satisfaction. I therefore desire, as anearnest of your good intentions, that you will orderyour people not to plunder the Company's villages,nor molest the people. If you will consentto this, I will empower Mr. Dupre to send a letterto Colonel Smith to halt at a proper distance."Treats signed. Cn the following morning, Mr. Dupre set outto join Hyderr, with whom he continued the wholeday, returning to the Presidency in the evening.The conference led to the conclusion of terms,and of a treaty, which was signed by Hyderr onthe 3d April. He announced his ngning it in thefollowing terms : — '* I have the pleasure of yourletter. Agreeably to your desire, I have put myseal to the treaty you sent. You will receive itby Mr. Stray, to whom I beg leave to refer youfor further particulars, as well as to the circumstancesof Colonel Smith's movements to-day.May your happiness and joy ever last !"It consisted of three articles. The contractingparties included the Rajah of Tanjore, the Mala-varRam Rajah, and Morarirow, who were describedas friends and allies to the Carnatic PaeanGaunt ; also all other friends and allies of the contractingparties, provided they did not becomeaggressors against either of them; but if they becameCmaf. v.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 251came aggressors, they were not to be assisted by I769.either.* MadrasThe cavalry raised by the Nabob during the warwere delivered over to him, but at his request theywere to be placed under the Company's officers.Proposals were made to the Council, in May* c'unTto^^ointhat they should join the Nizam against the Mah- S^j^J*^"*'rattan. The Council, in the event of the matterbeing pressed, determined to avail themselves ofthe clause in the late treaty, and likewise to declarethat the situation of the Company's affairsdid not admit of their affording the required assistanceIn announcing their determination tothe Court, they remarked : *' Engagements andalliances with the powers of India must unavoidablyexpose us to perpetual dangers, troubles, andembarrassments ; but it will be extremely difficult,if not impracticable, to figure in the character ofan Indian potentate, and yet avoid the dangersand inconveniences of Indian alliances and conesnations. The Company's possessions in the Carnaticare not such as would give them that character; but as possessors in part, and protectors ofthe whole, from Tinnevelly to Cuttack, they certainlyare regarded in that light, and subject toall the inconvenience of it." +After the treaty had been executed, Hyderr insistedupon the release of all the Newaughts, andi- thereprinted Treaties t Letter to Court, 27th June 1769.252 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CHAr. V.J''^' the delivery of the stores in the fort of Color. The^ADmAf. Council, anticipating some further demands,consulted Colonel Smith as to the means ofcarrying on a war, should hostilities recommence.That officer declared that, consideringthe reduced condition of the troops, the distressedstate of the country, and the inability of the Councilto procure any certain pecuniary resources,there was no probability of their being able toprosecute a war with any prospect of success;that they were not in a position to insist uponmore favourable terms, and that even a temporaryrespite was of great moment to the troops.In consideration of these circumstances, and ofthe success of the enemy in the Tinnevelly country,owing to the combination of the Polygars inhis favour, and the miserable defection of theNabob's sepoy, who fled from every part on theappearance of the enemy, the demands of Hyderrwere acceded to.Hyderr shortly afterwards solicited the Councilfor a small body of troops, merely as a proof ofthe Company's connexion with him, to assist himwith Janojee against Mhaderao. The Councilreferred him to the treaty, under which theydeclined acceding to his request, feeling thatit would be unwarrantable to take part againstMhaderao.On the termination of peace with Hyderr, theCouncil brought before the Court the relation inwhichChap. V.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA* 253which the Company stood towards the Nabob of mathe Camatic. They declared that the terms of Madam.the late peace had been imposed upon them byimperative necessity, to which they had accededfrom a conviction, that the result would onlyprove less disadvantageous than a continuance ofhostilities, with means wholly inadequate to theirvigorous prosecution.Had the negociation with Hyderr related to the Embassy'sCompany's interests alone, most of the difficulties Stboblf thewhich arose during the discussions would have ^"™***^-been obviated. So far as the Company . wereconcerned, Hyderr was said to have evinced anearnest wish for peace and friendship ; but hadthe Company observed a neutrality, and left theNabob to protect his own country, the Carnaticwould have fallen to the first invader. Althoughin this powerless condition to defend his territories,the Nabob possessed, in its fullest extent,the government of the country ; the appointmentof, and command over, the persons entrustedwith the departments, and the entire disposal ofits productions and revenues ; on all points connectedwith the Carnatic, it was necessary that lieshould be consulted ; in fact, nothing could be*done without his concurrence. His desire hadbeen to continue the war, notwithstanding theabsolute want of all materiel for the purpose.The treachery of his sepoy, in surrendering everyfort that was attacked ; the extension of the cruel •ravages254 Risk Ain Progress OF THE [Cbap. V.I'm. ravages to which the country had been exposed ;Mamas, a rooted hatred to Hyderr ; a desire to extend hisown possessions, and a belief in the Company'sinexhaustible credit and sources in Bengal, suppliedthe motives by which he had been actuated.He never spoke of Hyderrrr but as Hyderrrr Naigue«although the Nizam and others had, as itsuited them, used towards Hyderr the title of Nabob.Hyderr as resolutely refused to use the termNabob of the Camatic, but designated him mahometAlly, often accompanied with opprobriousterms. The Nabob absolutely declined beingmade a party to the treaty, as be would qot submitto give Hyderr the title of Nabob. The Councilwere, therefore, constrained to conclude and engagefor the Camatic.The Nabob was desirous that the Companyshould disband their troops and retire within theirpossessions, leaving him to defend the rest of theCamatic with his own means. The Council observedon the long friendship which had existedbetween the Company and the Nabob ; their promisesand engagements to support him and hisfamily ; the large debt which he owed to them ;the probable detriment to these affairs, should theCamatic fall into other hands ; and the certaintyof that event, if not prevented by the interpositionof our power, were urged as reasons for employingthe Company's troops whenever the countrymight be attacked. Arms, once taken up, couldnotCbaf. y.l BBmSH POWER IN INDIA. 255not be laid down at pleasure ; and although it ne. •might be nominally the Nabob's cause, it would, Made*in point of fact, be that of the Company. Fromthe first of his connexion with the Company, in1746, to the reduction of Pondicherry, in 1761,the Camatic had been a continued scene of war,in which the Nabob had been reduced to thegreatest extremities* The revenues had beenwholly inadequate to the expense of the wars upto1761. Before any reductions could be introduced,the defection of Usoff Khan in the Ma-^dura country, and the subsequent hostilities withHyderr, had still further embarrassed his resourcesbesides the debts which he had contracted to individuals.The Council, therefore, solicited theCourt's views as to the future course of policy tobe observed towards him, as, after all, he dependedsolely upon the Company for support ; ashehad not a friend in the Nizam, the Mahrattass,Hyderr, or the king of Tanjore. They stated,that they felt it necessary to put forward thefacts ; deductions from them being matter ofopinion.The Nabob was apprehensive, to the greatestdegree, that, sooner or later, some pretence wouldbe found by the Government to seize the carnatic,and establish such a system as had been introducedin Bengal. Although the day was, inall probability, far distant, when he would be enabledto discharge his debts, and insist upon theCompany256 BI8E AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.• 1709. Company evacuating his forts and country, theMamas; Council desired to possess the Court's opinion, inthe event of such a state of things arising. Thevalue of the Company's acquisitions, includingthe Circars and Jaghire» was estimated at aboutthirty-five to forty lacs; the Nabob's, betweenseventy and eighty : but this was not founded onany clear data.The Directors communicated their sentimentson the treaty with Hyderr, and the views ofthe Council, in a despatch to Madras, in March1770:*' In your letter to the Nabob, dated 16th July1767, you say, it has been your intention, eversince 1761, to embrace the first favourable opportunityof securing the several passes into the Carnatic.That you then had a favourable opportunity,because the Mahrattass had already struck aterror into Hyderr's forces ; therefore, you urgedthe Nabob to exert his utmost to get this accomplished.You afterwards promised him the governmentof the Mysore country. Your field deputiespompously appointed him phousedar thereof; andthen you accuse him of having an insatiable desireof extending his dominions. He finds himself, byfollowing your advice, reduced, disappointed, andalmost despised; and then you blame him forwant of temper.** You have attempted to explain away thevalueChap. V] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 257value of almost every thing for which you have 1769.ventured to plunge us into a war with a view to ^^'**^»-obtain. To such a degree of irresolution and disabilityhad your ill-conduct of the war reducedyou, that necessity obliged you, at last, to give Mr.Andrews, in his instructions to treat with Hyderr,a very extraordinary carte blanche nearly to thiseffect : ' If Hyderr will not relinquish places taken,we must relinquish pretensions thereto.'** You say the Nabob has the Bengal transactionsalways in his mind : — we wonder not at it.You have, contrary to our express injunctions,afforded but too much reason for all the countrypowers around you to suspect us of encroachingdesigns against their possessions and tranquillityand gained no one advantage thereby.'* In the first article of your treaty withHyderr, you include, in general words, all thefriends and allies of the contracting parties, * providedthey do not become aggressors ;' but if theybecome aggressors, they lose the benefit of suchtreaty.Now as, by the treaty with the Soubah, Ba-valetJung is prohibited expressly, at any timefrom yielding Hyderr the common formal civilitiesnecessarily practised by country powers who areat peace with each other, we cannot conceive how,J3azalet Jung can fulfil the condition by which heholds his circa, and yet continue on good termswith Hyderr, as all our allies must do, if they actVOL. I. s conform-liseAND PROOaE$S OF THE[Chap. V.1769.Madras.Circa takenunder Company'smanagement.conformably to the first article of your treaty withbim.'' By your letter to the President and Council ofBengal, 21st March last, and their reply thereto,of the 31st of the same month, we find a plan hasbeen concerted between you, for establishing afund for military resources, by a reduction of theinvestments on which we had so much reason todepend. However salutary it might be to provideagainst future exigencies, after your investmentsshall have been carried to their full extent, yet itis with the utmost astonishment we see that ourservants (apprised, as they are, of the obligationthe Company is under to pay £400,000 annuallyto Government, exclusive of the indemnity for tea,which may be estimated at near £200,000) couldentertain an idea of depriving us of the only meanswe could have to discharge the same, togetherwith such dividends as the Proprietors might reasonablyexpect from our late acquisitions, and atthe same time enable us to provide for the paymentof bills of exchange, or our common andnecessary consignments, and the other importantoccasions which must indispensably be compliedwith."As the term for which the Circars had been letto sustain Ally and Joquey Pundit expired in theensuing September, the Council resolved upontaking the whole under the Company's management,and to settle with the Zemindarss for theirjumnaV.] BSHTSH Power IN INDIA. . 259jummabundy. When originally let to Hussain i769.Ally, two only of the four Circars had acknow- ^•^»^"-ledged the Company's authority ; and the Zemindarof those two, notwithstanding their assurancesof fidelity and attachment, were ready to seizeevery opportunity to distress a government, towhich they only submitted through fear. By theplan proposed, a competent knowledge of theirmean value would be obtained, though the expensesof collecting the revenues might render itless advantageous for a time. The distinctionbetween zemindar and government lands wasfirst pointed out '' The zemindarries are lands zemindarheld by certain rajahs or chiefs as their hereditary m^ntkndTestates, paying a certain tribute to the Groves ^•■*™**^ment, and being subject to suit and service, inmanner very similar to the ancient feudal tenures.The tributes ought to be certain and invariable,though that has not always been strictly observed,and changes in government have also introducedchanges in the tributes ; which, indeed, is of nogreat consequence, for, besides these fixed tributes(supposing they were so), the Supreme Governmenthas always demanded, and Custom has givensanction and title to, a further sum as a bazars orfree gift; and these two sums, the tribute andlazar, are what we mean when we speak of settlingthejummabundywith the Zemindarss. Besidesthese seminaries, or hereditary estates, there arecertain lands (more in the Cbicacole than anys 2 other260 BISE AND Progress OF THE [CsAr. V.1769. other of the Circars), which are called lately, orMadras. Government lands, and are the property of thestate, or lord paramount. Such are yonrjagueer,&c. lands, in the Camatic ; and these are the landswhich we purpose to let out, even should we, bywayof trial, endeavour to settle ourselves thejummabundy with the Zemindarss for their lands"*Litigious and The introduction of English law had, at thisviolent pro . j , , . .1ceedingnofthe early period, been productive, as in later times, ofGrand Jury. , '. . * , , ^much inconvenience and annoyance to the Governmentas well as to the natives. At a momentwhen the Company *s affairs on the coast demandedthe utmost attention of the Council ; when thewhole of the country from Tinnevelly to theKistna was involved in troubles, and when theenemy were ravaging the Carnatic, the Councilwere harassed by the violent and litigious proceedingsof some members of the Grand Jury, whoobstinately persevered in pressing matters andpresentments, which threw the settlement into contentionsand embarrassments ; whilst on other occasionsthey declined to make a return to any ofthe bills of indictment brought before them.The jurisdiction of the Mayor's Court, under thecharter, became matter of doubt and dispute; theone party construing the word factory in the mostextensive latitude, the other taking it in its literaland strict sense.If,"Letter from Fort St. George, 27th June, 1769.Chap. V.] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA. 26 1** If," observed theCounciU ** the charter should i7«*.be understood in the extended sense, including not ^^'**^*-only all the old districts, but the nearly-acquiredjaghire and all the circles, and, consequently,that we should be required to govern and managethese countries according to the laws of England,we hope your honours will pardon us if we franklyconfess, that we are utterly unable to undertakesuch a task. It would be introductive of more disorderand confusion than we can now describe :but, as we do not think that the charter can, by anynatural construction, be extended thus far, we haveonly to hope that it may be understood not toextend beyond the places actually named withoutdependencies; that is to say, Madraspatnam, or theBlack Town, and Fort St. George, or the WhiteTown, and so of every other factory. We are ofopinion that, whether the Company hold their possessionsby one tenure or another, it was neverintended by the grants, to abolish the usages andcustoms of the people, or the forms of administeringjustice."The whole subject was referred by the Directorsto the consideration of counsel, who, after enteringvery fully into the various points, stated : —I have no doubt that the charter of justice counseraopudoes not extend to any territories or places ac durtSfth^""quire since that charter was granted ; cones ^™^ ^^^'quietly, the Presidency of Madras may be relievedfrom their apprehensions, that the jaghire landsare262 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. V.1760. are within their jurisdiction. The extent of theirMadras. power seems to be very exactly described in theforty-fifth paragraph of their general letter.'^ If any of the Grand Jury had complained tothe court of their fellows for refusing to go on withtheir business, and nothing had appeared to justifysuch refusal but what is said by the threememorialists in the court, it was the duty of thejudges to set fines upon them, and commit themuntil the fines were paid. The court have alsoa power of fining those who refuse to attend thejuries, who are liable to be called upon after theyhave been legally summoned : but fines are at thediscretion of the judges, and in such cases £30 hasbeen set. Nothing can be more illegal or insolentthan the address oF the Grand Jury to the justicesof Oyer and Terminer, 26th April 1769 ; there wasno punishment in the power of the court they didhot deserve. But when a grand jury is dismissedfor misbehaviour, and another summoned in itsstead, the second is not to consist of any part ofthe first jury so dismissed ; and the taking a laissernumber at first into grand juries will prevent thisinconvenience.'' It is proper I should make some observationson the memorial sent to the Court of Directors,and the conduct of the memorialists. They, afterthey had found one bill of indictment, stoppedshort in the business, because they apprehendedthey were not qualified to act, the court, in theiropinion.Chafe.] BRITISH POWER IN Indies. 263opinion, haying illegally dismissed a former jury. ^^69.It is impossible to conceive a circumstance more ^^^^foreign to their province as jurymen, or the businessthen before them. With equal propriety,they might have dated their disqualification fromsome misconduct in the Nabob of Areot. It isagain to be observed, that these gentlemen had beensworn on the Grand Jury, and as such had foundan indictment* They imputed, and by their memorialimpute, the interruption thus given to thepublic justice of the country, to the feelings anddictates of their conscience, and could not by virtueof their oaths as jurymen (though with thesame breath they declare themselves not qualifiedas jurymen) give any reason for their conduct.How this explosion was felt at Madras, I knownot; but sure I am, that if it had burst in theKing's Bench in this country, these gentlemenwould not have been permitted to plead consciencefor their outrage. If these feelings ofconscience are real and genuine, the owners ofsuch consciences are, indeed, disqualified forevery important connexion with public society,as they have not the least power and control overthemselves. Could it be imagined, that assistingin the administration of justice could offend themost tender conscience? Can any employmentbe more innocent or honourable ? Against suchqualms, so sudden, so unexpected* and so destructivein their operations, human foresight hasno264 SUE AND PSOOBEB8 OF THE [Cbaf. V1769. no protection. But if, on the other hand, these^'^'* feelings of conscience are not sincere or genuine,but are only used as a cover, under which resentment,detraction, and malice conceal themselves,the owners of such consciences are the pest of allpublic society''The Court dismissed three of their civil servantsand one military servant, who had beenprincipally concerned, and were parties to thememorial, leaving it to the Council to restoreeither or all, provided their conduct, in the intermediateperiod of the complaint, and the receiptof the Court 8 order, had proved entirelysatisfactory to the Council,condiwtortfae The French were at this period busily engagedin fortifying Pondicherry, under the pretence ofsecurity from the country powers. Two of theirtransports had gone to the Cape for provisions,after having been at the Mauritius, full of men andwarlike stores. They had also made a settlementon the eastern coast of Madagascar for the betteraccommodation of their troops.*1768. The armament sent from Bombay against Hys^^^'^ possessions on the Malabar coast, in theSS^t^?^' month of February, has already been noticedMalabar. That expedition consisted of five hundred Europeansand eight hundred sepoy, under the commandLetter from the Council 26th June, 1769.t Fide page 230.CuAf. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 265and of Major Gown, the marine force being neaplaced under Mr. Watson, to whom was added ^"■^^•Mr. Piebald, long resident at Onore, for the purposeof forming a committee to conduct any negociationthat might arise during the service.Mangalore, Onore, and Fortified Island, hadbeen successively captured in the month of March.On the 9th of May, a considerable body of Hyde'sforces were reported to be within a shortdistance of Mangalore, commanded by the Nabobin person. They were shortly afterwards discoveredposted on the hills and bringing up theircannon with elephants and oxen ; their numberamounted to six or ei^t thousand foot, and fourthousand horse. Captain Boy, who commanded company'sat the fort, was consulted, and joined with the Maitre. ^Committee in opinion that the fort was untenable ;that any attempt to attack the enemy in the fieldwould be fruitless and unsuccessful, and that measuresshould, therefore, be concerted for withdrawingthe troops. Arrangements were accordinglymade for that purpose; but from greatmismanagement in bringing up the boats, and thethe irregularity and precipitancy with which thetroops advanced to embark, one lieutenant, twoensigns, eighty-four Europeans, and one hundredand sixty-two sepoy, were either killed or fellinto the hands of the enemy.The Council considered the whole transactionto call for strict investigation. They ordered ageneral266 S18E AND PXOOBfiSS OF THE [Cha». V.1768. general court-martial to assemble in November,Bombay. f^^ ^^ ^j^gj ^f |.|j^ officers, who had given theiropinion to the council of war assembled at Mangalorethat the place should be evacuated, and alsofor the irregular and disgraceful manner of conductingthe evacuation, in leaving the sick andseveral oflken wounded to the mercy of the enemy. The .jj^g ^f jjj^ Qj^j.^ j^ ^ j|j^ dismissal of several ofthe officers from the service.The treaty concluded with Hyderr, by the Councilat Madras, was not deemed conclusive as regardedBombay. A vakeel reached the latterPresidency from Hyderr, on the 3d November,desiring that two members of the Board might beappointed to treat with hint : Messrs. Church andPiebald were accordingly nominated for that pose. After protracted negociations, a treaty wasPresidency of agTCcd Upon, in the mouth of August, consisting ofthirteen articles. The Company were allowed tobuild a fort at Onore, and to have the sole right ofof purchasing pepper in the Nabob's dominions*The amount, or as much of it as the Companychose, was to be made good in guns, muskets,saltpetre, lead, and gunpowder, and the balancein ready money; the Company were to exportfrom Mangalore what rice they might want; tocut and purchase timber at Onore, and to be exemptfrom anchorage-dues; the Nabob was not toassist the enemies of the English, nor the Englishthe enemies of the Nabob.TheCuikr. V.} BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 267The Court disapproved of the article of the >7eatreaty, which related to the supply of warlike ®^"■^''•stores to Hyderr ; as it not only enabled him tostrengthen his own power, but led to the belief thatMhaderao, with whom the Court were anxious topreserve a strict neutrality, might take umbrage atthe condition, which permitted Hyderr to add tohis military means.M268 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.CHAPTER VI.1705-69. To preserve a correct narrative of the iDgs of Parliament, in connection with those ofdirected to the tj^e Company and of their governments abroad,•^v^uv. reference must now be had to the aces of the Legislature,immediately following the acquisition ofthe Dewanny in 1765.*Intelligence of that event reached the GeneralCourt during its meeting on the 18th June 1766.After the despatches had been read, a motion wasmade to increase the dividend from 6 to 8 percent.The Court of Directors were opposed tothe motion ; they represented that, although theadvantage of the new acquisition was undoubtedlyimportant, yet the expenses incurred in the extendedmilitary operations that had been earnedon, had entailed on the Company a large andheavy expense, and they recommended, that beforeany increase was made on the ground of thesupposed enlarged profits, they should first dischargetheir incumbrances. The unanimous opinionof the Directors led to the withdrawal of themotion at that meeting, but a similar propositionwasFide page 146.Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 269was renewed and carried on the 26tb September, 1766.notwithstanding a report from the Directors tothe Proprietors strongly urged the prudence ofabstaining from the measure. On the followingday the House of Commons called for a copy ofthe proceedings. At this time a negociation waspending with His Majesty's Government for ageneral arrangement of the Company's affairs.Parliament determined, before entering upon the •more extended subject, to pass a law forthwithfor regulating the dividend. The bill brought inprovided against the declaration of a dividend butby the ballot, and that seven days' notice shouldbe given before such ballot took place. In May1767, the Proprietors determined to petition 1767.against the bill ; the Court of Directors werestrongly opposed to this course, whereupon theGeneral Court demanded a ballot to decide thequestion, and that it should take place instanter.The votes were accordingly taken between thehours of eight and eleven in the evening, the majoritybeing in favour of the petition against thebill for regulating the dividend. So far howeverfrom the Proprietors obtaining their object, theHouse of Commons called for a copy of their furtherproceedings, and passed two Acts, the oneprescribing the mode in which a declaration ofdividend should be made ; the other limiting thepower of voting at the ballot to Proprietors whoshould have had their stock six months, and alsoproviding270 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cbap. VI.1767. providing that do ballot, on any question, shouldbe begun within a less space of time than eighthours after the adjournment of the (General Courtin which the question might be proposed, andthat in no case should the ballot commence at alater hour than twelve at noon, nor close earlierthan six in the afternoon.*The regulation regarding the qualification of aproprietor to vote arose out of the mischievouspractice which had prevailed of splitting largequantities of stock into sums of £500, (the thenonly qualification) by which separate and temporaryconveyances were made* Thus dividendswere declared. Directors elected, and importantquestions regarding India decided, under the existenceof a practice subversive of every principleupon which the General Court was constituted,and which, if continued, would have left the permanentinterest of the Company liable to be sacrificedto the partial and interested views of the fewand perhaps temporary proprietors.These legislative measures were followed byfurther and more important proceedings regardingthe Company.In the month of September the Court of Directorsreceived an intimation from the first Lord ofthe Treasury that it was most probable the Company'saffairs would engage the attention of ParliamentAct 7 Gea S, cap. 48 and 49.Car. VL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 27 1lament in the ensuing session. A committee was ne?.accordingly appointed in November, who calledfor the Company's charters, their treaties with andgrants from the country powers, together with *all their letters from their servants and agents inIndia, and also a statement of their revenues.Lengthened discussions took place — the questionof the right of the Crown to the territories acquiredby the Company was felt to be of too muchimportance to be lightly touched upon, and theMinister* declared fully against the trial of sucha right in the House of Commons.The Company having petitioned Parliament,and submitted proposals for an agreement, thesame were acceded to, an Act being passed bywhich the Company were to pay £400,000 a-yearto the public, and to export a given value ofBritish producesThis agreement was renewed in 1769 for the i7oaterm of five years. ;]: At that period a general stateof the Company's affairs ; the contents of the dispatchesreceived from the three Presidencies,which announced the deputation to Shuja Dowlas,in Bengal ; the prosecution of the war on the coastagainst Hyderr, and the mission of Mr. Brome fromBombay to Poonahh, were communicated to theProprietors. They were also acquainted with, andfully• Lord North. f '^ ^^eo. 3, cap. 67.X 9 Geo. 3, cap. 24.272 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChak VI.1789. fully concurred in, the determination adopted bythe Directors, to send out a special commission,composed of three gentlemen of ability and experience(Henry Vansittart, Luke Scrafton, andFrancis Forde, Esqrs.). to superintend all the presidenciesand settlements, with full power to correctall abuses, and to dismiss or suspend such servantsas might appear to have been concerned in suchproceedings. They also resolved, that the Directorsshould apply to the Crown for naval aid inIndia.Government Application was accordingly made to His Ma-theKing's jcsty's Government, but they were not disposed towith power of grant a naVal force, unless its commander wasa plenipotentiary.invested with powers, as plenipotentiary, for treatingwith Hyderr Ally, the Mahrattass, &c. TheCompany were averse to arming him with suchpowers. Government were still of opinion thatthey should be conceded ; but subsequently suggestedthat they might be confined to his havinga voice on all questions connected with peace andwar. The objections of the Directors and Proprietorsto this modification not being removed,it was urged by Government, that the commissionproposed to be sent out by the Company was illegal;and, moreover, that his Majesty could notconsent to permit his forces to be subject to possibleemployment, contrary to the engagement bytreaty, to acknowledge the legal titles of the Sou-bahof the Deccan and Nabob of the Camatic.LordChas. VI.] British POWER IN INDIA. 273Lord Weymouth, who conveyed such intima ^'^^^eton to the Directors, desired that the sense of theGreneral Court should be taken upon it. On the15th of August, the day appointed for the GeneralCourt, another letter was read from his Lordship,in which he recapitulated the object contemplatedin his former communication, andconcluded by stating that, ** The difficulty of asole plenipotentiary, if ever it existed, is removed :the Crown does not desire to interfere with thepowers of the commission; wants no authorityover your servants, nor any direction or inspectionof your commercial affairs ; disclaims even a recommendationof any person to be employed in it;in short, only wishes to be enabled to assist youeffectually; and, in order to that, finds it necessaryto have a share in the deliberations and reso-»lotions of the Company, merely with regard to thetwo objects of peace and war, when his Majesty'sforces are to be employed."The proposed commission was declared by theAttorney-general and the Company's counsel tobe free from any legal objections. The questionof giving a voice to the naval commander-in-chief,in discussions as to peace and war, was consideredin successive General Courts, and finally rejectedon the 13th of September.Sir John Lindsay was nominated commander sir John Lindasay appointedin-chief of the King^s ships in India ; he was like J?.«>fn™P<*° * ' King*s shipswise appointed by the Company to take the com- in India.VOL. I. T and274 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.1709. and of all their vessels of war in the Indian seas,and to treat and settle matters in the PersianGulf. The commissioners were permitted toembark on board his Majesty's frigate Aurora.Although no official intimation was received ofany King's ship being ordered to India, it appearsthat two frigates, of which the Anson was one,were dispatched for that station.The Stag, ship of war, reached Anjengo, with1''^ Sir John Lindsay, in February, the Aurora, withthe commissioners, had left the Cape in Decemberpreceding, but no tidings having been receivedof her in India in the month of September, theCouncil apprehended that some fatal accident hadbefallen her.* They, therefore, determined todespatch the Lapwing to England in September,by which conveyance they announced to theCourt that, in consequence of the non-arrival ofthe commissioners, they had resolved to carryinto effect the Court's orders of June, 1769, onthe subject of the Dewanny revenue.Revenue tyi. The Sclcct Committee contended, that thetern opened.power of acting was vested in them; but theCouncil at large considered that, as the Court'sordersNo intelligence was received of the Aurora, or her passengers,after quitting England. In March 1772^ a motion wasmade in the House of Commons for a new writ for Reading inthe room of Mr. Vansittart The house refused to grant thiswrit, several cases being cited where members having been absentfour years had returned.Chas. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 275orders were directed to the Supervisors, and not vino.to the Board or the Select Committee, if they ®'*'°^'-wee to be taken up, it should be by the Presidentand Council at large. Councils of Revenuewere accordingly appointed at Moorshedabad andPatna. Their instructions were framed in conformitywith the Court's orders of June, 1769, andmay be considered as the introduction of the Company'srevenue system. The Court observed: —"We have attended to the several informations court's ideasto the reverendproceedings on the subject of the revenues ; nue manage-andfrom the result of our observations, we seereason to flatter ourselves that, with care andindustry, great improvements maybe made in theDewannee collections. We find the revenues ofthe Calcutta lands, as wbII as of Burdwan, ,and Chittagong, have been considerablyaugmented : and this increase gives us a sensiblepleasure, because we perceive the number of inhabitantshas increased at the same time, whichwe regard as a proof that they have found in thoseprovinces a better security of their property, andrelief from oppressions ; and it is with particularsatisfaction we can attribute these advantages totheir being more immediately under the Company'smanagement, and under the constant andminute direction of our covenanted servants.The like abuses, which have been corrected inthese districts, are still severely felt through allthe provinces of Bengal and Bahar, where theT 2 numerous*27G HISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. VL177a numerous tribes of Foujedars, Aumils, Girders,bmmqau g^^ practise all the various modes of oppression,which have been in use so long as the Moorishgovernment has subsisted. To correct abuses ofso long a growth will require much time andindustry, and, above all, a patient and moderateexertion of the powers vested in us by thegrant of the Dewannee : for we do not mean, byany violent and sudden reform, to change the constitution,but to remove the evil by degrees,by reducing that immense number of idle sycophants,who, for their own emolument andthat of their principals, are placed between thetenant and the public treasury, and of whichevery one must get his share of plunder, thewhole mass of which must amount to a mostenormous sum.'your intention is to proceed in this work,without taking off from any of those profits andemoluments which have usually accrued to theZemindarss, who have inherited lands from theirancestors, much less to add any thing to the rentsto be collected from the tenants ; on the contrary,we mean to better the condition, both of the oneand the other, by relieving them from manyoppressions which they now labour under.But a plan of reformation of so extensive anature cannot be effected by one man ; it mustbe the constant attention of many ; and for thispurpose we have resolved to establish a committeeofChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 277of some of our ablest servants, for the manage 1770.ment of the Dewannee revenues, at Muxadavad ^^^^^^for the Bengal province, and at Patna for that ofBahar.^' The gentlemen to be so appointed shall becomptrollers for the management of the Dewanneerevenues under your direction, and they are tohave so many other of our junior covenantedservants for assistants, as from time to time maybefound necessary to be sent into the severalprovinces, to correct abuses and maintain theintended reformation.** The object of this council must be, first, toinform themselves of the real state of the collectionsin every part : that is to say, what rents areat this time actually paid by the tenants, andwhat was paid formerly ; what is the nature ofthe cultivation, and what the chief produce ofeach district, and whether, in that respect, thereseems a prospect of improvement. They arcnext to inform themselves of the amount of thecharges of collection for some years past, in asparticular a manner as possible; and you arethen to judge how many of the Aumils and otherofficers, among whom those immense sums havebeen divided, may be spared. This saving, as faras it can reasonably be carried, at the same timethat it will be a profit to the Company in point ofrevenue, will likewise be a relief to the tenant :for it cannot be doubted but that these numerousinstruments278 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.J 770. instruments of power lay the inhabitants underBknoal. contribution in various secret ways, over and abovewhat appears upon the face of the accounts.'' In this reformation, you are to proceed witha moderate, steady, and persevering spirit of inquiry,looking rather to the prevention of fraudsfor the future, than the punishment of thoseoffences which have already passed, and which, ifnot justified, are at least much palliated, by theimmemorial custom of the Moorish government.'' The councils so to be appointed at Moorshe-dabad and Patna are to have the control of all thebusiness relating to the revenue; but MahmudReza Can, or some other principal person of thecountry, must be appointed Naib Dewan for theBengal province (that is, the Company's deputy),and all the business must be carried on throughthe Naib, and under his seal and signing ; and, inlike manner, Shitab Roy, or some other principalperson, at Patna, for the Bahar provinces."The Council of Revenue are to sit daily, oras often as may be necessary for the most minuteattention to this important branch of business.The Naib is to give his advice and opinion of themeasures necessary to be taken, the officers andcollectors requisite to be sent to the different districts,and the orders and powers to be giventhem ; but the council are to consider and determinethe whole, and no appointments are to bemade, nor the Naib's seal put to any orders, withoutChap. Yl.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 279out their approbation ; and copies of all such itaorders and appointments are to be entered upon ^*"«^«"their diary, or a book apart, and to be transmittedregularly to England.** We have said, in a former part of this letter,that we have no view to prejudice the rights ofthe Zemindarss, who hold certain districts by inheritance; but when any of these die withoutheirs, the lands are to be let for a term of years,and upon such conditions as may encourage improvementsin the cultivation. In like manner,where lands lie waste, you should propose termsfor settling them, giving the undertakers everyadvantage possible, to enable them to proceed inawork so beneficial to the community in general,and yielding to the Company, in process of time,a certain increase of revenue*** Before we close this subject, we cannot help separation o€remarking, that there seems to us to be great reve^rlSfe*"^danger and impropriety, in having the powers of ^^*"-revenue and the powers of justice in one and thesame person, which seems to be the case in theofficers of the Foujedary, and, as we apprehend,in most other of the public offices of the severaldistricts. This will be an object worthy of furtherinquiry ; and if the case is as it appears to us,those powers should be separated and distinctlines drawn."These instructions, far from evincing a spirit ofrapacity, appear to have been framed with ananxiousMahiftttat tndAuto.280 RISE AND PSOOBES8 OF THE [Chap. VI.iTm. anxious desire to acquire the fullest informationBivoAL. ^^ ^j^^ g^^l^ ^^£ ^^^ revenue, and to act under itwith the utmost consideration towards the natives :most especially in separating the executive andlegislative power which had been vested in thehands of one individual.The Mahrattass had constrained the chiefs of theJauts to come to a settlement, by paying sixty-fivelacs at given periods, besides an annual tributeof fifteen lacs, or a cession of lands to that value.*They then advanced and took possession of .Two of their detachments entered theprovince of Corah, seized the town of Better,and laid claim to part of the Vizier's dominions,waving, for the moment, the conquest ofDelhi.MeMureiof These aggressions constrained the Council todepart from the principle which they hadadopted of non-interference. The dominionsguaranteed to the King and Vizier had been attackedor laid claim to by the Company's mostformidable enemies. In accordance, therefore,with the treaty, and without waiting for a requisition,the Council determined to give immediateassistance ; they felt that delay would only increasethe danger, and whatever aid ought tobe extended, would prove infinitely more efficaciousif promptly afforded. They felt that energeticFide page 2M.CounciLCflAr.VI] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 281getic measures on the part of the Company might into.infuse some degree of vigour into the timid count B"'c^'-cils of the King and prevent the Vizier takingadvantage of any of the events which frequentlyarise during a period of confusion, favouring theviews of a man of enterprizing and ambitiousspirit. The security of the Company's possessionswas also involved in the determination. Theforce at Dinagepore was accordingly ordered tomarch to the banks of the Caramnassa, and thegarrison at Allahabad to be reinforced, to ensurethe safety of that fortress, in case of suddenattack during the absence of two of the King'sbattalions, which had marched from thence, atthe requisition of his Majesty.In the month of February, the Mahrattass raised Mahnttas takethe blockade of Furruckabad, and proceeded in ^ 'separate bodies, with great rapidity, towardsDelhi, of which city they took possession, togetherwith several branches of the royal familyIt appeared from incontestable proofs, that thisstep was adopted not only with the concurrence,but actually under the advice and recommendation,of the King himself, his Majesty subsequentlyadmitting that he was prompted to suggestthat course, in order to prevent their proclaimingthe Shah-ada in his room. It soon project of thebecame evident that the King*s intention was to ^'"^"join the Mahrattass, in the hope that he shouldeffect his long-cherished object of gaining hiscapital282 RISE AND Progress OF THE ICuaiw VL177a capital and being seated on the throne of his an*BiwoAL. castors It was apparent, that he would rathersee his capital in the hands of the Mahrattass,than in those of either Zabta Can, son of Nujib-ud Dowlas, or his Vizier. The latter, in communicationwith Sir Robert Barker, proposed thatthe Company's forces, with those of the King,and his own, should march without delay, andjoin the Rohillas and Patans, for the purpose ofplacing the King on the throne at Delhi. TheSelect Committee, although satisfied that theproposition could never be effected, concurred init rather than appear to weaken the ties betweenthe Company, the King, and the Vizier, as wellas to preserve the King from falling into the handsof the Mahrattass. His Majesty at first acquiescedin the plan, but abandoned it shortly afterwards,and resolved to throw himself into the hands ofthe enemy. Sir Robert Barker endeavoured todissuade his Majesty from pursuing such a step,and to induce him to join in the spirited measuresapparently adopted by his Vizier for his restoration.It was likewise proposed, that he shouldsend forward the royal standard, accompanied byone of the young princes, rather than undertakethe project himself, until affairs appeared morefavourable.]77j^ The King, resolutely bent on carrying intoeffect his plan of proceeding to Delhi, disregardedall the arguments urged by Sir Robert Barker,whoChap. VI] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA* 283who had pointed out to him the consequences 1771.which would probably ensue; and quilted Alia ^**°^^habad on the 15th April, for the purpose of joiningthe M mahratta.His Majesty's separation from the Company King joioa theappeared unavoidable. Any act on the part ofthe Council, to restrain him, would have inducedthe Mahrattass to place the Shah-ada on thethrone, and might also have irritated the Kingagainst the British interests. The Council, therefore,resolved, as a mark of gratitude and respect,that Sir Robert Barker should attend him to thefrontier of his province, and pay him every markof attention. The King felt very sensibly thisdemonstration, and, at his own request, Mrs permittedto take with him the four three-pounderfieldpieces attached to his troops.The Vizier, unable to effect any change in themind of the King, felt it to be his duty to aid him,both with money and troops, in order to promotea measure which he could not prevent ; but he, atthe same time, manifested a due regard to his owninterests : it being discovered that, in considerationof this aid, the King was to deliver over tohim the fortress of Allahabad. The negociationfor this object had been conducted so secretly,that the Council were not aware of it, until theyreceived intelligence of the terms on which thecession had been made. This act, on the part ofthe King, was totally at variance with his professionsRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. \U^771. sons towards the Company, and, at the same time,evinced the determination of the Vizier to availhimself of every opportunity for strengthening hisown power. The Council instructed Sir RobertBarker to point out these facts to his Majesty, andto endeavour to obtain the almost impregnablefort of Chunagur for the Company, as a counterpoiseto the cession made to the Vizier. Thepossession of this fortress, and the King's residencein the Lower Provinces, had been strongly urgedon the attention of the Council by the Court inCourt*! Tiewi. 1771 :» — *< These, and such further arguments asshall appear most conducive to the end, will, wehope, prevail on the King to establish his residenceat Rajah-nul, or Mongheer, or such other place,with the provinces, as may be thought most properfor the purpose, and most likely to preserve tousthat influence which is so essential to the Company'swelfare.^' The political interests of the Company makeus no less solicitous to obtain from Shuja Dowlasan exchange of the territories of Bulwunt Siug»for the provinces of Choral. and Allahabad, nowheld for the King, since by such an exchange ourfrontiers would be more easily defended a greaterinfluence would be preserved by us over theneighbouring powers, and we might possibly berelieved from the necessity of keeping up so largeandLetter to Bengal, 10th April 1771.Chap.VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 286and expensive a military establishment as we have 1771.at present in Bengal. ^■''o** We are not insensible to the difficulties whichmay oppose your negociations on this subject.These, however, we persuade ourselves, may, intime,be overcome, by a proper attention on thepart of our servants, and by their availing themselvesof the circumstances which may occur,either in the situation, desires, projects, temper,or wants of this prince ; and we recommend toyou, to lay hold of every opportunity which mayoffer for accomplishing, by a friendly negociation,so desirable an end.** There is another object, of the most essentialconsequence, which calls for the utmost exertionof your abilities; we mean, the obtaining fromShuja Dowlas the absolute cession to us of the fortof Chunagur.'* As we have experienced the strength of thisfortress, and are sensible of the vast importance thepossession of it would be to the Company, youmust use your utmost endeavours to acquire, byfriendly means, what could not be retained withoutviolence; we, therefore, enjoin you not to leaveessayed any effort which prudence can suggest,for obtaining from Shuja Dowlas, the cession ofChunagur Fort. But as our view is to acquire itby treaty, not by force, and considering also thesituation, power, and influence of this Soubah,your negociations must be conducted with thegreatestAL.236 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Crap. Vf.1771. greatest caution and delicacy ; and yon nraststrive^B.KOAU by every fair and honourable means, to strengthenhis friendship and engage his confidence ; nevertheless,you must not abate of your attention toall his motions, nor forego any opportunity to impresshim with an opinion of our activity andpower.** And here we take occasion to observe, thatshould we at any time obtain from him the cessionof this fortress, you must not fail to keep in it astrong garrison of Europeans, under the commandof an able and experienced officer, which possessionwould enable you to do ; since the security,which our possessions would thereby receive,would admit of a reduction in our other garrisons.'' Sensible of the difficulties which opposedyour endeavours to obtain the removal of M.Gentil from the court and councils of ShujaDowlas, we approve of the delicacy with whichyou have acted towards the Vizier, in your requisitions,on this subject ; but, as we cannot see aperson of the abilities of M. Gentil (a naturalenemy of this nation, as well as of the Company)continuing in possession of a power to promotethe designs of France, and not be alarmed for theconsequences of 'his influence at the Soubah'sCourt, you must, therefore, lay hold of the firstfavourable opportunity to renew your request toShuja Dowlas, to remove M. Gentil from hisservice."TheChap. VL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 287The King left in the hands of the Council two itt.of the young princes, as the best pledge of his b«^o^^faith, and proceeded by slow inarches throughthe Corah prince. Sir Robert Barker attendedhiift to within seven coss of its boundary, and onthe 30th June had his final audience of leave.His Majesty gave the strongest assurances offriendship for the English nation, and of thegrateful sense he entertained of the support andassistance they had at all times afforded him.The Council entreated his Majesty to be convincedof the attachment which they felt towardshim, and of the readiness with which the Companywould receive and protect him, should anyreverse of fortune compel him once more to returnto his provinces.*The Vizier had formed an alliance with theRofailla chief Hafiz Rhamet, to guard against theMahrattass, who threatened to deprive him of theVizerat, unless he joined the King's standard atShahjehanabad,t where his Majesty arrived onthe 6th January, 1772. He had also encouragedFrenchmen to enter into his service : the modelof a new fort, intended to be erected by him,having been prepared in a masterly manner by aFrench engineer. These steps were not to beconsidered as manifesting any doubt on his partof the sincerity of the English feeling towards "him,» Letter, Slst August, 1771. f Delhi.288 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.177a him, but as indicating an apprehension of theMama. Mahratta power, which was, in some measure,participated in by the Council.The Council at Madras advised the Court, thatMhaderao, the Mahratta chief, had expressedgreat dissatisfaction at the conclusion of the treatywith Hyderr,* in August, 1769, as he had meditatedan attack on the Mysore country, or on theCamatic, in conjunction with Janojee, with whomCarnatic liable he had come to terms. 'thus situated,' amidstto irruptions.powers whose ambition will never suffer them toremain quiet, and whose interests lead them todisturb the peace of their neighbours, whenevertheir interest incites them to do so, it may easilybe conceived how liable to interruption the peacein the Nabob's possessions must be." The Councilstated that they expected to be pressed byeach party for aid ; but as the Court had drawnthe line 'which appeared most eligible' theydetermined to pursue the course pointed out, asfar as possible.Hyderr seeks Hydcr, in the month of December, urged theMahrattassss. Couucil to assist him against the Mahrattassss, andreferred to the treaty of 1769 as the ground forsuch demand. The Council evaded complianceasserting that they could not be called upon toassist him, when it appeared that he was theaggressor — his refusal of the clout being cited inproofFu2epiige266,Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 289proof that such was the case. The inconvenience into.of the treaty now forcibly pressed itself upon the *'^^*^*'Council. They were glad to avail themselves ofany plea, tb avoid being involved in fresh expenseand hostilities, whether as principals or allies,being in daily expectation of the arrival of theSupervisors, to whose decision they desired toleave the matter.The Mahrattass entered Mysore in February. MaiuBttasHyderr endeavoured to take post and secure the ^"^' ^y*^-passes, to prevent their penetrating into the Bid-tenorecountry. At this juncture, a vakeel arrivedfrom Mhaderao, and expressed to the Council astrong desire, on the part of his master, to cementthe friendship between him and the Company,referring, at the same time, to the Nabob of Arcotwith regard to other points. These proceedings ofMhaderao grew out of the mission of Mr. Brometo Poonahh, already noticed.* The Council feltembarrassed by the Mahratta chief referring tothis circumstance. The mission of Mr. Bromehad been resolved upon by the Council as a lastresource, in the hope that some fortuitous eventwould set it aside. Such proved to be the case,as the treaty with the Mahrattass, the Nizam, andothers, was concluded before the propositions, withwhich Mr. Brome was entrusted, were madeknown. Still, the object of the mission becamesufficientlyVide page 241.VOL. I. URISE AND Progress OF THEIChaf. VI.1770. sufficiently public to authorize Mhaderao to claim,Habeas. upon the ground of reciprocity, equal considerationat the bands of the Council. The latter feltthemselves bound by the Court's orders, andadmitted that, if it were practicable for them toremain passive spectators, and permit the nativepowers to exhaust each other, it was the mostprudent course. They knew the Mahratta to bethemost dangerous power ; and that even theunited forces of the Company and of Hyderrwould not reduce them, whilst it might lead totheir making a conquest of the whole of Mysore,and thus establish, at the door of the Company'spossessions, a more powerful foe than even Hyderr.On the other hand, were they to join Hyderr, theywere aware that a more advantageous offer fromhis enemies would draw him off the next day.Nabob desires The Nabob of Arcot was anxious to act withto join Maltret- • -m, t t i» ••!• «tas; supported the Mahratta. In this critical situation, theLindsey? " Council, desirous to avoid taking any part, assuredHyderr's vakeel, that if they could not act withhim, they would not act against him. The Sou-bahadvanced to the banks of the Kistna, and therewaited to see which party prevailed.The non-arrival of the Supervisors, and the circumstancesconnected with the debts of the Nabobof the Camatic, increased the difficulties of theCouncil, the Nabob's private creditors infusinginto his mind an idea that they had power andinfluence to overrule the Court of Directors athome.Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 291home. Their embarrassments were enhanced by i77othe conduct of Sir John Lindsay, who, having lamas.arrived from Bombay, assumed, under what heconsidered to be plenipotentiary powers, a rightto inquire into the conduct of the late war, andto hold direct communication with the Nabob.By this proceeding, the Council were not onlyplaced at direct variance with his highness, butcolour was given to the idea that there was asuperior authority to the Company, to whom theNabob could resort, as occasion or caprice mightdispose him. Sir John Lindsay went so far as torequire the Council to attend him when he proceededto deliver the King's letter to the Nabob :he also desired them to furnish him with suchpapers and documents of the Company as hemight see fit.The Council determined to support the author Difference withcity of government, and not to " degrade them Lindsay.selves" by being mere attendants on a functionary,of whose powers they were not satisfied. They feltthat there was no medium. They observed, *' weeither must have delivered to him our papers andrecords, or not-ewe must either have renderedhim an account of our transactions, or not ; — ewemust have admitted him to have shared in ourdeliberations, or not. There appeared to be noroom for hesitation. We were charged with theCompany's affairs-we had no instructions fromour constituents. Their rights were attacked : weu 2 must292 RISE AND PROGRESS OE THE [Chat. VI.1770. must either have supported, or basely surrenderedMadras. them. Our fortunes may be at stake in the issue ;but were our lives at equal hazard, we should,without a moment's hesitation, have taken thepart we have taken. The die is cast ; we muststand the issue." Such were the terms in whichthe Council announced their having declined toobey the unauthorized requisitions of Sir JohnLindsay.A mission more pregnant with danger to theCompany's interests on the coast could not havebeen well devised.Conductor The advices from Madras, which announcedjiThn iJndn^ thcsc differences with Sir John Lindsay, reachedthe Court of Directors, by the Lapwings on the22d of March 1771 . On the 8th of April, they addressedthe following letter to the Earl of Rochford,one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State :Letter fioin '^ The late advices from India, brought by the LapwingMajel^i*''* ^^ °^ ^ ^^'y interesting and alarming a nature, that we*''"? h*^'** *® think ourselves indispensably obliged to lay the purport ofLindsay. them before his Majesty'^s Ministers, together with our sentimentson the present state of the East-india Ccnnpany^saffairs upon the coast of Coromandel, produced as we havereason to apprehend, from the exertion of powers which, tillwithin a few days past, we could not have the least reasonto conceive were ever delegated to Sir John Lindsay, in anyquality he holds from his Majesty in the East-indies.Sir John Lindsay, my Lord, in express contradiction tothe assurance given to the Company by his Majesty'^s Secretaryof State, your Lordship's predecessor in ofRoe, lias,underChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 293under his hand insisted that he has his Majesty's authority 1770.and plenipotentiary powers fix)in the Crown, to execute ay Madras.treaty with the Princes of the country, which may bejudged necessary to preserve peace in India.He has also, in like manner, insisted that his Majesty hasbeen pleased to appoint him his minister, and to invest himwith plenipotentiary powers to treat with the Princes ofIndia. The first intelligence this Company received oftheir existence, was communicated to them by their Presidencyof Madras, by advices which arrived so late as the^2d ultimo. If they appear alarming now, well mightthey be thought in the utmost degree perplexing and distressfulto the Company's servants there, who are told bySir John Lindsay, that he is commanded by the King toapply to the Grovemor and Council of that settlement for afull and succinct account of all their transactions with theNabob since the Treaty of Paris (concluded near eightyears before this requisition) ; that it is his Majesty's pleasurehe should enquire, with the utmost care, into the causesof the late war with the Soubah of the Deccan and HyderrAlly, and the reason of its unfortunate consequences ; andbe, therefore, makes no doubt but they will, with the utmostalacrity, put him in possession of the original papers,or authenticated copies of all their transacting since thesaid Definitive Treaty, in order to enable him to render afaithful account thereof to the King ; and that the wisdomof Government may co-operate with the prudence of theCompany, to establish a lasting peace in India.We beg leave to express our hopes, that our servants, inthe situation and circumstances they found themselves, willstand fully excused in your Lordship's sight, as they do inours, for not considering themselves warranted to comply withsuch a demand. At the same time, we must beg leave seriouslyto affirm, that the promulgation of the plenipotentiarypowers.2^^ BBT — ■^^ ^■«* ~ «= :C— . VLiTJH pBPWtf*. dancatf by S■am^A' IB dm local ioa»c€ acis|waT a laura, viae^cr be faroa^iit to beikvc,of die E«t4Bdia Cofc^ni, €r MtodoB. Soda, m tnitk. ^ >f"*^The Orator mJ CohboI oftfajt since the mi at Sir <of his cxtnonfiiHKTgi e ads F dimmidKd, avi thai the —Mt fatal <the Company » to he appRhodcd. It k car duty, asahead in tiber ■■nrifntr, to lay browjour Loffdbfaqi our ■fi f ilM n i i ni M aLso* thai vales somespeedy ranged j be applied, the ruin of the Coa^Mij, bmthe km of their consequence, infliipiwr, wd credit, will in-fidelity ensue."Lord Rochford's reply was dated St. Rameses,20th April 1771:^ In answer to your letter of the 8th instant, I must infonayou, that the repeated complaints made by the Companyof the mismanagement and disobedience of their servants inIndia, which caused them to desire from the Legislaturemore extensive powers for their coercion, and induced themto send out Supervisors invested with the highest authority,first suggested to his Mayest the expediency of giving hiscommission to a person of confidence, to procure the fullestinformation on the spot, ot the manner in which affirm hadbeen conducted in that country ; the thorough knowledgeof which the King could not but consider as a principalnationalChap. VI.] BBITISH Power IN INDIA. 295national concern, as well as of the greatest consequence to 1770.the interest of the Company. His Majesty was the more Madras.called upon, in this case, as his own honour, pledged for theperformance of the engagements entered into by him in thelast Definitive Treaty, was in the hands of the Company'sservants carrying on the government in India.His Majesty has reason to apprehend, that the Governorand Council of Madras gave themselves the first rise to theopinion of a contest between the King and the Company,by their improper reception of Sir John Lindsay, and theirrefusal to do the usual honours to the delivery of hi"Majesty's letter and presents ; which opinion, if it shouldat first starting be worked up by the ignorance of the peopleof that country, and their ideas of despotism, into prejudiceshurtful to the consequence and influence of theCompany, cannot but be checked in a short time, by thepositive instructions given to Sir John Lindsay to avoid, as• far as possible, even the appearance of any dispute with theCompany, which might produce the most unfortunate consequencesin the present state of affairs.The King, in his last letter to the Nabob, has beenpleased to express his confidence in the Company, and hisdesire to connect them inseparably with that prince ; andSir Robert Hariand, whom his Majesty has appointed tosucceed to the commission of Sir John Lindsay, besides theparticular orders given him to promote, as far as possible, astrict union between the Nabob and the servants of theCompany, and to remove every suspicion of the Company "^slying under the King's displeasure, received instructions tomake the support of their importance and honour in theeye of all the powers in In, a principal point of hisattention.I haire received his Majesty's commands to repeat thoseinstructions, and to guard against any mistake of the realextent294 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr. VI.1770. powers, claimed by Sir John Lindsay, must necessarily endMAOBAi. in the total loss of authority and consequence to the Companyin India, where all princes being despotic, they willnever be brought to believe, that when the King of Englanddelegates his power to a minister, the representativesof the East-india Company are entitled to any confidence,regard, or attention. Such, ia truth, my Lord, are theconsequences already, in no small degree, felt by this Company.The Grovemor and Council of Madras, in their letters,aiiirm, that since the arrival of Sir John Lindsay, and theoperation* of his extraordinary powers, their influence isgreatly diminished, and that the most ital consequences tothe Company are to be apprehended. It is our duty, asrepresentatives of the East-india Company, concurring withour Presidency abroad in their sentiments, to lay beforeyour Lordship our apprehensions also, that unless somespeedy remedy be applied, the ruin of the Company, fromthe loss of their consequence, influence, and credit, will infalliblyensuesLord Rochford's reply was dated St. James's,20th April 1771:** In answer to your letter of the 8th instant, I must informyou, that the repeated complaints made by the Companyof the mismanagement and disobedience of their servants inIndia, which caused them to desire from the Legislaturemore extensive powers for their coercion, and induced themto send out Supervisors invested with the highest authority,first suggested to his Majesty the expediency of giving hisconfession to a person of confidence, to procure the fullestinformation on the spot, of the manner in which affairs hadbeen conducted in that country ; the thorough knowledgeof which the King could not but consider as a principalnationalChap. VI.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 295natioiuJ concern, as well as of the greatest consequence to i770.the interest of the Company. His Majesty was the more Madras.called upon, in this case, as his own honour, pledged for theperformance of the engagements entered into by him in thelast Definitive Treaty, was in the hands of the Company'sservants carrying on the govemmoit in India.His Majesty has reason to apprehend, that the Governorand Council of Madras gave themselves the first rise to theopinion of a contest between the King and the Company,by their improper reception of Sir John Lindsay, and theirrefusal to do the usual honours to the delivery of hi'Majesty's letter and presents ; which opinion, if it shouldat first starting be worked up by the ignorance of the peopleof that country, and their ideas of despotism, into prejudiceshurtful to the consequence and influence of theCompany, cannot but be checked in a short time, by thepositive instructions given to Sir John Lindsay to avoid, as.far as possible, even the appearance of any dispute with theCompany, which might produce the most unfortunate consequencesin the present state of affairs.The King, in his last letter to the Nabob, has beenpleased to express his confidence in the Company, and hisdesire to connect them inseparably with that prince ; andSir Robert Hariand, whom his Majesty has appointed tosucceed to the commission of Sir John Lindsay, besides theparticular orders given him to promote, as far as possible, astrict union between the Nabob and the servants of theCompany, ad to remove every suspicion of the Company "*slying under the King^s displeasure, received instructions tomake the support of their importance and honour in theeyes of all the powers in India, a principal point of hisattention.I have received his Majesty's commands to repeat thoseinstructions, and to guard against any mistake of the realextent296 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. VI.177a extent and meaning of the powers given Sir Robert Har-madras,land, by conveying to him such an explanation of them aswill leave no reason of apprehension to the Company ; buton the contrary* will, whenever they shall be exerted, be aconvincing proof of his Majesty'^s paternal care and regardfor their interests, by shewing them to be the object of hisprotection and support*'Ream for It may be remarked, that a reference to mattersoee^n^iu'^ of SO remote a date might have been spared, aslength. ^I^^y j^^^^ j^j^^ ceased to possess the interest whichbelonged to them when the events occurred. Thesame remark will apply with equal force to allhistorical records. In tracing the chain of eventswhich took place in the extension of our powerin India, it cannot be uninteresting to many whohave been associated in the administration of theaffairs of that empire, to learn the difficulties with 'which the home authorities had to contend, andthe course which they followed, in maintainingtheir rights, and in meeting those difficulties,before they became subject to the legislative controlwhich was engrafted on their chartered privileges; and although that control circumscribedtheir powers, it so identified the interests of theState with those of the Company, that the latterwere relieved from a recurrence of the embarrassmentswhich they had experienced in early timesfrom the want of aid in most critical and tryingjunctures.Council dig The Council had injudiciously involved them-putpowers of .General Coote. selves in a dispute with Major-general EyreCoote,whoChat. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 297who had been appointed commander-in-chief of into.the Company's forces, by the Court of Directors, m^"**^-A difference of opinion arose, as to the terms inwhich the General was to be announced in ordersto the army, on assuming the command.The Council proposed that the same termsshould be used as on the occasion of General Lawrence'sappointment : to this General Coote objected.The Council, impressed with the necessityof preserving the supremacy of the civil power,suggested, in order to obviate the greater evil,that in lieu of a general order being published,letters should be addressed to all the commandingofficers, to make their returns to General Coote.The General would not consent to this ; and hedetermined to remain in a private capacity, untilhe received the opinion of the Councils at theother presidencies.As the remodelling the military establishmentrequired that no time should be lost, Brigadier-generalSmith was requested by the Council totake the command of the troops on the coast ; butbelieving that General Coote intended very shortlyto proceed to Bengal, he suggested that the ordermight be deferred until his departure. GeneralCoote did not remain in India : he quitted Madras ^^ OeneiBl Cootefor Bombay, from whence he proceeded to Busso- return torah,and thence to England vit Paris. The Courtcondemned, in strong terms, the conduct of theCouncil towards General Coote, who was requested298 Side AND PROGRESS OF THE [Car. VL17m quested to hold himself in readiness to return toM^BEA India.Rajah of Tail The conduct of the Rajah of Tanjore had beensore, and theNabob of Ar animadverted upon by the Court of Directors, incot'tdaimtoa i« ii i j ^,him. consequence of his backwardness in joining theCompany's forces with his horse, during the hostilitieswith Hyderr, and, that when they did join,they had been of little or no use. The Rajah hadreceived protection at the hands of the Company,and his country had enjoyed uninterruptedtranquillity ; it was, therefore, consideredunreasonable, that he should withhold all contributiontowards the preservation of his possessions,which were very fruitful, affording abundantmeans for supplying the troops engaged in thedefence of the Camatic, an object in which hewas deeply interested.* The Nabob had madestrong representations to the Council, in supportof his claims on the Rajah of Travancore, andthe Court of Directors had enjoined the Councilto give the Nabob every assistance, consistent withjustice, in prosecuting them,correepoii- The Couucil were at this time apprised thatwl^Tmnjore.^ a Correspondence had been carried on betweenHyderr and the Rajah. The former had promisedto obtain a remission of the peshcush due from theRajah to the Nabob, in consideration of the assistancethe Rajah had offered him. A communicationLetter to Madras, 1769.Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 299tion was stated to have been made to the Nabob's ito.vakeel from Hyderr that, although it was not the ^^"*^»-intention of the English to afford him any assistance,he should nevertheless use his endeavoursto obtain it. There was also reason to believethat Hyderr was in correspondence with M. Lawat Pondicherry.In this state of affairs, the Council addressed £mban«u.the Court in the following terms: — ** We are sur countermandedwith difficulties, which we cannot, darenot, venture to explain or even suggest ; but shouldour apprehensions not be completely verified, bythe failure in any one instance, the whole mightseem the effect of prejudice. The views of theministry, such as they appear to us — the secrettransactions between the Nabob and Sir JohnLindsay — the fluctuating state of the Company'saffairs — the prepossession in favour of the Nabob,which he knows full well, and even more, we believe,from private than public assurances — allthese create doubts which, in better times, in allour difficulties and all our dangers, we should opposewith resolution, firmness, and perseverance,were we even but sure of support from the Court ofDirectors. With respect to ourselves personally,we consider our fate as sealed by our transactionswith Sir John Lindsay and with GeneralCoote. We are right, or we are wrong : there isno medium. But in regard to the Company, permitus to recommend some stable form of governmentRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chas. VI.1770LMarat.Court*! viewsaa to the conductof theCouodl.ment and system, in which you may confide, andwhich you will support ; for without a confidence,on the part of those whom you employ, that theywill be supported, their measures never can havethat firmness, spirit, and vigour, which are soessentially necessary to the prosperity of youraffairs'Before the answer of Lord Rochford to theCourt's representation regarding Sir John Lindsay'sconduct had been received by them, theyaddressed the Madras Council, approving of theirconduct towards the Mahrattass and Hyderr Ally.They expressed regret at the Nabob's differing inopinion with the Council, and trusted that theywould find means to divert his mind from Mhaderao.They perceived with anxiety, that the affectionsof the Nabob, and his confidence in the Council,had been of late much weakened ; they wishedthe Council to deliberate on the steps to be taken,with coolness and impartiality, and once beingresolved, to act with vigour and effect ; assuringthem that being conscious of the purity of theirintentions, they should receive the support of theCourt.In alluding to the war between Hyderr Ally andthe Mahrattass, the Court remarked, that the viewsof the Council were expressed in a strain of timidityand despondence, unsuited to the Company'sreal situation in India. They observed ; *' Fearbegets weakness in council, and irresolution inaction.Chas. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 301action. It is in a choice of difficulties, that great i77o.ness of mind finds an opportunity of distinguish m^»»a»-ing itself. Conscious of our own superiority andpower in India, it seems to be our proper line ofconduct to observe a steady and uniform neutrality,till such time as our own dignity and interestcall upon us to interfere, and then a favourable •moment should be seized." The Court did notperceive that the war carried the appearance ofany immediate danger. They considered that thedissensions among the Indian powers could onlyserve to augment the influence of the Company,who, while they shewed their strength and keptit up, would be courted equally by all parties.The moment the Company adhered to any oneparty, they would make enemies of all the rest.It was the desire of the Court to fulfil, in themost scrupulous manner, all engagements withthe Nabob ; but viewing things in a more generallight, it would certainly be of no consequenceto the Company, who were masters of the Camatic,provided it were kept out of the hands of theirEuropean rivals, the French.They desired the Council to represent to theNabob in the strongest, although in the most respectfulterms, the injury he did himself, in endeavouringto create a difference between the King'sand the Company's servants and in imagining aseparation of interests, when, in the end, he wouldbe convinced none could exist. Whatever triflingdisputes302 Be AND PBOGSEU OF THE [Chap. Vf.ito. disputes of foi and ceremony might have arisenMadras. between them at the first, he would soon see that,in essentials, they must and would agree. TheCompany's connexion with the Nabob stood entirelyon ancient friendship and reciprocal kindness: the Court wished to continue it on thesame footing; but they observed, the Companycould not be compelled to follow his projects whenthey appeared totally repugnant to our interests.So, on the other hand, the Nabob could not beforced into the Company's views, should they bedisagreeable to him : all that was, therefore, leftwas to expostulate with him. He would determinefor himself, and the Company for themselves.The dangers which threatened the Camatic, fromthe Mahrattass, were more immediately the objectof his concern than of the Company ; and the joiningHyderr Ally (even were it expedient), withoutthe concurrence of the Nabob, would be a measureof perplexity, as it might lead to a situationwhere the different engagements of the Companyclash, viz. that of supporting the Nabob by theTreaty of Paris, and of defending Hyderr by thelast treaty with him : engagements which itmight also become impossible at the same timeto fulfil. .With regard to Sir John Lindsay, the Courtobserved, that it did not become them to pronounceon his conduct, unacquainted as theywere with the extent of his powers and the natureChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDU. 303ture of his instructions ; but they had a right to i*"^-judge of that of their own servants, and it was **^*"*"-with pleasure they declared their perfect satisfactionin the general line of the Coimcirs behaviour,and their acquiescence in every step they hadtaken for the support of their own dignity and therights and privileges of the Company, which, the *Court felt, 'rested upon as high authority as theKing's commission — Royal Charters, confirmed byrepeated Acts of Parliament."The Court, at the same time, expressed theirpersuasion, that the disagreements and disunionof councils, between the representative of theCrown and the servants of the Company, werealtogether repugnant to his Majesty's gracious intentions.It was apparent from Lord Rochford sletter, that Sir John Lindsay had no authority todemand of the Council a succinct account of alltheir measures, or to be put in possession of theoriginal papers relating to their transactions sincethe conclusion of the Treaty of Paris.*Admiral Sir Robert Harland, who had beenappointed to succeed Sir John Lindsay, with thesame powers, and a more respectable naval force,was charged with instructions from the King, toavoid, on any occasion, the appearance of lesseningthe consequence of the Company in the eyesof the natives of India, and he received thestrongestFfrfif page 294.304 use AND Progress OF THE [Chap. VI.1770. strongest injunctions, to remove the then existingMamas, uses of disquiet and disunion.At the time that these points were engagingthe attention of the authorities in England, theNabob of the Camatic, supported by Sir JohnLindsay, was urging the Council at Madras tojoin him in an alliance with the Mahrattass againstHyderr.1771. The Council refused to concur in such a step,toioin^the*^ and dwelt upon the injury which arose to theiailance'witih Company's affairs, by such an interference as thatthe Mabrmttai. exercised by Sir John Lindsay. ** To give you,"observed the Council, in writing to the Court, " aclear representation of the dangerous embarrassmentsthrough which we have been struggling tocarry on your affairs, since the arrival of bis Majesty'spowers in this country, is a task far beyondour abilities : they are daily more and more oppressiveto us. It has always been our opinion,that, with your authority, we had that of our Sovereignand nation delegated to us through you, formanaging the important concerns of our countryunder this Presidency. It is upon the prevalenceof this opinion in India that our influence andyour interests are vitally founded. It was in theconfidence of this opinion that your servants,exerting all their vigour, acquired such power andwealth for their country."After offering some remarks, as to what mighthave been the objects and motives of his Majesty'sGovernmentChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 305Government in sending Sir John Lindsay to India, i77i.the Council pointed out the striking opposition Madras.between that officer's political system when he firstreached India, and that by which he was now governed."At first he was the declared guardian ofpeace ; now, he declares for hostile measures, andaccuses us of a criminal inactivity. He wouldwillingly lead us into war, to favour the Mahrattassand increase their power ; and, not succeeding inthat, he would drive us into immediate hostilitieswith Tanjore, before we are prepared to act withvigour and effect, even with the certainty of bringingdown the Mahrattass in an hostile invasion onthe Carnatic, and at the risk of tempting theNizam to an attack upon the Northern Circars.Were we permitted to deliver our sentimentsrelative to the preservation of the national interestshere, we should humbly offer it as an opinionthat, if his Majesty will not be pleased torecall his servant and powers, and leave us uncontrolled,but accountable for our measures, there isa necessity that the forces we command be takeninto the hands of the Crown, and transferred withplenary powers to the absolute direction of hisMajesty's minister."The erroneous impressions that had been createdin the mind of the Nabob, received additionalforce from a matter which, under the existing circumstances,tended to lower the Presidency, andadd to the importance of his Highness. AVOL. I. X despatch30GRISE AND PROGRESS OF THEICnAr. VI.1771.Madras.Rajah of Tanjore.His proceedingsagainstPolygars.despatch reached the Council, announcing thathis Majesty had been pleased to confer the dignityof Knight of the Bath on Sir John Lindsayand Major-general Coote, and that the insigniaof the order had been sent to the Nabob, with fullinstructions for his investing the knights with theorder.The conduct of the Rajah of Tanjore towardssome of the Polygar chiefs, increased the pointsof difference between the Nabob and the Council.The Rajah had advanced, in the month of April,against the Marawar country, under pretencethat some districts had been wrested from theTanjore government. The claim to those districtswas resisted by the Nabob, who contended thatthe Rajah was a tributary to the Circarr of the Carnatic,and that he had no right to call the Polygarsto account. The Council were satisfied of theimpropriety of the Rajah's conduct; the Presidentaddressed a letter to him, pointing out therelation in which he stood towards the Nabob, andthe surprise that had been occasioned by his proceedingto attack Moravia, a Polygar dependentupon the Trichinopoly country.The Rajah stated in reply : — ** If I suffer moraviato take possession of my country, Nalcooty totake my elephants, and Bondsman to injure mycountry it will be a dishonour to me among thepeople, to see such compulsion used by the Polygars.You are a protector of my government ;notwith-Chai. VI. ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 307notwithstanding, you have not settled a single i77i.affair. I have finished the affairs relating to Mo Madras.raven, and confirmed him in his business : theaffair with Nalcooty remains to be finished, whichI shall also finish'*It was ultimately settled, that recourse should Nabob's sonproceedsbe had to negociation ; and as the Tanjore vakeel against Tan-didnot possess authority to settle the disputes, ^^^^'the Nabob resolved to depute his eldest son, ,to Trichinopoly. His missionwas supported by the Council's despatching troopsand stores for Trichinopoly, to be in readiness toact against Tanjore, should circumstances call forsuch a measure.The Rajah refused submission. A force underGeneral Smith accordingly marched from Trichinopoly,on the 13th September, and arrived beforeVellum, eight miles south-west of Tanjore, on the16th. On the morning of the 20th, a battery wasopened against it, and at midnight the fort wasevacuated. On the 23d, Tanjore was invested. Onthe 27th, at the moment the breach was reportedpracticable, a letter was received by GeneralSmith, from Omdut-ul-Omrah, announcing termsof accommodation ; and, on the 27th of October, apeace was concluded between the Nabob and theRajah, without the intervention of the Company.*The fort of Vellum was ceded to the Nabob,whoVide Printed Treaties.X 2308 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE IChaf. VI.177?. who requested that the Council would place aMadras. garrison in it, in order to render it an effectualcheck on the Rajah's conduct. The Marawar andNalcooty Polygars not having obeyed the requisitionof the Nabob, to join with their forces in theoperations against the Rajah, the Nabob urgedthe Council to call them to account.Sir Robert Sir Robert Harland reached Madras, in com-re^henMadnia maud of a squadron of his Majesty's ships, onKinK\!7/tter t^c 2d of September. He announced his arrivalto Niibob. ^^ ^^^ Council, whom he met assembled on the13th, and informed them that he possessed fullpowers, as the King's plenipotentiary, to inquireinto the observance of the eleventh article of theTreaty of Paris ; and that he had a letter fromhis Majesty to the Nabob. The letter was deliveredto his Highness by the Admiral, thetroops in the garrison attending the ceremonial.On the 1st of October, having intimatedto the Council his readiness to be of anyuse in the progress of their affairs, he quitted theroads, in order to avoid the approaching monsoon,and retired toTrincomalee, despatching a vessel toascertain the state of the French force at the Mauritius,which was reported to be very considerable.In the early part of December, there beingreason to apprehend that the Mahrattass were advancingtowards the Camatic, the Council resolvedto move the troops into a- central position,thatChas. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 309that they might more effectually present a check i77i.to their incursions. Madras.The Nabob being opposed to this measure, still count decline, ^ . . to join thepressed the Council to assist him, by joining: with Nabob with thethe Mahrattass against Hyderrrr. The President had «gai»»t Hyderrrr.an interview with the Nabob, at which he pointedout his Highness's total want of means to defraythe charge of such a proceeding, even were itsound in point of policy. Failing in inducing theCouncil to fall in with his views, the Nabob calledin the aid of Sir Robert Harland, and stated tohim the advantages which the Mahrattass had promised,in the event of his assisting them, in conjunctionwith the English, and the distress whichwould be occasioned to him should be not effectthat object : adding, that he had been called uponto pay a considerable sum to the Company ; thathe had a load of debt ; that his treasury was inadequateto meet all these demands ; that an invasionof his territories would lead to the destruction ofthe Carnatic; and that he, therefore, appealedto, and claimed, the royal protection.This proceeding led Sir Robert Harland to ad sir Robertdress the Council. He stated that, should a pons views'^of 'peace be refused to the Mahrattass, on the termswhich they proposed, they threatened to destroythe whole of the Carnatic "with fire and sword,"and they had a great army on the frontiers tocarry their threats into execution. The Admiralwas not backward in asserting and acting uponthe310 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CiiAr. Vr.1771. the powers which he considered he possessed.Madras. jjg observed, that the peace of the Carnatic, theprosperity of the Company, the preservation ofthe British interests, and the permanency of theirinfluence in India, appeared to him very properobjects for the attention of a ** national plenipotentiary.""As it is possible I may think themof consequence enough to require a national alliancefor their security, and as the particular interestsof the United Company of Merchants willbe a very material consideration, I am to demandof you, as their confidential servants, such lightsas may direct my judgment, and particularlywhat are your reasons for refusing to acquiesce inwhat the Nabob thinks the only measure for thepreservation of his country, and what appears tometo offer the only prospect of security, in thepresent circumstances, to the British interests inthis part of India"* He, at the same time,transmitted to the Council a copy of his commissionfrom the King.Differences The Council felt that they could not ""cate their transactions in the affairs of the Com-Snd '^ ""'" any, for the same reasons which had weighedwith them in the case of Sir John Lindsay.They, therefore, determined to address two lettersto the Admiral ; the one in his character of plenipotentiary,declaring why they declined puttinghim in possession of what he had called for regarding♦ Military Consultations, 1771.Chas. VI.] British POWER IN INDIA. 3 1 1harding the Company's transactions observing at I77i.the same time, that it was above all things their m^***^'-most anxious desire to manifest their unfeignedallegiance and inviolable attachment to hisMajesty's most sacred person and government;but that they could not render an account of theirconduct to any one but a constitutional authority,such as the Parliament of Great Britain and theCourts of Civil Judicature. The other letter wasaddressed to Sir Robert Harland, as commanderof the King's ships, wherein they observed:*' We have it now in the most authentic mannerfrom you, as his Majesty's Minister Plenipotentiary,that they threaten to destroy the wholeCamatic with fire and sword, if certain conditionswhich they require are not submitted to ; whichconditions are, as you express it, and as we believethey express it, friendship with the Englishand the Nabob, and a certain assistance fromboth, against Hyderr Ally, who is their enemy.Words are only used to convey ideas, and thesame words may convey different, and even contraryideas, according to the circumstances thatattend them. Thus, if the Mahrattass were topropose friendship with the English and theNabob, in the way that states generally proposetreaties of friendship for mutual advantage, weshould understand by it what the word in itsprimitive and natural sense implies, and shouldmost gladly embrace it, in any way that mightbe312 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CsAr. VL1771. be advantageous to the Company's commerce,MADEAf productive of security to their possessions, andconsistent with the rights and powers granted tothem by charter ; but, when they require friendshipand assistance, and denounce threats of fireand sword, if their demands are not compliedwith, the words change their meaning. It is nomore friendship they propose; it is. an abjectsubmission they demand to their imperious will ;such a submission as is conformable to the usageof the country. The subjected powers are alwayscompelled to attend the haughty conquerors witha certain number of troops. This is not all. Itis not only a demand of servile submission theyrequire ; they mean to render it still more humiliating: it must be accompanied with the mostflagrant breach of national faith. A formal treatyof peace and amity was concluded between thisPresidency, on the part of the Company andHyderr Ally Can, in the year 1769. He hathcommitted no act that can give the least attaintto that engagement, at least that we know of;but, on the contrary, he hath granted to the Companyall the privileges and advantages of trade inhis country, which they enjoyed before the latewar with him. The Mahrattass add to theirhaughty demand, this specific condition — thatthe assistance to be given them by the Englishand the Nabob be expressly employed, in openviolation of the faith of that treaty, a^inst HyderrAllyCbat. Vf.] BHmSH Power IN INDIA. 313Ally Can. We, therefore, offer it as our opinion, i77i.that a submission to such a demand would be in Madras.the highest degree derogatory to the honour of theBritish nation, and contrary to the interests ofthe Company." They concluded by suggesting,that the most effectual mode of securing the Carnatic,and, consequently, the Nabob, against theMahrattass, would be by a diversion on the Malabarcoast.Sir Robert Harland declined to separate hischaracter as Commander-in-chief from that ofPlenipotentiary. After commenting upon thevarious points urged by the Council, in supportof the policy which they determined to follow,he observed, *' Your charge of an unconstitutionalact cannot be against me : I do no more than myduty. But it seems to me to be directly pointedat the Royal Authority and the undoubted rightsof the Crown ; and when you take upon you tocensure a measure which is the sacred privilegeof Majesty, and the constitutional rights of yourSovereign, let me tell you it is very unbecoming ;it is presumptuous, it is arrogant; and I knownot whether it may not be looked upon as criminalin the eye of the law, as it is an undoubtedmaxim in the British Government, that the privilegesof the prince are equally sacred with theliberty of the subject"*On the 28th December, he declared it to behisConsultations, 26th December, 1771.314 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr. VI.*'"'^- his intention to enter into a negociation with theDeaf. Mahrattass, through Mhaderao, or any one hemight appoint. After expressing his respect forthe East-india Company, he stated, '' I must andshall, upon every such important occasion, alwaysmake a great distinction between the real interestsof the greatest commercial body in the world, andthe private views and interested consideration ofindividuals." The Council indignantly repelledthis insinuation. Sir Robert Harland perseveredin treating with the Mahrattass, and the Council asfirmly abstained from taking part in such a proceeding.At this juncture, they were put inpossession of the Court's views* regarding the lineof conduct to be observed towards the Nabob, theMahrattass, Hyderr, and his Majesty's plenipotentiary,which fortified them in their determinationto preserve neutrality as far as possible.1772. The Council were apprised by Sir Robert l2^^» tJ^^* h® ^^^ proposed to the Mahrattass, inml'i.!*'*''^"*" the name of the King of England, a cessation ofhostilities between their nation, the English, andthe Nabob of the Carnatic, until such time as hisMajesty's pleasure should be known : and that heunderstood the Mahrattass lead acceded to the proposal,and withdrawn their troops from the frontiers.This transaction presented a singular specimenof diplomacy. A minister plenipotentiary fromtheVide page 301.Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 315the Crown of Great Britain, writing in his Ma n^^-jest's name to a Mahratta general, proposing a Madras.cessation of hostilities between their nation, theEnglish, and the Nabob, when neither of the latterpowers had committed any act of hostility : theNabob having opposed the advance of the Englisharmy for the protection of his borders, which theMahrattass were plundering, whilst the Nabob andthe English were calmly looking on !The Council having acknowledged, in courteousterms, the communication from the Admiral as tothe negociations with the Mahrattass ; there wasreason to anticipate that here all differences wouldhave terminated. Another circumstance, howeverarose, which occasioned an irreparable breachbetween the two authorities.The Admiral had claimed many of the Company'sEuropean soldiers, on the ground of theirbeing deserters from his Majesty's service. Someof these men having, in the opinion of the Council,been improperly wrested from them, a protractedcorrespondence took place, in the course of whichthe Council strongly remonstrated against SirRobert Harland countenancing the acts of hisofficers. He ultimately issued directions for theirdesisting from further claims ; but neverthelesscharacterised the conduct of the Council as ^^dia-logically mischievous, and flagrantly unjust."Having declined, after a statement by the Council,which they considered fully refuted the charge,toRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Cbaf. VI.J 778.Madras.Sir RobertHarland embarkswithoutusual honours.to offer any explanation or apology, the Councildesisted from all further communication.The Admiral embarked from Madras on the 7thOctober, without paying the usual compliment oftaking leave of the President as Governor of theFort. The omission appeared, by a letter fromSir Robert Fletcher to the President,* to havebeen premeditated on the part of Sir Robert Har-land.He was, accordingly, neither accompaniedby the Governor to the beach, or saluted from theFort ; both which marks of honour had been observedtowards Sir John Lindsay, who took formalleaveLetter from Sir Robert Fletcher to the Honourable JonasDu Pr, Esq., dated Fort St. George, 7th October 1773 :Dear Sir ;— When I took leave of the admiral, the 5th instant,I told him that, by a conversation I had had with you, Iunderstood you was then unacquainted with the time of his intendeddeparture, and that you mentioned to me his havingbeen at your Garden-house to ask Mrs Du Pr's commands forBombay, without paying you the usual compliment or givingyou any intimation of his departure. The admiral said, hecould pay no such compliment to any servant of the Company,and that his visit was to Mrs. Du Pr. I replied, I was sorryfor such unhappy misunderstanding ; that I knew the Governormeant to attend him to the surf and pay him every due compliment,if he would but observe the usual forms of communicationwith him ; but if he did not, I feared it would interferewith the honours intended to be shewn him at parting. Heanswered, * Mr. Du Pre is the best judge of that'** I am, &c.(Signed) " Rob. Fletcher."*' Pes. The above is, perhaps, not word for word my conversationwith the admiral, but I am sure it is strictly the senseand meaning of it."Chap. VI.J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 317leave of the President, notwithstanding the differ 1772.fences between them had been greater than those madras.with Sir Robert Harland.The Council remarked, '* that ceremonies aretrifles in private life, and merely as they touchthe individual ; but opinion and usage have madepublic honours necessary to public characters,and have proportioned those honours to thecharacter. In that light, they become important ;and supinely to receive an intended slight degradesthe office and invites farther indignity."Although the honour was withheld from the individual,the Council gave strict orders that themoment the squadron got under weigh, a salute offifteen guns should be fired from the Fort ; but thesquadron remained at anchor during the whole ofthe day, and sailed in the night.Thus terminated a mission, which was originallybased upon erroneous principles, and in its progressproduced embarrassments and differences,little calculated to promote either the public characteror interests.The Council drew the attention of the Court to Relations withthe position in which they stood towards the Nabob tmjIJJ^'' *"'**and the Rajah of Tanjore, and pointed out therelation of those two powers to each other.The province of Tanjore was so situated, thatthe Carnatic would always be a natural barrier toitagainst invaders by land ; and it was, thereforereasonable that it should always bear a part ofthe318 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.1T72. the charge of repelling such invaders. The tri-maraYyute Tanjore paid to the Carnatic, in peace aswell as war, was considered only as an acknowledgementof superiority ; what quota of troops orpecuniary aid it should supply appeared to havebeen arbitrary, or rather what the government ofthe Carnatic could compel, Tanjore having refusedboth, when its ruler felt that he had powerto support such refusal. The Council observed,this is by no means peculiar to these two states ;the same principle prevails throughout Hindostan."The principle was that of power ; and, thoughit had long prevailed, it became more generallyfelt after the invasion of Nadir Shah, and theassumption of power by the various Omrahs,whose influence increased as that of the Mogulwas diminished. The Council stated, that wantof means, — the uncertainty of the designs of theNizam, the Mahrattass, and Hyderr,— sand the provisionsof the treaty in which the Rajah of Tanjorewas included, — all combined against the exerciseof coercive measures, in 1770, for the purposeof supporting the claim against him for thedefence of his country, and for the payment tothe Nabob of the peshcush^ which the Companyhad guaranteed.The subsequent operations against Tanjore wereoccasioned by the Rajah's indifference towardsthe Nabob, and his prosecuting hostilities againsttheChap. VI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 319the Polygars, over whose country Mahomed Ally unclaimedjurisdiction . The Tanjoreans were greatly m*"**^*-exasperated against the Nabob, being impressedwith a conviction that he intended to possesshimself of the whole of their country, on the firstfavourable opportunity. It was the opinion of theCouncil, that this impression would lead theRajah to join any power, should disturbancesarise in the Carnatic, which would enable him tothrow off the yoke of the Nabob. They considered,that the Company's guarantee of the engagementof Tan j ore with the Nabob, had been-cancelledby the late proceedings under Omdut-ul-Omrah, and that the Rajah would thus be leftat the mercy of Mahomed Ally; they, therefore,gave it as their decided opinion, that Tanjoreought to be taken, openly and avowedly, underthe Company's protection ; or that the countryshould be conquered and wholly subdued bythem.*These views of the Council reached the Court Parliamentary1 /• o 1 mi-r<k 1 • inquiry connthe month of September. The Parliamentary tempted.inquiry, then in progress, into the Company'saffairs, precluded the Directors from giving anydefinite instructions on the important advicesreceived from India. They wrote, on the 11thDecember, 1772: — "In our former letters ofthis season, you have been acquainted withthe• Letter, 28th February 1772.320 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr. VI.177S. the critical situation of the Company's affairs,Madras. j^jj^ |jy Q^j. gjjjp Mercury we enclosed for yourperusal the King's speech at the opening of thepresent session. In consequence thereof. Committeeshave been appointed to inquire into thestate and condition of the Company^s affairs, bothat home and abroad. The measures which laybe pursued, in consequence of their reports to thetwo Houses of Parliament, indispensably occasionsuch particular and constant attention on our part,as at present to deprive us of the opportunity ofentering into a reply at large to your advices nowbefore us, and, therefore, our remarks and directionsthereon are necessarily suspended, until thedeparture of the latter ships of this season."succeftionto Sparrow, who had held the zemindar ofNosed jointly with his brother Narrain Row,having died without issue, the zemindar naturallydevolved on the surviving brother. The Council,however, thought it necessary that all the Zemindarshould clearly understand, the Company assertedthe right of judging and determining thesuccession. The Resident was ordered to makeinquiry, for form's sake; after which NarrainRow was put into possession.Couucil resolve The Couucil having determined, in cation with the Nabob, to commence operationsfor the purpose of reducing the Mara war andNalcooty Polygars, a force of one hundred andtwenty artillery, four hundred European infantry,threegars.Chap. VI.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 321three battalions of sepoy, and six battering can irrg.non, to be augmented by some of the Nabob's '*^'>**'»-cavalry, and two of his battalions of sepoy,marched from Trichinopoly, the 12th of May,accompanied by Omdut-ul-Omrah, who had beendeputed by his father to superintend the expedition.He arrived before the capital of theMarawar Polygar, on the 28th May. The batteriesopened against it on the morning of the2d June, and the fort was taken by assault inthe evening, the Marawar Polygar, his mother,and the Dewan, being captured in the place.Trepanavam, one hundred and fifteen miles eastof Madura, belonging to the Nalcooty Polygar,was taken by assault, under the direction ofLieutenant^Colonel Honour, on the 24th of May.The Polygar was not reduced until the end ofJune, after which the troops were ordered to theirrespective stations.The Rajah of Travancore declined compliance conduct of thewith the requisition of the Nabob of the Camatic Sre/^"^for aid in the operations against the refractoryPolygars, on the ground that he was apprehensiveHyderr would attack the Travancore country;Hyderr being applied to, disavowed having evencontemplated such a step. He declared that theTravancore country was in no shape dependentupon him, and that he had no demands whateverupon the Rajah. Since peace had been concludedbetween Hyderr and the Mahrattass, the attendI. Y tionRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. VI.1772.BIadkas.Sir RobertFletcher succeedsGeneralSmith in commandof army.1778.Differences betweenCounciland Sir RobertFletcher.tion of the former had been directed to recruitinghis army, and restoring the affairs of his owncountry. The Council remarked, " these measureswere necessary, merely on a defensive plan ;but mere defence and inactivity cannot long beexpected from his genius."Brigadier General Smith, having returned tothe Presidency, resigned the command of thearmy in the month of August. The post devolvedupon Sir Robert Fletcher, who, in accordancewith the Court's order of April 1771, was admittedto a seat in the Council and Select Committee,on the 24th of August.Various differences as to military arrangementsarose between Sir Robert Fletcher, the President,and a majority of the Council. They were carriedon with so much personal feeling, as not onlyto impede the progress of public business, but tocreate apprehensions that serious results might beproduced, unless decided measures were taken toput an end to the proceedings.A question having arisen on the powers of thePresident, as commander of the garrison, in whichthe conduct of Sir Robert Fletcher formed matterof discussion, a decided majority of the Councilwere of opinion that he should withdraw. It wassubsequently proposed, for the general welfare ofthe service, that Sir Robert Fletcher's absencefrom Council was essential to the good conduct ofthe public business. A resolution was passed by amajorityCitA».VI.] british POWER IN INDIA. 323majority of seven to two in the Council, on the ina12th January, that he should be ordered to repair MAun/t.to Trichinopoly, to take the command of thatfortress, where his services could be most usefullyemployed for the Company's interests. Onthe following day. Sir Robert Fletcher addressedthe President, stating that, as he considered theproceeding contrary to the order and intentionsof the Court, and equal to a dismission of theservice, he felt that the duty he owed to the publicobliged him to make application for a passageand accommodation in the first ship for England,that he might be enabled to give his attendancein Parliament,*On the 14th, Sir Robert Fletcher was desiredto proceed to Trichinopoly, and informed that, onthe same day, a Council would be summoned,when his letter would be considered. He repliedby protesting, as a member of the governmentand of the legislature, against the conduct of thePresident, which he deemed contrary to law andto the privilege to which he was entitled. TheCouncilHowever strange it may appear at the present day, thatMembers of the House of Commons should at any time have retainedtheir seats, while serving in so distant a quarter of theglobe as India, yet the instance in question as well as that ofMr. Vansittart in 1769 (vide note, page 191)^ are in point.The Act of the 10th Geo. Iv, cap. 62, disqualifies personsholding the station of Governor or Deputy Governor in India,from a seat in Parliament. — Query, does it exclude inferiorfunctionaries?y2324 RISE A\D PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.ira Council informed him, that the proceeding wasMadras. ^^^ intended as a dismission, but an appointmentto a station, where his services might be most usefullyemployed. They repeated and enforced thesame, and informed him that, when he should havecomplied therewith, and *' have given the wholemilitary establishment that example of obedienceand attention which we have a right to expect, weshall give all due consideration tD whatever youmay have to represent." He reached Trichinopoly,and received charge of the fortress on the26th January.The Council met on the 29th, and came to aresolution, declaring that '* out of unfeigned respectand veneration for the Honourable House ofSir Robert Commons and their privileges. Sir Robert Flet-Fletcher's plea r o »ofpnvijegeof cher, in consequence of his plea of privilege as amember of parliament, is, for so much as dependson this Board, at full and free liberty to return tohis duty in Parliament, whenever and by whateverconveyance he shall think proper ; and that thisBoard do further declare Sir Robert Fletcherhenceforth free and exonerated of and from allobligation to serve the Company in any capacityunder this Presidency, that so there may not remainany restraint, or colour of restraint upon, orimpediment to, his proceeding to his duty in Parliament,agreeable to his claim."Brigadier General Smith consented, at theearnest request of the Council, although on theeveParliamentChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 325eve of departure for England, to resume the com- inaand, and communicated the same to the Council, Madras.on the 29th January, in the following terms : *' Iassure you that no motive whatever could have inducedme to enter into a public station again ; but,being thus called upon by you, the duty I cheerfullyacknowledge fo my employers, and a verygrateful sense of the advantages I have derivedfrom their service, are obligations which outweighwith me every other consideration, and afford methis opportunity of once more shewing that attachmentI have always professed for our honourablemasters," General Smith's appointment beingannounced in orders, he took his seat as a memberof the Council, on the 30th. Sir Robert Fletcher,having received a copy of the order on the 2dof February, wrote to the Council from Trichi no-holy,that he had given over the command to thesenior officer, and should proceed to the Presidency.Mr. Du Pr resigned the' government on the31st January, and was succeeded by Mr. Wynch*Sir Robert Fletcher was to proceed to England sir Roberton board the Triton, with Capt. the Hon. Fullers ce^dsto'^Ei^.ton Elphinstone. Further correspondence ensued, ^^^in which Sir Robert Fletcher animadverted uponthe state of the army. To which General Smithfully and satisfactorily replied. He then demandedcopies of such allegations as might be senthome regarding him, or access to the records;intimating326 RIS£ AND PSOORCaS OF TUB [CiiAr. VI.ina intimating, that the Council would refuse the^^''*^'' same at their peril. The Council did not see fitto comply with either of the requests, and he embarkedin the Triton, which was despatched onthe 16th March. The subject was brought underthe consideration of the Court of Directors ; whosedecision, at the same time that it condemned theconduct of Sir Robert Fletcher, regarding the authorityof the Governor as commandant of the fort,restored him to the command of the army wheneverBrigadier General Smith should resign.The conduct of the Rajah of Tanjore led tothe Council unanimously agreeing to meet the requisitionof the Nabob of the Camatic for troops,to enable him to subdue his tributary. The forceassembled at Trichinopoly, under the command ofGeneral Smith. They arrived before the capitalof Tanjore on the 6th of August. On the 20th, thearmy broke ground, and on the 17th of Septemberthe place was carried by assault, with an inconsiderableloss, the Rajah and his family beingprisoners to the Nabob's two sons, who accompaniedthe expedition. At the commencement ofthese operations, intelligence was received by theNabob, that the Dutch were aiding the Rajah withstores from Negapatam. He accordingly despatcheda vakeel, with a remonstrance. To giveweight to this proceeding. Sir Robert Harlandordered two ships of war to accompany the vakeel.The Dutch disavowed, in the most submissivemanner,CifAP. YI.] BBinSH Power IN INDIA. 327manner, having rendered any aid to the Rajah of ^773.Tanjore. Suspicions still existed that such was ^^^*^»-not the fact ; they were shortly confirmed by theDutch possessing themselves of the sea-port ofNagore, and also of some valuable districts in theTanjore country, on the plea that they had purchasedthem of the Rajah. As a tributary of theNabob, he had no right to alienate these posses*Lions ; but it was not until the appearance of theNabobs troops, under the command of his son,followed at some distance by General Smith, thatthe Dutch guards quitted Nagore and retired toNegapatam. Had the Council hesitated in aidingthe Nabob to reduce Tanjore, and permitted theRajah to introduce foreign troops into the centreof his country, and to make grants of districts andsea-ports to an European power, the results mighthave seriously affected the English interests onthe coast.The position of Hyderr and the Mahrattass, at i774.the commencement of this year, threatened a cwnatlc!'**descent on the Camatic, and induced the Council,in conjunction with the Nabob, to take precautionsfor its defence. The jealousy of the Nabob,his vacillating conduct towards the native powers,the declared poverty of his treasury, his desire ofacting independently of the Council, and his secretintrigues, rendered the task of guiding hisaffairs one of no easy accomplishment ; still it wasthe determination of the Council to preserve, asfarRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chas. VL1771.BOKIAT.Mahrattass defeatHyderr.far as possible, the tranquillity of the Carnatic,and to avoid anything tending to involve them indissensions either with Hyderr or the Mahrattass.The President of Bombay, Mr. Hodges, died atVictoria, on the 23d February, and was succeededby Mr. Hornby.On the 7th March, the Mahrattass obtained acomplete victory over Hyderr, near Seringapatam,obliging him to retire within that fortress. Heapplied to the Council for aid, which they wereutterly unable to afford him, either in men ormoney, but offered to supply him with five hundredmuskets and four twenty-pound guns.The Mahrattass, being in possession of thegreater part of Mysore, prevented Hyderr fromraising troops, or drawing the necessary suppliesfor them. In the month of October, he addressedthe President, representing that the enemy, notwithstandinghis readiness to pay them their justclout, were determined to make a conquest of hisdominions, and then to attack the Nabob of Arcotand the Camatic ; he, therefore, called upon theCouncil, in the name of the Company, who wereequally interested with him in checking the progressof the Mahrattass, to join in measures forthat object. The Council were disposed to consent,under all circumstances, provided Hyderrassigned over the forts and districts of Mangaloreand Pier Gur, and deposited five lacs of pagodastowardsChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 329towards the expenses, that he should be informed i77i.five hundred Europeans and one thousand two ®^'^^-hundred sepoy would be sent to his assistance,^n intimation of this intention was notified to theCouncil at Madras.Hyderr applied for a specific force of one thousandEuropeans, and four thousand sepoy, to beemployed in making a diversion by an attack onBassein and Salsette, and to march inland, inorder to draw off the Mahrattass from his country.The Council felt no disposition to concur in thisproposition, it being evidently the desire of Hyderrto make them principals in the war. The receipt,at this moment, through the Council at Madras,of the Court's views,* determined them to closeall further treaty. Hyderr's fortune triumphedover his danger: he obtained a tolerable peace,without a friend or ally ; but the coolness of theMadras Government alienated his feelings, andindisposed him towards the English power.During the differences between the Mahrattass Conquest ofand the Nizam, Hyderr had made the entire con ^quest of the dominions of the Comorin and theKing of Cotiote ; he also preferred a complaint tothe Resident at Tellicherry, that some of theprincipal people of Cotiote had been harbouredin the Company's districts. The Prince of cherishpaid a visit to the Chief at Tellicherry, bywhomFide page 801.330 RISE AND P800BE8S OF THE ICnAr. VI.1771. whom he was interrogated regarding his late cor-bombay.respondence with Hyderr. He admitted, withevident confusion, that he had received severalletters from the Nabob, the purport of which hedid not before choose to disclose, but said that,on his return, he would send the originals for inspection.Instead of fulfilling his promise, heassembled two hundred natives, and immediatelywent over to the Cotiote country, and joinedHyderr's camp, which was about twelve leaguesfrom Tellicherry,Sir Robert Sir Robert Harland having arrived at Bombay,rives at Bon. produced his powers to the Council. They re-hu^poweraT^^ marked, that he appeared to think he was authorizedto enter into any treaty, and to make anyterms on behalf of the Company, with any princesor powers in India that he might see fit. ** Weresuch a power granted, it would be truly alarming; but, as we cannot believe any such powerwas intended by the Crown, or that we are empoweredor authorized to submit our demand onthe Mahrattass, or any other power, we declinedto do so, until we should hear from you on thesubject'*1772. The Nabob of Broach had, at his own instance,in the month of July 1771, repaired to Bombay,and entered into a treaty with the Company, onthe 30th November, by which they were permittedto erect a factory there. The Nabob was not toassist the enemies of Ie English, but to aid theCompany ;Chap. VI.) BRITISH POWEft IN INDIA. 331Company ; nor was he to engage in war without 1773.their consent ; but in hostilities begun in commun ^^^-f-nation with the Council they were to aid him,on his paying a certain stipulated rate for eachman, and four lacs in full for all demands on thepart of the Company. A firm friendship was tosubsist between the Councils of Surat and Bombay.The Nabob having, under various pretences,evaded from time to time the performance of anyof the articles of the treaty, the Council recalledMr. Morley, their Resident at Broach. At theearnest entreaty of the Nabob, he was sent back ;but his reception, added to the continued extraordinaryconduct of the Nabob, in refusing to observethe treaty, led the majority of the Councilto concur in sending an expedition to enforce theobservance of its provisions. The troops and operationsvessels left Bombay on the 2d November, underthe command of Brigadier-general Wedderbum,and Mr Watson, the Superintendent of theMarine. The general, reconnoitering too nearthe works, was killed on the 14th. On the 16th,the batteries opened against it, and on the 18th,it was taken by storm. Five officers and onecadet were killed ; two captains and four lieutenantswounded. The revenues were stated toamount to seven lacs ; half of which was claimedby Futty Sing Guicowar, with whom an agreementwas entered into on the 12th January, bywhich it was declared that the town of Broach,lately332 RISE AND Progress OF THE ICuaf. VI.1773. lately belonging to Mahazuz Can Nabob, having^**^^' been conquered by the East-india Company,every thing should remain on the footing it wasat the time of the conquest, the English andFutty Sing each receiving a share of the revenues.*Mr. Mostyn had been especially designated bythe Court for the station of Resident at Poonahh,in order to acquire, upon safe and honourableterms, such privileges and possessions as wouldnot only be beneficial to the Company's commerce,but also contribute to the security of their settlementson the coast of Malabar.The acquisition of Salsette, Bassein, and Ca-rana,were the principal objects contemplated bythe Court, and strongly pressed upon the attentionof the Councils who, in negociation with Shadeswere authorized to offer in exchange whatthey might deem an equivalent for such a cession.The Council, in the month of February, advisedthe Court that there was little prospect, at thatperiod, of the object being accomplished.Timwactionsat Mhadcrao died in November 1772, and wasPoonahh.succeeded by his brother, Narrain Rao. Janojee,the Mahratta chieftain in Berar, died about thesame time. Narrain Rao was murdered in hispalace at Poonahh, on the 20th August, in thefollowing year, by the partizans of his uncle, ,Vide Printed Treaties. f ^"^ P«g« 210.Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 333gobah,* who was immediately proclaimed through 1773.out the city, and succeeded with little opposition* Bombay.Ragobah proceeded forthwith to Sattarah, for thepurpose of receiving the surpavrf from the Rajah.Moodajee Bhonslah was the party whose influencehe had most to apprehend. Ragobah badwritten to him to attend with five thousand men :notwithstanding this requisition, he proceededwith his troops towards Poonahh, and was joinedby some other chiefs, who enabled him to assemblea force of nearly 80,000 men. This movementcreated great suspicion on the part of Ragobah,whose force amounted only to about 60,000, andthe fidelity of these was doubtful. He was, however,ultimately joined by Moodajee. The unitedforce proceeded against the Nizam, who had takenthe field with a considerable army. An engagementensued, in which the Nizam had the advantage; but a treaty followed, to the benefit of ,who then meditated an attack on the Carnatic,in order to induce the Nabob to pay him alarge amount of clout, and likewise to explain hisconduct in having made war against the Rajah ofTanjore. Ragobah was deterred from carryinghis intentions into execution, by the proceedingsof the ministerial party at Poonahh, who were dissatisfiedwith his government, and the means bywhich♦ Properly Resonant Rao, but commonly called and knownas Rogobah, which designation is used.t fide page 8.334 RISE AJf D Progress OP THE [CifAr^ VT.1773. which he had obtained it. They availed 'selves of his distance to declare in favour of thewidow of Narrain Rao. These measures obligedhim to retrace his steps, from the confines of theCarnatic to the heart of his own government.The two parties met — Ragobah gained a decisivevictory over the forces of the ministry ; their generalwas taken prisoner, and died of his wounds.Notwithstanding Ragobah's success, his positionwas very precarious ; having little money, entertainingdoubts as to the fidelity of his troops, andbeing constrained to levy contributions, in hismarches through the country, in order to supporthis army, while the remains of the ministerialforce was recruited from that of Moodajee, whohad likewise joined the Nizam.At this juncture, the country round Broach wasthrown into a state of disorder, by Ragobah havingsupported Govind Rao, in opposition to FuttySing, who had for some time been at the headof the Guicowar government ; but being defeatedin an engagement with his brother, he was dispossessedof all the country except Baroda, thecapital, the open country remaining under GroundRao.The determination of the Government of Bombayto support Ragobah, involved the Companyin hostilities with the Mahrattass. The oppositionwhich he met with in his efforts to re-establish hispowerCMAr.VI*] Brush POWER IN INDIA. 335power at Poonahh, led to his making proposals J773.to the Council at Bombay for the assistance of a ^^^'body of the Company's troops. His terms fellshort of those required by the Council, whichincluded a cession of Salsette and Bassein ; Rago-bah being averse to parting with either of thosepossessions.33G HISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr.VII.CHAPTER VII.j^2. ^^ ^ ^h^ members of the Special Commission,Attention of Dominated in 1769 * for the purpose of supervisingdirected to the the whole of the Company's affairs, reached India,company. ^^^^ would have Operated as a check on the extensivepowers of control and interference assumedby the naval officers of the crown towards theseveral governments. The effects caused by theirproceeding rendered the necessity still more apparentfor introducing a revised system of administration,as regarded both the Home and Foreignaffairs. Enactments had been passed to regulatethe declaration of a dividend, and the exercise ofthe ballot by the proprietors : a lengthened andrigid scrutiny had been substituted into the generalstate of the Company, and doubts had beenraised on the question of right in the territorialpossessions ; but the Company were still unfetteredin the exercise of all powers of government, andwere at full liberty to follow their own views,whether relating to the dismemberment of a kingdom,the deposition of a sovereign, or the provision• Tune page 272.Chas. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 337sion of an investment. But although possessing 1772.this power, they had no means of effectually enforcingobedience to their orders, on the part oftheir servants, who were represented " to havemade enormous fortunes at the expense of theirmasters, and to have hazarded by their conductthe total loss of their valuable possessions."From the period of hostilities commencing withthe French, followed by those with the nativepowers, the greatest embarrassment was occasionedby each of the three presidencies actingindependently of the other. There was no definedsuperior authority to direct affairs, or to ensureunity of object, or co-operation in action.This state of things led to the following passagein the speech from the throne, at the opening ofthe session in January 1772. " The concerns ofthis country are so various and extensive as to requirethe most vigilant and active attention ; andsome of them, as well from remoteness of placeas from other circumstances, are so peculiarlyliable to abuse, and exposed to danger, that theinterposition of the Legislature for their protectionmay become necessary."The financial means of the Company had been Financial ems- , /» 1 . embarrassments ofmaterially affected by the measures of their the company.servants. The subsequent operation against theMogul and the Vizier — the war in the Carnatic,during which Hyderr committed such extensiveravages — the reduction of the refractory Poly gars,VOL. I. z and338 RISE AND PROGRESS OP THE ICbap. Vlf.^'^^ and the incursions of the enemy on the coast ofMalabar, not only absorbed the revenues, butcaused a suspension of the investment upon theout-turn, on which the Directors relied to meetthe heavy demand that pressed upon them, in thelarge amount of bills drawn from India, in additionto the charge occasioned by the necessary supplyof troops and stores for service. Their only resourcefor relief was an application to the minister. Littleencouragement was, however, held out of pecuniaryaid from that quarter.Disappointment had been created on the partof the public by the non-payment of the£400,000, under the agreement of 1769,* Theaffairs of the Company had become the generalAttacks on the subject of discussion and animadversion. Pam-companyand "^on Lord clive. picts issued from the press, reflecting in strongterms of severity on the Company, and on theconduct of their servants. Virulent attacks werelevelled against the character of Lord Clive, whoseadministration of the government of Bengal, in1765, had unjustly caused him many enemies.The circumstances under which his lordship hadentered upon that arduous trust were forgotten,whilst the most distorted views were given of hismeasures. Lord Clive was not a recognized servantof the state : he derived no authority fromlaw : he was placed over a presidency, divided,head-strong, and licentious — the Treasury waswithout• Attic page 271.Crap. VII.] BjtITTSH POWER IN INDIA. 339without money, and the service without subordi* 1772.nation, discipline, or public spirit : * the subordinatefunctionaries being aware that they were onlyamenable to punishment within the precincts of theMahratta ditch. Such a state of things was aloneto be met and overcome by the firm and resoluteline of conduct which his lordship adopted. Theeffect on the interests of the individuals who sufferedunder the well-merited rebuke their conducthad drawn upon them, led to the strong oppositionevinced at the time towards his lordship, a feelingfomented by some of the leading members ofthe Direction, who were personally indisposedtowards him.The Chairman of the Court, who was likewisea Member of the House of Commons, had obtainedleave to bring in a bill for the better administrationof justice in India, and for controllingthe Company's servants. The Proprietorshaving rejected a proposition for conferring extraordinarypowers on Mr. Hastings, who had beenappointed to succeed to the Government in Bengal;the Directors resolved upon sending outanother Superintending Commission for the pur Parliament^ 1 1 • i 'restrain Composeof correcting abuses, and applying such panyfrom-. . 1 1 !•/»»•• • appointingremedies as might place their affairs in a satis another su-factorycondition. The bill submitted by the commission.Deputy-Chairman♦ The description given by his Lordship's successor. Fidepage 177.z 2340 RISE AND Progress OP THE [Cbmt, VI f.I 1772. Deputy-Chairman was lost on its second reading,I BnroAL. the House determining to appoint two ParisAppoint two momentary Committees to inquire into the affairsCommittees ofInquiry. of the Company ; the one a secret, the other ai select committee.The Secret Committee was to inquire into thestate of the Company. They purposely made anearly report, which led to an act restraining theCourt from sending out the proposed SuperintendingCommission. Eight other reports werepresented by the Committee, in which a full reviewwas taken of the debts, credits, and effectsof the Company ; their profits from commerce,and their territorial acquisitions; the managementof their affairs abroad and at home, thesource of their revenues, the extent of bills drawnupon them from India, and the charges of theirseveral settlements.The Select Committee was to inquire into "thenature, state, and condition of the East-indiaCompany'*The speech of Colonel Burgoyne, in April,1772, when he moved the appointment of theCommittee, of which he was chosen Chairman,sufficiently indicated the spirit in which the proceedingswould be followed up. They branchedout into an inquiry on points connected with theconduct of Lord Clive, and the services which hisLordship rendered to the Company in Bengal, inthe year 1757. Thirty years had passed awaysinceCtiAF. VIL] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA. 341since his Lordship first reached India. He had 1772.on four several occasions received the thanks of ^■"^'^^the Court of Directors; he had been stronglyurged to continue in the government of Bengal,and five years had elapsed since he finally quittedthat country with the highest tokens of regardand esteem from those who succeeded him in thegovernment, as well as from the Company athome. His Lordship's conduct in transactions inwhich he had been engaged, fifteen years before,was now arraigned at the bar of Parliament witha spirit of vituperation from which it was feltthat his merits and services might well haveshielded him. The report of the Committee wasmade on the 26th of May. It was observed byone of the members of the Committee, that it washis wish the inquiry should have been directed'* not to persons but to things," but his voice hadbeen over-ruled. Another described the proceedingsas founded on envy and illiberal principles —as narrow — pointing at individuals, and neglectingthe real and only object, 'which should havebeen the provision of regulations for the futuregovernment."It was at this juncture that Mr. Warren Hastings Mr. warrensucceeded tothegovernmentof Bengal, onthe retire succeedgtothementor Mr. Cartier, in the month of April, 1772.The earlier history of Mr. Hastings, with thestatement of his services before he was placed inthe342 RISE AND Progress OF THE IIChat. VII.i77«. the prominent station of a Member of Council inBzwAu th Government abroad, more properly belongsHastiiigt. to the biographer. It is to be hoped that someonecompetent to do justice to the life of this extraordinaryman, who for so long a period filledthe public eye, will take up the subject. Theremust be abundant materials, both public and private,to furnish matter for a work iVhich, invariety of incident and depth of interest, cannotbe surpassed. A brief reference will be made tohis original appointment, and to his services previouslyto his return to India in 17G9.Mr. Hastings, the son of the Rev. PennistonHastings, was baptized at Churchill, in thecounty of Oxford, on the 15th December, 1732,and proceeded to Bengal as a Writer, on the 29thNovember, 1749, being then in his seventeenthyear. He reached Calcutta in the autumn of thefollowing year, and was attached as an assistantin the Secretary's oflSce. In 1755 he appears tohave been appointed one of the Council for managingthe affairs of the factory at Cossimbuzar,where the ability which he manifested in dischargingthe duties of his office, gained for himthe confidence of the Government. In 1756, theobstacles occasioned by the conduct of the Nabobto the progress of the Company's affairs, led tohis being deputed, with one of his colleagues, todemand a private audience for the purpose of declaring,that unless measures were adopted tocheckCmJLP. VII.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 343check the system of plunder pursued by his 1772.ministers, to gratify their avarice, on the Com- b*«oal.any's tenants, they should withdraw from theprovince. As there was reason to believe thatsome immediate change would take place in thenative government, Mr. Hastings was authorizedto expend 20,000 rupees amongst the servants ofthe Durbar in securing the interests of the Company.Mr, Hastings was one among a number ofthe Company's servants who stood forward at thatcrisis and accepted a military commission, which,it appears, he resigned, together with Messrs.Scrafton, Cartier, and Rider, in April 1757, whenthe troubles had terminated. In the followingyear he was at Moraudbaug, and entrusted witharrangements connected with the settlement ofthe Nabob's revenues and the claims of the Company.His conduct was highly approved by theCouncil at Calcutta, and a native agent, namedCossinaut, was sent up to aid him in the managementof the responsible duties committed to him.Cossinaut was not to settle any thing finally, butthrough means of Mr. Hastings, and with his entireapprobation. Throughout the year 1769 heappears to have encountered considerable difficultyin settling the Company's claims on theNabob, and in attempting to satisfy a spirit ofdiscontent which Jaffier Can manifested. Ashis pecuniary arrangements with the Durbar wereconsiderable, he rendered full and explicit accounts344 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CBAr.VIL]772. counts of the monies which passed through hisBsMOAL. hands, to the satisfaction of the government.At the close of 1759 he was relieved from theduties connected with the factory, and nominatedResident at Moraudbaug, and agent for the Companyat the Nabob's Durbar; and so onerouswere his duties, that the Government nominatedan assistant who was cognisant with the nativelanguage, in which Mr. Hastings had acquiredgreat proficiency : the officer was unfortunatelydrowned in his way up to. join the Resident.In 1760, Mr. Hastings ineffectually endeavouredto obtain payment from the Nabob of twolacs and a half, which had been lent to himon account of the Company, In the month ofNovember he was with the President, when arrangementswere made with Meer Cossim, whowas placed on the musnud, when Jaffier Canwas again deposed.* In 1761 he was appointedto inquire into the conduct of Nundcomar, whoforms so prominent a character in the course ofsubsequent events. That native had been falselyalleging, that the Company's Government wereindisposed towards the Rajah of Burdwan ; hehad also instigated RoyduUub to a similar attempt.The inquiry terminated in Nundcomarbeing confined a prisoner to his house as. a dangerouscharacter.In December 1761, Mr. Hastings appears tohave• Fide page 77.Chap. VIL] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 345have taken his seat as a Member of the Select ^'^2.Committee at Calcutta. In March 1762 he was ^■'"*^'^deputed to visit the Nabob, with the view ofsettling the various points of dispute which hadarisen from the unjustifiable conduct of the Company'sservants in the prosecution of private trade,and in their behaviour towards the Nabob. Itwas on that occasion that the majority of theCouncil, in entire opposition to the President,issued orders to Mr. Hastings to demand a presentof twenty lacs from the Nabob, which, theyasserted, he had promised them on being placedupon the musnud. The Nabob indignantly rejectedthe demand, at which the Directors expressedtheir entire satisfaction. After variousother services as a Member of the Select Committee,Mr. Hastings embarked for Europe in theship Medway, in February 1766, his place as aMember of Council being filled by Mr. Gray,who was called from Malta for that purpose.In consideration of his acknowledged talentsand qualifications, the Court of Directors, on the20th December, 1768, unanimously appointed hima member of Council at Fort St. George. It wasannounced to that government in the followingterms: — *' Mr. Warren Hastings, a gentleman whohas served us many years upon the Bengal establishmentwith great ability and unblemished character,offering himself again to be employed inour service, we have, from a consideration of hisjust346 USE AND Pfi06RE86 OP THE [Cumw.VIL"72. just merits and general knowledge of the Com-BtNoiL. pays affairs, been induced to appoint him one ofthe members of our Council at your Presidency,and to station him next to Mr. Du Pr," who hadbeen nominated to succeed to the government onthe 31 St January, 1770 — Mr. Hastings being selectedfor his successor.Appointed to In April, 1771, the Court, having had underciiwitbsucoes- Consideration the condition of the Company'scommerce, and the general aspect of their affairs,in Bengal, resolved to appoint Mr. Hastings secondmember of Council at Calcutta, with successionas President and Governor of Bengal,whither he was to proceed from Madras withthe least possible delay.* He reached Calcuttaon the 17th February, 1772, when he took his seatat the Board, and, on the 13th April following,assumed charge of the government,Court's orders Que of the first measures which engaged hisas to Mahomed -^ . ,ueza Khan, attention arose out of the Court's instructions c^August, 1771, which he received only ten daysafter his accession to the chair. They related toMahomed Reza Khan, whose name was associatedwith the early revenue administration ofBengal, and became familiar to the English readerin connexion with the seventeenth charge onthe celebrated impeachment of Mr. Hastings.Mahomed Reza Khan held the Chuklaf ofPace aLetter to Madras, 10th April, 1771.f An assemblage of the smaller divisions of a province.Chap. VII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 347Dacca in 1762, of the Nabob Meer Jaffier, at a ir72.rent of between thirty-eight and thirty-nine lacs bengal.per annum. It was represented to the Court ofDirectors, that he had been considerably in arrearto the Nabob, who, it was alleged, had, by a subsequentagreement, consented to an abatement inthe rent, from thirty-eight to twenty-seven lacsper annum. No authority in support of this allegationcould be traced beyond the assertion ofMahomed Reza Khan. The Nabob was said tohave complained of his carelessness, and to havestrongly objected to his continuance in theChukla ; but at the entreaty of Mr. Spencer, thenPresident, Meer Jailer not only retained him, butremoved him to Moorshedabad, where he exercisedsupreme power, as well over the Nabob himselfas over all his ministers. The Nabob died,in February, 1766, and was succeeded by hisson, Nijim-ud-Dowla, a minor. The Council, notconsidering him qualified to take into his ownhands the management of his affairs, and beingindisposed to leave them to the direction of Nund-comer, in whom he was inclined to place greatconfidence, they selected Mahomed Reza Khan, MahomedRezaand, in concert with Nijim-ud-Dowla, appointed ©d Naib^^uSahhim Naib Souhak* of the province of Bengal, in ®^^®'**'which capacity he was to conduct and manage allthe Nabob's affairs.On intelligence of this appointment reaching theDirectors,• Deputy Viceroy.348 BISE AND Progress OF THE [Cbap. Vll.1772. Directors, they adverted to Mahomed Reza KhansBengal, conduct when at Dacca, and observed, "Wethink you passed too slightly over the chargeI urged against him, of being so very deficient inI accounting for the revenues of the province ofwhich he had been governor'*Notwithstanding these supposed grounds for attachingsuspicion to his former conduct, the mannerin which he discharged the duties of his newstation received the repeated expression of theTest won y in Councils approbation, who gave the strongesthis favour. . i . i • 11^ »testimony to his having pursued the Company sinterests with unvarying steadiness and diligence.S^l^pro-**** The provinces had for some time been in a device.cHuiug state. The Council instituted an inquiryinto the supposed causes, and expressed their unanimousopinions that they arose from the wantof sufficient checks on the instruments of government; the delegation of trust and authority to oneor a few, which required the abilities and integrityof many to execute ; their ignorance of the realproduce and capacity of the country, in whichthey were necessarily kept by a set of men, whofirst deceived them from interest, and afterwardscontinued the deception through fear of punishmentand a necessary regard to their own safety ;theLetter to Bengal February, 1766.t Letter from Bengal, SOth September, 1769.Chap. Vll.] BRITISH POWER IN INDU. 349the numerous train of dependents and underlings 1772.whom the Collectors entertained, were all to be Bkngatsatisfied from the spoils of the industrious ryot ;the venality which formed part of the genius ofthe Collectors, which was known to be openlyexercised or tacitly allowed by Government, withoutdrawing any shame or discredit on the guilty,or being thought any peculiar hardship on the injured:the collusion of the Collector with theZemindar, whom the Collector employed as a toolto screen his mal-practices, or admitted as an associatein his fraudulent gains ; the oppression towhich the ryot was subject from the multitude ofgomashtahs* and their dependents; and, lastly,whilst the Company were in reality the principalsin the revenues of the country, and the most interestedin the good conduct of its government,they were precluded from a knowledge of its realstate.*' Power without control, knowledge withoutparticipation, and influence without any effectualcounteraction, was a state of things too importantand replete with consequences to be vested in anythree ministers, or rather one single man, who,allowing him the clearest preference for integrity,ability, and attachment amongst his countrymen,could not be supposed superior to temptation, andat least ought not to be trusted so extensively andindependently,Native Agents.350 BISe AND Possess OP THB [Chap. VIT.i*"** independently, as has been necessarily the consequenceof the present system."vieiTB of Court At the period that the Council were thus alasto revenue j • i ^ , *management dressing the Court the latter communicated tothe Council their views as to the future managementof the revenues,* and pointed out MahomedReza Khan as a fit person to be appointed NaibDewan, or the Company's deputy, for the Bengalprovince; and, in like manner, Shatab Roy, orsome other principal person, for the Bahar province.The unexampled drought with which India hadbeen visited, caused the greatest distress throughoutthe provinces. The future prospect was contemplatedwith so much dismay by the Council,that they suggested the expediency of authorizinga remission in the demands of the Government onaccount of the revenues, which remission theywere constrained to grant to the farmers in theJanuary following, without awaiting orders fromEurope.nevenuecoun- To ffivc effect to the Court's instructions rfcela appointed. °1769,t for a revision of the revenue management.Councils were appointed, in September, 1770, atMoorshedabad and Patna: the former for theBengal provinces, the latter for those of Bahar.The Councils were to inform themselves of thereal state of the collections in every part ; whatrents♦ Firfir page 278. f ^«Vfc page 275.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 851rents were actually paid by the tenants, and what i77«.formerly ; the nature of the cultivation ; the chief »«*^°^'"produce of each district, and whether in thatrespect there was a prospect of improvement.Enquiry was to be made as to the charge of collectionsfor some years preceding, in order that ajudgment might be formed of the requisite numberof Aumils* and other officers, amongst whomimmense sums had been divided," which it wassupposed might be spared.His reformation was to be carried forward in amoderate, steady, and persevering spirit, with aview rather to the prevention of frauds for thefuture than the punishment of offences which hadbeen already committed. At the same time, theywere not entirely to pass over offences, nor to abstainfrom enquiring into the character and conductof the officers of government, from the highestto the lowest.The Councils were to have the control of theDewanny revenues ; but all the business was tobe carried on through the Naib, and under hisseal and signature. He was likewise to give hisadvice and opinion upon all proposed measures.No appointments of officers or collectors were tobe made by the Naib, nor was his seal to beaffixed to any order but with the approbation ofthe Council. Regular consultations were to bekept of their proceedings. MahomedCollectors of the Revenue.352 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CsAr. Vii.177%. Mahomed Reza Khan had acted in the twoBbvoal. capacities of Naib Dewan and Naib Nazim. InDuties of the *NaibDewin the former office were determined — all disputesand Naib .as to revenue, boundaries of land, charity lands,lands held for private emolument, limits of cultivatedor uncultivated lands, so as to fix the revenuearising therefrom on an equitable footing ;jurisdictions on landholders, duties on merchandize,encroachments by inundation or otherwise,inheritances and patrimonies, religious lands,honorary lands, oppression of tenants or improperdemands of Zemindarss and Phousdars, or merchants: settling bundabust or rent-roll for theprovinces, promoting cultivation and population.All sunnuds for lands required the approbationof the Nizamutututut. Under the Nizamututututwere regulated — sall the affairs of the household,protection of the country, sentence on criminalsand capital punishments, regulation of courts ofjudicature, appointment of Nails and Phousdars.*Upon the due execution of these extensive andimportant trusts, the welfare of the country andthe happiness of the people mainly depended.Hitherto, no Europeans had formally interfered.It was too much to expect that one man shoulddischarge them satisfactorily ; and it could scarcelyhave been matter of surprise, that the results ofthe inquiry instituted in 1769, justified in somemeasure,.Magistrates under the immediate orders of the Nazim.Chap. VII.] BmTISH POWER IN INDIA. 353measure, the suspicions entertained by the Council, 1772. [that oppression had existed, and that the revenues ^*'*<'^'- !had been overstrained. Instances were cited inproof of the lamentably defective system whichhad prevailed of administering what was termedjustice ; but these proofs tended rather to shewthe absence of any well-defined system, than tobring home acts of personal delinquency to MahometReza Can. Nevertheless, such was the difficultyof devising any adequate remedy, that,under the newly-constituted system of RevenueCouncils, it was determined that the administrationof justice should continue as usual. TheCouncil, however, were not only to interpose whennecessary, but every transaction of the countrygovernment was to come before them. All criminalcases were to be tried in the Adawlut establishedfor that purpose, and their proceedingswere to be submitted to the Revenue Council,before the sentence awarded was carried intoeffect. All causes relating to property in land,and to the revenues, were to be referred to theKbalsa Cutcherry,* and causes for debt to thejudicial Adawlut.fWhen the various statements of the falling-offof the revenues, the sufferings of the people,through alleged oppression, inflicted either directlyor* The Revenue Court,f Consultations, 11th October, 1770. Court of Justice.VOL. I. 2 A354 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI 1.1772. or intermediately* at a time of severe famine, .gether with the mal-administration of justice,reached the Court of Directors, they were naturallyled to connect these circumstances with thegrounds for suspicion which they had previouslyentertained of the character and integrity of mahometReza Can. In addition to the publicdespatches, various private representations hadbeen sent home, all calculated to strengthen thedoubts entertained of his conduct* The Courtaccordingly addressed the President and Councilcourse order at Calcutta* in the following terms : — 'sat a timefor Company *=*fttandingfor- whcu famine was depopulating a country withand for removal which wc are SO immediately connected, and mof Mahomed . i j» i i •Reza Can. the prosperity whereof we are so deeply interested,we cannot but highly approve every well-meantand generous effort to relieve the miseries of thepoor inhabitants, by whom, in an especial manner,the calamity must have been experienced in all itsdreadful consequences ; and as we enjoy a verysingular pleasure in commending those of our servantswhose attention has been turned towardsalleviating the general distress, so are we filledwith the greatest indignation on finding a chargeexhibited against any persons whatever (but especiallynatives of England), for monopolizinggrain, and thereby aggravating the woes, and nodoubt increasing the number of wretched mortals,labouring under the most awful circumstanceswhich• Letter to Bengal, 28tb An^of 1771.Chas. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 355which could possibly happen to any people what i772.soever. We are led to these reflections by penis b«^*«^i^'ing the letters which accuse the Gomastahs ofEnglish gentlemen, not barely for monopolizinggrain, but for compelling the poor riots to selleven the seed requisite far the nest harvest."As we have further reasons to suspect thatlarge sums have, by violent and oppressive means,been actually collected by Mahomed Reza Can,on account of the Dewanny revenues, great partof which he has appropriated to his own use, ordistributed amongst the creatures of his power andthe instruments of his oppressions, we should notthink ourselves justified to the Company or thepublic, were we to leave to him in future themanagement of the Dewanny collections ; and asthe transferring the like trust to any other ministercould yield us little prospect of reaping anybenefit from the change, we are necessitated toseek, by other means, the full advantage we haveto expect from the grant of the Dewanny. It is,therefore, our determination to stand forth asDewan, and, by the agency of the Company'sservants, to take upon ourselves the entire careand management of the revenues. In confidencetherefore, of your abilities to plan and executethis important work, we hereby authorize andrequire you to divest Mahomed Reza Can, andevery person employed by or in conjunction withhim, or acting under his influence, of any further2 A 2 charge356 RISE AND PBOOBE8S OF THE [CdAi>. Vlf .iT7e. charge or direction in the business of the coUec-BiKOAL. jjQjjg . j^^d yf^ t|.Qst tijj^t^ in the office of Dewan,you v^ill adopt such regulations, and pursue suchmeasures, as shall at once ensure to us every possibleadvantage, and free the riots from the oppressionsof Zemindarss and petty tyrants, under whichthey may have been suffered to remain, from theinterested views of those whose influence andauthority should have been exerted for their reliefand protection.'from the grounds we have to suspect thatMahomed Reza Can has abused the trust reposedin him, and been guilty of many acts of violenceand injustice towards his countrymen, we deeminsufficient the depriving him of a station whichmay be made subservient to the most corrupt purposes.It is, therefore, our pleasure and command,that you enter into a minute investigation, notonly of the causes to which the decrease of revenuemay be ascribed, but also into Mahomed RezaCanes general conduct during the time the De-fannyrevenues have been under his charge ; andas the several complaints and accusations alreadynoticed to you are of a nature too serious to besuffered to pass over without the most rigid enquiry,we have directed our President to orderhim to repair to Calcutta, there to answer to thefacts which shall be alleged against him, both inrespect to his public administration and privateconduct."Mr.Chap. VIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 357Mr. Hastings had resided at Calcutta only two 1772.months, and had, as already observed, succeeded Bimqal.to the chair but ten days, when the orders of theCourt of August reached him in the night of the24th April. On the following morning, he des Arrest of matchedinstructions to Mr. Middleton, at Monte* Can.jeyl, desiring, in conformity with the orders of theSecret Committee, that he would arrest the personof Mahomed Reza Can, together with his Dewan,Rajah Aumest Sing, and send them down to Calcuttaunder a sufficient guard. Every mark oftenderness and respect was to be shewn to mahometReza Can, consistent with the literalperformance of the service. Secrecy was to beobserved, in order to avoid all cause for alarm ordisturbance.Precautions were taken by Mr. Middleton toallay any tumult, but none were required. mahometReza Can, on learning the purport of thecommission, evinced no inclination to impede theexecution of the orders, ** but with calm submissionmet his unhappy fate," manifesting a readinessto comply with them to the fullest extent. Heproceeded from Mootejeyl on the 27th, and wasto embark at Mirzapore for Calcutta. On the 28th9two days only having elapsed after their receipt,Mr. Hastings laid before Council the instructionsfrom the Secret Committee, under which he hadacted. The Board resolved that, consistently withthose orders, they could not receive MahomedReza358 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CbakVII.1772. Reza Can with the usual honours. It was .posed, that, in consideration of the rank of " hisExcellency," the station he had filled, and thecharacter and consequence he held in the empire,a member of the Board should be deputed to waitupon him, to explain verbally and in general termsthe articles laid to his charge. A majority of theBoard concurred in this measure. The Presidentand three other members dissented from it, on theground that it was inconsistent with the proceedingsagainst him. Mr. Hastings had alreadywritten to assure Mahomed Reza Can of theexceeding grief and mortification which the commandsof the Company had caused him; butstated, that he was their servant, and that whateverthey ordered it was his duty to obey, *' norcould he deviate one tittle from it ;" but if, in hisprivate character, he could afford him any testimonyof his good will or attachment, he mightrest assured he would.Mr. Middleton was ordered to take charge ofthe office of Dewan, until a proper plan should bedigested by the Council.Rajah shatab The Board considering that the charge of negroseized and ^ ^ ^sent down to let or embezzlement of the revenues was appliedequally to Shatab Roy, the Naib Dewan of theBahar province, they resolved to lay an immediaterestraint upon his person. He was sent down toCalcutta on the 7th May.Mr. Graham, the member of Council deputedtoChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 359to wait upon Mahomed Reza Can, met him at 1772Chitpore. Having explained the cause of his mis Bengal.sion the latter expressed much anxiety that nodelay should take place in bringing forward thecharges to be preferred against him.A plan for the future arrangement of the Nabob's Arrangementaffairs was taken up by the Committee at Cossim- bob.bazars where Mr. Hastings had arrived from thePresidency. The Company having resolved tostand forth as Dewan, a question arose as to themaintenance of the office of Naib Soubah. TheCouncil, after fully considering the various dutieswhich appertained to that station, and referring tothe probable state of affairs at the period whenthe Nabob Maborek-ud-Dowla, who succeededhis brother Syoof-ud-Dowla, in 1770, would reachhis majority, were of opinion, that whatever faithmight be due to treaties, doubtful in themselves,a divided government could only be productive ofthe most serious results and continual contests,terminating in anarchy and bloodshed. They,therefore, contemplated the possibility of a totalchange of rule taking place by degrees, by whichthe real power that protected the country should -be substituted, in lieu of that which claimed thepower by right, but was at the same time unableto maintain or support that right. In order to pre BrituTi sove-* ^ , * reign comparethe way for this change, they determined to tempted.take such measures as would retain openly in theirhands the whole conduct of government, at leastfor360 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chas. VII.ms. for the present, and so to accustom the people toBbmoal. ting sovereignty of the British nation.The office of Naib Soubah was accordinglyabolished, and a guardian appointed to the Nabob.The party fixed upon was Munnee B^um^ thewidow of the late Nabob Jaffier Ally Khan. Herrank was considered to give her a claim to thepre-eminence, without being open to the objectionof its interfering with the course of policy to beobserved in promoting and extending the Britishinterests. The plan was adopted by the Councilat Calcutta.The next proposition submitted by Mr. Hastingswas the selection of Rajah Goordass, the sonof Mala-Rajah Nundcomar, for the office of Dewanof the Nabob's household. The groundsurged for this appointment appear to have beenthe " inveterate and rooted enmity '* which hadlong subsisted between Nundcomar and MahomedReza Can, and the necessity of employing thevigilance and activity of so penetrating a rival, tocounteract the designs of the latter, and to eradicatethe influence which he might retain in thengovernment. This measure was considered to bein strict accordance with the instructions fromthe Court of Directors ; who, if they had not soexpressed it, had necessarily implied it in theircommands, since it was not to be expected that anew plan of government could effectually takeplace, while the influence of the former subsisted.TheChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 361The youth and inexperience of Rajah Goordass 1772.were stated to render him inadequate to the real Bkkgal.purposes of his appointment ; but his father wasconsidered to possess all the abilities, perseverance,and temper, requisite for such ends,in a degree, perhaps, exceeding any man inBengal.Mr. Harwell entirely concurred in the proposal opposition toof Mr. Hastings ; but Messrs. Dawes, Lawrell, ^'J^ed**'and Graham objected to the measure. They con ^""***^'""-ordered it, in effect, the appointment of Nundco-mar, whose previous political conduct, and theorders of the Court of Directors thereon, renderedhim, in their judgment, unfit for the partwhich was suggested by the President. Theyadverted to his having assisted in carrying on acorrespondence between the Shazada and theFrench governor of Pondicherry, in 1762, and tothe fact that he was subsequently proved to haveforged letters, with the view of inculpating andruining a native, named Ram Churn, who hadacted as banian to Lord Clive, General Caillaud,and Mr. Vansittart, which led the Court of Directorsto remark, that Nundcomar had beenguilty of carrying on correspondence with thecountry powers, " hurtful to the Company's interests; that he appeared to be of a wicked andturbulent disposition, and should not be trustedwith his liberty in the Company's settlement."In October, 1764, he was found to have been intreaty362 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI L1772. treaty to furnish Meer Cossim full accounts ofBeKUAt. all tjj^ transactions of the English army, on conditionof being appointed to the Dewanny ofBengal ; and in March, 1765, Mr. Vansittart hadreported his treasonable correspondence with theenemy.Mr. Hastings' In reply to the objections urged against thesupport of appointment of Rajah Goordass, Mr. Hastingsremarked, that Nundcomar's situation differedmaterially from that in which he stood underMeer Jaffier. He drew a distinction between theviolation of a trust, and an offence committedagainst a government, to which, at the time, heowed no allegiance ; and although he had himselfdetected the circumstances alleged against Nund-comer,* still he was persuaded that the Court ofDirectors would attribute his countenancing himto motives of zeal and fidelity to the service, inrepugnance, perhaps, to his own inclinations.The father would have no trust or authority, andthe son not possessing abilities equal to so greatan undertaking, the slightest suspicion would besufficient to remove the former, and frustrate allhope of his following up any design of momentagainst the government. The Board at Calcuttaunanimously concurred with the Committee ofCircuit in the appointment of Munnee Begum, asguardian to the Nabob ; but there was a differenceof opinion ou that of Rajah Goordass, whowas• Vide page 344.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 363was, however, nominated by a vote of the 1772.majority. bengal.These arrangements were notified to the Court Causes of delay1-kit TT '" proceedingsin September 1772, when Mr. Hastings himself against Maho-1 »%. - ^ . f «>«<* ^^^addressed the Directors from Cossimbuzar, ex can and RajahShatabRoy.planning the circumstances under which MahomedReza Can and Rajah Shatab Roy bad been solong detained in confinement, without any proofshaving been obtained of their guilt.*' I beg leave to call to your recollection, thatby a strange concurrence of unforeseen causes,your administration had at this time every objectthat could engage the care of government (waronly excepted), all demanding their instant attention.The settlement of the revenue of Bengal ;the dismission of the Naib Dewan and Naib Sou-bahof the provinces ; the inquiry into his conductfor a course of years preceding ; the dismissionof the Naib Dewan of Bear, and inquiryinto his conduct ; the establishment of the De-fannyon the plan directed by the HonourableCompany; the arrangement of the Nabob's household; the reduction of his allowance and expenses; the establishment of a regular administrationof justice throughout the provinces ; theinspection and reformation of the public offices ;and, independent of all thescr the ordinary dutiesof the Presidency, which, from the amazinggrowth of your affairs, were of themselves sufficientto occupy the whole time and applicationwhich364 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [CHAr. VII.1772. which we could bestow upon them, and evenBcMGAL. more than we could bestow, from the want of aregular system, the natural consequence of therapidity with which these affairs have accumulated.So circumstanced, we were under an absolutenecessity to leave many affairs suspended,that we might give due despatch to the rest. Thefirst in consequence claimed our immediate regard: this was the settlement of the revenues.It was late in the season. The lands had sufferedunheard-of depopulation by the famine and mortalityof 1769. The collections, violently keptup to their former standard, had added to the distressof the country, and threatened a generaldecay of the revenue, unless immediate remedieswere applied to prevent it.** The farming system, for a course of years subjectedto proper checks and regulations, seemedthe most likely to afford relief to the country, andboth to ascertain and produce the real value of thelands without violence to the riots. It was, therefore,resolved, that this business should first takeplace ; and it was deemed necessary, for this purpose,that a Committee, composed of the membersof the Council, should be appointed to carry it intoexecution. The arrangement of the Dewanny, andthe regulation of the Nabob's household, wereadded to the charge of the Committee ; and asthese comprehended the most valuable parts ofyour concerns, it was thought proper that I, asPresident,Chap. VIT.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 365President, should be joined with it. This rendered ^'"^•it necessary to suspend the trials of Mahomed ^''''^*'-Keza Can and Rajah Shatab Roy, and this reasonis assigned for it in our minutes. Neither MahometReza Can nor Rajah Shatab Roy complainedof the delay as a hardship. Perhaps all parties,as is usual in most cases of a public concern, hadtheir secret views, which, on this occasion, thoughopposite in their direction, fortunately concurredin the same points. These had conceived hopesof a relaxation of the Company's orders. MahometReza Can had even buoyed himself up withthe hopes of a restoration to his former authority,by the interests of his friends, and a change in theDirection ; and his letters, and the letters of hisDewan to the city, declared these expectations."This communication to the Court was succeededby a secret despatch of the 10th December following,in which they were apprized that thealleged balance against Mahomed Reza Can, offorty lacs, on account of the Chukla of Dacca,had risen from a mistake, his name having beeninserted in the accounts of the year 1762, insteadof the name of his predecessor, Mahomed AllyCan, and that the former had, as he stated,agreed only for 27,62,766 rupees, in the room of38,86,242 rupees. The Government neverthelessremarked, " We have great reason to believe that,on a strict scrutiny, there will appear a balanceagainst him of seventeen lacs."Before366 Disc AND PSOOBE88 OF THE [Csaf. VII.177a Before this latter statement had reached theBsifOAL. Court of Directors, they had written to Mr. hastings,*expressing their entire approbation of themeasures detailed in his letter from Cossimbuzar,of the 1st September.coortofiMrec 'the whole of your conduct seems to haveton entirely •'approve of the fully j justified the choice of the Secret Committee,!conductor. -^ -^ 'Hastings. who entrusted to your management the executionof a plan of the utmost importance.** Although you will observe that sundry changeshave lately taken place in the direction of theCompany's affairs at home, those changes will notin the least affect the measures in which you areengaged : on the contrary, we take this early opportunity,not only of testifying our entire approbationof your conduct, but of assuring you of ourfirmest support in accomplishing the work youhave so successfully commenced; and we doubtnot, but it will issue in the deliverance of Bengalfrom oppression, in the establishment of our credit,influence, and interest, in India, and consequently,in every advantage which the Company or the nationmay justly expect from so important a transaction.*• WeLetter to Mr. Hasdngfi, 16th April 1773.f The terms in which the tenth article of the seventeenthcharge in the impeachment was couched, questions the truth ofthe assertion made by Mr. Hastings, that he received orders,directed to himself, tom the Secret Committee. This answerof the Court of Directors puts the fact beyond all doubtCa4P.VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 367"We assure ourselves that you will prosecute ^'^^'your inquiries with steadiness, impartiality, and ^«^°*^-to full effect, notwithstanding the many difficultiesand temptations which, we are sensible, may bethrown in the way of persons engaged in inquiriesof this nature, in order to weaken their zealfor the public good, and to render their endeavoursineffectual for the great purposes of reformation.'* Your attention to the settlement of the revenues,as a primary object, has our entire approbation; and it is with the utmost satisfaction weobserve that the farming system 'will be generallyadopted ; more especially as the researches anddiscoveries made in the two preceding years musthave nearly ascertained the value and produce ofthe lands ; so that imposition on the part of thefarmers, respecting the value of the lands and oppressionof the tenants, may, we hope, be easilyavoided.'* The extirpation of Mahomed Reza Can'sinfluence was absolutely necessary, and the apprehendingof Shatab Roy equally so. As to anyhopes which Mahomed Reza Can may entertainof profiting by changes in the Court of Directors,those hopes must Speedily vanish ; for, howeverdifferent their sentiments may be in some particulars,they heartily concur in the propriety andnecessity of setting him aside, and of putting theadministration of the Company's affairs in thehands368 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap VII.1T7X hands of persons who may be rendered responsibleBelial. jj^ England for their conduct in India.'' Your choice of the Begum for guardian to theNabob, we entirely approve. The use you intendmaking of Nundcomar is very proper; and itaffords us great satisfaction to find, that you couldat once determine to suppress all personal resentment,when the public welfare seemed to clashwith your private sentiments relative to him.As the shortness of our time will not permitus to be more particular, we can only repeat toyou our assurances of protection and support, incarrying into full execution the arrangements youhave so happily begun ; and as we desire particularlythat you will distinguish and encourage meritwherever you find it, so do we most strictly conjureyou, not to suffer rank, station, or any connexionor consideration whatever, to deter youfrom bringing every oppression to light, and everyoffender, native or European, to condign punishment.** If the abolition of the office of Naib Dewan,and stepping forth as principals, should in anydegree alarm your European neighbours, we relyon your prudence for removing every improperjealousy that may be entertained on this account.'' Notwithstanding this letter is signed by us,the Court of Directors, we mean it as secret, andtransmit it confidentially to you only; and weleave it to your discretion to lay the contents, oranyChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 369any part thereof, before the Council, if circum 1773.stances should, in your opinion, render it necessary,or if you should judge it for our interest soto do, and not otherwise."Considerable progress had been made, by March,in the inquiries instituted respecting Rajah ShatabRoy and Mahomed Reza Can ; but the Councilforesaw in the latter '* a tedious and troublesomebusiness." They observed, *you may depend uponit, that neither pains nor attention shall be wantingto bring it to a conclusion : at present, nothingdefinitive has been done"*In the month of August following, the Court ^^^^^were informed of the entire acquittal of the RajahShatab Roy, of embezzlement or mismanagement,during the period of his administration ; and as theCouncil were fully satisfied of his great abilitiesand experience in revenue affairs, they appointedhim to act as Roy-royanf of the Bahar province ;and the Nabob, at their recommendation, consentedto retain him his Naib for the criminalbranch of the administration of justice, and tointerpose in disputes with foreign nations.He quitted Calcutta in a very bad state of health. His death,and, after languishing some time, died in September,Rajah KuUiam Sing, his son, was appointedtoLetter to the Directors, March, 1773.f The principal officer under the Dewan of the Provinces-who has the immediate charge of the crown lands; and Superintendantof the Exchequer.VOL. I. 2 B370 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. VII.1778. to the vacant office of Roy-royan, in testimony ofBengal. jj^^ sense entertained of the merits and services, aswell as in consideration of the sufferings, of hisfather, by whom he had been entrusted with aconsiderable share in public affairs. The Nabobgranted him sunnuds, appointing him Naib of theNazim for the Bahar province, and confirming tohim the title of Mala Rajah.*Charges not With regard to Mahomed Reza Can, the firstproved against , /• . . i • iMahometan Charge only, of monopolize gram dung thefamine, had been gone through, and the Councilacknowledged that none of the proofs in itssupport had established his guilt On the contrary,the belief which prevailed in the country,of his being concerned in that trade, appeared tohave arisen from the notions of the people, who,,ignorant of the facts, blended and mistook theduties of Mahomed Reza Gawn's public station, inthe measures which he pursued for the relief ofthe city, during the height of famine, for theexertion of sordid views to gratify and promotehis private interests.The second article of charge was the balanceagainst him during the two years that he collectedthe Dacca revenues. This balance he alleged tobe grounded on a document extorted from him,when under bodily fear, by Nundcomar. Thelatter denied the charge, and still declared thatthe balance was due, and might be recovered.The• Letter from Bengal, 10th November, 1773.C«AF. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 37 1The Council determined to call upon Niindcomar 1774.for proof of the truth of his allegation. b«hcal.At the termination of the examination into thefirst charge, Mahomed Reza Can had undergonefourteen months* confinement. Upon maturelyweighing every circumstance, the Council wereunanimously of opinion, that full opportunity hadbeen afforded to all persons desirous of accusinghim, or of obtaining redress for grievances sufferedat his hands, to have appeared to give their testimony,or to make their application, unawed byapprehensions of his power or resentment. Theguard which had been placed over him wasaccordingly removed, on. condition that he engagednot to depart from Calcutta till the inquirywas completed. It terminated in March,1774. The Council stated, that although theiropinions amounted to a general acquittal, theyhad forborne to pronounce them decidedly, butreferred them to the Court for final judgment.He was declared free from arrest, but required Declared free1 ▼% 1 • Ml* '^ro™ arrest.not to leave the Bengal province until his entireenlargement was authorized by the Court.*In addition to the address from the Governmentof the 17th March, Mr. Hastings felt it necessary,in consequence of his having received the especialcommands of the Court for conducting the inquiry,to enter into a personal explanation regardingsomeLetter from Bengal, 15tb March, l??'!.2 B 2372 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. VII.1774 some points in the proceedings. He accordinglyB*"*^"- wrote to the Directors on the 24th of that month,and alluded to the difficulties which he had to encounter"in the progress of that intricate business."Mpii^lrt^S — " ^ ^^^ neither witnesses, nor vouchers, nortorts" IwUd. materials of any sort to begin with. For these IMdiomedResa ^^^'^^ chiefly ou the abilities, observation, andc»wn. active malignity of Maharajah Nundcomar. Inconcurrence with the Councils at Cossimbuzar andCalcutta, advertisements were published, invitingall persons to give information against such as hadcontributed to distress the country in the time offamine. I patiently bestowed hours and days inlistening to the multiplied but indefinite suggestionsof Nundcomar : in a word, I omitted nomeans, which were consistent with my character,to bring the truth of this accusation to light. Inthe course of the inquiry, I proceeded with themost rigid impartiality, not suffering (I can safelysay) the smallest bias to incline me. You will seewith what materials I was furnished. I am sorryto say, that some were collected with so littledecency and regard to truth, as to make me apprehensiveof the effects which they might have produced,from the countenance afforded to the PoliticalAgent in the prosecution, had I not, in myown immediate conduct, invariably adhered to thestrictest rule of justice."The natives from whom statements had beentransmitted home, and to which the Court referredinChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 373in support of the course they directed to be ob 1774.served towards M ahomedReza Can, when called ^*"«^to the proof, failed in establishing one iota of thecharges against him. The accounts furnished byNundcomar appeared more calculated to acquitthan to afford any proof against him; and althoughNundcomar had offered to supply veryminute accounts as to the Dacca collections andthe Nizamutut accounts, and likewise to prove embezzlementin the rate of exchange, none of thepapers which he produced afforded any thing likeproofs, but merely reiterated charges, without onevoucher, or the least aid that could lead to one, insupport of them.'' I am at a loss," said Mr. Hastings, ** to discoverthe secret spring which governs the mysteriousconduct of this man ;" and then, as if inanticipation of what was to befall himself at afuture period, he wrote : " Notwithstanding theconsciousness which I possess of my own integrity,and the certainty that my conduct throughout thisungrateful business will, on the most rigid scrutiny,do me credit, yet I am not without my fears ;I am .aware of the violent prejudices which weretaken up at once against Mahomed Reza Canby all ranks of people, both here and at home. Iam also aware that, in England, where the veryname of inquiry into the past management ofaffairs in India, flatters the passion of the times,and raises expectations of great and importantdetections.RISE AND PB06RESS OF THE[Cm.VIT*1774.BSMGAL*Duplicity ofNundcomar.detections, the result may baulk those expectations,and turn the torrent of clamour anotherway. In many of the private letters which I receivedfrom my friends in England, I was warnedto act with great caution in this inquiry, as theconfirmation of my credit with the public, and(forgive me for adding) with your HonourableCourt, depended upon it. The magnitude of thecharges which were alleged against MahomedReza Can, his reputed wealth, the means whichthat afforded him, both of suppressing evidence,and even of influencing his judges in his favour,and the natural conclusion deducible from somany exaggerated accusations, that some part ofthem, at least, was true, gave additional force tothese cautionary intimations, and made me fearfor the consequences, not only as they mightaffect my reputation, which it has been the studyof my life to maintain unblemished, but as theymight blast all my hopes from the continuationof your favour, which I hold solely on the creditof my integrity. I must candidly own, that Inever gave up a portion of my time to thisbusiness, without feeling a painful regret thatso much of it was lost to the care of your realinterests."He then adverted to the dark and deceitfulcharacter of Nundcomar, whose gratitude nokindness could bind, nor even his own interestdisengage from the crooked politics which hadbeenChaf.VIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 375been the study of his whole life. '* Before my it?*-departure from Fort St. George, when my ap ®"*'**^^ointment to this Presidency was known, a messenger,expressly deputed from Munnee Begum,came to me there, with letters from her, entreatingmy protection in the most earnest terms, bothfor her house and for the people of Bengal, againstthe tyranny of Mahomed Reza Can, and referringfor further information to Maharajah Nund-comer, from whom I received similar addresseson the same subject and by the same hand. TheMunnee Begum has since solemnly disavowedever having written such letters, or authorizedsuch a communication.A short time after the elevation of his son asDewan to the Nabob, Nundcomar sent drafts ofletters to the Beguta, which he recommended herto write to mo, enumerating the many encroachmentswhich had been made by the EnglishGovernment on the rights of the Nizamutut, andreclaiming them on behalf of the Nabob. I trustto his own genius to furnish you with nearerproofs, in the representations which he has alreadymade, or which he may at this time convey toyour knowledge." In closing the letter, Mr.Hastings observed : ** Whatever your resolutionmay be concerning the future fate of MahomedReza Can, it is my duty (although I believe itunnecessary) to represent that, whatever reparationyou may think due for his past sufferings, therestoration376 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIL1774. restoration of any part of the power which heBengal, i^^^q^q possessed, wil inevitably tend to the injuryof the Company's affairs, and the diminution ofyour influence and authority. There can be butone government and one power in the province.Even the pretensions of the Nabob may prove asource of embarrassment, when he is of age toclaim his release from the present state of pupilagewhich prevents his asserting them."^J^^iJt must ^^ connexion with this last passage, which isbe supreme. [^ accordance with the views entertained by Mr.Hastings, on framing the arrangement by whichMunnee Begum and Rajah Goordass receivedtheir respective appointments of guardian anddewan to the Nabob, it is necessary to bear inmind what passed when the Nabob Nazim-ood*Dowlas was supported in his succession to themusnud, on the death of his father, Meer Jaffier,in 1766.*The acquisition of the Dewanny, which shortlyfollowed, led to the further extension of theBritish authority: but the assumption of theoffice of Dewan by the Company was productiveof far greater changes in the native system of administrationthan any measure by which it hadbeen preceded.Conduct of Mr. The conduct of Mr. Hastings and of his Countcil, throughout the whole course of the .^^^^ regarding Mahomed Reza Can and ShatabRoy,• Firfepage98.Ghap.VIL] British power in Inn. 377Roy, was fully approved by the Court of Directedtors, who observed, that the general and alarming Bmoal.accounts of the oppressions rendered a scrutinyinto their conduct indispensable. The Governorand Council had expressed a belief that the inquirywould issue in proving a large balance tobe due ; the Court, therefore, felt authorized toconclude, that there roust have been such publicand general appearances of mal-administration, aswarranted the course they had adopted ; but asthey wished Mahomed Reza Can to remain underno other obligations than those of *' gratitude''they did not object to his total enlargement.*The original instructions to Mr. Hastings, ofAugust 1771, were peremptory and decided; heobeyed them promptly and literally; but the Sympathy awa.whole of the proceedings exhibit the baneful of Mahomedeffects of acting in any degree upon private andunofficial representations, and awaken feelings ofdeep sympathy for the sufferings of a distinguishednative, who had been subjected to soprotracted and severe an ordeal, terminating inthe entire failure of his enemies to establish anyoneof the charges so unjustly brought againsthim.Amidst other important matters which engaged 1772.the attention of Mr. Hastings and his Council,were the negotiations with the Vizier, followed bythe Rohilla war.TheLetter to Bengal, Sd March 1775;378 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cor. VIL1772. The Court of Directors had received with muchmiKQAu concern the statement of the incursions made byIncursions of •^the Mantis. the Mahrattass, not only into the territories of theKing, but those of Shuja Dowlas, to part of whichthey had also laid claim.* They regarded theconduct of the Rohillas and Jauts as a matter ofregret rather than surprise, the King and Vizierhaving neglected the opportunity to unite withthose powers for the purpose of repelling the Mahrattawho were the common disturbers of theempire. To whatever causes this general timidityor supineness was owing, the Company's interestswere equally affected, and the tranquillity of theprovinces endangered. Still, the projects of theKing and the Vizier were of too mysterious acharacter to enable the Court to decide as to themotives of their inactivity; and as they could notknow what alliances might be formed to justifythe carrying the Company's arms beyond thebounds of their dominions, they felt precludedfrom proposing any precise plan for the guidanceof the Council, but trusted that their sole objectwould be the security of the Company's possessions,and those of the powers with whom theywere connected, both by treaty and interest; andas this appeared to have guided their conduct,upon the Mahrattass invading the province ofCorah, the measures which they had adopted fordefending the dominions of the King and VizierfromFide page 280, et seq.Cbap. VII.] BBinSH POWER IN INDIA. 379from their inroads and depredations, were fully 1772.approved.* Bikoal.The Vizier at length found his position towards vizier consultsthe Mahrattass so critical, that he was induced to Barker,seek an interview with General Sir Robert Barker,to discuss the measures most prudent to be pursuedfor the preservation of his interests. Hewas also desirous of adjusting some points connectedwith the cession to the Company of thefortress of Chunagur. They accordingly met atFyzabad. The Vizier persisted in his determines P?^*|?*"^tion not to obey the summons of the King for hisattendance at Delhi. He felt that, if he joinedhis Majesty, he should be merely an idle spectatorof the enterprize preparing by the Mahrattassagainst the Rohillas ; and in the event of the latterbeing compelled to surrender a large portion oftheir country, his own possessions would be placedin jeopardy by the proximity of the enemy, whilean alliance might, at the same time, take placebetween them and the Rohillas against himself.In order to avert these consequences, he resolvedto open a negociation with the Rohillas. To giveweight to this proposition, he entreated Sir RobertBarker to accompany him on the expedition. TheCouncil, anxious to bring matters to a pacific termination,acceded to this request. The Rohillas views in sup-appearedready to make a cession of part of their wiias, who are'^^ « . * defeated by theterritory to him, on condition of his supporting Mahimttas.HabitaLetter to Bengal August 177K380 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Crap. VII.1772' Zabita Can, then at Succurtaul, guarding theBsKOAL. ^^^^g ^£ ^^ Ganges against the Mahrattass, whohad prevailed on the King to oppose him. Abody of the former, under Madajee Scientia,amounting to 40,000 men, advanced within sixteenC06S pf the fords. Having taken every precautionto ensure their passage, they crossed undercover of their cannon, and entirely defeated theRohillas. Finding Succurtaul abandoned byZabita Can, who sought safety in flight, theyfollowed up their success by penetrating to thevery heart of Rohilcund.AppnhennoM Hj^j thg Vizier not been encouraged by theof the Vizier. ^ •'presence of Sir R. Barker at this juncture, he wasprepared to have submitted to the most humiliatingterms to purchase his security. Conduct so oppositeto his general ardour, and with a well appointedarmy, was attributed to the disaffectionwhich his troops had of late so frequently manifestedtowards him. The general enabled theVizier to place his affairs on the frontiers on arespectable footing ; but being apprehensive thatthe Mahrattass might attempt to penetrate into thedominions of Oude» he ordered the first brigade,then at Patna, to pass the Caramnassa.* TheCouncil disapproved of this step, as no requisitionhadThis river squurates the province of Bahar from that ofBenares. On crossing this river, the Company's officers wereconsidered to have quitted the Company's territories, and re*ceivedan additional allowance, in consideration of their distancefrom the Presidency.Cbaf. VII.] BRinSH Power IN INDIA. 38 1had been made by the Vizier either to the Council 1772.or to the Commander-in-chief, for aid, nor had ^»''«^^-any stipulation been entered into for the Vizier'spaying the extra expenses to be incurred by themovement.The fort of Chunagur being at length ceded to cession of^ n t 1 . , Chunagur tothe Company for as long a term as they might the company.desire to hold it, one of their battalions took possession; their troops were also to remain at Allahabad,the Vizier requiring that his colours shouldbe exhibited on the walls merely as an acknowledgementof his authority. These measuresnecessarily led to our passing the boundary whichhad been so long laid down as the line withinwhich the Company's operations were to be confined.The Mahrattass limited their incursion to layingwaste the Rohilla country, retiring at the commencementof the rains. The Rohilla chiefs. Dispersion ofHafiz Rhamet and Zabita Can, fled precipitately chiefs.towards the northern hills, and others had surrenderedto Scindia. The Vizier subsequentlyentered into a treaty with the Rohillas through vizier agreesHafiz Rhamet, by which, on paying him forty lacs RohK*^of rupees, he was to take an active part in theirdefence. The Mahrattass did not object, providedthey received their clout. They even offered theVizier part of the conquered territories from theRohillas, contiguous to his own, retaining forthemselves the tract of land to the westward oftheSide AND Possess OF THE [Chap. VII.Its.Bengal.Council revisetoo-operate*Mahnttas*treatment ofthe King.Duplicity ofthe King.the Ganges and Zabita Can's country, whichhad already been made over to the King. Hethen made a formal requisition to the Council foraid, which they declined, not feeling bound bytreaty to engage with him in distant schemeswholly opposed to the course of policy they haddetermined to pursue. They resolved to keep thetreaty with him inviolate, but disapproved ofoffensive measures, intending to avoid, withoutabsolute necessity to the contrary, all militaryoperations foreign to the immediate defence of theCompany's provinces ; but they were apprehensivethat the ambition of the Mahrattass wouldbring the period of interference nearer than theycould wish. They had already overrun theRohilla country, and they regarded the King,who was virtually in their possession, solely asthe instrument of their own aggrandizement. Sofarfrom re-establishing him in his government,they positively refused to keep their engagementof sharing with him half the spoils ; and havingextorted from him sunnuds for Meerut, they lefthim almost destitute, in the midst of a rich andplentiful camp, even of the common necessariesrequired to support at least an appearance ofdignity.His Majesty at this time evinced a desire toreunite himself to his former allies ; but, at themoment of making this profession, he was suggestingto the Mahrattass the necessity of theirsowingCiiAP.VII.1 BBinSH POWER IN INDIA. 383sowing dissensions between the Vizier and the ^'^•Council, in order the more effectually to promotethe success of their own movements.The negociations between the Rohillas and the Mahratta* op.-r- • • 1 1 1 mir position to theVizier were scarcely terminated, when the Mah- treaty betweenYiaeraad Bo*rattan, finding themselves excluded, and that atreaty of defence had been entered into againstthem, determined to revenge themselves on Dowlas, and demanded, as the terms for preservingtranquillity, the cession of Corah, Allahabad,and Benares, the abandonment of his settlementwith the Rohillas, the discharge of allsums which the King stood indebted to them,and, lastly, that the Vizier should unite with themagainst every opponent.The Vizier first announced this intelligence tothe Council in July, and requested a body oftroops for his support. The President stated thata defensive course could alone be adopted ; butinorder to allay his fears, the first brigade wasdirected to join him: he also wrote to Mhadarao councu expos-andByilajee, the Mahratta chiefs, acquainting Mahnttas.them with the extreme dissatisfaction of the.Council at the hostile demonstration towards theVizier, and that, by treaty, the Company werebound to defend his territories against everyinvader.The Council, in communicating these proceedingsto the Court, stated it to be their unanimousdetermination, that no object or considerationshouldRISE AND PROGRESS OF Tlffi [Cbaf. VII .1772.Bengal.Difference betweenMahrattacbiefr.Defeat of theJauts by theMahmttas.should tempt or compel them to pass the politicalline which they had laid down for their operationswith the Vizier, which were to be defensive only,and the army was not to be carried beyond theborders of the Vizier's territories ; adding, ** tothis resolution we shall steadily adhere."The Mahratta chiefs having espoused differentinterests in the distribution of Zabita Gawn'scountry, Bysajee and Tokajee broke up theircamp at Cool, and proceeded towards Delhi, forthe purpose of intimidating the King into a compliancewith their respective demands on the Ro-hills.His Majesty, influenced by Scindia, opposedall their measures, he would not consent totheir interfering in the settlement of the Rohillaaffairs, without the previous concurrence of Mha-darao ; and intimated that the Vizier ought to beconsidered the ostensible person in the negociations.He was also extremely irritated at themarch of the chiefs, and collected a body oftroops, in order to oppose them, should theyattempt other means than that of negociation.Neither party giving way, a battle took place, inwhich the King was completely defeated, andagain placed at the entire mercy of the Mahrattass.Scindia pursued his success against the Jauts,who suffered from the defection of a Mr. Maddox,an active officer in their service, formerly a deserterfrom the English army, having gone over fromthe Jauts with a considerable force to the King.AtCha». VII.] BfflTISH POWER IN INDIA. 385At the earnest solicitation of the Vizier, Colo* 1773.nel Champion was ordered to join him with the ^'^^^^,* Ai^'j /• Council deter-firstbrigade. A bridge of boats was thrown over mine to include.m . T» /• •!• 1 i* I Corah withinthe never at Benares to facilitate the progress of the line of defend.TT' • ^ ^» • 1 * sive operations.troops. His instructions were accompanied by aninjunction, that '^ not a single sepoy was to passthe frontiers of the Vizier's territories." ColonelChampion replaced the first with the second of thebrigades at Dinagepore.The King's affairs in connexion with the Mahratta,who had extorted from his Majesty a formalsurrender of the provinces of Coral and hurrah,secured to him for the support of his dignityand expenses, under the treaty of 1765^ were atthis time fully entered into by the President. Thesubject having been freely canvassed, and theCourt's views, of August 1771,* specially referredto, the Council determined to include those provinceswithin the line of defensive operations.Colonel Champion was accordingly authorized tocross the river at Allahabad, either with the wholebrigade, or such part of it as he might judge properfor the service. Precise instructions weregiven to Sir Robert Barker on no account to commencehostilities with the Mahrattass, but to confinehis operations to the Corah province, and notto cross the line, nor to engage in an offensive war.If the Mahrattass should have begun a war byactual♦ f^irfe pages 284-287.VOL. I. 2 C386 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE (Crav.VIL177& actual invasion, then he was to be at full libertyBcNOAL. ^^ adopt such measures for repelling them as hemight judge most proper even to passing the bordersof Corah, to attack with advantage. Ou Lieservice being completed, he was to return withinthe previous limits. The Vizier was to assign therevenues of Ghazeepore, or some other adequatesecurity for the payment of the additional chargeoccasioned by these movements for his defence.Appoint a 8u. On the 26th April, instructions were approvedsuperintendent of , >-, m m^ vCorah, &c. by the Council to Mr. Lawrell, a member of theBoard, desiring him to proceed, in the character ofsuperintendent, and receive charge from GeneralSir Robert Barker, of the province of Corah, andsuch part of the Allahabad province as was confirmedto the King by the treaty of 1765.Munerah-ud-Dowlah was to be maintained asthe King's Naib in the actual government, butunder the control uf the superintendent. The appointmentof Mr. Lawrell was to take place in themost public manner, in order that no doubt shouldexist as to the intention of the Council to maintainthe Company's influence and participation in theaffairs and revenues of the province, and to establisha right to the future disposal of it in the mostequitable manner, when it might become matterof negociation.Sir Robert Barker was informed, that the greatand important duties of his station, and the distanceto which the operations had drawn him,precludedCkat.VII.} BBITISI^POWEft IN INDIA. 387precluded the Council from availing themselves of ^773.the continuance of Ris services in the Corah pro ^""^o evince.Previously to the receipt of the above Barker com-communication from the Council, Sir Robert Bar uiterfereJce^fker had addressed them on the ill*consequences with miiSul^which he considered to have arisen from civil ser ®^*^"'wants interfering with the employment of the militarystationed in the provinces.In all instructions issued by the Council, the Explanationsgreatest caution had seen inculcated as to the ^bearing to be observed by civil servants towardsthe military. The ardour of Mr. Pending, acivilian, in an affair at Chittacottah, had carriedhim a little beyond the mere line of his civilduty, but rather to his praise than censure : thecivilian's duty being to point out the service to beperformed ; but the military, to judge of the modeof performing it. The matter was taken up verywarmly by the General. The Committee of Circuitbore the strongest testimony to the delicacyobserved by Mr. Pending towards the military :according to the rule, he had done nothing morethan become the channel of conveying the ordersto the military officers. The General stated thatthe officers had become dejected, and that, whenit was generally known that they were under thecivilians, ** none but men of infamous characterwould accept the Company's service"*TheConsultations, Sd March, 1773.2 c2RISE ANp PSOGRBW OF THE Chap. VII.177aBemqauFurther differ*fences.Sir RobertFarmer's reagentfor desiringto design.The General was apprised by th Council thatthe orders of the Coinpany*were clear and explicit: that obedience to the civil power was acondition of the acceptance of the service ; andthat the circumstance of the retreat alluded to bythe General from Buxydar, was executed by themilitary officer, and not by the civil servant.Another circumstance unfortunately occurred inthe following month, which tended to increase themisunderstanding between Sir Robert Barker andthe Council. It related to Captain Harper's recalfrom the Court of the Vizier, where he had been forsome time stationed, his services being no longerdeemed expedient at that post. Notwithstandingthis determination had been made known to SirRobert Barker, he thought proper to send CaptainHarper again to the Vizier, for the purpose of transactingbusiness with his Excellency, giving him thecommand of the Viziers grenadier sepoy. Hehad also received instructions, through the general'ssecretary, to remain at Mongheer or Patnatill he joined him, notwithstanding the publicorder of the Board, that Captain Harper was notto be engaged in any way in the Vizier's service.The General entered into various explanationson points connected with differences that hadarisen upon military etiquette, and desired to repairto the Presidency, in order to resign the service; stating, ** it is now, from many concomitantcircumstances, become impracticable for the commandingChap. VII ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 389mending officers of the forces to execute what I inaimagine our honourable employers expect from ^«'«°*^-such an office,— t;i^. to regulate the conduct, manners,and discipline of the officers and soldiers oftheir army in Bengal, and for other reasons whichI shall communicate to the Board." *The Council replied to this communication in councils re-the following terms : " We solemnly declare, that ^^we know no instance in which we have eitherattempted to weaken your authority or depriveyou of the means to execute this essential part ofyour trust, or where we have refused our supportto any measure, by which you might advance thecredit or improvement of the military corps. Theinstance to which alone the charge seems applicable(we mean, the power granted to the civilservants of the Company, of commanding the militaryforces) cannot be a motive for you to giveup so important and honourable a station, and todeprive the Company of your services, since youexpress your entire satisfaction in the line whichwe have laid down for the conduct of all militaryoperations which shall be undertaken under thecontrol of the civil servants. If we have contributedin any other instances to impel you to soabrupt and extraordinary a resolution, we requestthat you will acquaint us very fully with the particulars,that we may be enabled to vindicate ourconductLetter to Council from Sir R. Barker, 12th January 1773.390 RIS£ AND PBOORESS OF THE [CuAr. VII.1773. conduct to our superiors. The temper of theBknoal. Lines obliges us to this caution and requisition.We see the characters of the Company's servantsindiscriminately branded with the most atrociouscrimes, founded on vague and indefinite hints, withwhich they have too liberally furnished the publicagainst each other, and often on circumstanceseither wholly unknown or unnoticed in the Company'srecords. It becomes, therefore, our dutyto guard against the possibility of every suchattack, by fixing every imputation upon our conduct,however remote, to the facts and circumstanceso which it may allude."The General urged, that his powers as Com-mander-in-chief had been lowered ; and, althoughappointments might be made to particular offices bythe Council at the Presidency, yet that the recommendationshould always have come through him,as the Commander-in-chief ; that he should havebeen invested with the power of bestowing rewardsas well as inflicting punishments ; and if the Presidentand Council, and the President by himself ytake upon them the sole arrangements of ccurps,the nomination of every post in the army, theforming of every detachment, and the appointmentof every officer to command, there was no occasionfor any Commander-in-chief.Mr. HagUngB* Mr. Hastings being absent when this letter fromMinute in reply , ^ , . i , i <r^ .11 ,to Sir Robert the General was received by the Council, the sub-barker., , . "^ . T> . ,sect was taken up on his return to the Presidency.HeChaf.VII.] BfilTISH power in INDIA. 891He recorded a minute, in which he observed, that i's*the objections taken by the General to the extent ^■"^^*-sion of the civil authority, was rather to the abuseof that power than to the power itself.I have neither employed it to gratify personalresentment nor personal favour, having made it arule, from which I have never varied but at theinstance of the General himself to promote everyofficer according to his rank in the service. Whatevercause I may have to conceive myself unfairlytreated in the reflections cast upon me by the General,I mean only to vindicate myself in thisreply. Had he, on any occasion in which hejudged me to have encroached on the line of hisduty, acquainted me with it, he would have foundme disposed to hear him with candour and to repairmy own inadvertency. I am not ashamed to acknowledgemy errors ; because, from the varietyand rapid succession of affairs which occupy myattention, I have less time and power of recollection,and, of course, am more liable to error, thanany person in the service."He then laid down what he considered to be thegeneral principles which should govern their proceedings:-^"The collective body of the Council are, orought to be, possessed of an absolute and uncontrollableauthority over every office and every departmentof the government ; but in all the detailof business, and in the execution of their orderswhich392 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cbaf. VII.errs. which they have entrusted to others, they should**"^^'* impose upon themselves the rule of avoiding tointerfere but on every necessary occasion, of whichthey can only be the judges.•*The powers of the Council devolve on theGovernor during the intervals of the meeting ofthe Board, with the same cautionary reserve inrespect to the detail and executive business, andwith the exception of such matters as, either byexpress rule, by usage, or by their evident importance,are only cognizable by the Board."The Council collectively felt called upon torecord the most ample testimony to the candourwith which the President had replied to the General'sstatements, and to his conduct having beenstrictly regulated by the principles of equity andmoderation, in no instance exceeding the usage ofhis predecessors.Mr. Lawreii Mr. LawrcU took formal possession, on the 26thassumes chaise i« V^ iof come. June, of the provinces of Corah and Allahabad,and their dependencies, in the name of the Company,acting as allies to the King, Shah Alum.Had the encroachment of the Mahrattass beentacitly acquiesced in, their power would havebeen firmly established in the Dooab and in .The only barrier between them and theCompany was the Vizier; andjt was apparent,from his conduct on the occasion of the formerdefeat of the Rohillas by Madajee Scindia, in1772,Chas. VII.] British POWER IN INDIA. 3931772» that his continued adherence could not have 1773.been expected unless supported by the Company's ®**°^'-forces.He had repeatedly expressed a desire for an interviewwith the President, to concert measuresfor opposing the Mahrattass. The Council, feelingthai such a meeting might prove advantageousto the Company's affairs, resolved that Mr. Has Mr. Hastings*tings should proceed to Benares. He accordingly vizier.left Calcutta on the 25th June. The circumstancesattending the connexions with the Kingand the Vizier being liable to so many variations,the Council felt it to be impossible to mark outany precise line for the guidance of Mr. Hastings,in whose experience and abilities they reposed themost entire confidence. A revision of the existingtreaties between the Company and the Vizier,which were felt to be based on an unequal footing,was one of the leading objects, as the lattermight call upon the Company for assistance, andyet was under no defined obligation to defray theadditional charge thrown upon them by affordinghim such assistance.The King having originally proceeded to Delhiagainst the earnest remonstrance of the Council,they considered that, so long as he continuedthere, all engagements between his Majesty andthe Company were dissolved. The permanentretention of the provinces of Corah and Allahabadby the Company, would have been both inconvenient394 RUB AND Progress OF THE LCbat. VIL1773. convenient and expensive, whilst their proximityBsKOAL. tQ th possessions of the Vizier rendered them aneligible exchange with him for Chunar and Gha-tempore.In the event of the King renewing his alliancewith the Company, they were prepared to restoreto him those provinces, upon his renouncing thetribute of twenty-six lacs from Bengal and Baharand re- uniting himself with the Vizier, to whom themanagement of the provinces was to be confided.Mr. Hastings, during his journey towards Benares,repeatedly urged the King to send someoneto meet him, with full powers to treat on hisaffairs. His Majesty, instead of complying withthe request, wrote to the Vizier and Munerah-ud-Dowlah, demanding the balance of the tributeand its regular payment for the future ; also requiringthat the provinces should be restored toMunerah-ad-Dowlah on his behalf.Treai^wicb Mr. Hastings reached Benares on the 19thAugust, and, on the 7th September, concluded afinal treaty with the Vizier, by which the districtsof Corah and Allahabad were ceded to him, oncondition of his paying fifty lacs of rupees to theCompany; twenty in ready money, and the remainingthirty lacs in two years, in two equalpayments ; and defraying the charges on accountof any of the Company's forces which he mightrequire, the same being fixed at two lacs tenthousand per month for a brigade. The Vizier, atthethe Vizier.CuAP.VlI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 395the instance of Mr. Hastings, renewed with They t ins.Sing the engagements made with hys father Bui- Bekoai.went Sing, in 1764, excepting the additionaltribute of two and behalf lacs of rupees, to whichChest Sing had agreed, on his accession to theRaj, in 1770. Application was again made tothe Vizier for the dismissal of M. Gentil, althoughMr. Hastings was of opinion that '* the man" hadacquired importance from the notice taken ofhim, rather than from his real power to affect ourinterests. It was arranged that a Resident shouldbe appointed to the Court of the Vizier from thePresidency.The Vizier left Benares the 10th September, on Mr. Hastings-whichday Mn Hastings departed for Lunar, courlandwhere he fixed the boundary of th lands appears "^^"^ ^^ ^training to the fort. He then proceeded to Patna,for the purpose of acquiring information respectingthe saltpetre-manufactories ; ad resumed hisseat at the Board on the 4th October, when hesubmitted a detailed report of bis proceedings,and adverted to what had passed between theVizier and himself, as to the appointment of aResident at the Court of Oude, from the Governorin Council.In the course of our conversation, the Vizierfrequently expressed the satisfaction which he hadreceived from our meeting, aud from the friendlyand confidential intercourse which had taken placebetween us. Though such professions are notalwaysd96 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. VII.177a. always to be received in their literal sense, I took®'"®*'" occasion from them to ask him whether it wouldbe agreeable to him that a person in whom I confidedshould be appointed by me to reside near hisperson, for the sake of perpetuating and strengtheningthe good understanding so happily begun,as well as for the transaction of such ordinaryaffairs as might not suit the formality of a correspondenceby letter, but which, in their amount,are always found to be productive of importanteffects: that I desired it myself; but unless itwas equally his wish, I would neither proposenor consent to it, as it would not, in such a case,be productive of the good effects which I meantto derive from it. He declared to me that itwould be entirely pleasing to him. I told himthat I would again address him, after my returnto Calcutta, on the same subject, when I shouldhave made choice of a person duly qualified for soimportant a trust. It now rests with you, gentlemen,to determine on the propriety of this appointment.I will offer it frankly as my opinion, thatif you shall think it proper to entrust with me thesole nomination of such a Resident, and the powerof recalling him whenever I shall judge his presenceto be no longer necessary, it may be attendedwith good effects ; in any other mode, I fearthe appointment would exclude me from beingthe channel of connexion between this governmentand the Vizier, and prevent my availing myself ofthatCH4P.VII4 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 397that influence with him which I have taken much Inapains to establish, and I hope not altogether P****^*-unsuccessfully'The Council congratulated the President on the council ap-successfultermination of his mission, which they Hastings* con-consideredto be most beneficial for the Company'sinterests, and declared that the treaty had beenframed in strict accordance with the system recognizedby the Court for maintaining and strengtheningan alliance with the Vizier, whose dominionsformed the natural barrier for the security of theCompany's provinces. They also agreed to delegate Authorize lumto Mr. Hastings the power of nominating an agent resident wiuito reside at his court, whenever, in his judgment,circumstances might require it : the party to beapproved by the Board, the power of recal beingleft to Mr. Hastings, who was to notify its exerciseto the Board.Sir Robert Barker arrived at Calcutta on the sir Robert-^ 111- ' r^-ii Barker dissents7th October, and took his seat m Council, when from the treatyhe recorded his dissent from the arrangementwhich had been made at Benares, contrary, in hisjudgment, to the treaty of Allahabad of 1765.Mr. Hastings replied to the General's objections, Mr. Hastings1,1 1 !•• n r^ 1 1 justifies thatand contended that the distinct of Corah and measure.Allahabad had been bestowed on Shah Alum forthe support of his dignity and expenses. Thatthe King first abandoned, and afterwards, by asolemn grant, gave them away to the Mahrattass,who were more dangerous neighbours. In resuming398 BISE AND PR00BSS8 OF THE [CirAi*. TIT.177a suing tftese ptx join ce s , the Gofcnmestt did so,BsKaAu ^^j f^^ ^jj^ King, whose property and rightswere annulled by his own alienation of them, butfrom the Mahrattass. If it was repugnant to thetreaty to possess these provinces from the King, itwas equally so to oppose the Mahrattass, who byforce obtained them from the King, a mere pageantin their hands. The sunnuds for the Dewannycould in no way be considered dependent uponthe possession of Corah and Allahabad by theKing. The General observed, '' that it was morethan probable that we should soon see these sun-nutsin the hands of other nations." Mr. Hastingsasked, ** What will they avail them ? It was notthe want of the sunnuds of Shah Alum whichdefeated the long-concerted projects of the Duede Choiseul, nor will the possession of themquicken the designs of the Mahrattass against us.Tie sword, which gave us the dominion of Bengal,must be the instrument of its preservation; and if(which God forbid) it shall ever cease to be ours,the next proprietor will derive his right and possessionfrom the same natural charter.** Opinions of what might have been done,always have an advantage in the comparison withwhat has been done. Any conjectures may behazarded of the probable consequences of the former; no events can refute them : the latter arefixed to certain and unavoidable proofs. I feelthe force of this inequality in the present argumentChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 399ment with the General. I caa cmly suppose rtiy rmown opinions to his Conjectures, which cannot P«"«^'-overthrow them. The measures which I haveadopted can at this time admit of no amendment,nor can any reasoning avert the effects althoughit will always be easy to infer every disappointment,and every ill-consequences as the necessarydeductions from them'*The General charged Mr. Hastings with havingexcluded him from the commission to treat withthe Vizier, and with bringing him to Benaresmerely to lessen his consequence in the eyes ofthe natives. The act of exclusion was, however,that of the Council, and not of Mr. Hastings ; whoimmediately on his arrival detailed to the General,very circumstantially, the subject and design ofhis commission and his instructions, of whichthe General had expressed his full approbationin every part, excepting that more notice had notbeen taken of him in it. To this remark Mr.Hastings very frankly replied, that the Vizierwas little acquainted with the regular powersand constitution of the government; that he had,in fact, placed no dependence upon the government,but had made all his applications to theCommander-in-chief; and that it was intendedto convince the Vizier that his immediate depend •hence was on the government alone, and to establisha communication direct with him, withoutintervention.TheseRISE AND Possess OF THE LCBjir.VII.1T73.BmmuAUVisiter midi*states operationsagainstthe Robins.His letter tothe Council.Councils determinationas tothe Dooab andthe RobilJas.These unprofitable differences were scarcelyterminated y when circumstances arose which ledto the Company's troops taking part in die operationsagainst the Rohillas.On the 18th November, a letter was received bythe Council from the Vizier, representing thatHafiz Rhamet Khan, and other Rohiila girders,intended to take possession of Etawah and therest of the country belonging to the Mahrattass inthe Dooab.** I therefore write to inform you, that if suchis their intention, I will not put up with it, butshall, undoubtedly, undertake an expedition againstthem ; for, in the first place, they have not madegood a single dam (the fortieth part of a rupee)of the forty lacs of rupees, according to theiragreement ; and, in the next, they are now goingto take possession of another country.' This I willnever submit to, and I am, therefore, determined topunish them.'' On condition of the entire expulsion of theRohillas, I will pay to the Company the sum offorty lacs of rupees in ready money, whenever Ishall discharge the English troops ; and until theexpulsion of the Rohillas shall be effected, I willpay the expenses of the English troops ; that is tosay, I will pay them the sum of 2, 10,000 monthly."To the first proposition respecting the Dooab,*theThe Dooab signifies a tract of land formed by the approximationand junction of two rivers. That formed by die Gangesand Jumna rivers is so called.CMAr.VII.l BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 401the Council had no hesitation in giving a direct 1773.negative. The second they considered to involve ^^^^^^many points connected with the political interestsof the Company in those parts, and thereforecalled for serious deliberation.The power of the Rohillas had long beenthought dangerous to the Vizier, the only usefulally of the Company. The Council acknowledgedtheir ignorance of the Rohilla states generally,and, consequently, that their reports to the Directorsmust have been too defective to have enabledthem to form an accurate opinion, althoughsuch reports had led the Court to rank themamongst the powers capable of opposing the Mah^rattan.* Their country was stated to be so remotefrom that of the M mahratta, that the latter mightoccasionally attack them by allurement of plunderbut would never form a systematic scheme of conquestof a possession so diflScuIt to hold. On theother hand, the Vizier would always be an objectof jealousy and apprehension to the Rohilla&;and it was more probable that the Mahrattass andRohillas should unite in hostilities against Oude,than continue at war with each other. IThe• Vide page 19B.f An interesting report on Rohilcund will be found in theIst vol. of the Revenue and Judical Collections, selected underthe orders of the Directors in 1820^ and printed for the use ofthe Court and their servants. The Report was made to theSupreme Movement on the ISth April 1806, by the Boardof Commissioners, R. W. Cox Esq. and H. St. George TuckerVOL. I. 2d Esq.402 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cha».VII.!77a The advantages anticipated from an expeditionbemoan against the Rohillas were, the placing the possessionsof the Vizier in a complete and compactstate ; and shutting them in from foreign invasionby the Ganges, from the frontiers of Bahar to themountains of Tibet at the same time that theywould remain equally accessible to the Company'sforces, either for hostilities or protection.The Vizier would also acquire wealth, of whichthe Company might partake, and his securitywould be increased, without any dangerous increaseof power ; for, by bringing his frontier nearerto the Mahrattass, to whom singly he would beno match, he would be rendered more dependenton the Company. Among other considerable benefitswere, the acquisition of the forty lacs, andthe immediate ease to the Company of the burthenof one third of their whole army.Notwithstanding these reasons in favour of theexpedition, upon general principles, some doubtswere entertained by the President as to its expediencyEsq. both then of the Bengal Civil Service ; the latter nowa member of the Court of Directors. Rohilcund formed part ofthe ceded territories acquired by the Company, through treatywith the Nabob Vizier, and is described in the Report as '< themost productive and valuable of the late acquisition." Sugaris in great abundance and of excellent quality, and when thetransit dudes which embarrass the cultivation shall be regulated,it will become a valuable article of export. '' The managementof Fistula Can was celebrated throughout the country.It was described as that of an enlightened and liberal landlord."Chas. VIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 403diency at that time, *the Company being exposed inaat home to popular clamour ; all their measures ^*"<'^being liable to be canvassed in Parliament ; theircharter drawing to a close, and his Majesty's ministersbeing unquestionably ready to take advantageof every favourable circumstance in the negociationfor its renewal. In this situation, there appearsan unusual degree of responsibility annexed tosuch an undertaking."Mr. Hastings felt the embarrassing position inwhich he was placed, from what had passed withthe Vizier at Benares, and the assurance givenhim of aid in the enterprize.The Council having deliberately considered thevarious circumstances stated by the President,'concurred heartily in wishing to avoid the expedition."They admitted the advantages that wouldaccrue to the Company, but felt the objections topreponderate. Still, the honour of the Company'sgovernment being concerned, they agreed upon aletter to the Vizier, couched in terms rather calculatedto produce a refusal on his part to accept ofaid, than to promote the undertakings Orderswere at the same time sent for the brigade at Pinaforeto await the requisition of the Vizier.The letter produced the desired effect. His vizier declinesExcellency declined the proffered aid in his dis "p*"^*" 'tant expeditions, on the conditions required of him;butConsultations, 26th November 1773.2 d2DoiNib.404 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. VII.1773. but requested that the brigade should be ready toBiKQAi. march, whenever be might summon it, for the defenceof his own dominions. He then advancedsucceeds in the into the Dooab. Etawah, being defended byonly a smalt body of Mahrattass, surrendered atdiscretion. He treated the garrison with greatmoderation, but ordered the fortifications to bedemolished.This success, added to his. large and apparentlyformidable army, in the absence of the Mahrattass,who had marched to the Deccan, where seriousdivisions had arisen amongst their leaders, enabledthe Vizier to pass through an enemy's countrywith as little interruption as if he had been inKing's troops progress through his own dominions. At the samejautsandcap. time, NujifF Can, the King's general, who sups*"' ported the remains of the royal authority, havingdefeated the Jauts, and being recovered from thewounds which he had received in the action withthem, advanced to invest Agra,* the capital city ofthe Jauts. The Vizier was obliged to contribute tothis operation, for the sake of appearances, andaccordingly despatched part of his troops, withi77i. some guns. Agra capitulated on the 15th February,and was taken possession of by NujiffCan, in the King's name, on the 17th March.A requisition having been made by the Vizierfor the brigade to advance from Patna, orders wereaccordinglyNow the seat of a lieutenant-governor under the Companyfor the Western Provinces !CHAr.VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 405accordingly given for its being placed under the 1774.command of Colonel Champion. The Vizier „ ®*^°^*-■ Requisitionagreed to the terms already stated. The troops to from vizier for° ^ ^ ^ ^ the brigade tobe employed only in his own country, or in that advance against^ . Rohilcund.of the Rohillas, lying between the Ganges andthe mountains. The monthly subsidy of twolacs ten thousand to be paid, and the fortylacs, when the operations against the Rohillaswere concluded.Colonel Champion was apprized by the Council instructions tothat the express purpose for which the Vizier had ^ ^**'"'demanded aid was the reduction of the Rohillacountry lying between the Ganges and the mountains.On reaching the Vizier's country, he wasto acquaint his Excellency that he was ready toproceed on the service, for which he required hisfurther instructions. The Council did not supposethat the Vizier would find time, after his operationsin the Dooab, to attempt the conquest of Rohil-fund ; but, in the possible event of his prosecutingthat enterprize, Colonel Champion was desirednot to pass the boundary which divides the provinceof Oude from the Rohillas, except at theexpress requisition of the Vizier ; in which case, hewas to confine all his operations to that country,and to the dominions of his Excellency. He wasnot, upon any account whatever, to permit thetroops, or any part of them, to pass the riverGanges from the Rohilla country, nor the boundariesof the Vizier's dominions, comprehending hisancient406 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Crap. VI f.i77<k ancient possessions of Oude, and the new acquitnations of Corah and Allahabad. He was to seeka personal interview to concert the intended operationsin which the Company's forces were tobe employed. He was publicly to declare that hewent only to meet the Vizier, and with no intentionof joining in any measures against the Mah«rattan. In the event of the subsidy being onemonth in arrear in payment to the troops, ColonelChampion was to retire with his forces to Benares,there to await the orders of the Council.He took leave on the 21st February, and immediatelyproceeded to the command of the army.Troops crown The troops crossed the Caramnassa on the 24ththe CuwDnassAand defeat the March ; and having advanced through the Vizier'sdominions, encountered the enemy on the 22dApril, when a decisive action was fought, inwhich a considerable number of the Rohilla armywere killed, including their leader, Hafiz Rhamet,who fell, together with one of his sons, whilstbravely rallying his people. The Vizier wasrepresented to have evinced the most ** shamefulpusillanimity."Colonel Champion having addressed the Councilas to the ulterior views of the Vizier, and thecourse to be adopted in the event of the Kingadvancing a claim to any portion of the Rohillacountry, the majority resolved that the Kingshould be opposed, as he was, in fact, a mereinstrument in the hands of the Mahratta.AccountsChap. VIL] BRITISH POWER IN India. 407Accounts of severity of conduct, on the part of 1774.the Vizier, towards the family of Hafiz Rhamet, Bengal.reaching the Council, they intimated to ColonelChampion that it had been an invariable maximinthe policy of the Company's governments, inthe execution of any enterprizes undertaken inbehalf of their allies, to interpose their protectionin favour of the conquered princes, for the securityof their lives and honour ; that it was theintention of the Council to adhere to a maximwhich had so greatly contributed to the reputationof the British name, and to perform whatmight be incumbent on them on the occasion inquestion. They accordingly desired to be informedof the nature and instances of the ill-treatmentalluded to, in order that they might judge ofthe measures proper to be adopted. In the interim,the Commander-in-chief was to urge suchremon-strant^es to the Vizier as occasion might require ;and to point out how entirely abhorrent the Councilwere to every species of inhumanity. No instanceswere, however, adduced in proof of theallegations of cruelty, which appeared to havebeen made upon general rumour.The Vizier having intimated to Colonel Champion,in the month of May, that he had no furtheroccasion for the services of the troops in the fieldbefore the rains, preparations were made to cantonthem at Bareilly. The whole of the country latelypossessed by Hafiz Rhamet, with Only and Bes-soul.408 HISE AND Progress OF THE IIChat. VIL1774. soul, belonging to the son of Dudley Can, hadBsifoAL. \yeen acquired by the Vizier.Disptttebtothe The Council, in announcing these events to theCourt of Direct ^^tore, with rea Directors, Stated, that ** every circumstance thatsons for the , , ., , /. • . ,operations could possibly favour this enterprize, by an .common combination of political considerationsand fortuitous events, operated in support of themeasure.** 1st. Justice to the Vizier for the aggravatedbreach of treaty in the Rohilla chiefs.*' 2d. The honour of the Company, pledgedimplicitly by General Barker's attestation for theaccomplishment of this treaty, and which, addedto their alliance with the Vizier, engaged us to seeredress obtained for the perfidy of the Rohillas.** 3d. The completion of the line of defence ofthe Vizier's dominions, by extending his boundaryto the natural barrier formed by the northern chainof hills and the Ganges and their junction. •4th. The acquisition of forty lacs of rupees tothe Company, and of so much specie added to theexhausted currency of these provinces.*'6th. The subsidy of two lacs ten thousandrupees per month, for defraying the charges ofone third of our any employed with the Vizier.**6th. The urgent and recent orders of theCompany for reducing charges, and procuringthe means to discharge the heavy debt at interest,heightened by the advices of their great distressesat home.'* 7th.CHAr, Vn.] BtltTlSH POW£R IN INDIA. 409*' 7th. The absence of the Mahrattass from Hin i774.costa, which left an open field for carrying the »««•*«-proposed plan into execution,** 8th, and lastly. The intestine divisions anddissensions in their state, which, by engaging themfully at home, would prevent interruptions fromtheir incursions, and leave a moral certainty ofsuccess to the enterprise.*' These were the inducements which determinedus to adopt this new plan of conduct ; inopposition to which, one powerful objection, andonly one, occurred, namely, the personal hazardwe ran, in undertaking so uncommon a measurewithout positive instructions, at our own risk,with the eyes of the whole nation on the affairs ofthe Company, and the passions and prejudices ofalmost every man in England inflamed against theconduct of the Company, and the characters oftheir servants. Notwithstanding which, we yieldedto the strong necessity impressed upon us by theinducements abovementioned, in spite of the suggestionsand the checks of self-interest, which setcontinually before our eyes the dread of forfeitingthe favour of our employers and becoming theobjects of popular invective, and made us involuntarilyrejoice at every change in the Vizier'sadvices, which protracted the execution of themeasure. At length, however, his resolution coincidingwith our opinions, the enterprize wasundertaken ; and if our intelligence be confirmed,it4 1 SUE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI I.1774. it is now finally closed, with that success whichBcNOAb ^g j^g^^ foreseen from the beginning. We shallthen again return to the state of peace from whichwe emerged, when we first engaged in the Rohillaexpedition, with the actual possession or acknowledgedright (which the power of this Governmentcan amply and effectually assert) of near seventylacs of rupees, acquired by the monthly subsidyand the stipulation : and it rests with you to passthe ultimate judgment on our conduct"*Further opera This letter had scarcely been despatched, whenthe^Rohijiiui. the troops were again called into the field, in consequenceof intelligence that matters were accommodatedbetween the Mahratta chieftains.The Vizier was, therefore, anxious to complete thetotal reduction of the Rohillas without delay, bywhich the designs of the King and the Mahrattass,to be executed after the rains, would be defeated.The King had taken into his service Sumroo, thenotorious assassin of the unfortunate prisoners atPatnaThe Vizier had been punctual in his paymentsof the monthly subsidy for the brigade, and hadgiven an assignment on his treasury for the fifteenlacs due by the treaty of September, 1773,:t; ^^^the second payment on account of the cession ofCorah and Allahabad.Colonel Champion, under all the circumstances,consented• Letter to Court, 17th October, 1774,t Fide page 89. J Fide printed Treaties.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 4 1 1consented to advance. On the 10th of August 1774.when within four short marches of Patter Gur, he ^'«°*'-received information that the Rohillas were retiring,but had left a body of troops at that place,which was taken possession of by the Vizier onthe 16th. This event completed his conquest ofthe Rohilla country, wherein the Company hadengaged to assist him. Fizula Can, their remainingchiefs with an army of 40,000 men, wascooped up in the mountains. They had sufferedmuch from the want of provisions. The Vizier,desirous of finishing the war, made proposalsto him, which were rejected. The position ofFizula Can was beyond the Rohilla country,the limits within which the operations of the Company'stroops were to be confined. Colonel Championhad been repeatedly solicited by the Vizier toattack them; being subsequently authorized toexercise his own judgment as to the best measuresto be pursued for bringing the war to a close, heconsented to advance against them and thus terminatedhostilities.The Vizier proposed an interview with the King, vizier proposesfin interviewfor the avowed purpose of regulating the lately with the King.conquered countries. It was agreed, that the commandingofficer of the Company's troops shouldbe present, and assist with his counsel and advice.He was strictly prohibited from engaging theCompany as guarantee to any of the treaties oragreements which might be entered into betweenhis4 1 2 BI8E AND Progress OF THE [Chap. VI !.1774. his Majesty and the Vizier, or from being a partyWeal. ^ ^^y other engagements whatever, likely to produceany new claims or demands upon the Company.If the influence of the brigade, employedfor the security of the Vizier's country, shouldextend itself to the protection of any part whichmight be allotted to the King, Colonel Championwas instructed to demand the renunciation of hisMajesty's claim to the Bengal tribute, and therebyprevent any future cause of misunderstanding betweenthe King and the Company.Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 413CHAPTER VIII.The collection of the Revenues and the ad 1772.4.ministration of Justice were other important ^^'^o^^-,.-,.,, n Revenue andobjects which claimed the attention of govern judicial system.ment.The approbation given by the Directors to Revenue Battleplan of farming lands on lease, has been al **"'ready noticed, in connexion with the proceedingsrelative to Mahomed Reza Khan, and theirdetermination to stand forth as Dewan, '* by theagency of the Company's servants," and to assumethe entire management of the revenues.*The Council accordingly deliberated on theestablishment of a plan for giving effect to theCourt's views, for settling the several districtsthroughout the provinces upon the same footing,and for the future government of the collections.Some conception of the difficulty of the taskmay be formed from a consideration of the variouscircumstances connected with the state ofthe revenue system at that periodThe effects of the famine with which the provinceshad been visited, had been dwelt uponin laboured descriptions; every circumstance offact, and every art of language, had been accumulatedTtcfe page 355.414 RISE AND PKOOHE8S OF THE [CnAf. Vfll.1772^ lated to raise compassion and to excite indigaa-BsKGAL. jIqjj against the Company's servants. But its influenceupon the revenues had remained unnoticed,and even i^nfelt^ by those for whom itwas collected ; for, notwithstanding the loss of atleast one-third of the inhabitants o£ the province,and the consequent decrease of the cultivation, thenet collections of 1771 exceeded those of 1768,which preceded the year of dearth, and followedthat of the famine in 1770. This circumstancewas owing to the revenue having beenviolently kept up to its former standard. It wasnot easy to trace the various means by whichthis was effected ; indeed » the task of followingthe progress of the collections through all its intricatechannels, or even of comprehending all theelements which composed it in its first operations,vires most difficult. There was one tax, however,which the Council described as accounting for theequality preserved in the past collections. It wascalled Nqjaihy, or an assessment upon the actualinhabitants of every inferior division of the lands,to make up for the loss sustained in the rents oftheir neighbours, who were either dead or had fledthe country. This tax, equally impolitic and oppressive,had been authorized by the ancient andgeneral usage of the country. It had not thesanction of government, but took place as a matterof course. In ordinary cases, and while thelands were in a state of cultivation, it was scarcelyfelt,Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 415felt, and never or rarely complained of. However i772-*-irreconcilable with strict justice, it afforded areparation to the state for occasional deficiencies ;it was a kind of security against desertion, bymaking the inhabitants mutually responsible foreach other, and precluded the inferior collectorfrom availing himself of the pretext of waste ordeserted lands, to withhold any part of his collect*tiohs. But the same practice which, under differentcircumstances, might have been beneficial,became under the affliction of famine, an intolerableburthen, and fell, with peculiar severity,upon the inhabitants of those villages which hadsuffered the greatest depopulation. It also affordedan opportunity to the farmers and others to levy,under colour of it, contributions on the people,and even to increase it to whatever magnitudethey pleased, being themselves the judges of theloss sustained, and of the proportion which theinhabitants were to pay to replace it.It has been observed, with reference to the thenstate of the Revenue System, *' that seven yearshad elapsed since the Company became possessedof the Dewanny, yet no regular process had beenformed for conducting it." Such was the undoubtedfact ; but it may be asked, whether theCourt at home, or their representatives abroad,were in a situation to have framed and laid downany such scheme? The novelty of the businessconnected with the revenue, to those who wereappointed4 1 6 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbj^p. VI 11.1772^ appointed to superintend it — the chicanery of the^•'•**^'- people whom they were obliged to employ as theiragents— the accidental exigencies of each district,and not unfrequently the just discernment of thecollector, occasioned many changes ; every changeadded to the confusion which involved the whole,and few were either authorized or known by thepresiding members of the government. The articleswhich composed the revenue, the mode of keepingaccounts, the computation of time, even the technicalterms, which form the greatest part of theobscurity of every science, differed as much asthe soil and productions of the province. Thisconfusion was stated to have had its origin iu thenature of the former government. The Nazimsexacted what they could from the Zemindarss andgreat farmers of the revenues, whom they left atliberty to plunder all below them, reserving tothemselves the prerogative of plundering in theirturn. The Mootsuddees,* who stood between theNazim and the Zemindarss, or between them andthe people, had each their share of the publicwealth. These profits, being considered illegalembezzlements, were consequently taken withevery caution which could ensure secresy : and,being fixed by no rule, the amount was dependenton the temper, abilities, or power of each individual.It therefore became a duty in every mantoClerks or accountants.Chap. Vii] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 417to take the most effectual measures to con ir724.real the value of his property, and elude every ®**«^'-inquiry into his conduct ; while the zemindar andother landholders, who had the advantage of longpossession, availed themselves of it by complex divisionsof the lands, and intricate modes of collection,to perplex the officers of government, andconfine the knowledge of the rents to themselves.To the original defects inherent in the constitutionof these provinces, was added the unequaland unsettled government of them. Part of thelands which were before in the possession of theCompany, such as Burdwan, Midnapore, andChittagong, continued subject to the authority ofthree chiefs, who were immediately accountableto the Presidency. The Twenty-four Pergunnahs,acquired by the treaty of Plassey, were the Company'son a different tenure, being their immediateproperty, by the exclusion of the zemindaror hereditary proprietors. Their rents were receivedby agents appointed to each pergunnah,and remitted to the collector, who resided at Calcutta.The rest of the province was for some time entrustedto the joint charge of the Naib Dewanand Resident of the Durbar, and afterwards to theCouncil of Revenue at Moorshedabad, and tothe supervisors, who were accountable to thatCouncil. The administration itself was totallyVOL. I. 2 £ excluded418 RISE AND Progress OF THE ICvap. Vii1778-i. excluded from all concern in this branch of therevenue.The internal arrangement of each district variedno less than that of the whole province. Of thelands subject to the same collector, and intermixedwith each other, some were held by farm,some superintended by sheikdars or agents on thepart of the collector, and some left to the zemindaror talookdars themselves, under various degreesof control. The first were racked withoutmercy, because the leases were but of a year'sstanding, and the farmer had no interest or checkto restrain him from exacting more than the landcould bear. The second were equally drained,and the rents embezzled, as it was not possiblefor the collector, with the greatest degree of attentionon his part, to prevent it. There was noreason to suppose that the latter escaped the generalcorruption.A Committee of Circuit, consisting of the Presidentand four other members of the Board, wasaccordingly appointed for the purpose of forminga settlement, under personal inspection, at theSud-der Cutcherry of each district. In consequenceof the proximity of the districts of Hooghly,Hedgellee, the Calcutta pergunnahs, Burdwan,Midnapore, and Beerbhoom, their settlement wasleft to the determination of the remaining membersof the Board. As the servants would henceforthbe solely employed in superintending andcollectionChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWfiH IN INDIA. 419collecting the revenues, the designation of coUec- item.tor was substituted for that of supervisor, which ®»"«^'"was abolished.*In order to counteract the improper influencewhich the banyans of the collectors were desirousof assuming and also to provide against the lossof rents and the confusion of accounts, from thefrequent removal of collectors, a fixed dewan wasto be nominated by the Board, and joined with thecollector in superintending the revenues.To give the farmer the greatest security for therights and profits of his farm, and encouragement tothose who were solicitous of obtaining farms to makeproposals adequate to their real value, neither thecollector nor dewan was to send sepoy, peons, orany other persons with authority, into the lands,but when indispensably requisite for the maintenanceof the peace, or the immediate execution ofjustice, where the authority of the farmer shouldbe insufficient. On such occasions, a warrant inwriting was to be issued under the public seal,signed by the collector, and recorded in the judicialproceedings.To free the ryot from undue exactions on thepart of the farmer, the latter was not to receivelarger♦ The Court of Directors, in a letter of the 7th April Ins,written previously to their receipt of the plan laid down inthese regulations, expressed their opinion that the institution ofsupervisors not having answered the intended purpose, must bewithdrawn, and some plan framed for ascertaining the exactvalue of the lands.2e2420 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII L1772^. larger rents from the riots than the amountBbkoal. stipulated in the portals, on any pretence whatsoever.On the conviction of any party guilty ofsuch extortion, he was to pay back the sum sotaken from the ryot, in addition to a penalty tobe paid to the Circarr equal to the same amount.In the event of a repetition of such paction, thelease was to be annulled.It having been a practice of ancient and almostuniversal standing, for further claims to be madeby the mootsuddees and officers of Governmenton the farmer who had improved his land, wherebyhe was led to conceal the profits of his farm,or to rack his tenants for the means of purchasingexemption from such claims, the Board resolved,in order to relieve him from such exactions, thathis payment to Government should be ascertainedand established ; the same to be expressed inthe soul, or rent-roll, delivered with the lease,beyond which no demand was to be made. It wasdetermined that no ragouts, or other assessments,or tax, should be imposed upon the riots, andthat those imposts, which were of late establishment,should be carefully scrutinized andabolished, at the discretion of the Committee of.Circuit, if found to be oppressive or pernicious.This regulation was framed to give ease andsecurity both to the farmer and the ryot ; it havingbeen the constant practice of the Mogul government,on the slightest pretence, to authorizetheChap. VI II.] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA. 421the exaction of new taxes from the zemindar and vti^Afarmers, all view of the remote consequences b.koauwhich might arise out of such impolitic conduct,being lost sight of in the desire of immediate gain.The principals being thus taxed, had a fair pretextto indemnify themselves from their tenants ;and they never failed to extort a much greateramount than they themselves had been obligedto pay. Every dependent agent in the collections,likewise, endeavoured on such occasions toget his share of the embezzlement ; and thus thepoor ryot was disheartened, and often disabledfrom attending to the culture of his lands, whichrequired money as well as labour to bring themto perfection.The trivial presents, which the custom of theEast had established as debts of vassalage andthe rights of office or power, were felt in themselvesto be undeserving of notice, had they ex .tended no further ; but the same practice ranthrough every degree of subordination, till theamount became a mighty grievance, and, likeother levies on the principals, was reclaimed withaccumulated extortion from the riots. It wastherefore determined that all buzzard* and salariesusually presented at the first interview asmarks of subjection and respect, should be totallydiscontinued,A present to a superior,f A present on receiving an appointment.422 Lobe AND PROGRESS OF THE [CiEAr.TIIL1778^ discontinued, as well to the superior servants ofBcMOAu ^Q Company and the collectors, as to the zemindar,farmers, and other officers.The collector was forbid, on pain of dismissionfrom his office, to be concerned directly or indirectlyin the purchase or sale of grain.No peshcar, banyan, or other servant, of whateverdenomination, of the collector, or relation ordependent of any such servant, was to be allowedto farm lands, or directly or indirectly to holda concern in any farm, or to be security for anyfarmer.In the event of collusion, the farms were tobe relet, or made khass.^ No European was permitteddirectly or indirectly to hold lands in anypart of the country.Had the collector, or any person who partookof his authority, been permitted to be farmers ofthe country, it was felt that no other personswould dare to be their competitors ; neither wasit fitting that the servants of the Company shouldbe dealers with their masters. The collectorswere, in fact, to be checks on the farmers, againstwhom the riots were to look to the collector forrelief.The Committee of Circuit were enjoined to devisesome means for preventing the practice oflendingLancUy the rents of which are not leased, but collected immediatelyby the officers of Government.Chap. Vii] BRITISH POWER IN India. 423lending money on exorbitant usury; it having irn^been frequently found that the riots had been ®*«°^"-thereby involved in irretrievable ruin, and that thefarmer's dues, which were in fact the property ofthe state, had become that of money-lenders.In order to relieve the farmer from the necessityof borrowing money for the payment of hiskiss or instalments, the kistbundee for the ensuingleases were to be so regulated that the kissmight be made payable at the usual periods ofthe harvest, proportionate to the estimated quantityand value of the crops, and as local circumstancesmight direct. Such an arrangement wasfelt to be one of the most salutary expedientswhich could be adopted, whether for the ease ofthe farmer and the ryot, for the security of therevenue, or for the prevention of oppression. Therate of interest was stated to have been rarely lessthan three per cent, per menses, which, withmonthly accumulations, and fees to agents,banyans, peons, and sepoy, entailed certain ruinon the borrower.In framing these regulations, the Council weregoverned by an anxious desire to adapt them tothe manners and understanding of the people, andthe exigencies of the country, adhering as closelyas possible to the ancient usages and institutions.To enable the committee to fix the necessaryestablishments in each district for its safeguardand protection, and for preserving its peace andtranquillity.424 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. VIII.1T7M. tranquillity, accurate accounts of the chakaran*BnroAt. lands were to be prepared, with a statement of thepurposes for which they had been allotted, and ofthe number of land-servants necessary to be retainedfor that service.The Board of Revenue at Moorshedabad wasabolished, and the business of the collections in allits branches put under the management of themembers of the administration at the Presidency.After these preliminary steps had been determinedupon, the lands of Kishnagur were put uptopublic auction, and a final settlement was madefor five years, on an accumulating increase.During the course of the sale, the Rajah of theplace gave in proposals for farming the wholedistrict; upon which the Council remarked, ** whenit can be done with propriety, the entrusting thecollections of the districts to the hereditary zemindarwould be a measure we should be very willingto adopt, as we believe that the people would betreated with more tenderness, the rents moreimproved, and the cultivation more likely to beencouraged; the zemindar less liable to failure ordeficiencies than the fanner, from the perpetualinterest which the former hath in the country, andbecauseThe chakaran lands were portions of ground allotted tocertain o£ the inhabitants, whose ofRoe it was to preserve thepeace of the country and to guard it against common robbers;it was an establishment common to all parts of India, and wasof very ancient standing.Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 425because his inheritance cannot be removed, and it 1772-4.would be improbable he would risk the loss of it, ^"oauby eloping from his district, which is too frequentlypractised by a farmer when he is hardpressed for the payment of his balances, and asfrequently pre-determined when he receives hisfarm."The administration of Justice was intimately Judicial sys.connected with the collection of the revenues.The Council observed, " that the regular courseof justice was suspended every where; but everyman exercised it who had the power of compellingothers to submit to his decisions."The plan for administering justice comprisedthe establishment in each district of the two courtsof judicature; the one by the name of MofussilDewanny Adawlut, or Provincial Court of De-fanny,for the cognizance of civil causes ; theother by the name of Phousdarry Adawlut, orCourt of Phousdarry, for the trials of all crimesand misdemeanors.The collector of each district was to preside onthe part of the Company, in their quality of King*sDewan, attended by the provincial Dewan, appointedby the President and Council.In the Phousdarry Adawlut, the cause andmustee of the district, and two moola vies, were tosit to expound the law, the collector attending tothe proceedings, so far as to see that all necessaryevidence426 RISE AND Progress OF TH£ [Cmaf. VIII.17784. evidence was summoned and examined, and thatBsMOAL. ^^g weight was allowed to their testimony, andthat the decision passed in a fair and impartialmanner.Two superior courts of justice were to be establishedat the chief seat of Government, the oneunder the denomination of Dewanny Sudder Adaw-lut, and the other the Nizamutut Sudder Adawlut.They were to form courts of appeal from those ofthe provinces. The President, with two membersof the Council, eras to preside in the DewannyAdawlut, attended by the dewan of the khalsa,the head canon goes, and other officers of the cutcherry;in the absence of the President, a thirdmember of Council was to sit.In the Nizamutut Adawlut, a chief officer ofjustice was to preside by the title of DarogaAdawlut, assisted by the chief cause, the chiefmustee, and three moolavies.In forming the plan, the Committee confinedthemselves with scrupulous exactness to the constitutionalforms of judicature already established,which were considered to be calculated for expeditingthe course of justice, and best adapted tothe understanding of the people. It was observedthat the general principle of all despotic governmentsis, that every degree of power shall besimple and undivided, and it necessarily introduceditself into the courts of justice; in proof ofwhich a review of the different officers of justiceinstitutedChas. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 427instituted in the provinces was given by the 17724^Council.* ®«''°^'-The'< 15/A August 1772. — 1. The NA21M9 as supreme magistrate,presides personally in the trials of capital offenders andholds a court every Sunday, called the Roy Adawlut.2. The Dewan is the supposed magistrate for the decisionof such causes as relate to real estates or propriety in land, butseldom exercises this authority in person.** S. The Darooa Adawlut is properly the deputy of theNazim* He is the judge of all matters of property, exceptingclaims of land and inheritance. He also takes cognisance ofquarrels, frays, and abusive names.4. The Darooa Adawlut Dbwannsb, or deputy of theDewan, is the judge of property in lands.'* 5. The Phoujdar is the officer of the place, the judge ofall crimes not capital ; the proofs of these last are taken beforehim and reported to the Nazim for his judgment and sentenceupon them.6. The Cauzee is the judge of all claims of inheritance orsuccession. He also performs the ceremonies of weddings,circumcision, and funerals.7. The MoHTBSiL has cognizance of drunkenness and ofthe vending of spirituous liquors and intoxicating drugs, andthe examination of false weights and measures.8. The MuFTEB is the expounder of the law. Memorandum.— the Cauzee is assisted by the Mustee and Mohtesil in hiscourt; after hearing the parties and evidences, the Mufleewrites the fetwa, or the law applicable to the case in question,and the Cauzee pronounces judgment accordingly. If eitherthe Cauzee or Mohtesil disapprove of the fetwa, the cause isreferred to the Nazim, who summons the ijlass, or generalassembly, consisting of the Cauzee, Muflee, Mohtesil, the Daro-gas of the Adawlut, the Molasses, and all the learned in thelaw, to meet and decide upon it. Their decision is final.'« 9, The Canoongoes are the registers of the lands. Theyhave no authority, but causes of land are often referred to themforRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE Chap. VIII.17724.Bbmoal.Measures forsuppressingdeceits.The peace of the country had for some yearsbeen disturbed by bands of deceits, who notonly infested the high roads, but often plunderedwhole villages, burning the houses and murderingthe inhabitants. The secrecy of their haunts, andthe wild state of the districts more immediatelysubject to their incursions, enabled them to eludeevery attempt to bring them to justice. It wastherefore determined, that each criminal, on conviction,should be carried to the village to whichhe belonged and there executed, as a terror andexample to others. The village was to be finedaccording to the enormity of the crime, and eachinhabitant according to his substance. The familyof the criminal were to become slaves of the state,to be disposed of for the general benefit and convenienceof the people, according to the discretionof Government.The Council were quite alive to the unfavourableimpression which this sanction to slaverywas calculated to make upon their countrymen inEngland, with reference to the practice in theAmerican colonies ; but, they observed, slaves inIndiafor decision by the Nazim or Dewan or Daroga of the .10. The Cut WALL is the peace-officer of the night, dependenton the Poujdarree.*From this list it will appear that there are properly threecourts for the decision of civil causes (the canon goes beingonly made arbitrators by reference from the other courts), andone for the police and criminal matters.Chas. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 429India are treated as the children of the families 1772.4.to which they belong, and often acquire a much Behoal.happier state by their slavery than they couldhave hoped for by the enjoyment of their liberty ;so that, in effect, the apparent rigour exercised onthe children of convicted robbers, would be nomore than a change of condition, by which theywould be no sufferers, though it would operate asawarning to others, and afforded the only effectualmeans of dissipating the desperate and abandonedsocieties which subsisted on the distress ofthe general community.*The excesses of the deceits increased to sogreat an extent, that the subject was brought speciallyunder the consideration of the Council, inthe month of April, when it was determined, atthe recommendation of the President, to appointfoujdarsf to the several stations, for the protectionof the inhabitants, for the detection and apprehensionof public robbers within their respectivedistricts, and for transmitting constant intelligenceof all matters relating to the peace of the country,to the Presidency. The zemindar, farmers, andother officers of the collections, were enjoined toafford them all possible assistance in the dischargeof their duty, and to obey such orders as theymight have occasion to issue for that purpose.TheProceedings Committee Circuit, 1773.t The FouJDAR, a military officer who is charged with thecare of the police in his districtRi£ AND PaOORESS OF THE [Cbap.VIII.1778-4. The farmers were to make over the land-servants"'*^** allowed for their respective districts, who were tobe under the absolute command of the founders.The chakaran* lands (allotted for the maintenanceof the thanadarsf and pykes;^), which had beenresumed and included in the jumna, were to beagsun separated and applied to their original design; the jurisdiction of each founder was to beascertained by proper lights, he being made responsiblefor the maintenance of peace within itsA Kmmdat The first instance of a zemindar being arrested,arret tea Bt thtsuit ctf an Eu at the suit of an European, took place in the streetseuropean.of Calcutta, on the person of Rajah Kissed Chund,of Nuddeah, who had been summoned to attendat the khalsa upon the affairs of bis district. TheCouncil feeling that great detriment would beoccasioned to the revenues of the district bythe confinement of the zemindar, and that it mightbe followed up by other cases, gave bail for KissedChund, and caused a proclamation to be issued,forbidding all the Company's servants, underpenalty of dismission, from lending money to thezemindar under any pretence whatever: alsorequiring all persons having claims against themto recur to the ordinary courts of the country forjustice.Tie note, page 424.t Thamadar, the officer in charge of a thana, or molestation.X Ptke^ a watchman.§ Revenue Consultations, 19th April 1774.Chat. VIII.] British POWER IN INDIA. 43 1justice.* The matter was referred to the law ire*.officers by the Court of Directors, who, under the ^*"«'*''advice of counsel, directed that the action shouldbe discharged. The proceedings of the Governmentwere fully approved, and the standing orderconfirmed, which prohibited Company's servants,on pain of dismissal, from lending money to thezemindar, or from having any dealings with them,and declaring that those who had claims must gotothe courts of the country for redress.The establishments which had been formed for 1774.the police of the town of Calcutta having been f^^^^^found insufficient to remedy all disorders incidentto so populous a city, and the Foujdarry Adawlutbeing greatly impeded in the proper exercise ofits functions, from the continued appeals made byEuropean inhabitants in complaints against theirservants, by which crimes of the " most atrociousnatures," often remained for months unexamined,and the jails crowded with prisoners, the Councildetermined upon sundry regulations, calculated toease the Foujdarry Adawlut in the cognizance ofcomplaints of masters against their servants forvenial offences, and to introduce better order inthe police of the settlement, by vesting a degreeof authority in such matters in the superintendenceof the police of the settlement. The subject wassubmittedLetter from Bengal, 10th November 1773.432 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cut. VI 1 1.1774*. submitted to the consideration of the inhabitants,Bbkgal. ^\^q^ selecting from their body a committee oftwelve, agreed to every measure that could tendto give them efficacy.* Among the regulationsone demands to be specially noticed, as it was toabolish in future the right of slaveryTheConsultations, May 17th 1774, and Letter 18th October1774.t Uti May 1774,— *' That from the Ist day of July 1774,no person shall be allowed to bay or sell a slave who is not suchalready by former legal purchase, and any cauxee who shallgrant any cabala after that date for the sale of any slavewhatever, shall be dismissed from his employment, and suchcabala shall be invalid."The practice of stealing children from their parents and sellingthem for slaves had long prevailed in the country, and hadgreatly increased since the establishment of the English government.The influence derived from the English name, to everyman whose birth, language, or even habit, entitled him to assumea share in its privileges ; the neglect of the judicious precautionsestablished by the ancient law of the country, whichrequired that no slave shall be sold without a cabala, or deedattested by the cause, signifying the place of the child's abode,and in the first purchase, its parent's names, the names of theseller and purchaser, and a minute description of the persons ofboth had greatly facilitated this savage commerce, by whichnumbers of children were conveyed out of the country in Dutch,but more especially French vessels, and many lives of infantsdestroyed by the attempts to secrete them from the notice of themagistrate. There appeared to be no probable way of remedyingthis calamitous evil, but that of striking at the root of it,and abolishing the right of slavery altogether, excepting suchcases to which the authority of government could not reach ;such, for example, as laws in being have allowed, and whereslaves have become a first property by purchase, and antecedenttoChat. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 433The instructions from the Court of Directors in 1774.April 1773,* combined with the little success ^■'•*'^'which had attended the revenue settlement, arising ten reviMd.in a great measure from the bidders having beeninduced by eagerness of competition to makehigher offers than the country could bear, in consequenceof which many of them failed in the performanceof their engagements to a considerableamount, led to a change of system in the earlypart of 1774.The European collectors were recalled, but thedistricts that formed the existing collectorshipswere to remain. Each district was to be superintendedby a dewan or aumil, excepting such ashad been let entire to the zemindar or farmer.The administration of civil justice, which hadbeen entrusted to the collector, was transferred tothe aumil, from whom an appeal lay to the ProvincialCouncil, and from thence, under certainrestrictions, to the Sudder Dewanny, or the Governorin Council.A Committee of Revenue was formed at thePresidency, consisting of two members of theboard and three senior servants, who were tosuperintendto the proposed prohibition. The opinions of the most creditableof the Musaeknen and Hindoo inhabitants were taken uponthe subject: they condemned the authorized usage of sellingslaves as repugnant to the particular precepts both of the Koranand Shastras, oppressive to the people, and injurious to the generalwelfare of the country.• Vide page 419.VOL. I. 2 F434 BI8E AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. VIII.1774. superintend and control the whole of the revenue""^ branch, subject to the superior Council. Occasionalcommissioners were to be appointed to visitsuch districts as might require a local investigation.They were to be taken from the Company'sservants, not by seniority, but by the free choiceof the board, and were to be qualified for the trustby a knowledge of the Persian or Hindoostanee,and a moderation of temper. All complaints ofthe riots or others against the deans, farmers,zemindar, or other public officers, were to bereceived and decided upon by the committee.To carry the plan into effect, the provinces wereformed into six grand divisions, the first to bemanaged at Calcutta, the second at Burdwan, thethird at Moorshedabad, the fourth at Dinagepore,the fifth at Dacca, the sixth at Patna, comprisingthe whole province of Bahar. The districts ofChittagong and Tipperary were to be maintainedon their existing footing.Provincial councils were established for eachgrand division, composed of a chief and four othersenior servants, with a secretary, a Persian translator,an accountant, and three assistants.It was an article in the instructions to each ofthe Councils, that they should make particularenquiry concerning every talook, or other smallerportions of land, included within each district oftheir division, but appertaining to some otherdistrict, whether of their own or any other division.Chas. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 435sion. They were to ascertain the aumil's magus it*.mary and profit of the same. All particulars were ^"'^^to be furnished to the superior council, so as toenable them to form a more complete and entirearrangement, for the better government andmanagement of the collections. Whenever theaccounts and arrangements of any division permittedit, the controul of such division was to bebrought down to the Presidency. The ProvincialCouncil was to be carried on at Calcutta, and, ifpossible, by the Committee of Revenue.Mr. Haled, of the civil service, undertook, atth instance of the President, to make an Englishtranslation of the Mahometan and Hindoo codeof laws, it being considered that great utilitywould be experienced from such a work, not onlyto the members and superior judges of the Adaw-lut, but to the public at large. The work wascompleted in March 1775, and dedicated by itsauthor to Mr. Hastings, to whom he ascribed boththe result of the execution, and the entire meritof the original plan.The province of Cooch Bahar, which forms the cooch Bahia.boundary of a large portion of the Rungpore district,devolved to the Company, with the rest ofBengal, 1765. In 1772, the Cooch Rajah, thena minor, offered, through his minister, Nazu Neo,to place his province under the dominion of the.Bengal government, and to pay to them half its2 F 2 revenues.436 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CnAr.VIII.^T^i. revenues, on condition of the Company's aidingin expelling the Boutanneans, who, headed bytheir chief, the Deb Rajah, had suddenly invadedhis country.The Company's district of Rungpore havingbeen frequently exposed to the incursions of theBoutanneans, by which the revenues drawn fromit had been rendered very precarious, the Councilresolved to detach a force to effect the intendedobject. The result being successful, the BoutanRajah applied to the Teshoo Lama to mediatebetween him and the Company.The Lama accordingly addressed the followingletter to Mr. Hastings :*' The Taishooa Lama at Boutan to the Governor : —(Received 29th March 1774.)« The affairs of this quarter in every respect flourish, andI am night and day employed for the increase of your happinessand prosperity. Having been informed by travellersfrom your quarter of your exalted fame and reputation, myheart, like the blossom of spring, abounds with gaiety,gladness, and joy. Praise ! that the star of your fortune isin its ascension — Praise ! that happiness and ease are thesurrounding attendants of myself and family. Neither tomolest or persecute is my aim : it is even the characteristicof my sect to deprive ourselves of the necessary refreshmentsof sleep, should an injury be done to a single individual.But in justice and humanity I am informed you surpass us.May you ever adorn the seat of justice and power, that mankindmay, under the shadow of your bosom, enjoy theblessings of happiness and ease ! By your favour I am theRaja and Lama of this country, and rule over numbers ofsubjects.Chap.VIII] fiRITISM power in INDIA. 437subjects, a particular with which you have no doubt been 1774,acquainted by travellers from these parts. I have been re- Bk^qal.repeatedly informed that you have been engaged in hostilitiesagainst the Dah Terre, to which, it is said, the Dah's owncriminal conduct in committing ravages and other outrageson your frontiers, has given rise. As he is of a rude andignorant race, past times are not destitute of instances of thelike misconduct which his own avarice tempted him tocommit : it is not unlikely that he has now resumed thoseinstances, and the ravages and plunder which he may havecommitted on the skirts of the Bengal and Bahar provinceshave given you provocation to send your vindictive armyagainst him ; however, his party has been defeated ;. manyof his people have been killed, three forts have been wrestedfrom him, and he has met with the punishment he deserved,and it is as evident as the sun, your army has been victorious; and that if you had been desirous of it, you mightin the space of two days have entirely extirpated him, forhe had not power to resist your efforts. But I now takeupon me to be his mediator, and to represent to you, that asthe said Dah Terre is dependent upon the Dahe Lamawho rules this country with unlimited sway (but on accountof his being in his minority, the charge of the governmentand administration for the present is committed to me),should you persist in offering further molestation to theDah^s country, it will irritate both the Lama and all hissubjects against you. Therefore, from a regard to our religionand customs, I request you will cease all hostilitiesagainst him, and in doing this you will confer the greatestfavour and friendship upon me. I have reprimanded theDah for his past conduct, and I have admonished him todesist from his evil practices in future, and to be submissiveto you in all matters. I am persuaded that he will conformto the advice which I have given him, and it will be necessary438 RISE AND Progress OF THE [CiiAr. VIII.I^4> say that you treat him with compassion. As to my part,'"^^^' I am but a queer, and it it the custom of my sect, irishthe Tosaiy in our hands, to pray for the wdfkre of mankindand the peace and happiness of the inhabitants of thiscountry ; and I do now, with my head uncovered, entreatthat you cease all hostilities against the Dah in future. Itwould be needless to add to the length of this letter, as diebearer of it, who is a Croseign, will represent to you allparticulars, and it is hoped that you will comply therewith.In this country, worship of the Almighty is the professionof all. We poor creatures ate in nothing equal to you.Having a few things in hand I send them to you by way ofremembrance, and I hope for your acceptance of themesA treaty, consisting of ten articles, was agreedto on the 25th April, by which certain lands wererestored to the Deb Rajah, who was to pay to theCompany for the possession of the Chitta Cottaprovince a tribute of five Tauzan horses : the Boutmerchants being allowed the privilege of sendinga caravan annually to Rungpore.Mr. Hastings being of opinion that the communicationfrom the Teshoo Lama opened a fit opportunityfor effecting an intercourse between Tibetand Bengal, proposed that Mr. Bogle, of whosemerits and services the Council entertained a highopinion, should be deputed to the Lama, with aletter and suitable presents, accompanied by asample of goods, with the view of ascertainingwhat were most likely to become the objects ofcommerce.The Council fully concurring in the views oftheChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 439the president, Mr. Bogle proceeded on the mission i77i.in June, together with Mr. Hamilton, an assistant »"«-^*surgeon.The province of Bengal had suffered very severelyfrom a lawless banditti, consisting of dynastiesor fairs. Under pretence of religiouspilgrimage, they had been accustomed to traversethe chief part of the province, begging,stealing, and plundering wherever they went.Having defeated and cut off a party of the sepoysent against them, with their commander. CaptainThomas, who had been solely engaged in makingthe collections, a separate corps was formed purposelyfor the frontiers, in the hope of entirelysuppressing these marauders, a provision beinginserted in the treaty by which they were consideredas enemies to the English. The Deb Rajahengaged not to allow any of them to take shelterin his district.440 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Char. IX.CHAPTER IX.The Parliamentary inquiry, which commencedin 1772, terminated in the act of the 13 Geo. Ill,cap. 16, commonly called the regulating act, itbeing the first legislative measure which prescribedany defined system for the conduct of theCompany's aJBTairs.The twenty-four Directors had hitherto beenchosen annually. Some of the abuses had beenpartially checked, by a Proprietor being requiredbefore voting, to declare upon oath, that he hadpossessed his qualification of £600 stock for sixmonths, yet the evils resulting from the limitedduration of a Director's office to one year werestrongly felt. The practice tended to weaken theauthority of the Court, and to produce instabilityin the Councils of the Company. It was accordinglyprovided, that a Director should retain officefor four years, at the expiration of which term hewas to retire from the direction for a year, whenhe was eligible for re-election. .This restrictionappears to have originated in a by-law, passedin the year 1734, which ordained that no membershould retain his seat for a longer termthan four years successively. No party who hadheldChas. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 441held office in India was eligible to be chosena Director until he had resided two years inEngland. The qualification was enlarged from£500 to £1,000 stock, and the period for whichthe party intending to vote must have held hisqualification before voting was extended from sixto twelve months. The privilege of voting beingincreased in proportion to the stock held by anyoneparty.*A new oath was prescribed by the act, to betakenby the Directors. It was framed with referenceto the combined affairs of the Company, andespecially to their varied commercial operations.The same oath is continued at the present time,but appears to be wholly inapplicable to thealtered duties of a Director.With regard to India, a Governor-general andfour Councillors were appointed for Bengal, eachindividual to continue in office for the term of fiveyears. The presidencies of Madras and Bombaywere henceforth required to obey the orders ofthe supreme Government in Bengal. The Directorswere to forward to one of his Majesty's Secretaries• £1,000 Stock gives 1 Vote3,000 do. . 2 Vote*6,000 do. . 8 —10,000 do . 4 —Which latter number is the maximum allowed to be given byany one Proprietor. £500 stock enables its possessor to takepart in debates in General Court, but not to vote, either byshew of hands, or on a division, or ballot. IS Geo. III. cap. 63.BbkoauRegulating Aet442 USE AND Progress OF THE [Csatl Illsecretaries of State and to the Lords of the Treasury,copies of all advices, within fourteen daysafter their receipt by the Court, which related tothe civil and military affairs and government ofIndia. From this period, therefore, his Majesty'sMinisters were empowered to become fully informedupon all the political concerns of theCompany in India, but possessed no power to interferewith or to control the measures of the executivebody at home, or the orders and instructionswhich they might see fit to issue for theconduct of their servants abroad.1773. Warren Hastings, Esq. was nominated, in theAct, Governor-general, and Lieutenant-generalClavering, the Honourable George Monsoon,Richard Barwell, and Philip Francis, Esqrs.Councillors.On a vacancy occurring in the office of Governthe Councillor next in rank was tosucceed, and in the event of a vacancy in theCouncil, the Directors might appoint a successorfor the remainder of the five years, subject to hisMajesty's approbation. From and after the expirationof five years the power of nominating andremoving the succeeding Governor-general andCouncil was vested in the Directors. The provisionsrelating to the Governor-general andCouncil were to commence from the time thatpublic proclamation should be made of their arrivalin Bengal.HisChap.IX.1 BRITISH Power in Ina. 443His Majesty was authorized to establish a Su i?^*prime Court of Judicature at Calcutta, to consist R^-J][[^Aetof a chief justice and three puisne judges. Thejurisdiction of the Court was to extend to all Britishsubjects in Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa : andappeals might be made to it from the ProvincialCourts.The commerce was specially reserved to theCompany. No British subject was to trade insalt, betel-nut, or tobacco. No person was totake more than twelve per cent, interest per annumon loan of money. All offences and misdemeanorstried in the Supreme Court were to bedecided by a jury of British subjects. In casesof indictment or information laid in the Court ofKing's Bench in England, writs of mandamusmight be issued, requiring the judges abroad andother persons to examine witnesses, &c.Rules, ordinances, and regulations, when madeby the Governor-general in Council, were to besent home.Another Act was passed at the same time,granting to the Company, on loan, £1,400,000for their relief.*The public were to forego, for a time, all participationin the territorial profits. The dividendto the proprietors was fixed at six per cent, perannum. The Company were not to accept billsdrawn on them beyond a certain amount, andwere• 13 Geo. III. cap. 94.444 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbaf. IX.ins. were to continue to export annually £380,837 ofji^^l^j^ct British merchandize,conduit pati. The Company petitioned both Houses of Palliationagainst it. .ment against the provisions of the new Act ; objectingespecially to the clauses by which theCrown or Parliament appointed officers to conductthe whole of the civil and military affairs,whilst the directing power over them, withoutpenalty for disobedience of orders, was pretendedto be left in the Company. They representedthat the object of the intended court of judicaturewould be defeated, as the persons who might beguilty of acts of oppression were exempted fromthe jurisdiction of the court, and consequentlyleft without restraint ; and the remedy of the writof habeas corpus, whereby men might know of whatcrime they were accused, being wholly omitted,it legalized the tyranny of a double government,without responsibility any-where. Allopposition to the bill, however, proved ineffectual.The Proprietors, when the Act was laid beforethem in July, resolved that no orders or instructionsshould be sent out by the Directors untilthey had been submitted to and approved by aGeneral Court specially summoned for the pur-proprietorpose. To maintain their privileges, and not outpoint"Genend of disrespect to General Clavering, they furtherCommerce resolved '' that they did not choose to appointhim their commander-in-chief in India."TheChat. IX.] BRITISH POM^ER IN INDIA. 445The instructions proposed by the Directors to ^'^^be sent to Bengal, for carrying into effect the conrtof dI-provisionsof the Act, were laid before the Pro SSJJ^^praetors on the 7th December. The considerationwas postponed, and a committee consisting SS^rietoraJp-of seven Proprietors, the Duke of Richmond J^^Sit^^*"being chairman, was appointed to prepare count ^^"•*ter-instructions. They were printed with thoseproposed by the Directors, and taken into considerationon the nth January 1774. On the25th of that month, the Directors' propositionswere approved by the ballot, the votes in theirfavour being 406 to 308. On the 8th February,it was resolved by the ballot, 354 to 311, thatit be recommended to the Directors to nominateGeneral Clavering commander-in-chief ofthe Company's forces in India, with an expressprovision, that, in the event of his succeedingas Governor-general, his appointment as com-mander-in-chief was immediately to cease anddetermine.General Clavering, Colonel Monson, and Mr. ^^^ oovem-° ment, underFrancis, together with Sir Elijah Impey, the new Regulatingchief justice, Robert Chambers, Stephen LeMaitre, and John Hyde, Esquires, puisneindies, embarked at St. Helen's for their des Councaion•^ ® and Judgesnation, on the Ist April 1774. General Cleave England.veering wrote to the Court of Directors fromMadeira, on the 24th, urging the importance of anadjutant-general being nominated, for the bettergovernment446 RISE AND PIOGXBM OV THE [Cigar. IX.1774. government of the Company's army, and recommendingLieutenant-colonel Thornton, of theKing's service for the office. He at the sametime stated the inadequacy of his allowances ascommander-in-chief to meet travelling and otherexpenses for equipage, horses, table. Sec. when hetook the field.They reached Madras on the 21st September,where the General inspected the military establishment,respecting which he offered variousremarks, observing : " I speak unwillingly ofdefects where there is so much to commend'He considered the fortifications to have beenplanned 'with great judgment, and executedwith equal care and attention." On the 22d, heaccompanied the Governor, Colonel Monson, andMr. Francis, on a visit to the Nabob of theCamatic.The members of Council and the judges reachedKedgeree on Friday, the 14th October. Theformer announced their arrival to the President,who deputed the senior member to congratulatethem on the happy termination of their voyage,and to assure them of the cordiality and respectwith which they would be received by theAirivettQu. Board. On the afternoon of Wednesday, they^'^ landed at Calcutta, under a salute of seventeenguns.First meatijig The first Couucil was held the following day,^" ' although Mr. Barwell had not arrived at CalcuttafromCttAF.IX.1 BBmSH POWER IN INDIA. 447from the provinces. A proclamation was agreed in4^upon, to be published the ensuing morning by ®*~^'-the sheriff, announcing that the new government,as constituted under the Act, commenced from the20fh October. The Governor was requested bythe new members to order a guard from the fortto attend upon the sheriff during the ceremony.The publication having taken place, the Court's Proclamationinstructions, with their general letter of the SOth segmentMarch 1774, were read to the Council: they instruction^ under Newwere addressed to Mr. Hastings, as Governor Act.general, and to the Councillors named in theAct.Harmony was earnestly recommended. Attentionwas directed to the preservation of peacethroughout India, and to the security of the Company'spossessions. The Council was to assembletwice in every week. The correspondence withthe country powers was to be carried on by theGovernor-general only, but all letters proposedto be sent by him were to be first approved inCouncil, and all letters received by him were tobe laid before the Council at their next meeting.It being unlawful, under the Act, for the otherPresidencies to declare war or make peace withany Indian power without the consent of theSupreme Government, the Council were attentivelyto view the general posture of the Company'saffairs respecting the country powers, theirinterests, and probable connexions with each other,with448 USE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cm at, IX.i774u with the Company, and with other European .^jQjjjg^ ting safety and prosperity of Bengal beingthe principal object.A Board of Trade was nominated, to conductthe commercial affairs of the Company. Noparties employed under the Governor-general inCouncil in the management of the revenues wereto be employed by the Board.The military expenses having increased '' to adegree insupportable' strict inquiry was to bemade into the causes of such increase, and thecharge of erecting, repairing, or completing fortifications,barracks, and all public buildings, inBengal and its dependencies, was limited infuture to £100,000 per annum. The reduction ofthe bond debt, in Bengal, was pressed upon theattention of the Council. The system of lettingthe lands and farms of Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa,on lease, was approved, and, in the event of anylands falling in, the Council were to advertisefor proposals to relet them. Inquiry was to bemade into past oppressions, and regulations wereto be framed for preventing future abuses. Onthe establishment of the Supreme Court, all aidwas to be given to the judges, and a court-house,with proper officers, to be provided.Disputes having frequently occurred, on accountof the powers claimed by the Governor and themilitary commander-in-chief, under their commissions,which caused injury to the public service,aCup. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 449a commission was issued to the Governor-gene 1774.oral, constituting him Governor and Commander* bemoan.in-chief of the fortress and garrison of Fort Williamand town of Calcutta.Lieutenant-general Clavering was granted acommission as Commander-in-chief of all theCompany's forces in India.If the Governor-general and Council should atany time think proper to issue orders, under theirhands, or by their secretary, to any officer in thearmy, thereby suspending or superseding the specificcommands of the Governor-general or militaryCommander-in-chief, such orders were to beimplicitly obeyed.The military Commander-in-chief was not toleave Bengal without the sanction of the Governand Council.Whenever the Commander-in-chief in Indiawas at either of the other Presidencies, he was tohave a seat as second in council ; but to vote onlyon political and military affairs.His allowances, as Commander-in-chief, werefixed at £6,000 per annum, and his salary, as aMember of Council, at £10,000 per annum. Copiesof the commission to Mr. Hastings and toLieutenant-general Clavering, and of the Court'sinstructions, were to be forthwith published ingeneral orders at Fort William.In addition to the foregoing instructions, a generalletter was addressed to the Governor-generalVOL. I. 2 G anda>\ M■ a -a^ -t '. "- - .■.X » 1T Ccr^•- ^r* '.'fv.CuAF.IX.1 BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 451rdelivered in by Mr. Hastings, reviewing the revel ^'^'^^nue system and the political state of the provinces. ^'"^^^It was brought under consideration in the SecretDepartment. Mr. Hastings informed the Councilthat, in submitting his views, he by no meansintended to preclude any member from offeringsuch points for immediate deliberation as mightbe judged to claim a preference, and proffered hisassistance upon any matter in which his communicationsmight be considered useful. Hestated that his desire had been to promote theCompany's interests, and that he had full confidencein the dispositions of his colleagues to cooperateand unite in promoting the general welfareof the country.He proposed to retain the revenue system asrecently framed.The Company's political connexion with theVizier was pointed out, and they were informedthat the original design of the Rohilla enterprisefurnished the first occasion of the Governor-generalmeeting with his Highness. The advantagesanticipated from that measure were an additionof territory and wealth to the Vizier, in whichthe Company would participate — the completedefence of his Highness' dominions — the employmentof a third part of the Company's troopsfree of charge, and the forced retreat of the Mahrattawithin their ancient territories. The Mogul,or King, was a mere cypher, residing at Delhi ;2 G 2 the452 AISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Ccjkr. IX.y1774. the Company^s connexion with him had ceased,BxKOAU j^jjj jf ^3g ijjQ Governor-general's wish that itmight never be renewed. The Bengal tributehad been withheld from his Majesty since hisdesertion of the Company and his union withtheir enemies, the Mahrattass, amongst whom dissensionshad existed for the preceding twelvemonths.couDcU tito The Council resolved to allow a full operationfull operationto Revenue to the revenue system, as proposed in the minute•yi em. ^^ ^^ Hastings.T^i^ronvoiKf On discussing the treaty of Benares, and theof RobiUt 1/rtf • '^ ^policy of the Rohilla expedition. General Claveringcalled for the production of the Govemor-generals original correspondence with the residentat the court of the Vizier. Mr. Hastings,although fully prepared to lay before the Boardall his correspondence which related to publicaffairs, declined to communicate such parts asmight not be proper for public inspection. TheCall for Mr. majority of the Council, nevertheless, resolvedHastuigB* pn- '^ -^vatecorrespon- that all ought to be produced. Mr. Hastingsrecorded his reasons for adhering to his originaldetermination to refuse it; stating, that it containedunreserved and confidential communicationsgiven to the Resident, as his immediatelyrecognized agent, appointed on his own responsibility,with the sanction of the late Board, and instrict conformity with the practice which had prevailedfrom 1757 to the dissolution of the lateGovernment.Cap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 453Government. He declared that, if those engage 1774.ments were legal, no power on earth could au b«w«al.thrice him to violate them, still less was heprepared to submit to an ex past facto law, of sosudden a formation.This determination led the majority of the !i^s;*5„"^'Council, at the same meeting, to recall Mr. Middleton,the Governor-general's agent with theVizier, and to require him to bring down thewhole of his correspondence, as essential toa right judgment on the course of policy observedtowards the Vizier, as well as of the Company'sexisting engagements with his Excellency.They also supported this requisition for the correspondenceby appealing to the principles ofpolicy which they knew had been established by** the highest authority," meaning Parliament ;and they further resolved, that Colonel Cham* Appoimtcoi.pion, or the commanding officer, should be ap ^^pointed to negociate with the Vizier, in the roomof Mr. Middleton. Whilst thus removing theGovernor general's own agent, without one singleproof, or even suspicion of misconduct, they professedto compliment Mr. Hastings, by proposingthat he should nominate a substitute;* but, atthe same moment, they required that he shouldapprize the Vizier of the recall of Mr. Middleton,and of the appointment of the commanding officertoConsultations, seth October 1774.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1774^BbmoaL.Proposed In-functions toCol. Champion.to negociate with his Highness. Two dajrs onlyhad elapsed between the first meeting of thenew Council and the adoption of these decidedproceedings towards the Governor-general, andbefore even the original official correspondencewith Colonel Champion and Mr. Middleton hadbeen communicated to the Council. That correspondencewas not completed until the followingFriday, when General Clavering, ColonelMonson, and Mr. Francis recorded their protestagainst the determination of Mr. Hastings towithhold the confidential communications thathad passed between himself and the Resident.A series of propositions was at the same time submittedby the General, as the basis of instructionsto Colonel Champion, who commanded thetroops with the Vizier. He was to repeat the demandon the Vizier for the forty lacs, to requirepayments of such sums as might be due, and tocall upon his Excellency to liquidate all unsettledaccounts. If the whole of the forty lacs couldnot be obtained, not less than twenty lacs was tobe taken, and the rest to be paid within twelvemonths.He was to protest against any refusal,on the part of the Vizier, to these terms, and towithdraw the brigade within fourteen days fromthe receipt of the instructions. Whenever theVizier should have paid the money, the troopswere to be withdrawn within the province ofOude, and unless his Highness required them fordefenceCrtAF.IX.1 BBITISH POWER IN India. 455defence of Corah and Allahabad, they were to be ^'^^cantoned at Pinafore. bekoal.These propositions remained for the considerationof the members until the next Council,which was to be held on Monday, the 31st October,On that day, a letter was received fromColonel Champion, announcing that terms ofpeace had been agreed upon between the Vizierand Fizula Can, the Rohilla chief.Notwithstanding this intelligence, the majoritypersevered in sending instructions to ColonelChampion, framed in accordance with the precedingpropositions, which, after further discussion,had been finally adopted. Mr. Hastings JJJm"'^^and Mr. Barwell protested, in the strongest man '^^} ^^^^*^ ^ against inner,against the abrupt removal of the brigade, instructions.which, as the first act of the new Government,would be received as a declaration that the engagementswith the Vizier were no longer existing.They suggested that, at all events, an extensionof time might be given the Vizier, andthat the Council should await the result of an applicationto him before coming to a final determination.They urged that the measure was oneof the past administration, and on the pointof being concluded; that, under such circumstances,they considered the members of the newGovernment might have been satisfied with recordingth*lr disapproval of the enterprize, andafter the completion of the service, by withholding456 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [C«af. IX.i774i. |0g their consent to the employment of the troopsB«w«A«" beyond the bounds which they judged to be prescribedby the orders of the Court. That, insteadof removing Mr. Middleton, his appointmentmight have been confirmed, transferring thetransactions with him from the superintendenceof the Governor-general only to the Council atlarge. Expostulation was vain. The letter toColonel Champion was despatched the very dayon which one was received from him. acquaintingthe Council that the army had countermarched ;that he purposed to station the brigade at Ram-gaunt,and that he should himself forthwith proceedto the Presidency, leaving the commandT^iinute of Mr. in the lauds of Colonel Allies. It was on thisoccasion that Mr. Francis recorded a minute, containingthe following passage: *' The conditionswhich the late Government had unfortunatelysuffered the Vizier to prescribe to them, consideredmerely as the terms of a contract (for Ido not mean to insist upon the danger and dishonourof submitting to such conditions), are soloose and unguarded, that they will always furnishhim with a pretence for deferring payment ofthe forty lacs. For my own part, I do not scrupleto declare, that if this extravagant engagementhad been ratified in all the forms by which publictreaties are usually authenticated, but none ofwhich have been observed upon the present occasion,I should reject it with disdain."TheFrancis.Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 457The spirit thus evinced at the opening of the 1774,new Government, indicated too clearly that the Bikoal.majority of the Council partook of the prejudicethat had been raised in England against boththe Court of Directors, and their governments inIndia.The Council felt it to be their duty to make areport of their proceedings under the new systemto the Home authorities. Strangers to the spirit ofharmony which the Court had enjoined, theyfound it impossible to agree upon any generaldespatch. It was accordingly resolved that eachparty should address the Court separately ; thatthe joint letter should be simply one of advice,comprehending resolutions and facts, and referringto the consultations for the reasonings onboth sides.General Clavering, Colonel Monson, and Mr.Francis wrote to the Court on the 30th November.After enumerating the various points connectedwith the Rohilla war, and reiterating the objectionswhich they entertained to the course of policypursued by Mr* Hastings, they entered into a statementof some matters of a personal, yet frivolousnature, which indicated that they had labouredunder a jaundiced feeling from the first moment oftheir landing at Calcutta. They complained thatproper honours had not been paid to them on thatoccasion; that a sufficient salute had not beenfired ; that the troops were not drawn out ; thatthey458 RISE AND PROOSEflS OF THE [Ciiaf. IX.177*. they were received at Mr. Hastings' private^***"^'^ house instead of in the Council Chamber ; thatthere was an unnecessary delay in issuing thenew commissions ; that the proclamation of thenew Government was not made with sufficientparade ; that it was at the desire of the Governor-generalthat the Council adjourned until theMonday, and that, during this interval, they wereleft *' in the most anxious, not to say disgracefulsituation." That public report soon informedthem of the nature of the enter prizes in whichthe Company's troops were engaged, and thattheir alarm and anxiety at the intelligence theyhad acquired could only be equalled by thatwhich they were persuaded the Court must havefelt on first receiving it. They then drew a pictureof the state in which they found the countryon their arrival.*' We saw your provinces stripped of one-thirdof their defence ; the lines most repeatedly andperemptorily drawn by you for the conduct ofyour servants towards the princes of Hindostanmanifestly transgressed ; in short, the wholesystem of your wise and pacific policy completelyoverturned ; the summa rerum of all things beingat stake."In another letter, dated the same day, theystated that they had refused all buzzard and presents.They noticed the Governor-general'sreasons for accepting and paying buzzard into theCompany'sChap. IX.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 459Company's treasury, and added, *^Mr. Barwell 1774.has also given his reasons for accepting and not b»»«ai-paying them over to the Company." They thendwelt upon the example of moderation and economywhich they themselves had set to the service,declaring " that they had no conception ofthe degree in which such an example waswanted." They further stated that, in accedingto the appointment of Captain Brooke to an independentcommand under the Vizier, they yieldedtheir own strict judgment to considerations ofpersonal respect to Mr. Hastings ; " adding,'* that, to have recalled that officer, could not failto have been attended with personal pain to theGovernor-general. "It was expecting too much of the Governor-generalthat he should attach any weight to thisprofession, the same parties having, without anyknowledge of the facts, and with no one fault toallege against Mr. Middleton, after taking theirseats in Council but a few hours, resolved to recallhim in the most abrupt manner from his station,as the confidential agent of the Governor-generalat the Court of the same prince. Mr. Hastingsentered into a general defence of his conduct.He pointed out the reductions he had effected inthe bond debt since the close of 1773, and thincreased amount of investment sent home; headverted to the military operations under Government,and urged that every expedition had beenconnected460 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CtfAr. IX.1774. concerted for services of solid utility, and calluslated for precise terminations : he stated that theMr. Hunting Campaign of 1773 had the recovery of Corah for^^m^ its immediate object, and the application of itsmeans to the relief of the Company's wants. Thelast campaign, he observed, had terminated with themost complete success. The district of Bamghurhad been brought into subjection, and the revenuesincreased. The Jungle Territory, a tract ofcountry unknown, and considered inaccessible,serving as a receptacle for robbers, had been reduced,and their further ravages prevented. TheCooch Bahar expedition had produced all the contemplatedeffects, in the settlement of that country,and the dispersion of the Dynasties. Painful ashefelt his situation, and unsuitable as it was tohis disposition, it was his determined resolution toretain the place which the Court's favour originallyassigned to him, and which the Legislature had sohonourably confirmed.He inferred that Parliament had intended somepeculiar power should attach to the office of ,above the other members ; but hefelt that a majority had been formed against him,not by an accidental occurrence, but by a decidedand permanent combination, which called forsome remedy. He nevertheless declared that hewould not quit the ground on which he stood ; heappealed to a large portion of his life passed in theCompany's service, and rested his cause solely ontheChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 461the measures which had drawn him into his pre 1774.sent vindication. Measures adopted solely for the ^■*'o^«-Company's benefit and the national honour, andhe knew that they had been productive of both tothe utmost reach of his wishes. Should the Courtjudge him fit to be continued in his station, heexpressed his readiness to devote the best years ofhis life to the Company's service. If, on the otherhand, either the Court, or a higher authority,should decree his yielding his post to another, heshould submit without a murmur, conscious of hisown integrity, but retaining the sense of gratitudewhich he felt for the obligation already conferredupon him.He then referred to the several orders of theCourt, as to political and military operations inIndia. He considered the principle primarilyinsisted upon by the home authorities, was toavoid the extension of territory. He construedtheir orders of June 1769, as confining Their viewsto the security of the Company's possessions, andthose of their allies, but, nevertheless, as contemplatingthe possible necessity for carrying theCompany's arms in certain cases beyond thosebounds, and of becoming parties in war. TheMahrattass might have been permitted to take possessionof Corah and Allahabad, to have alliedthemselves with the Rohillas, or to have establishedthemselves in Rohilcund, and to have lain withtheir armies unmolested on the borders of the opencountry462 Be AND PHOGBCS8 OP THE [Chair IX.1774. country of the Company's ally till they bad com-BiHOAi. pitted every preparation for invading the territoryof the Vizier, and that such a forbearance mighthave been vindicated by an appeal to the letter ofthe Court's instructions ; but he felt that it wasnot by such cold and prudential caution, that theBritish empire in Bengal had been acquired orcould be maintained. Nor did he feel that it would,in point of fact have been in conformity with thespirit and intent of such instructions. With regardto the non production of his private and confidentialcorrespondence, he stated that it had been carriedon in the same mode as had been observed by hispredecessors, and that he considered it would havebeen a dishonourable breach of confidence to haveplaced it on the records. In proof of this, it wasshewn that, in the correspondence between ColonelSmith and the Secret Committee, in 1766,when, by some mistake, a private letter from thatofficer to 'Lord Clive was only alluded to in aletter from the Select Committee, Colonel Smithobserved: ''I have been made accountable to apublic board for a confidential discussion of facts,which ought never to have transpired beyond thebreast of the right honourable person to whom,and to whom alone, they were addressed."Adverting to the complaint on the score ofwant of ceremony and respect in the receptionof the new members of Council at Calcutta, hedeclared that he felt ashamed to occupy theattentionCuAf. IX.] BKinSH POWER IN INDIA. 463attention of the Court on charges of so trifling 1774.a nature ; he remarked, " I am averse to parade b«kgai.myself, and have never used it." Higher honourshad been paid to them than had ever been paidto persons of their rank in the country, as higheven as had been paid to Lord Clive, or Mr.Vansittart, when they came as governors ; —men, whose names must ever stand foremostin the memories of the people of India, and whomerited as much from their employers as anywho have filled, or are likely to fill, that station.He had written to the new councillors ontheir arrival at Madras to bespeak their confidence. .The senior member at Calcutta had been deputedto meet them on landing at Kedgeree ; one of theGovernor-generals immediate staff had been sentdown, as a mark of personal respect, to attendthem ; and the whole of the late Council assembledat his house to receive them.He had desired time to determine Whether hewould accept the new government, or concludehis services to the Company with the close of thelate administration, before the commissions werepublished ; and Mr. Barwell being absent fromCalcutta, he had requested that the meeting mightbe postponed from the Friday till the followingMonday : this request having been acquiesced inby the Council, he did not expect it would havebeen urged as an objectionable part of his conduct.Mr.464 Rise AND Progress OF THE [Cbat. IX.1774 Mr. Barwell did not join the Council till theBiMOAL. Monday, when he expressed his full concurrence inthe sentiments of Mr. Hastings, and declared thathe foresaw no possible advantage to the nation, orto the Company, in debating the propriety of pastmeasures, which had been submitted long since tothe decision of the Directors, and for which neitherhimself, nor any of the existing administration,the Governor-general excepted, were heldresponsible.obfemtionon As tic war against the Rohillas was stated bydifferences to . r i ^theRobiiiAww. the majority of the Council to have subjected thenative inhabitants to unheard-of cruelties, inflictedby the orders of the Vizier, and to have beencountenanced in a degree by the Governor-general,although there was proof from the records*to the contrary; Mr. Hastings proposed thatsundry queries should be submitted to the commandingand other field officers who had servedin the campaign, in order to ascertain the facts.He at the same time signified to the Board hisreadiness to submit the whole of his correspondencewith Colonel Champion, provided that officergave his consent. From replies to certain queriesapproved and put by the Board, it appeared thatthe Rohillas were not the original inhabitants, butatribe of Afghans, of the Mussulman faith, followingno other profession than that of arms;that^Mfe pages 406, 407.Cmaf. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 4G5that the Gentoo inhabitants were not oppressed ; it74.that the Riots were as much cherished as ever ^"''*'*^-they were under any former government; thatthey returned to their plough immediately afterthe passage of the army, and appeared to be *' ashappy as ever;''* and that the charges against theVizier of outrages on the families of the Rohillaswere proved to have been utterly without foundationsThe animi which governed the proceeding maybegathered from the following question, put byGeneral Clavering to Colonel Leslie, passing bythe extraordinary fact of such a question beingproposed by a military man, and a member ofthe Government. " Did the army consider thewar in which they were engaged as one that didhonour to the British name, or such as disgracedit ? " The Colonel replied, **I cannot answer forthe opinion of others upon this subject." It wasattempted to be shewn that the Rohillas werean ill-used people, deserving of every commiseration; it was, nevertheless, admitted, that theyhad broken faith with the Vizier, and that wantof sincerity was part of their character. It wasdeclared, that when Ally Mahomed was theirhead, he prevailed upon the Alcoran Rajah andthe other hill chiefs to assist him in his rebellionagainst the Mogul Mahomed Sha. They did sowith 20,000 men. Their inferiority to the King'sarmy on his approach, induced them to prevail onVOL. I. 2 H the466 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1774. the Alinorah Rajah to admit them into his^^^^ country, which would afford them the greatestsecurity : the access to it was by a narrow pass,where a small body of troops could defend themselvesagainst a numerous army. .They wereadmitted, and continued there until an invasionof the Mahrattass drew off the forces of the Mogul.Immediately on their retiring, the Rohillas seizedthe country of the Alcoran Rajah, their ally, andcarried away captive their handsomest women.It was stated to be a proverb in Hindostan, that** a Rohilla prays with one hand, and robs withthe other"*Another question arose on the appointment ofan Adjutant-general, in which the majority opposedMr. Hastings. Major Hanney had beennominated by the former Government. GeneralClavering declared that he would not employ himin that station, as he considered the late Government,under the by-laws of the Company, to havebeen precluded from making such an appointment.It will be recollected that the General, inwriting from Madeira on his passage out, had recommendeda King's oflScer.fThe offer of a sum of seven lacs of rupees bythe Vizier, as a present to the troops engaged inthe Rohilla war, was urged by the majority as anadditional cause of complaint against the lateGovernmentConsultations, Dec 1774. f Vide page 445.Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 467(Government. The majority considered all pre 1774,sent to be prohibited by the Act of Parliament, ^*^»*''*but agreed to receive the sum in deposit, observing:'ewe cannot but lament the difficult anddistressing situation in which the measures of thelate Administration have reduced the presentGovernment, by placing us between the strictprohibition of the law, and the earnest desires ofthe army : the unhappy consequences of an offensivewar undertaken on such principles as thatagainst the Rohillas, must operate in every direction.An innocent nation, without offence, striptof their property : one part of the conqueringarmy engrosses the whole plunder, the other isdisgusted ; languor and despondency succeed ;and when, at last, our troops return home, thedifficulty of deciding between their claims andthe prohibition of the law, is thrown upon thecivil government ! "The Vizier returned to Fyzabad in the middleof December, from whence Mr. Middleton, theResident at Oude, wrote the Governor-generalon the 21st of that month, that fifteen lacs hadbeen received by him from the Vizier, and forwardedto Calcutta. The health of his Highnessconfined him wholly to his private apartments; it rapidly declined, and on the 26thJanuary 1777, he expired, at six in the evening.His eldest legitimate son, Meerza Humane,supported by the Supreme Council, succeeded2 H 2 to468 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE ICwaf. ir.irr&s to the musnud, under the title of Ausuf-ul-^"'""'- Dowlas.As the Council considered that the old treatyceased at the death of the late Vizier, they resolvedthat a new defensive treaty should be entered into.After a tedious negociation, in the course of whichAusuf-ul-Dowlah evinced the most fluctuating disposition,seven articles were agreed upon on the21st of May. The Company thereby acquired theexclusive right to the rich zemindar of Benares,without being encumbered with any new engagementsor loading them with additional expenses.The revenues amounted to Rupees 1,23,72,656,and were to be paid by the Rajah Cheyte Sing inmonthly payments, as a net tribute, without renderingany accounts of his collections, or beingallowed to enter any claim for deductions. TheNabob agreed to pay 2,60,000 rupees per monthfbr a brigade of the Company's troops, which wasan addition of half a lac to the former allowance.The important point was gained of his consentingto dismiss all foreigners from his service, and hisengaging to deliver up Cossim Ally Can andSumroo, the assassin of the English at Patna,should they ever fall into his hands. The provincesof Corah and Allahabad were to remainwith the Nabob.* Instructions were sent toColonelThe treaty was concluded by Mr. Bristow, whose conducton the occasion was highly applauded by the Supreme Grove*ment.Chat. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 469Colonel Allies to continue with the brigade in 1775.the territories of Oude for their defence, and for ^^^^^^that of the provinces of Corah and Allahabad,should the Nabob require it. Hostilities had forsome time been carried on between Nudjiff Can,the Rajpoots, and Jauts, and they had alternatelysought an alliance with the Nabob in support oftheir respective views. The latter, jealous ofNudjiff Can, had evinced a disposition to joinhis opponents. The grand object of the Councilwas to preserve a good understanding betweenthe Vizier and the other neighbouring powers, forwhich purpose Mr. Bristow was ordered to takethe necessary measures, and at the same time tourge the Nabob to attend to the good governmentand improvement of his dominions.The Directors conveyed the expression of their views of thesentiments on various parts of Mr. Hastings' ad ton on administration,which had been subjects of animate count!version and difference with the new Council.They considered, that although the provinces ofCorah and Allahabad were reserved to the Kingby the treaty of 1765, his Majesty did not acquirea right to resign them into the hands ofthe Company's enemies. As the Vizier was thefirst officer in the empire under his Majesty,and the territories in question were formerlyheld by him, it was an act of great propriety tocommit them again to his management, when theKing470 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CiiAr. l^1775. King could not hold them in his immediate '"trol. The King having withdrawn himself fromthe Company's protection, abandoning the possessionsassigned to him, and given every countenanceto the depredations of the Mahrattass, theCourt entirely approved of the payment of histribute being withheld. The principle of self-preservationwarranted it, as the possessions wouldnecessarily have fallen into the hands of the Mahratta.Upon these grounds the Directors confirmedthe treaty of Benares, and directed that nofurther remittance should be made to the King.The highest opinion was entertained of the honourand integrity of Mr. Hastings, nor did a suspicionexist that any corrupt motive led to the agreementwith the Vizier. In a political point of view, theCourt did not consider the engagements with theVizier to be unexceptionable ; but they trustedthat his Excellency would now be enabled to repelthe Mahrattass, should they repeat their incursions.The Vizier formed a barrier to the Company'spossessions. The Directors viewed thetreaty of Allahabad as compelling the Governmentto aid the Vizier in defending his dominions,but not in the prosecution of new conquests,or any warlike enterprises; all advancebeyond his frontier being absolutely prohibited,as also the employment of the Company's troops,on any pretence whatever, in such an undertaking.TheCmap.IX.] British power in INDIA. 471The conduct of the Rohilla chiefs in refusing to 1775.fulfil their solemn engagements with the Vizier, Bmwai.was admitted to have drawn upon them the calamitieswhich they had suffered : bul the Courtdeprecated the aid given by the Government withthe Company's forces as founded on wrong policy,as being contrary to the instructions of the Courtfrequently repeated for keeping their troops withinthe provinces, and to the general principles theydesired to maintain. The recall of the troopswas consistent with the orders from home; butthe hasty manner of recalling them, as determinedupon by the majority in Council, theCourt considered might have been attended withinconvenience to the public service.With regard to the correspondence of Mr. Hastings,the Court were of opinion that the wholeshould have been laid before the Council. Theyobserved with regret the differences that had arisenamongst the members, and they trusted that asense of duty would animate them to an exertionof their utmost abilities, in the conduct of theimportant affairs entrusted to them, with the spiritof harmony and cordiality so essential to the welfareof the public interests, and to the prosperityof the Company.*As to the donation of seven lacs by the Vizierto the troops, the Court disapproved generally ofall presents to the army, but intimated that intheLetter to Bengal March 1775.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THEiCHAr. IX,1775.BXMGAL.Nuiidcomar.the instance in question they should endeavourto obtain an Act of Parliament for the grant ;and they entirely sanctioned the maintenance ofa brigade of the Company's troops in-che Oudeterritories.Whilst the Court of Directors were inculcatinga spirit of cordiality amongst the members of theSupreme Government, events wereoccurringabroadthat strengthened the existing feelings of hostility,and widened the breach between the Governor-generaland the majority of the Council.Nundcomar, whose name will be familiar to thereader, fully alive to the differences which existedin the Council, and aware of the party composingthe majority, waited upon Mr. Francis, on themorning of the 11th of March, scarcely fourmonths after the inauguration of the new Government;and delivered to him a letter, addressed tothe Governor and Council, '' demanding of him,as a duty belonging to his office, as a councillorof the state, to lay it before the Board." Mr.Francis presented the letter at the meeting of theCouncil that day, and stated that he conceived hecould not, consistently with his duty, refuse toreceive such a letter; that he was unacquaintedwith its contents ; that it was given to him publicly,in the presence of a considerable number ofpersons ; and that the Rajah's request was interpretedto him by three different persons.The letter from Nundcomar recapitulated variousCuAP.IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 473pious circumstances connected with his being 1775deprived of the office of Naib Dewan, and the ^''"'*'"substitution of Mahomed Reza Can, who, healleged, 4)ad been guilty of acts of great violenceand oppression. That when Mr. Hastings firstarrived from Madras, he promised him his support; but when the new councillors entered upontheir office, he changed towards him, and debarredhim his presence. That Mahomed Reza Can,being charged with extensive embezzlement, proposedmaking a present of ten lacs of rupees toMr. Hastings, and two to himself; and that Mr.Hastings, on being acquainted therewith, madeanswer, " that he could not suspend an inquiryinto the misappropriation of crores of rupees forsuch a sum, and that it was proper the Governmentmoney should be recovered ;" he likewisestated that he was informed Mahomed Reza Canshould not be released from confinement till thepoints in question were decided upon : nevertheless,a few days afterwards, Mahomed RezaCan was set at liberty, the inquiry into hisconduct dropped, justice not being done in thethe complaints that had been preferred againsthim.In addition to this statement, Nundcomar specifiedparticulars, which comprised presents heasserted to have been made to Mr. Hastings,amounting to 3,54,105 rupees.Mr. Francis, on being asked by Mr. Hastings,whether474 RUE AND PBOGU8S Wolf THE ICuaf, IX.im. whether he was previously acquainted with Nund-BMOAk omar s intention of bringing such charges, replied,that though he was totally unacquainted with thecontents of the paper, he did apprehend it containedsome charge against him.On the 13th of March, Nundcomar addressedthe secretary, transmitting a letter which he requestedmight be delivered to the Governor andCouncil, and opened in their presence. It referredto his letter of the' 11th, and expressed his desireto appear before the Council in support of its contents; he stated that he had no other object thanthe prosperity of the Company, and that he hadwarned former Governments that, by their immediateattention to private emoluments, the countrywould suffer ; that Mr. Hastings, till he had beeninformed by him of the state of affairs, yeas wellpleased with him ; but that, when he had acquiredthis knowledge, he no longer consulted him, andinstead of his patron, became his enemy, andacted as such ; becoming inattentive to the welfareof the country, and the enrichment of the state,making his own private emolument the rule of hisconduct.On the proposition of Colonel Monson, supportedby General Clavering and Mr. Francis, itwas determined that Nundcomar should be calledbefore the Council, to give proofs of the chargeagainst the Governor-general. Mr. Hastings declaredthat he would not sit at the Board in thecharacterChap IX.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 475character of a criminal, neither would he acknow- ma.ledge the members of the Board to be his judges, Bwoal.but looked upon them as his accusers ; he left itto them, ^ they pleased, to form a committee forthe investigation ; he resolved not to sit in Councilto hear men, collected from the dregs of the peoplesgive evidence, at the dictation of Nundcomar^against his character and conduct. Mr. Daniellobjected to Nundcomar's being called in, and contendedthat the Supreme Court of Judicature wasthe proper tribunal for examining and decidingupon points of such a nature. He also suggestedthat Nundcomar should be informed that he wasexpected to support whatever he might set forthas evidence adduced before one of the judges ; andthat, unless he did so, his complaint would berejected as a libel. The proposition for his appearancebefore the Board was, nevertheless, perseveredin, for the extraordinary purpose of enablingthem to judge whether the nature of the evidencehe had to produce would be thought sufficient.Mr. Hastings quitted the Council. Mr. Bar wellremarked, that it was then five o'clock ; that heconsidered the Council to be dissolved ; and unlesshe received a summons, according to theusual form, he should not partake in the debates :he then withdrew. The majority determined thatthe Governor-general had no right to dissolve the^oardi, and that an adjournment could only becarried by a majority. The chair was accordingly476 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IK.1775. ingle taken by General Clavering. NundcomarBcvoAL. ^^^ called in, and being asked what he had tooffer in support of bis charges, he replied, *' 1 amnot a man officiously to make complaints, butwhen I perceived my character, which is as dearto me as life, hurt by the Governors receiving intohis presence two natives of low repute, and denyingme admittance, I thought it incumbent uponme to write what I have. Every thing is containedin the letter I have given in." Beingcalled upon for other papers, to which he alluded,he delivered in a letter, purporting to be writtento him by Munny Begum, in which she advertedto the favour that bad been conferred upon herbyappointing her guardian ; and, after consideringwhat would be a proper offer, stating that she senta proposal of one lac as an acknowledgment, thatthe Governor answered, " that he had not donewhat he had from motives of private advantage,but for the satisfaction of his employers. Ipressed the present exceedingly upon him, whenhe at last said, ' very well ; if you do think properto make a present, give two lacs, as Maharajah(meaning you) engaged ; otherwise, do as youplease, you are your own mistress'" One lacwas stated to have been provided by MunnyBegum, the other by a draft on Nundcomar. Theletter concluded in the following terms : 'for thefuture, let us take care, in the conduct of ouraffairs, to consult and plan beforehand, that when weareCbaf. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 477are called upon, no difference may appear in out 1775.representations and answers and that I may conform ®""®*"^to whatever you may say ; let nothing of the secretpart of these transactions be known to the Go*memor or the gentlemen of Council, or any others.The proverb is, * a word to the wise"*A comparison being made of the hand-writingin the letter from the Munny Begum deliveredin by Nundcomar^ with one received from her atthat time and produced by Sir John Doyle,from the Persian Department it appeared that theseal was that of the Munny Begum, but that thehand-writing was not the same in the two letters.The majority observed, that the letter to Nundco-mar had been written a year and a-half before,and the letter produced by Sir John Doylewithin a few days. In either case there was suffixcent proof of the delinquency of Nundcomar. Ifits authenticity be admitted, its contents establishthe fact of a conspiracy on the part of the Begumand Nundcomar. If its authenticity be denied,the guilt of forgery against Nundcomar is placedbeyond doubt.Nundcomar being desirous to withdraw, thesecretary was sent to inform Mr. Hastings, andto request that he would resume the chair. TheGovernor-general refused to acknowledge the messageas coming from the Council: he returned hiscompliments to General Clavering, Mr. Monson,and Mr. Francis, but declined to meet them at solate478 BI8E ABfD PROGRESS OF THE [Car. IX.177ft. late aa hour of the night, intimating that when heB^o^"- could nmuBoii a ful Board (Mr. Barrel being inthe country), he would do so, and hoped to havethe honour of meeting them in the Revenue Departmentthe following day.Upon such evidence as had been adduced, andwithout any further deliberation, the majority resolvedthat the sum of three lacs forty thousandrupees had been received by the Governor-general; that of right it belonged to the Company,and that Mr. Hastings should be required to payinto the Company's treasury the amount for theiruse. The secretary forthwith waited upon MrHastings with the resolution ; but he refused toreceive it as a resolution of the Board, and wouldgive no answer to it. Upon which the threemembers ordered, that the whole of the papersshould be placed in the hands of the Company'sattorney, for the purpose of counsel's opinionbeing taken as to the best mode of proceeding torecover the amount from Mr. Hastings.On the 11th of April, Nundcomar was accusedbefore the Judges of the Supreme Court, of beingparty to a conspiracy against the Governor-generaland others, by making a man against his willwrite a false petition injurious to their characters,and sign an account of bribes pretended to begiven to them. On the following day, an examinationtook place before the Judges, which lastedfrom eleven in the morning until eleven at night.Mr.Ch4v. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 479Mr. Hastings having been required to attend a I'rrs,meeting of the Judges at Sir Elijah Impey's, ad b«»oal.dressed a letter to General Clavering, requestingthat he would take the chair with the other membersand despatch the current business. TheGeneral having proceeded with what required immediateattention, the three members wrote Mr.Hastings from the council-chamber. They advertedto a letter from Mt. Fowke, relative to theconspiracy, and as they conceived that an investigation,which could demand the absence of theGovernor and Mr. Barwell from Council, must beof great moment, if not interesting to the safetyof the state, they determined to continue in Counciltill apprized of the issue. Mr. Hastings repliedthat, having received a letter from the ChiefJustice and the Judges, the preceding night, informinghim that a charge had been exhibitedupon oath before them against Messrs. Fowke,Rajah Nundcomar, and Radachurn, for a conspiracyagainst himself and others, he and Mr.Barwell, to whom a like notification was made, hadattended, and that he was sorry the three membersshould have thought it necessary to remain inCouncil until informed of a subject and issue ofan inquiry, which they would perceive had no relationto the safety of the state, nor to any circumstancethat required their present attention.*TheConsultations, 19th April 1775.480 RISE AND Peeress OF THE iCuAw. I XL1775. . The circumstances appeared so well attested,BixoAk jjjg^j there was thought sufficient reason for bindingover the accused to take their trial at the followingassizes. Notwithstanding these facts,General Clavering, Colonel Monson, and MrFrancis accompanied by Mr. Fowke and others,went to Nundcomar's house on a formal visit tohim, an honour which he had never before receivedfrom those gentlemen, or from any previousadministration. They also appealed to publicopinion in support of their judgment against theGovernor-general. Mr. Hastings, in the followingterms, desired to submit his case to that criterion.Writing to the Directors, he observed :** It is in your power, honourable Sirs, to obtainthat opinion. There are many men in England ofunquestionable knowledge and integrity, who havebeen eye-witness of all the transactions of thisgovernment in the short interval in which I hadthe chief direction of it. There are many hundredin England, who have correspondents in Bengal,from whom they have received successive advicesof those transactions, and opinions of the authorsof them. I solemnly make my appeal to theseconcurring testimonies, and if, in justice to yourHonourable Court, by whom I was chosen for thehigh station which I have lately filled, by whommy conduct has been applauded, and throughwhom I have obtained the distinguished honourassigned me by the Legislature itself, in my nominationChai*. IX.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 481mention to fill the first place in the new administersoration of India, I may be allowed the liberty of ®''''*^'"making so uncommon a request, I do most earnestlyentreat that you will be pleased to call uponthose who, from their ovm knowledge or the communicationsof others, can contribute such information,to declare severally the opinions whichthey have entertained of the measures of my administration,the tenour of my conduct in everydepartment of this government, and the effectswhich it has produced, both in conciliating theminds of the natives to the British government, inconfirming your authority over the country, and inadvancing your interest in it. From these, andfrom the testimonies of your own records, let mebe judged, not from the malevolent declamationsof those who, having no services of their own toplead, can only found their reputation on the destructionof mine."On the 6th May, Nundcomar was committedto jail, in order to undergo a trial at the ensuingassizes, upon a charge of forgery exhibited againsthim by a merchant of Calcutta. On the 9th ofthat month, the majority of the Council determinedto displace Munny Begum from the oflSceof Guardian of the Nabob, upon the alleged groundthat she had overcharged the ministers, in her accountof arrears due from the estate. This factalso seemed to throw suspicions upon the truthof her letter to Nundcomar, before alluded to,VOL. I. 2 I even482 RISE AND Progress OF TH£ [Chap. IX.1775. even if its identity had been satisfactorily stabswished. Rajah Goordass, lately servant to MunnyBegum, a young man of mean abilities, a Gentoo,and the son of Nundcomar, was nominated tosucceed Munny Begum in an office, the rank ofwhich was scarcely inferior to the sovereignty ofthe provinces.* .Nundcomar addressed the Council, pointingout the impossibility of his performing the ablutionswhich were essential before he partook ofany kind of food ; and stated that, even couldthey be performed, the place itself presented aninsurmountable obstacle, being inhabited by menof different religion : he therefore requested to beremoved.The majority of the Council resolved to sendthe message to the Chief Justice, with the representationfrom Nundcomar. General Claveringobserved, that the Judges were probablyignorant how much a close confinement mightendanger the life of the Rajah, which was of somuch importance to the public, for proving anaccusation of venality against the Governor-general.Mr. Hastings observed, that time could not thenadmit of his replying to the severe personal attacksmade upon him by every member present, but thatthe attacks were not unexpected.Mr.Letter from Mr. Hastings, 18th May 1775.Chas. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 483Mr. Francis proposed, that the sheriff or his 1775.deputy should wait on the Chief Justice, on the ^*»<»^^-part of the Board, and desire that he would considerof granting the prisoner relief: ColonelMonson and General Clavering concurred in thisproposition. Mr. Hastings dissented, as the samerepresentation might be made by the prisonerhimself, and he thought it would be improper thatit should be conveyed to the Chief Justice throughthe authority of Government.Sir Elijah Impey, the Chief Justice, previouslyto receiving the message from the Council, hadbeen informed of the grounds on which Nundco-mar refused sustenance, and had already givenorders for his confinement being made in everyrespect as easy as possible : he had also takenmeans to ascertain from Pundits, in the presenceof the Judge who had come with him, how farthe grounds of caste affected his case. From theiranswers, the Judges were fully satisfied that nogrounds existed for altering the mode of confinement.The Pundits having been requested to inspectthe rooms in which he was confined, viz. the tworooms usually occupied by the jailor, who hadgiven them up to the Rajah, expressed it as theiropinion, after examining every part, that he wouldnot lose caste by eating or drinking, or performingablution, but that he would be obliged to performprausckit (penance).2 i2 In484 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cvak IX.^'^^ In communicating this to the Council, theChief Justice observed, that he had forwarded theresult for their information, in order that he mightnot appear to be wanting in the attention whichhe should always give to any message from them,as well as to prevent their being deceived by impropersuggestions. He assured the Board, thatthe Bench would be prepared to yield even toprejudices, if national and deep-rooted ; but thatthey could not suffer the pretence of religion tobe set up for the purpose of eluding the ordinarycourse of law. He stated, that the Judges werehappy in the opportunity of vindicating themselvesfrom any surmise of rigour, or want ofhumanity ; but they requested that, in the eventof the Mama Rajah having any other applicationto make for relief, he should address himself immediatelyto the Judges, for should he continueto address himself to the Board, that which could,and would only be obtained from principles ofjustice, might have the appearance of being obtainedby the means of influence and authority,the peculiar turn of mind of the natives being, toexpect every thing from power and littk from Justice.The majority of the Council intimated to theChief Justice, that they considered the natives ofIndia as the immediate objects of their care andprotection, and that, to guard against any deception,they had examined the sheriff and his deputyas to the contents of Nundcomar's petition.ItChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 485It however appeared, that the examination of the 1775.sheriff and his assistant had been confined to the ^■*'«^'-legality of the commitment, the place of confinement,and the propriety of yielding obedienceto the Judges who made out the commitment.The Chief Justice satisfied himself by the mostample inquiries, that in the general opinion, theMala Rajah's scruples were mere pretence. SirElijah Impey observed, that the bounds betweenthe authority of the Supreme Court and theCouncil were of too delicate a nature to be discussed,unless there should be an absolute necessityto determine them. He did not questionthe authority of the Board in receiving petitions,and he did not desire that the Rajah's petitionsshould not be received, but when received, if anythingwas required of the Judges or the Court,that he was to apply directly to the Judges, adding,'* it is not sufficient that courts of justice act independently,it is necessary for the good governmentof a country that they should be believed andknown to be above all influence.*Nundcomar was found guilty, and suffered the Nundcomar^ ^ executed.extreme penalty of the law.This event, after a lapse of fourteen years, was,in the course of the impeachment, on the 14thMay 1789, dwelt upon by Mr. Burke, when hecharged Mr. Hastings with having ** murderedNundcomar,Consultations, 16th May 1775. (Secret)RISE AND Process OP THE[Ckaf. IX.irrxBemqauFurther differencesinCouncil.Nundcomar, through the hands of Sir Elijah imply."This virulent attack led the MarquessGraham to move, and the House to adopt by alarge majority, a resolution, that those wordsought not to have been spoken. They were characterizedas indecent, and such as could not havebeen tolerated in any other place.In the course of the investigation into the chargespreferred by Nundcomar against the Governor-general,Cantoo Baboo, the banian of Mr. Hastings,was summoned to attend the Council on the 13thof March. When it reached him he was with theGovernor-general, who prevented his attendance.General Clavering on the 20th (Mr. Hastings beingpresent) submitted a motion, that CantooBaboo had been contumacious in not obeying thesummons, and that he should now be broughtbefore the Council. It was objected to, first, becausethis intention had been concealed from themembers of the Council until its meeting, and secondly,that the Council had met for the specialpurpose of considering advices from the Vizier,which business was now proposed to be set aside,that personal feelings of hostility to the Governormight be indulged. The motion was, nevertheless,carried for the attendance of the Banian,upon the plea that the Council was assembled onmatters connected with the revenue, and thatCantoo Baboo was a farmer. Mr. Boswell defendedthe Banian from any intentional disrespecttoChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 487to the Board, and declared that he considered the n75.plea of summoning him on account of his being a ^**°^''*farmer, was the application of a legal power to anillegal purpose. The Banian having attended anddeclared that he should have obeyed the summons,had not the Governor-general interdictedhim, withdrew. General Clavering then stated tothe Council, that Mr. Hastings had threatenedhim for proposing to punish the Banian by puttinghim in the stocks, and he had also declared, thatif any thing was meant personally he would makehim answer for it with his life. He thereforemoved that Cantoo Baboo be placed in the stocks.Mr. Hastings then stated, that General Claveringhaving before proposed that the Banian shouldbe placed in the stocks, and that in the languageof a menace, he had declared that if the Generalattempted any thing in his own person and by hisown authority, ** I would oppose it personally atthe peril of my life, and that if he made use of law,I would meet him by law." General Claveringdisavowed having intended any menace. TheCouncil, on the motion of Mr. Barwell, adjourned.These proceedings in the Secret Departmentwere followed by others in the Revenue, equallyinvolving personal altercations, and attacks on theGovernor-general. The Ranee of Burdwan havingvisited Calcutta on some affairs connectedwith the district, addressed the Government requesting488 HISE AND Progress OP THE [C>af. IX.1775. question that a kbilaut might be conferred. Mr.Francis accordingly moved, that a day might befixed for the purpose of conferring one upon herand upon her son also (an infant), and upon berservants according as it was understood to be thecustom. Mr. Barwell remarked, that no suchmotion had ever been made since the Company'ssuccession to the Dewanny. It was the invariablecustom to hold up the head of the Government inthat light to the natives. A voluntary complimentto a person who, like the Ranee, had noright to it, might be left to the pleasure of theGovernor. The grant was however supported byGeneral Clavering. Mr. Hastings felt it to be an additionalinstance to the indignities already offeredhim, and declared that he could not consent to theproposition. A day was nevertheless fixed, onwhich various statements in the English languagewere presented, to shew that payments had beenmade by a native on behalf of the Rajah of Burdento Mr. Hastings of 15,000 rupees ; but whenthe accounts were demanded by the Governor-generalin the Bengal or Persian character, theywere not forthcoming, and the party alleged tohave made the payment denied all knowledge ofsuch a transaction.The Governor-general adhering to his resolutionto be no party in conferring the khilaut, and hisbanian having been summoned before the Council,and no assurance being given Mr. Hastings thatpersonalChap. IX.] BRITISH POWEll IN INDIA. 489personal severity was not intended, he dissolved 1775.the Council and withdrew from the Board. Behoal.The majority proceeded to confer the khilautupon the infant Rajah, who presented a nuzzar ofnine gold moeurs. They also stated that they hadfelt called upon to interfere in the appointment ofparties to fill the several vacancies in the provincialcouncils, as every day's experience evinced thenecessity of endeavouring to break the formidablecombination of reciprocal interest ** which theGovernor had established in his settlement, byaccepting unwarrantable advantages himself andconniving at those which were received by theCompany's servants. Although the degree of evidencewas not such as we could entirely dependupon, we thought however we could scarcelybe imposed upon by giving some credit to thereports voluntarily made to us by such persons ashad neither courage to declare themselves openlyagainst the late administration or privately to makeknown the true state of the Government. In thelate proceedings of the Revenue Board, there isno species of peculation from which the HonourableGovernor-general has thought it right toabstain."Such were the unqualified terms in which themajority felt themselves authorized to record theirsentiments on the conduct of the Governor-general.Astonishment will cease, that a spirit of harmonyshould have been little known amidst proceedingsmarked490 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Coat. IX.1775. marked by such virulent and personal feelings.w ^^^.^ . ^^^ Hastings indignantly remarked: "To talk ofMinute. persons having the courage openly to declare themselvesagainst the late administration, is an insulton my situation. The fact is, that it requirescourage in any man not to do it, it being universallybelieved that the surest means to obtain thefriendship and support of a fixed majority of theCouncil, who have the whole power of governmentin their hands, is to lodge accusations against thelate administration, and to refuse is the surestmeans of incurring their resentment. Promisesand threats have been used by the instruments ofthe majority, particularly by Nundcomar, to obtainaccusations against me." *In alluding to various other instances in whichthe majority had evinced so decided an opposition,Mr. Hastings observed : ** My adversaries haveplaced me in a situation peculiarly difficult anddelicate. They have made me the butt of unceasingpersecution for these seven months past,and have called down the whole host of informersfrom every quarter of Bengal against me. Yetwhen I have endeavoured to bring to justice, mencharged with a conspiracy to ruin my fortune andblast my character with forged and libellous accusations,the same charge is retorted upon me bythe gentlemen of the majority, although in alltheirSecret Consultations, 15th and 16th May 1775.Gasp. IX.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 491their most violent attacks upon me they have made 1775.professions of the deepest concern for the honour ®*^«^'-of the Governor-general. This is the very wantonnessof oppression ; it is like putting the man tothe rack, and exclaiming against him for strugglingvirith his tormentors ; while rewards are held outpublicly to those who will offer themselves as myaccusers. You cannot be surprised, honourablesirs, at these effects. Rewards and punishmentsin the hands of good men in power, are the mostuseful instruments for producing great and virtuouspurposes ; when employed by a wicked administration,they serve equally the ends of malice,private persecution and oppression." He disclaimedthe intentions which might obviously beascribed to the appeals which he made to theCourt, as solely for his own vindication. ** Hadthis been the sole object which I could have attained,much as I feel for my own honour, andgreat as my ambition is, to devote my future laboursto your service, I should long since have quittedthe scene of trouble in which 1 am involved. Ifthe powers of the vast government which wereformed for the purpose of concentrating the scatteredand independent parts of your empire, anddrawing improvements from it, and proportionableto so extensive a combination are employed only forthe support of a faction or for the gratification ofprivate vengeance, and if in the pursuit of suchobjects, your rights are exposed to a public andjudicial492 Ri£ AND Progress OF THE [Chap. IX.1775. judicial reference by one part of your administration.jj^jj f^^ ^Yie sake of charging on the other theinjuries which they may sustain in the discussion,it is my duty to appeal to your authority for thepreservation of your constitution, not to your justicefor the redress of a personal wrong.*Mr. HastiiiRi The Unfortunate spirit which existed in thefiivourtngapro- Supreme Council was further evinced on thescribed Nabob. • !• ^t ^ %occasion of the Governor-general presenting apetition from Kureem Alia, who styled himselfvakeel from Cossim Ally Can, praying thatGrovemment would interfere in obtaining from theestate of a native a sum of money to which hismaster laid claim. The money ia question, if belongingto Cossim Ally Can, was to be viewedas the effects of an enemy, and the Governor-generalaccordingly proposed that the questionshould be referred for the opinion of the Company'sstanding counsel. Colonel Monson thereuponasked the Governor-general, whether KureemAlia, who was the servant of a proscribed nabob,had received his permission to come to the Presidency.Mr. Hastings replied, that he had nothis permission, neither did he know when hecame, but understood that he had been at Calcuttasome years. Colonel Monson then asked,whether the Governor-general knew with whomheMr. Hastings to the Court, Slat July 1T75.Chap. IX.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 493he had lived, and who had subsisted him. Mr. ^™*Hastings replied, that he neither knew by whom *"^^*"he had been subsisted, or where he had lived;that he had already told Colonel Monson, that inconsequenceof Kureem's extreme distress, a fewdays before he had given him a small sum ofmoney, but before he should answer any otherquestions, he asked to be informed of the objectof them. Colonel Monson replied, '' I beg toanswer the Governor-general's question by anotherquestion to him, which is, whether he thinks aproscribed prince has a right to send a vakeel tothis Presidency to reside here? My object is toclear the Governor-general's conduct from anyimputation that may be thrown upon it; all theworld knowing the connexion that formerly hasbeen between the Governor-general and CossimAlly Can. I am more particularly anxious atthis juncture to have this matter clearly explained,as I perceive many of Cossim Ally Can's adherents,and strenuous opposers of the English, standforth as the arraigners of this administration, andreceive many compliments and civilities from someof the most distinguished characters in this Presidency."Mr. Hastings declined acknowledgingany obligations to Colonel Monson for the professedwish to clear his conduct from any imputationwhich might be thrown upon it, and statedthat had he known the views of Colonel Monson,in proposing the questions, he should have felt itinconsistent494 Rise AND Progress OF THE [Gbaf. IX.1775; inconsistent with his station to have answeredBoat. g^^i^ interrogatories. Kureem Alia was calledand examined before the Council, when it appearedthat the only sum he had received fromMr. Hastings was 100 rupees, three or four daysprevious to the present occasion. The proceedingwas adopted to fix upon the Governor-general theunjustifiable act of countenancing the vakeel of aproscribed native of rank, and of still maintaininga communication with that native. Mr. Hastingsbrought the subject to the notice of the Court ofDirectors in the following terms.** I shall not deny the connexion which formerlysubsisted between Cossim Ally Can and myself,whilst he was Nabob of the Provinces. It is aswell known to the world as the little advantagewhich I made of it* More I shall not say on thissubject,The facts alluded to were doubtless well known to theEuropean community at Calcutta at the period Mr. Hastingswas making his representation to the Directors ; bat half a centuryhaving elapsed since that time it may be proper to supportthis declaration by a shunt extract from the report madeby Governor Vansittart, of the proceedings which took placewith Cossim Ally Can,At a meeting of the Select Committee on the 22d March 1762,a proposition being made to instruct Mr. Hastings to demandpayment of the twenty lacs stated to have been promised byMeer Cossim, Mr. Vansittart protested against such a measure,and represented the circumstances under which the idea ofsuch a present arose. When the treaty was signed with MeerCossim in the month of September 1761, the Nabob desired tomake a present of twenty lacs to him and the other gentlemenof the Select Committee. Mr. Vansittart immediately and absolutelyChaf.IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 495subject, unwilling to revive the remembrance of 1775.the calamities of his government, or to awaken ^*"«^the unhappy dissentions which attended them.Although I avow the unimportance of the refutation,I do not regret the opportunity which it hasfurnished me of setting before your eyes from thissmall sample, the distracted state of your affairs,and the temper and objects of the members whorule your present administration. From the momentof their landing, their aim was, by personalindignities, to provoke me to resign my stationand leave them uncontrolled masters of the Government,or by accumulated attacks to blast mycharacter, and to effect the same end by alienatingyour confidence from me. These are the principlesby which they judge of almost every matterwhich comes before the Board, of whatever natureor importance ; and for the truth of this I dareappeal to any section taken at hazard out of theConsultations. Thus the merest trifles impede thecourse of business, and swell the minutes of thepubliclately declined it, both on behalf of himself and the other membersof the Committee. When Jaffier Ally Can returned toCalcutta, and Meer Cossim was proclaimed, the offer wasrepeated, and again declined; but he was informed by Mr,Vansittart, that if his finances admitted of it, he might presentthe Company with five lacs in aid of their operations at Madras,to which the Nabob immediately consented. Mr. Vansittartfurther represented, that he returned from Moorshedabad withoutreceiving directly or indirectly one rupee from the Nabob,or from any other person, and that he could aver as muchfor Colonel Caillaud and Mr. Hastings, who were with him.496 Sib AND Progress OF THE [Cbat. IX.1775. public proceedings; and points of real conesquench, which require the coolest and most temperatedeliberation, are warped and converted toinstruments of personal violence and the supportof a party system.Prompted equally by duty and gratitude, I havehitherto resolved to bear my part in this distractedscene, and if I live I will see the end of it"*OvDi. The affairs of Oude continued to engage muchof the attention of the Supreme Government. TheNabob Vizier, suspecting the fidelity of BusierCan, who commanded in Rohilcund, issued privateorders for his seizure and assassination.Busier narrowly escaped: he fled across theriver, and proceeded to Agra, where he enteredthe service of NudjilF Can.Anoop Gyre and Aumroo Gyre, the two Gros-sainRajahs under whom the late Vizier had leftthe country of the Dooab, openly shook off allallegiance to the government of Oude, and assumedan independent authority. The Vizier ultimatelyeffected their removal from the Dooab, withoutentering into hostilities. But the affairs of Oudewere in such a state as to induce the Governmentto desire Mr. Bristow would bring the subjectbefore the Nabob, and urge upon him the absolutenecessity of forming such a system, and layingdown• Letter to Court, 8th Sept 1775.Chaf.ix.] British power india. 407down such regulations as would efFectually it75extricate him from the difficulties and ems ^"*'°^'"embarrassments occasioned by his irresolute andwavering conduct, and by the ambition of hisminister Murteza Can. To provide means formeeting the subsidy on account of the brigade,tuncaws were obtained from him to the value offorty-five lacs per annum. The Nabob had recourseto his mother. Baboo Begum, who retainedpossession of the whole of the late Vizier's treasure.On the entreaty of many of the Vizier'sfriends, aided by the influence of the Company'sResident, the Begum gave him thirty lacs in readymoney, and a release for the sum of twenty-sixlacs, which he had previously received fromher. This concession was made on conditionof his engaging by treaty, ratified by Mr. bristol,not to molest her again with demands formoney*The Nabob Vizier being satisfied that the onlymeans by which he could effectually disciplinehis troops and secure their fidelity, was to putthem under European officers, applied to theGovernor-general, with whom arrangements weremade for that purpose.*Many of the officers who joined him in the Mutiny in themonth of March, found that the sepoy cheerfully "' * ^^^'submitted to their commands. But the Nabobhaving• Letter, November 1775,VOL. !• 2 K498 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cmaf.^I.1775. baying dismissed one of his corps of .^^^ j^ whom five months' arrears were due, and hispromise to pay them in fifteen days being consideredby the men a mere evasion four thousandof them riotously assembled and marched towardsthe Nabob's camp at Etawah. He went out tomeet them in person. Failing in his attempt tosatisfy them, and judging that his former passivebehaviour bad given rise to the present mutiny,be resolved on drawing out 15,000 of his sepoy forthe purpose of cutting the refractory corps to piecesif they continued to resist. Mr. Bristow remonstratedagainst such a proceeding ; but the Nabobwas inflexible. The 15,000 regulars were drawnout to compel the matchlocks to give up theirarms and accept about 20,000 rupees in full for thepay due to them. The men having been reducedto great distress and thinking the proffered termsmost unreasonable, 2,500 of them stood theirground and supported an engagement for sometimewith great spirit — repeatedly repulsingtheir opponents : they were ultimately overcomeby the blowing up of a tumbril, six hundredbeing killed and many wounded. Three hundredof the Nabob's sepoy were also killed, andsome wounded. These iniquitous proceedingsput an end to the mutiny. Ausuf-ul-Dowlahpassed whole days in dissipation, being himself frequentlyintoxicated, and delighting in making hismenials and favourites indecently drunk t He hadlittleChap. IX] British POWER IN INDIA. 499little disposition for business, and always referred ^'^'^^to his minister Murteza Can, who was by nomeans favourably disposed to the Company.*The Nabob while at Etawah was invested withthe office of Vizier of the empire by a gratuitousappointment from the King. The Governor-generalhad anticipated that his affairs would have beenrestored to a state of regularity, and his forces tosubjection, but dissentions had been brooding inhis court, occasioned by the enmity of the oldservants of the Vizier against his minister. CojaBussunt, an eunuch of extraordinary talents as asoldier, who had disciplined and commanded acorps of infantry, consisting of fourteen battalions,was the chief of the party against the minister.He had quarrelled with him and proceeded tohigh words in the Nabob's presence, by whomthey were apparently reconciled. In token ofsuch reconciliation, Coja Bussunt provided an entertainmentfor the minister, at which they bothbecame intoxicated. Coja Bussunt retiring onpretence of sickness, had no sooner left the roomthan five or six men rushed in and assassinated theminister. Coja Bussunt went immediately andreported the murder to the Nabob, who taxed himwith being the cause, and ordered him to be beheadedon the spot. These tragical events occasionedan immediate alarm at the Durbar and in thecamp.• Letter to Court, March 1776,2 K 2600 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.^775. camp. Audit Ally, the Vizier's brother, suspectingthat his own person was in danger, as he hadbeen refused admittance to the Vizier's presence,mounted his horse and fled with precipitation toNudjifF Can. . Fruitless endeavours were madeto discover the real occasion of the murder of theminister. Surmises attached it to the Vizier, who,it was stated, wanted a plea to get rid of BussuntCan. He was thus in a moment deprived ofhis minister, his general, and his brother. Duringthe time that he was negociating with the Mahrattato settle their claims to some countries westof the Jumna, he was carrying on the siege ofJhansi, thdh belonging to the Peishwa. Suddenlyabandoning these objects, he quitted Etawah andreturned to Lucknow. In this distracted state ofaffairs, Mr. Bristow was obliged to act. A partof the Vizier's troops marched to oppose the Mahratta.The pay of the whole was in arrear andno funds provided for their discharge ; his enemiesattempted to excite his troops to mutiny ; the nativecommandants, jealous at the appointment ofEuropean officers over them, fomented the disgust.The several battalions under British officers,though at a considerable distance from eachother, at once broke out, as by a preconceivedarrangement, into open disobedience and defianceof their officers, and in rebellion against theprince. Their treatment of the Company's officerswas as alarming as threats and the appearanceCHAf.IX] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 501once of a very seditious spirit could make it. I'i^s.Some escaped privately and joined the British ^**^'^^camp; others recovered their authority, and bymeans of two of the Company's battalions and othercoercive measures, the mutinous troops were eitherreduced or disbanded. There still remained onegeneral, of whose fidelity the Vizier had suspicion: this was Mahboob Ally Can, to whosecontrol he had formerly committed the Corah province.When Mahboob Ally was ordered to marchwith two battalions under English officers againstthe Mahrattass, the Nabob applied to GeneralStibbert to detach two of his battalions to occupythat district in Mahboob's absence. Colonel Parkerunder the General's sanction, marched into Corahwith his detachment. The equivocal conduct ofMahboob led Colonel Parker to imagine that heshould render the Nabob an essential service bydisarming his officers.No proof, however, had been given of this suspicionbeing well founded ; but Mahboob's troopshaving saluted Colonel Parker with twenty-oneguns, the latter considered a salute so givento be a mark of defiance, and demanded in theNabob's name the surrender of the guns ; a refusalbeing given he attacked them within twenty paces;the affair lasted ten minutes, Mahboob's troopswere routed, and Colonel Parker obtained possessionof the whole park of artillery. It was statedthat the Vizier had dismissed Mahboob from hisservice502 Ri£ AND Profess OF THE ICuArw IX.1775. service and had declared him a traitor; thankingBiKOAL. Colonel Parker for his services. It was neverthelessasserted that Mahboob had been since at the Viziercourt, and received with some degree offavour. Notwithstanding these untoward events,the Government were led once more to expressa hope that the dominions of their ally wouldshortly recover from the state of distraction andanarchy into which they had been plunged.View* of the The Directors received with regret and disap-the proceedings ointment accounts of the continued differencesment **^*™ and dissentions in the Supreme Council. Farfrom disapproving a difference of opinion, theydesired that each member should express his sentimentswith freedom, and record his dissent toany measure of which he might not approve ;but they observed with much concern thewarmth of altercation exhibited, which discussionsthreatened to destroy that mutual confidenceand respect so essential to the good of thepublic service.They entirely disapproved distant expeditionsand expensive wars ; they drew a marked distinctionbetween operations essential to preservethe honour of Government or the safety of theCompany's possessions, and those undertaken formere pecuniary advantage. They declared thatthe revenue regulations of 1772 were intended notonly to exclude the servants and dependents ofcollectors from holding lands on farming lease,butChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 603but likewise the servants of^all Europeans, and 1775.above all, Europeans themselves, without any **««^»-distinction. Having fully investigated the chargesagainst Cautoo Baboo, they adopted a series ofresolutions which condemned the conduct of thePresident and Council in having permitted thebanian to hold lands. They stated their convictionthat sums had been paid by parties holding farms,contrary to the regulations, and conveyed theirpositive command that not any person in their serviceshould presume to ask or accept, directly orindirectly, any present, gratuity, reward, or benefitfrom any farmer of the Company's lands or revenues.Nor was the farmer to receive more fromthe ryot than was specified in the portal under theregulations. No farmer was to rent lands abovea specified amount, hereditary zemindar excepted,and excepting also occasions to prevent inconvenience.The regulations prohibiting the loan of moneyto zemindar, farmers, or riots, were to extend toall servants of every denomination, and theofifeaderwas to be suspended. As monopolies in the handsof individuals in the out-settlements tended todistress the country, the Directed's desired thatmeasures might be devised to prevent any undueinfluence from operating to the prejudice of thefair trader.The observations and suggestions submitted byGeneral Clavering on the military expenses of Government,504 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.177& government, were highly applauded, and the conductBEM9AU ^f ^jj^ majority commended, as well as their indefatigableassiduity and laborious researches for thewelfare of the Company and of the natives.*Letters to Bengal, December 1775, January and April1776.CuAT.X.'] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 505£zp6ditioiiCHAPTER X.During the negociation with Ragobah,* intel 1774.5.licence reached Bombay that the Portuguese „J^"^^'authorities at Goa contemplated the conquest ofSalsette. To avert such an event, the Councildetermined to avail themselves of the dispositionor the inhabitants to deliver up that island to theCompany. The Resident at Poonahh was to makesuch proper representation of the circumstances aswould prevent its operating unfavourably uponRagobah, during the pending discussions on theterms of the proposed treaty.The forces under Brigadier-general Gordonleft Bombay for Salsette on the 12th December,and reached the fort of Hannah on the followingday. Operations being forthwith commenced,it was taken by storm on the 28th. The Company'sforces suffered considerably; amongstthose who fell was Commodore Watson, the superintendentof marine. The loss of this gallantofficer was greatly regretted by the Government,who caused a monument to be erected to hismemory at the Presidency, and the DirectorsappointedFt(2e page SunriseAND PROOBB88 OF THS[Cbat. X.1775.BXNOAL.Supreme Governmentci&l^for Reportsfrom Madreand Bombay.Nabob orAbbot.appointed his nephew a writer on the Bombayestablishment, in testimony of their sense of theCommodore's services.Before the enterprize had been undertaken ,though not previously to its being determinedon, a letter was received from the Council inBengal, announcing their assumption of the SupremeGovernment under the Regulating Act, anddesiring to be informed oi the whole of theproceedings regarding Salsette and the generalstate of the Presidency. A similar requisitionwas at the same time made to the governmentof Madras.The demand was immediately met by bothPresidencies. The Bombay Council anticipatedthat their measures would be appreciated andapplauded by the Governor-general.The following extracts are given from theReports.Madras.The Nabob of Arcot is the Company's ancient ally. Thepossessions he holds, including the Tanjore country, areestimated by the best accounts,* at upwards of two crore ofrupees. His force, by the best information we can procure,consists of ten battalions of sepoy, who may be consideredas regulars, being commanded by European officers, accoutredIt appears somewhat extraordinary, that with so close analliance as that which subsisted between the Nabob, generallystyled the Nabob of the Cambric, and the Company, the Madrasgovernment should not have possessed more ample as well asmore correct information.Chap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 507tree and disciplined after the European manner, and a 1775.battalion of five hundred topmasts* He has also four regis Bxmoal.intents of cavalry, with guns and artillery-men attcK^hed toeach ; and he is at present raising two more, besides theirregulars he maintains, which may be estimated betweenten and twelve, thousand. The regiments of cavalry arehis best troops, having been disciplined by European officerslent to him fix>m this establishment.As the Company^s interests on this coast are so materiallyaffected by their connexions with the Nabob, and as misunderstandingsand jealousies have long subsisted, which,notwithstanding our utmost endeavours to remove do stillexist, we think it necessary to enumerate some circumstances,which may serve to give you an idea thereof. Some timeafter the capture of Tanjore, when we had reason to bealarmed by the preparations of the Dutch, in collecting aconsiderable force at Negapatam, and when an army ofM mahratta was threatening the peace of the Camatic, wethought proper to represent to the Nabob the necessityof putting a garrison of the Company's troops into Tanjorefar the better security thereof; but although every argumentwas used for that end, he would not consent to it, declaringthat he considered the place sufficiently secure in thecharge of his own troops. When any measures are adoptedby the Nabob which are inconsistent with good policy orthe interests of his country, we never fill to use our endsyours, by reason and argument, to dissuade him from them ;but having no constraining power over him, the option stillremains with himself, either to acquiesce in our ideas or toadhere to his own opinion. We are not only responsible forthe safety of the Company^s possessions, but we are alsocharged with the protection of the Camatic, without anycertain resources to provide for the exigencies of a war. Tothe Nabob we are obliged to look for money, provisions,bullocks,508 RISE AND PftOOKESS OP THE [Chap. X.177& bullocks) and in short for almost every article necessary toBxvoAL. enable us to equip and maintain an army in the find ; andconsequently it rests with him either to give those suppliesor not, as the measures we recommend may coincide withhis views. The truth of this was fully evinced upon aleoent occasion, when we were threatened with an invasionby the Mahratta, as we have mentioned before. TheNabob seemed averse to every measure which in prudencewe thought necessary to adopt for the safety of the country,and we were given to understand that, as his resources dependedsolely on the revenues of his country, in case thatwas involved in war, it would be out of his power to supplyus with either money or provisions, and it was in consequenceof this declaration that we applied to your presidencyfor a supply of numen, when it was uncertain how soon theCamatic might be attacked. The danger of such a systemis too apparent to require animadverting on.Connexions of With regard to the connexions of the Nabob with theser powmT European and country powers, we enclose you copies ofthe treaties subsisting between him and the French andDutch, and the Rajah of Travancore. We know not of anyother alliances that he has entered into, independent of theCompany. A correspondence has for a considerable time pastbeen carried on between him and Hyderr Ally Cawn,but fromthe jealousy which they entertain pf each other, there appearslittle probability of a hearty union ever taking place.French force at The force of the French at Pondicherry is nearly as^ ®"7' follows : between nine hundred and a thousand Europeans,and about four hundred blacks, including Sepoy, Cai&ees,and Sibbendis. Their revenues and customs are said to beone hundred and thirty-four thousand rupees a year, andtheir annual expenses two hundred and sixty-four thousandrupees.WithCiiAF. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 6Q9With respect to the Dutch, they have sent back the troops 1775.which they had collected at Negapatam, soon after the Bekoal.reduction of Tanjore, and have reduced their militaryestablishment to its former force, and the Sepoy, whichthey had entertained at the same time, have since beendisbanded.Dutch force.Bombay.The Portuguese at Goa have lately received a considerable Portugueseforce.reinforcement of troops from Europe on two men-of-war,and two others are expected with a further supply of troopson board.Alluding to their connexion with Broach, the Reportstated : " The unwarrantable conduct of the Nabob ofBroach, in evading a compliance with every article of atreaty entered into with him, in the year 1771 determinedus, in the support and credit and interest of the Company,to procure effectual satisfaction; and in consequence wesent such a force from hence in the beginning of November,1772, as reduced the town of Broach, which, togetherwith the territories dependent on it, so far as the Nabob hadpossessed them, became the property of the Company.Immediately after this acquisition, we fixed a Chief andCouncil at Broach for the government of the town and per-gunners, and for the collection of the revenues, with asuitable garrison for its defence.The Guicowar Mahrattass, whose capital is Baroda, is TbeMahmttas.tributary to the Paishwa or Poonahh Mahrattass, and shortlybefore the present divisions broke out amongst the latter,Ragobah appointed Gt)vindrow, who is the brother of FuttySing, to be supreme in the Guicowar government, andwhat was more material, he furnished him with an army tosupport his claims. With this force Govind Row soongainedHis AND Prioress OF THE[Cmjlt. X.1776.BsKaAL*Of the Scindefactory.Persia.The Chaiibf ,(Arabs).gained possession of the creoles put of the Guioowardominions, his brother, Futty Sing, shutting himself upin Baroda, about thirty does from Broach, and in thissituation they have continued fcv some months pastAt Tattah, situate aa the river Indus, the Companyhave a factory, under a resident and one other servant, whoare placed there merely to endeavour at selling their w<x>llengoods, for which the Company hare an extensive grant ; butas their factory is itself very unimportant, from the smallquantity of woollens that is annually disposed of, and as itis unconnected with the political government of the country,which is extremely bad, it is unnecessary to speak furtherof it here.At the time the kingdom of Persia was in a flourishingstate, the Company had factories for the vend of theirwoollen commodities in various parts of it, and enjoyedmany valuable grants and privileges ; but this trade decayingby the intestine troubles and divisions that tore thatkingdom to pieces for many years after the death of NadirShaw, when neither the persons of their servants nor theireffects were secure in the inland parts, their factories wereat length withdrawn, and reduced to the single one at Grom-brown, where the agent and council resided. The insultsand oppressions they had experienced in the factories inland,followed them in some degree to Gombroon, which, togetherwith the trade of that port, being turned into anotherchannel, induced the Company to order, about twelve yearsago, that the agency or chief settlement in thegulph shouldbe withdrawn from thence, and established at Bussorah,where till then one or two only of the Company's servantsresided, for the disposal of their woollen goods, which wasdone accordingly, and it has since continued so.At the top of the Persian Gulph, between the riverswhich disembogue themselves into it, are the Clubs, a tribeofCharon.] British POWER IN Il^BIA. 511of Arabs, wboae territories li partly within the Turkish 1775.and partly within the Persian dominions, and his dependance BsiraAL.on both, he (the chief) ought to acknowledge by paying anannual tribute ; but from the situation of his country, whichis very difficult of access, and from his being possessed ofa marine force, consisting of about fifteen galivats, whichis superior to that either of the Turks or Persians, he hasat times refused to acknowledge his dependance on either.The Company have a fort, with a sufficient garrison to Teliiclierry.protect it fix>m the country powers* under the establishmentof a chief and council. It is situated on the territory of aMalabar prince, called the king of Colastria, who granteda small district to the Company. This factory is kept solelyfor the purchase of pepper, sandal-wood and cardamoms.The territories of several other Malabar powers are adjacentto this, but they have lately been subdued.The Company have also a factory at Calicut, where one calicut.of their servants resides, chiefly for the provision of plank,masts, and timber. This factory is under the orders of thatof Tellicherry. Calicut was subject from time immemorialto a prince called the Comorin, till the last year, when itwas taken by the forces of Hyderr Ally, with the rest of theZamorin^s dominions, who fled no one knew whither.In the progress of the negociation with Ragobab,he consented to make a deposit of a certain sumin consideration of the military aid he was toreceive from the Government. Being unable tofulfil the condition, he consented to a treaty, whichwas concluded on the 6th March, ceding for ever Treaty withto the Company, Bassein, Salsette, Jambooseer,and Orpad, with the islands of Catania, Canary,Elephants, and Hog Island. In consideration ofthese5 1 2 RISE AND PRCN3RESS OF THE (Chap. X.1^5. these cessions, he was to be assisted with a forceBewail. ^f ^^j j^gg ^jj^ 2,500 men, of which 700 were tobe Europeans, and a train of artillery : 1,500 onlywere to be immediately supplied, and the rest,if wanted, afterwards.* A force under ColonelKeating, consisting of 1,500 rank and file, wasaccordingly sent to his aid.The Bombay Government, in advising theHome authorities of their proceedings, requested ,in consequence of *' the many services they hadin hand, in which the European soldiers are undoubtedlythe life of the cause'' that a supply ofrecruits might be sent out to them.Before the detachment could join Ragobah, hisenemies, through bribery and other means, hadinduced many of his troops, who were mostlyArabs, to desert him. They then attacked thequarter where he was posted, and ultimatelyHe 11 obliged obliged him (he not knowing how far the treacheryhad spread) to fly, with a body of 1,000 horse,towards Cambay. The Nabob of that place, seeinghis situation, and dreading the power of hisenemies, refused to admit him. By the advice ofthe Company's agent at Cambay, he made his waytowards Bownagur, where he found a vessel belongingto the Company, in which he embarkedon the 23d February. He reached Surat in safety,and was received as an ally and friend of the Company.Two principal chiefs in his army, Conderowand• Fide Printed Treaties, p. 540.Chaf.X.] BBITISH power IN India 513and Govindrow, with a force of not less than ^''75.25,000 men, being within forty coss of Cambay, ®""^^"-and still in his interest, and many others beinglikely to join them, the Bombay Governmentacceded to the desire of Ragobah, that he shouldproceed to Cambay, accompanied by ColonelKeating, where he anticipated success against theenemy. They left Surat on the 15th March ; inthe interim, by supplies from Madras, the forceunder Colonel Keating was increased to 2,500.The junction was effected on the 28th April, whenthey proceeded towards Ahmedabad, instead ofPoonahh, as contemplated by the Council. Variouscauses, followed by the setting in of the monsoon,protracted the termination of the operations, whichit was confidently anticipated would restore Rago-bah to full authority at Poonahh, as chief of theMahrattass. The accession of revenue arising outof the cessions, was expected to make Bombay'' turn out annually advantageous and profitable,instead of being a burthen to the Company."While the Council were awaiting the openingof the season to renew the campaign, they receiveda dispatch on the 12th August from Bengal,censuring the whole of their proceedings,and positively requiring that their designs shouldbe relinquished, and their forces withdrawn totheir garrisons, let affairs be in what situation theymight, unless their safety should be endangeredby an immediate retreat ; at the same time plainlyVOL. I. 2 L hinting514 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Gar. X.1775. hinting, that unless the commands of the SupremeBmoAL. Government were punctually complied with, theyshould exercise the authority vested in them bythe Act, in support of their controlling powerover the political concerns of the Company inIndia.The Governor-general wrote at the same timeto Sacra Bapoo, the chief of the confederacyagainst Ragobah at Poonahh, acquainting him ofthe total want of authority and power on the partof the Bombay Presidency to act as they haddone; and the Supreme Council deputed Upton to Poonahh in the characterof plenipotentiary, for the purpose of concludinga treaty with the confederates there.The Council at Bombay felt indignant at themanner in which the Supreme Government hadexercised their new powers, ignorant as they confessedthemselves to be of the affairs connectedwith the Mahratta states, and the interests of theparties at Poonahh. They observed that their deputingan officer, even less conversant with therelation in which the Company stood towardsthe M mahratta states than the Government of Bengalitself, was calculated to place the whole ofthe Company's affairs in a state of danger, and unnecessarilyto degrade the authority of the BombayPresidency.They represented to the Supreme Governmentin the month of July, that the Company's forceshadChapel.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 515had in every engagement gained advantages over 1775.the enemy, but in consequence of Rajfobah's troops ^*»<'^'-/. 1 /v» . 1 . . 11 Success ofproving far less efficient than was anticipated, they company's1-11^ 1 forces in favourrequested a supply both of men and money, to of Ragobau.secure the advantages which could not fail to accrueto the Company. A similar application wasmade to Madras. Another communication wasaddressed by the President of Bombay, on the6th of August, to the Governor-general and Council,advising them of the advantages obtainedthrough Futty Sing, the Guicowar, having quittedthe ministerial party at Poonahh, and concluded atreaty with Ragobah, to whom he was to furnishsuch troops and money as had been usually suppliedby the Guicowar to the Paishwa. Notwithstandingthese altered circumstances. General Majority su.Clavering, Colonel Monson, and Mr. Francis support on""^supported the order for the Bombay troops being of company'swithdrawn. They also interdicted the supply of u^K."'*^ ^^aid from Madras. Mr. Hastings considered that m^. Hastingsthe changed situation of Ragobah authorized the ^^^^"'required assistance. This difference of opinionfrom what he originally expressed, having drawndown on him the severe animadversions of themajority, he stated that in discussing a point soimportant to the safety of the Company's interests,he felt it to be of little moment, whether his opinions,which had no weight in the political measuresof the existing administration, were exactlyconsistent with each other or not, yet it concerned2 L 2 hisA6file AND Progress OF The[Chat. X.1775.Bknoal.Col. UptonreachesPoonahh.Retires toBombay ;which governmentis authorizedto negociatewithRagobah.his credit to defend them, and he accordingly referredto his former proceedings in proof thatthere Meas nothing inconsistent in the opinions hehad given. The majority still determined that noreinforcements should be sent from Bengal orMadras, but agreed to extend the pecuniarysupply to twenty lacs.The Nabob of the Carnatic having expressedan earnest desire to be included in any treatyeffected through the instrumentality of ColonelUpton, the Bengal Council consented to theNabob's deputing Mr. Chambers from Madrasto Poonahh, for the purpose of conferring withColonel Upton, on the Nabob's intentions.*The latter officer reached Poonahh on the 30thDecember. The negociation proving unsatisfactory,he made various references to the governmentat Bombay, to ascertain their views on thegeneral question. That Government had resolved,notwithstanding the peremptory ordersfrom Bengal, to continue the Company's forceswith those of Ragobah, which were encamped atSurat, until a treaty should be concluded.Colonel Upton being at length constrained toretire to Bombay, the Supreme Government determinedto remove the restrictions imposed uponthe subordinate presidency, and authorised theBombay Council to conclude a treaty with Rago-bah. In furtherance of this object, a force wasprepared• Letter from Bengal, November 1775.Chap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 517prepared at Calcutta to proceed by sea to Bomb '"^^^bay. Instructions were also sent to Madras forthe Council there to render all possible assistance.Communications were at the same time made bythe Governor-general to Hyderr, to the Nizam,Holkar, Scindiah, and other chiefs, urging themeither to join in supporting Ragobah or to observea neutrality. Greneral Gordon at Bombaywas to assume command of the troops belongingto the Presidency, and Colonel Upton those fromBengal.These measures were scarcely determined upon Treaty con.^1 I-ii* 1-11^1 eluded 8t PoorCalcutta, when intelligence reached the Su nab.prime Council, from Colonel Upton, that theministers at Poonahh had agreed to a treaty ofpeace, which had been signed at Poorunder onthe Ist March 1776. It consisted of twentyarticles, the third of which declared that, in accordancewith the wish of the Paishwa, the islandof Salsette and the small islands adjacent wereto be restored by the English, they receiving inexchange a country valued at three lacs of rupees,with the clout, in the neighbourhood of Broach,all subject to confirmation by the Bengal Government.That portion of the Guzeraut countryceded by Ragobah to the Company, was to berestored to the Paishwa.* Ragobah 's army wasto be disbanded within one month. In the eventof his not acceding to this stipulation, the Englishwere• Fire page 511.518 BISE AND Progress OF THE [Chat. \.1775. were to separate from him. A residence, with aBekijau limited personal establishment, and an annualstipend being secured to him. The treaties withthe Mahrattass, of 1739 and 1756, were to remainin full force. The Paishwa agreed to pay twelvelacs of rupees, in part of the expenses of the Englisharmy. The treaty was confirmed by theSupreme Government with the exception of thepart relating to the surrender of Salsette, whichColonel Upton formally declared would not begiven up, nor would the proffered territory inexchange be accepted by them.Half the detachment prepared for service atBombay, with upwards of two lacs of treasure,had been despatched from Calcutta before intelligencewas received there of the treaty of Poor-under.*Ragobah, as was to be expected, declared thathe would never accede to the treaty. He referredto that which he had solemnly entered into withthe English nation in 1774 : he determined, therefore,to reject every other proposition, and tothrow himself upon the protection of the BritishGovernment. The authorities at Bombay accordinglyresolved to receive him into one of theCompany's settlements.The orders of the Directors fully authorized theretention of the cessions made by Ragobah. Theycondemned• Letter from Bengal, Marli and May 1776.Chi. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 619condemned the policy observed by the Supreme 1775.Government towards the Bombay Presidency, ^"'"'^^and the interdiction of the aid originally intendedto have been sent to that presidency fromMadras.*The Paishwa not having made his stipulatedpayment to the Company, Colonel Upton wasdirected by the Supreme Government to quitPoonahh and repair to Bombay, from whence hewas to carry on his negociations. The BombayCouncil, as well as their representative at Calcutta,Mr. Taylor, most strongly protested againstthis additional indignity. After protracted andunsatisfactory discussions, the minister at Poonahh,at the close of 1777, intimated, through Mr. ,the Resident from Bombay, a desire to cometo some accommodation with Ragobah. TheGovernment of Bombay adhered to their opinionthat he was the rightful head of the Mahrattass,and that his elevation would alone secure the interestsof that empire with those of the Company.The French, who had at this time obtained access French atPoonahh •to the Court of Poonahh, exerted every eliot,through M. Bellecombe the Governor-general oftheir settlements, to extend the French influencein India. He had sailed from Bengal to takepossession of Mah6, and to confer with M. F.Lubin then at Poonahh.In♦ Letters, November and December 1776.520 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChaf. X.1775 In March Its, a revolution broke out atBkhoal. Poonahh in favour of Ragobah, in whose name aproclamation was issued for restoring peace andorder. In July, the Bombay Council declaredthat the treaty concluded by Colonel Upton hadbeen violated by the Durbar proceedings; andthat they were consequently freed from its obligations.They also declared that measures hadbecome imperatively necessary to defeat the intriguesof the French, who had been long exertingthemselves in schemes hostile to the English.*ia^p^'iuuro. '^^^y proposed to place Ragobah in the regencywh, and form at Poouah, and that he should conduct the treaty with ®«"■• government in the name of the Paishwa. This latterarrangement appeared to be in consonancewith the views of the Court of Directors. fThe necessary operations consequent upon thisdetermination could not be commenced until themonth of September. In October, a treaty wasconcluded with Ragobah, by which the Companywere to assist him with 4,000 troops to conducthim to Poonahh. :j;During these proceedings on the western sideof India, the attention of the Bengal Council wascalled to the conduct of Lord Pigot, Governorof Madras, towards the Rajah of Tanjore ; and toan♦ Secret Letter from Bengal, April 177at Letter to Bombay, July 1777. J Fide Printed Treaties.Craf.X.] BRITISH Power IN India. 521an appeal from the Nabob of the Camatic in relay >776.tion to the measures of the Rajah. The affairs of ®""^""these two Native chiefs continue even to this distantperiod of sixty years to occupy the attention ofthe home authorities, including that of Parliament.A brief reference will be made to the relationin which the Nabob and Rajah stood towards eachother, and towards the Government of Madras,when the unprecedented event of the arrest andimprisonment of Lord Pigot took place.Tanjore had been considered in the light ofa tributary to the Nabob of the Camatic, whoexacted, as he did from his other tributaries, whathis power enabled him. The Company were aparty to the original treaty of 1762, and whilstbound to see it fulfilled, they felt it equally importantnot to support the Nabob in reducingTanjore so as to bring it immediately under hisGovernment. The Select Committee at Madras,in July 1771, expressed their desire to avoid beingparties in subverting the established governmentof any power with whom the Company had politicalconnexion. Should the Rajah of Tanjore besubdued by the Nabob, they felt it would be betterto restore the Rajah or some more fit person ofhis family upon the throne, he paying a certainpresent and assigning territory as security for repaymentof the expenses that might be incurredby the Company on his behalf. The Directorsfully approved of this view. No sooner, however,had522 BI8E AND PROGRESS OF The IIChat. X.1775. had the Committee at Madras expressed their in-BwMOAu tentiQug tQ the Court, than they determined toleave the Nabob, sho was the inveterate enemyof the Rajah, to negociate personally with thestate of Tanjore : thus, in point of fact, surrenderingthe Rajah's interests to the will and capriceof the Nabob. The Council intimated to thelatter, that whatever might be taken from theRajah in forts, money, or otherwise, should beleft at his disposal. Tanjore was attacked andsubdued. When intelligence reached the Directorsof this event and of the treaty of 1771, theystrongly reprobated the conduct of the MadrasCouncil. They deprecated the estrangement thatit would necessarily occasion on the part of theRajah. They animadverted upon the extraordinarycourse subsequently pursued by the MadrasCouncil, who, without awaiting the Court's viewson their proceedings of 1771, declared Tanjorehumbled ; the treaty of 1762 to be positively annulled; and adopted a resolution to aid the Nabobstill further, by withdrawing the troops sent againstthe Nalcooty and Marawar Polygars, and detachingthem for operations against Tanjore.These measures determined the Court to removethe Governor, Mr. Wynch, and to appoint LordPigot as his successor, to whom instructions weregiven to replace the Rajah of Tanjore on themusnud ; he agreeing to admit a detachmentof the Company's troops to garrison that settlement,Chap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 523ment, as well as to ensure regular payment of 1775.the Nabob's demands, and to watch and count ^■''oal.tract the intentions or intrigues of any Europeanpower in their attempting to form connectionsinimical to the Company's interests. Anaccount of the garrison was to be laid before theIlajah every three months, and the surplus of theassigned lands, after defraying the proper charges,was to be faithfully restored to him. The Companyfelt that justice required the Rajah shouldbe placed out of the power of the Nabob, at thesame time that the former should not be protectedin withholding the proper tribute that was due tothe Nabob.The Directors then expressed their views generallyregarding the Company's territories on thecoast. After the affairs of Tanjore were settled,the Council were instructed to nominate a Committeeof Circuit, for the purpose of investigatingthe state of the Jaghire and the Northern Circars.They were to ascertain, with as much exactnessas possible, the produce of the Circars, the numberof inhabitants, the state of the manufactures,the fortified places, the gross amount of revenues,and the sources from whence derived ; the modeof collection; the specific proportion receivedannually by the Rajahs or Zemindarss, and thatwhich custom had allotted to the cultivator inreward for his labour. A particular, statementwas to be given of the security which the nativehad\524 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Cha». X1775. had for bis property ; of the courts which existedBxiroAu ^^^ ^^ administration of justice, and how farregulations, similar to those in Bengal, might beintroduced into the Circars. They expressed anearnest desire to secure to the Rajahs or Zemindartheir annual income, free from the necessityof maintaining an armed force to compel payment.The proportion of the produce to be received bythe farmers was to be ascertained, and no moreto be exacted.These orders manifested an anxious desire toproceed upon sound principles, in effectually providingboth for the security and happiness of thepeople, and the just and fair claims of the state.Subsequent events effectually checked the inquirythus ordered to be carried forward, andpostponed to an indefinite period the acquisitionof the necessary data, upon which to form a rightconclusion on the important measures which theCourt had in view.Lord Pigot took his seat as President and Governorof Fort St. George on the 11th December1776.The Council at the first meeting, expressed theiropinion that great delicacy would be necessary inannouncing to the Nabob the purport of theinstructions with which his Lordship was chargedby the Directors. After repeated interviews betweenthe Nabob and the President, his Lordshipfrankly stated, that it was impossible to permitTanjoreChapel.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 525Tanjore to remain under his management ; that 1775measures must be immediately adopted to restore ^■*«^'the Rajah ; and that troops would be ordered totake the field for such purpose. The Nabob representedthat many groundless reports had reachedEurope. He declared that the misconduct of Tullin connexion with the Dutch, the Danes,Hyderr, and others, together with his havingassigned and mortgaged lands, dependencies ofTanjore, to other European nations, threateningto call in the Mahrattass to disturb and laywaste the Carnatic, and attacking the Nal-coots and Marawar Polygars, were some of thecauses which had shewn the necessity of hisacting ; and added, the King ** of Great Britainhad sent to congratulate me on the success ofmy troops !" affording another proof of the inconvenienceof the missions from the crown ofAdmirals Sir John Lindsay and Sir Robert Har-land.*The Nabob closed his appeal by declaringthat he would agree to put Company's troops intothe garrison at Tanjore ; that he had placed hislife and honour, and those of his children, in thehands of the Company, and had fixed his residenceat Madras ; but to the proposition to giveback the fort and countries of Tanjore to Tulland to bring disgrace upon himself, — whatanswer could he give? He said, *' I have beenlong a friend of the Company ; my Other's lifewas• Fide pages 291, 308.526 RISE AND PBOORESS OP THE [CiiAr. X.1775. was sacrificed for them, my riches have beenBBMaAL. expended in their service, and I now beg fromtheir friendship that they will have pity upon anold man's grey hairs ! "This appeal was calculated to interest the mostindifferent person in wishing that the claim of theNabob should be acknowledged, but it was in truthprompted by an implacable hatred to the Rajah ofTanjore, and a thirst for power and acquisitions.Lord Pigot was not to be diverted from hispurpose : he determined to carry the Court'sorders into effect. The fort was garrisoned bytroops under Col. Harper, and the Rajah set atliberty. His Lordship proceeded in person torestore the Rajah. A difference of opinion aroseas to what military powers could be exercised bythe President out of the fort. Sir Robert Fletcherobjected to orders being given to Col. Harper toobey Lord Pigot, The Nabob at the same timeurged delay until answers had been received fromEurope, as he was sure no such orders wouldhave been given had the facts been fully stated.Lord Pigot nevertheless proceeded to Tanjore, andissued a proclamation, restoring the Rajah, who, inaddressing his Lordship, said, '' Had I a thousandtongues, I could not express my gratitude." Atthis time Mr. Paul Benfield, whose name was sofrequently before the public in connexion with thecreditors of the Rajah, preferred a statement of hisdemand to the Council. Lord Pigot referred lotheCiiAP.X.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 527the Act of 1773, which he considered to recognise its.just claims only. His Lordship had suggested the disappointmentof a Resident at Tanjore, and submittedMr. Russell's name for the oflSce; Col.Stuart was opposed to his Lordship's proposition.That officer himself being proposed by themajority for the station of commandant of Tanjore.Lord Pigot refused to put the question ciapproval on the orders to Col. Harper to deliverover the command to Col. Stuart. The majorityof the Board insisted upon their right to decide,and called upon the secretary, should the presidentpersist in his refusal, to put the question toeach member, beginning with the youngest.After the letter had been approved and signed.Lord Pigot took it from the secretary, and intimatedthat he should stop the matter where itwas. His Lordship then charged Messrs. Strattonand Brook with issuing orders subversive of theestablished authority, and the majority with adesire to overturn the government. They protestedat the same time in the strongest manneragainst the arbitrary act of Lord Pigot. The proceedingsterminated in the arrest of his Lordship,and in his confinement at the Mount, under theorders of the majority. The admiral, Sir EdwardHughes was invited by the Council, who, as themajority, had assumed the government, to attendthe Board on the 25th of August, in order that hemight have explained to him the circumstancesrelative528 Rise AND PBOORfiSS OP THE [CuAr. X.1715. relative to so extraordinary a proceeding as the®*"®^ seizure of a governor. After hearing their statementshe requested to be furnished with a copy ofthe proclamation and of the Commission constitutingthe government of Madras. On the 27thSir E. Hughes addressed the Board :RaplyofSir In reply I have only to say, that, as a good subject,^ * and a hearty well-wisher to our country and the Company,and as the known friend of all parties, it will be difficultfor me to express to you my amazement and sorrow at suchdisagreements, productive of such extraordinary consequences.You may naturally be led to suppose, gmdemen,that situated as I am, and finding you in possession of thegovernment of a presidency, I am ordered by his Majestyto communicate with you for the common cause, and forthe welfare and interests of the Company. I shall joinyou in all such measures tending to those desirable ends,when you may find proper to call for my assistance.On the same day the Admiral wrote to theBoard, stating that Lord Pigot having claimed theprotection of the King's flag, ^' I am to require, inhis Majesty's name, that you give orders for hisLordship's safe conduct to my ship." On the4th September Sir Edward Hughes attended acouncil of the government, when various questionswere put to him as to his becoming responsiblefor Lord Pigot if his lordship should be givenup to him. Sir Edward Hughes declined to answerany question until he received a reply to ibisletter of the 27th : one was accordingly writtenon 4th September, and placed in his hands. TheAdmiral'sChap. XO: BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 529Admirers reply was made on the 6th, and stated i77e mthat the requisition for safe conduct to his ship ^MA°DYAr**being made in the King's name, no terms could beadmitted. He could only repeat and again require,that safe custody might be given his Lordship tothe Admiral's ship."The Council sent the following reply to theAdmiral : —As loyal subjects to his Majesty and faithful servants Proceedings atto the Company » we shall always shew the greatest general inrlIonn%S!tion for the sacred name of his Majesty, and the utmostrespect to the British flag ; but, having no proof that hisMajesty empowers any of his officers to require the removalof any servant of the Company in a similar situation withLord Pigot, from under the authority of the Company'sGovernment, we beg to add that this is another reason whywe cannot surrender his Lordship.The Admiral replied to the communication fromthe Council on the 7th September: —I confess I should have been disappointed to have beentold that you had any proofs before you, that his Majestyhad empowered any of his officers to require the removal ofany servant of the Company in a similar situation withLord Pigot I believe, the case to be unexampled, and Ifeel in my heart that I have done my duty to his Majestyand to my country in making the requisition. I must leavethe results and all iU-consequences with you.The Supreme Government determined to supportthe majority as the legally constituted governmentunder the Court's orders, a copy of whichVOL, I. 2 mRISE AND Progress OP THE(Crap. X.1776.7a they transmitted to Lord Pigot, with the announcement of the resolution they had adopted.The Council at Bombay having declared it tobe their intention to support Lord Pigot, theGovernor-general remonstrated in the strongestterms against the irregularity of their resolution,and the dangerous effect which might be producedby an appearance of disunion between them andthe Governor of Madras.*Colonel Monson being precluded by ill-healthfrom attending the Council, the foregoing proceedingswere sent to him for his informationand concurrence ; he expressed his sense ofthe attention shewn \o him by his colleagues,but stated that he thought any opinion givenwhen absent from his seat in council wouldbe unconstitutional, he therefore declined tooffer any opinion, although he had little doubt heshould have united in the sentiments of theBoard. This gallant officer removed to Hooghlyfor change of air, where he expired in the nightof the 25th September.General Clavering had written to the Directorson the 23d of that month, representing thatColonel Poison's illness had long deprived theBoard of his invaluable services. He stated, thatthe Government of Bengal had in fact been vestedin the hand of Mr. Hastings and Mr. Barwell foran♦ Secret Consultations, 10th September 1776.Death of Col.Monson.Cbap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 531an indefinite lime, by the Governor-general's cast irro-ming vote: "men whose conduct you have cens ^^^0^x1"^sured in every letter of this season, but whoseprinciples are so incompatible, that my duty toyou, to the public, and to myself, oblige me todeclare that I do not hold myself responsible forthe safety of these provinces whilst the governmentcontinues conducted as it now is." He concludedby requesting that the King's ministersmight be informed of his intention to resign hispost of councillor and commander-in-chief, inthe month of November or December 1777.The whole of the proceedings regarding the we«>iutionof^ , ^ ^ ^^ Propnetoreonarrest of Lord Pigot were reported to the Home Loi Rgot*«authorities from Madras, on the 24th September1776. On the 9th May following the GeneralCourt passed a resolution, highly disapproving ofthe removal of Lord Pigot, but at the same timerecommending the recall of his Lordship and thatof all the members of council, in order that theirconduct might undergo a full inquiry. The resolutionwas passed by 414 votes to 317. The matterwas likewise taken up in Parliament. HisLordship's death, which occurred on the 11thMay, was, in a great measure, caused by theeffect of the proceedings upon a naturallyirritable frame. He was succeeded by Mr.Rumbold.The Directors had resolved to order the restores Order of Directorsas totionof Lord Pigot, and appointed Mr. (afterwards pJ^^^J^^JJ.2 M 2 Sir ments.532 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. X.me-m Sir Thomas) Rumbold second member of countcil, with succession to the government. In consequenceof the embarrassment occasioned at thisjuncture by the proceedings of Mr. Benfield andother parties contracting pecuniary engagementswith the Rajah of Tanjore, and with othercountry powers, specific commands were sent outprohibiting all persons from being concerned insuch transactions. Regulations were likewise laiddown for the guidance of the Council in future.1. The opinion of the majority was to bind the minority; but in the event of equality of votes, the Presidentwas to have the casting voice.S. Any question proposed in writing was to be put bythe President, or, in his absence, by the presiding councillor.3. In the event of the President refusing to put thequestion, the councillor next in succession was to proposeit ; and on his declining, the third member present, andso on.4. All orders and instructions were to be issued in thename of the Grovemor and Council, although the Grovemormight dissent.5. The Council was only to be dissolved by a vote ofthe majority.6. No councillor was to be suspended, but by the votesof three parts in four of the members resident at the presidency.No governor possessing a commission from theCourt was to be' imprisoned or removed, except for felony,breach of trust, or unfaithfulness to the Company.7. If the President refused to summon a council whenrequested by three members, then the secretary was tosummonChas. X.]BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA.aumincHi a meeting, on receiving a requisition for that purposein writing.8, Unless a council had been so summoned, no proceedingsof a meeting, although of the majority, were tobe valid.9. No officer, civil or military, was to obey any ordersfrom the government, unless issued in the nsime of thePresident and Council, countersigned by the secretary.Inquiries were ordered to be made into allegations thatpresents had been received by Lord Pigot ; ad ColonelStuart was suspended for the term of six months, to admitof a full investigation regarding his proceedings.* Major(afterwards Sir Hector) Munro, was appointed commanderin-chief.1776-7aBbmoal anUMadras.Bengalona new RevenueAnother subject of difference in the BengalCouncil arose on the question of a new revenuesettlement. That which had been concluded ■^"^•"^"^in 1772 with the farmers for five "years, failed toproduce the expected improvement, because theyhad engaged at a higher rate than the districtscould afford. The matter had occupied the attentionof the Government in 1775 : in November1776, Mr. Hastings recorded a minute, jointly views of Mr,with Mr. Barwell, and submitted a plan foradoption in the provinces at the expiration of thethen existing term. Amongst the proposed provisionswere the following : —That all taxes which had been imposed upon the riotssince 1764-5 should be entirely abolished.That the Twenty-four Pergunnahs should be sold asseminariesLetters to Madras, 11th June and 4th July 1777-Hastings.RISE AND PROGRESS OP THE[Chap. X.1776-78.Bbmaal.Views of Mr.PniDcit.seminaries by publie auction in lots not exceeding ajumna or rent-roll of 20,000 or S0,000 rupees. Therevenue to be paid by the purchasers to be settled on anaverage of the three preceding years collections, with anallowance of fifteen per cent to be deducted for charge ofcollection and their profits. The revenue to remain fixed atthat rate during the life of the purchaser, the Governmenthaving liberty to sell if the zemindar should be deficient inhis payments.That all the other districts in Bengal should be farmedout on leases for life, or for two joint lives, to such sensiblepersons as should offer the most advantageous terms,allowing the preference to the zemindar. It was not tobe in the power of Government to change or deviate fromthem on any occasion, or for any pretence whatsoever. Thecontinual variation in the mode j>f collecting the revenue,and the continual usurpation on the rights of the peopleproduced by the rapacity or remissness of the MogulGovernment, and in that of the English by a desire to acquirereputation from a sudden increase of collection, withoutsufficient attention to remote consequences, had fixed inthe minds of the Riots a rooted distrust of the ordinancesof Government. No assurance, however strong, would persuadethem that the laws which had no apparent object butthe ease of the people and the security of property, could beof longer duration, unless confirmed by a stronger pledgethan the resolution of a fluctuating administration.Mr. Francis considered that the opinion of thegoverning power, being the proprietor of the soilunder the constitution of the Mogul government,was erroneous, and that a permanent Fixed tributeought to be determined, instead of acting uponthe principle of raising the greatest possible revenueChap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 535venue from the country, a principle which had 1776.78.prevailed from the acquisition of the Dewanny , and ^"«^'"under which he was satisfied the Government hadbeen living upon its capital, or in other words, hadannually taken a portion of the existing wealthwhich ought to have been reserved for future production.He urged at considerable length, andwith great ability, the necessity of establishingsome general fixed system of policy for thegovernment of the country, and not to aim at purchasingimmediate advantage, inconsistent withthe permanency of our dominion, or the welfareof the natives. It would be absurd, he observed,to propose a plan for the internal settlement of thecountry, without taking it for granted, in the firstinstance, that ere long it will be determinedwhether the natives of Bengal are to acknowledgeone sovereign, or to be subject to onegovernment, or whether they are to be left intheir present state, divided between their nativeprince, claiming the title of soubahdar, whosegovernment, the Company tell us, they are solemnlybound to support; the emperor, whoserights, as lord paramount, inherent in the constitutionof the empire, have for a number of yearsbeen acknowledged by the Company ; the presidencyof Fort William, who hold the sword byagreement with the Nabob, as they do the grantof the purse from the emperor ; and lastly, acourt of judicature, exercising an unlimited jurisdiction536 Kite AND Progress OF TU£ ICma*^ X.1796 7a jurisdiction through the provinces in the name of'^'^ the King of Great Britain. The decision of thisgreat question must originate at home. Four thepurpose of forming an internal settlement, it issufficient to suppose that the undivided sore*reign shall be assumed and declared by hisMajesty, whether directly and to all intents, orwith a reserve of the actual government to theCompany. The sovereignty once declared, thesubsequent question, viz. in what manner it maybemost expedient to exercise it for the penna*went benefit of the governing power, will be relievedof a great part of the difficulty which nowattends it."Ten years had not elapsed since the Companystood forth in the character of Dewan, under thegrant to them of the revenues of Bengal, Bahar,and Orissa. It was too much to expect thateither sufficient time had been given, or thatmeans had been possessed by the Government,to enter upon the inquiry with a reasonablehope of arriving at anything like a satisfactoryresult, even under the suggestion of Mr. Hastings;still less could it be expected that the preliminarypoint insisted upon by Mr. Francis couldbe decided, at so early a period of the Company'sacquisitions. The minute of Mr. Hastings wasframed for a practical result ; that of Mr. Fran •cis, able as everything was which proceeded fromhis pen, contemplated a prospective measure,whichCiiAp. X.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 537which he little anticipated would have required i776-7ahalf a century to effect, and that the attempt at anearlier attainment of the object would be followedby the exclusion of the distinguished leader ofhis party from the councils of his Sovereign formore than twenty years.Nothing final resulted from these proceedings ofthe Government. But the period drew nigh whenthe Governor-general felt that the new settlementwould necessarily press itself upon their attention,and must be decided. He accordingly recordeda minute in the month of November 1776, Farther minutein which he posted out the necessity, before kings.coming to a decision, of being previously furnishedwith accurate statements of the real valueof the lands, and the grounds upon which theyshould be prepared. To obtain them he feltwould be a work of labour requiring much officialknowledge some management, and unremittingapplication, in comparing and collating theaccounts of the past collections, in digesting thematerials which might be furnished by the provincialcouncils and deans, in issuing ordersfor special accounts and other materials of information,and in deputing native officers on occasionalinvestigations. He felt the impossibilityof the Revenue Boards conducting a business ofsuch detail, and that it could not be left whollyto the provincial councils, as it required uniformityin its design, authority in its execution,and538 Rise AND Progress OF THE [Ciuur. X.1776.7a and an extraordinary share of responsibility tobekoal. animate the zeal of those who should be entrustedwith the charge of it. He therefore proposedthat a temporary office should be constituted toexecute the business, under the conduct of one ortwo covenanted servants of the Company, assistedby a dewan and other officers, either selectedfrom the office of the khalsa, or occasionallychosen for special commissions. To ensure des*patch it was proposed that all orders issued fromthe office, when sanctioned by the Board, shouldbe written in the name of the Govemor*general,and that the control of it should be committed tobis immediate charge.oppoMd by This suggestion met with the most determinedMessn.Claver. . . ,inland Fiwicis. opposition ou the part of General Clavering and Mr.Francis. The latter recorded sundry minutes inreply to that of Mr* Hastings. General Claveringdeclared it to be an attempt on the part of theGovernor-general to assume an authority which beconsidered to contravene the constitutional formof the Council, and that the intention of the measurewas to exact from the people the utmost revenuethey could pay.The proposal was at length carried by the castingvote of the Governor-general. Messrs. Bogleand Anderson, together with the Accountant-general,were to form the Board. Letters beingproposed by Mr. Hastings to 'the provincial councils,calling upon them to aid in promoting themeasure.CaAF.X.] URrnSH POWER IN INDIA. 539measure, and that the members of the Supreme Jew -t^-Council should sign them, Mr. Francis opposedthe extension of such power to the councils, asunwarranted by law, and as being inconsistentwith the general duties of a councillor.Greneral Clavering would be no party to deprivehimself of any of the rights that had beenassigned to him as a member of the Government ;he protested against the intended measure;* hedeclared he would not sign the proposed letters,and that, to the utmost of his power, hewould render every person liable for every actdone by them in virtue of an order issued by Mr.Hastings.The letters were nevertheless ordered to be sentforward. Protests and rejoinders were recordedon the proceedings of the Government. Thesubject was closed by Mr. Hastings observingthat he thought it had been exhausted, andreferring to his minute for a reply to the argumentsurged against it.In announcing this measure to the Directors,the Governor-general and Mr. Harwell urged intheir justification, that some preparatory meanswere necessary to the formation of the future settlementof the province at the close of the existingsettlement. If the Council were not unanimousin their choice of these means, it was undeniablynecessary that the choice of that part inwhich the constitutional majority coincided shouldprevail.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Cbat. X.J776.7a prevail, and it was equally clear that the acts ofBbnoau g^j^jj majority were the acts of the Government,and they considered that General Clavering andMr. Francis, in refusing to be bound by the majority,were guilty of a breach of the law. ** Unfortunatelythe power which we possess is butaccidental, and its duration uncertain. The declaredexpectations of the change to take placein this government, with the arrival of the Eaglepacket, favoured, perhaps, by the severity of yourlate censures on us, and the indulgent sentimentsexpressed to our opponents, tend to scatter doubtsand distrusts in the minds of the people, to weakenour authority, and to sanctify every oppositionto it'ni"'*'urtfMr ^^ **^^ opinion of Mr. Farmer, the Company'sHastings* men. standing counsel, the measure of investing Mr,Hastings with the proposed independent powerwas illegal and contrary to law.In its progress, the conduct of some of the nativeamiens, who had been sent into the interiorfor the purpose of collecting documents, wasstated to be cruel and unjustifiable, and that theyhad beaten and otherwise ill-treated the natives.In order to ascertain the legality of their exercisingwhat was considered to be such unbridledGeneral cia sway. General Clavering, in May 1777, advisednatlvw!"^**'''*' the Directors that he had determined to support,in a civil suit, a native writer who had been ill-treatedin the district of Rajeshaye.DifferencesChap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 54 1Differences continued to distract the Council. 1776-78.The opponents of Mr, Hastings declared that he ''■'•**^'-had never clearly avowed the object of theinquiry which he had instituted ; they still urgedits illegality and bis desire to raise the revenueat the expense of the zemindar, who hewas charged with desiring to deprive of theirinheritance.He disavowed these motives ; '' I am entitled tocredit, because, in the first place, I am certainlythe best judge of my own intentions ; and in thesecond, it would be the height of imprudence tomake such a declaration on a point not ultimatelydepending on my will, if I really meant to actcontrary to it. But I will not stop at this negativedeclaration. It is my earnest wish, and my unitedobject, in the enquiry which I have set on foot, toestablish an equal, an easy, and a perpetual assessmentof the public revenue, to collect it through thezemindar, where they are capable of the charge,and to employ other means where they are not,still reserving to the zemindar a fixed proportionof the net revenue arising from their lands."In reply, General Clavering declared, that Mr.Hastings evaded what he could not defend, andmisrepresented what he avoided to answer ; andlest the art with which his minute was drawnup, intended as it was to deceive those who hadnot leisure to compare documents, might throw aveil over facts, which it was vainly attempted toremove.542 Rise AND Progress OF THE [Cigar. X.i77e.7a remove, he should sit down to point out that hisBmoAL. declarations, combined with his conduct, did infact amount to nothing less than a subversion ofthe Government, and that he was convinced ofthe justness of the remark made by an eminentpersonage in England, on reading his defence ofthe Rohilla war, '' that the arguments it containedwould even have been unworthy of Mrs. Rudd"*Mr. Hastings alluded to General Clavering'sminute in the following terms : 'Mt is beneath areply. He may continue to revile me with languageyet grosser, if grosser can be invented.This, with the other evils attendant on my presentsituation, while I continue in it, I must bear, andhe knows it."The Court of Directors having considered thevarious circumstances connected with the letting ofthe lands, as communicated to them from Bengal,!directed that only annual settlements should beentered into, and the lands to be let for each succeedingyear on the most advantageous terms. IneveryThis female was tried as an accomplice with the Messrs.Perreau, who were executed for forgery in 1775. Withoutquestioning the delicacy of the comparison, it establishes beyondall doubt the fact that Mr. Hastings' opponents did notconfine their differences to the council chamber, but were incorrespondence with influential parties opposed to him in Englandas the defence was not sent home till October 17749 themonth in which the new councillors reached Bengal. Videpages 410 and 419.t Fide pages 413-425.Chap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 543every disposal of the lands, they enjoined that a i776 ts.strict preference should be given, and every indulge ^«»o*'-hence shewn, to the native inhabitants, and that noEuropean, or the servant of an European, shouldbe permitted to hold any share.Demands were to be made for outstandingbalances but should cases requiring lenity arise,the Court authorised the remission of such part, oreven the whole, its might appear proper in thejudgment of the Governor-general and Council.The Court cautioned the Government againstsudden transitions from one mode to another, inthe management and collection of the revenues,as being calculated to alarm the inhabitants. Atthe same time they admitted the importance ofascertaining with precision, as far as possible, whatrevenue could be properly collected from thecountry without oppression. As the distance ofmany of the districts from Calcutta, would renderit necessary for the zemindar or farmers to treatwith the provincial councils, or other agents ofthe Company, hereditary zemindar were to becontinued, where they could with safety to therevenues, and were to enjoy their seminarieson terms sufficiently moderate that they mightmaintain a degree of respect amongst their dependants.This object the Court directed might bekept in view in every agreement made with them.After having ascertained the various taxes or collectionsthat had been imposed upon the districtssince544 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Ciur. %,I776>7a since the Company's acquisition of the denny,bbvqal. jjj^ Council were authorised to abolish the whole,or such part thereof, as might appear to weighoppressively oh the country. Wherever lands hadbeen let at a reasonable rate, and the zemindar orrenter fulfilled his engagements to the satisfactionof the Government, no such party was to be dispossessedof, or compelled to pay an advancedrent, without the most substantial reasons for suchadvance, and even then the occupant was to havethe preference over all others, and to be sufferedto continue at a moderate additional rent. But inall instances where the increased value should notbe considerable enough to become an object toGovernment, no zemindar or renter was to bedispossessed or molested, but permitted to enjoythe fruits of his industry and improvements, andto renew his lease or agreement from year to year,without any increased rent.If the provincial councils were not found toanswer the intended purposes of their appointment,the Government were directed to form a new planfor the collection of the revenues, and submit thesame to the Court's consideration.*Only four months had elapsed from the despatchof the foregoing instructions to Bengal, when theDirectors received an account of the measuresadopted in pursuance of the Governor-general'sminute• Letter to Bengal February 1777.Chas. X] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 545minute of November 1776. The Court lost no i776-7atime in conveying the expression of their surprise ^•^^'^^and concern, that after seven years' investigation,the information was still so incomplete, as torender necessary another and still more extraordinaryinnovation than any of the former. TheDirectors remarked, that in 1769, supervisors werenominated expressly to investigate the subject.In 1770 controlling councils of revenue were substituted.In 1772, the office of Naib Dewan wasabolished, natives were discarded, and a committeeof circuit formed, who it was stated hadascertained, distinctly and precisely, what wasnecessary to be known — but now, two seniorservants, with the assistance of a few natives,were to be employed to collect and adjust materials.The Directors did not disapprove of theattempt to get additional information, but expressedtheir decided disapprobation of the conduct ofthe majority. They observed that the Governor-generalhad no power to act upon his own responsibility— they fully concurred in the views ofGeneral Clavering and Mr. Francis, and were ledto believe that the Governor-general had availedhimself of Colonel Monson's death to act as hehad done. They expressed their astonishment atnatives being deputed on the intended investigation,and observed, if a committee of circuitand council of revenue, composed of the mostintelligent of our servants, and armed with all theVOL. I. 2 N power'546 RUE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. X.iT7<j.78. power of the Presidency, could not obtain theBcKoaL. necessary information, from whence were thenatives to acquire it V *^mThm^** An incident had occurred shortly before thisiiv8 tewiePid time, in England, which led to the belief that aliy Mr. Mac .leave. change would have forthwith taken place in theSupreme Government.On the II th October, a letter was received bythe Court of Directors, dated the 10th of thatmonth, from Lachlan Macleane, Esq., to the followingeffect: —** Gentlemen :—Mr. Hastings seeing the necessity of unanimity inthe Supreme Council in Bengal, for conducting the affairsof the Company there, and for establishing any permanentsystem of government for the good and prosperity of thatcountry, and finding from the unhappy divisions which havesubsisted in the Supreme Council, that such union is notlikely to subsist, and having anxiously, on every occasion,studied to promote the welfare of the Company, a conductwhich he will ever continue, has from these motivesauthorised, empowered, and directed me to signify to youhis desire to resign his otRce of Governor-general of Bengal,and to request your nomination of a successor to the vacancywhich will thereby be occasioned in the Supreme Council.L. Maclean."** Ix)ndon, lOth October 1776.''The Court, in order to satisfy themselves of theauthority under which Mr. Macleanee acted, in amatter of such very great importance, desired hisattendance.• Letter from Bengal, July 1777.Chaf.X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 547attendance. On being introduced, he expressed 1776-78.his readiness to give the Directors every satisfies Bengal.tion on the point, but as the subject was mixedup with others of a nature extremely confidential,he was prepared to submit the same to the inspectionof any three members of the Court, andthen withdrew.The Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, andRichard Beecher, Esq., were empowered to makesuch inspection. On the 23d October, they reportedto the Court, that having conferred with Mr.Macleanee on the subject of his letter presented tothe Court on the 11th, they found that, from thepurport of Mr. Hastings' instructions, containedin a paper in his own hand writing, given toMr. Macleanee, and produced by him to them,'* Mr. Hastings declares he will not continue inthe government of Bengal, unless certain con ,editions therein specified can be obtained," of whichthey see no probability : and Mr. George Vansittarthas declared to them, that he was presentwhen these instructions were given to Mr. maclean,and when Mr. Hastings empowered Mr.Macleanee to declare his resignation to the Court.Mr. Stewart likewise confirmed to them, thatMr. Hastings declared to him, that he had givendirections to the above purpose by Mr. Macleanee.The Court conceiving that Mr. Macleanee wasacting upon full authority, unanimously resolvedto accept the proposed resignation.2 N 2 Mr.BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. X.177e-78.BBVOAft.1777.Proceedingsthereon atCalcutta.Mr. Wheler was appointed to succeed to theoffice in the Council, which would become vacantby the said resignation, subject to His Majesty'sapproval.A memorial from the Court of Directors to hisMajesty, praying that effect might be given tothe foregoing measures, was approved by theCompany's counsel, and transmitted to LordWeymouth, for the purpose of being laid beforethe King ; which memorial, after being amendedagreeably to a suggestion made by his Lordship,was presented to his Majesty, who was graciouslypleased to approve of Mr. Wheler's appointment.A commission of government was accordinglyprepared, declaring that, on the resignation ofMr. Hastings, General Clavering would succeedas Governor-general under the Act, and thatMr. Wheler would succeed as councillor under theforegoing appointment.The first official proceeding which appears tohave taken place in Bengal, on the measures athome, occurred on the 20th June, when Mr.Barwell, as he was proceeding to the councilchamber, received a note signed **J. P. Auriol,Secretary," requesting him to meet in councilby order of General Clavering, "Governor-general."At the same time a letter was presented toMr. Hastings from General Clavering, requiringhim to deliver up the keys of Fort William andof the Company's treasury.Mr.CHAr. X.] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA* 549Mr. Hastings replied that he knew of no act of ^Tn.resignation on bis part and that it was his deter ^"^^^mention to retain the office : he then caused aninjunction to be issued in writing to ColonelMorgan, the commandant of Fort William, not toobey any other orders than those from Mr.Hastings as Governor-general. A summons wasissued by Mr. Hastings to Mr. Francis to meet incouncil, and Mr. Auriol, the secretary, receivedinstructions to issue orders for a meeting of theCouncil through Mr. Hastings only. The judgeswere also assembled at the instance of Mr.Hastings, for the purpose of their opinion beingobtained on the critical position in which the Governmentwas placed. Mr. Barwell had ineffectuallyendeavoured to obtain a perusal of theletter from the Court of Directors, purporting toconvey their orders as to the new Government.Instructions were sent off to the commandantsat Bankipore, Pinafore, and to Mr. Baber, thechief commissioner of the Council at Moorsheda-bad to obey only the orders of the Governor-generalunder the Act of Parliament.The Court's instructions, with the whole of thepapers, having been submitted for the opinion of thejudges at Calcutta, they expressed their opinion"unanimously, clearly, and decidedly, that Mr.Hastings had not resigned. It was quite evident thathe was not dead, that he was not removed, andthat he had not resigned." Adverting to ColonelMacleanee's550 Rise AND PBOORESS OF THE [Charon.1777. Macleanee's letter, they remarked that it was no re-BmoAL. stagnation but the expression of a desire to resign,and that the appointment of Mr. Wheler was to anoffice which would become vacant and not whichhad; and that the resignation of the Governor-generalwas a proposed resignation. This, and noother, the judges observed, could be the Court'sintention. In conclusion the four judges stated,'* we have given the papers and the subject severalhours* consideration, wishing to deliver such anopinion as from the reasoning of it, not from itsauthority, might claim weight sufficient to preventthe fatal consequences of a divided government,but we do assure you that none of the time hasbeen taken up in settling a difference of opinion.There is not one point of it, from the first to thelast, in which we have not entirely concurred.We transmit it in strong hopes that it may havethat effect, the consideration of which could onlyhave led us to deliver any opinion at all, and mostardently praying God that it may avert the mischiefswhich seem to impend over the East-indiaCompany and this country."On the 21st June, a proclamation was agreedto by General Clavering as Governor-general,which was ordered to be translated into thePersian and Bengallee languages. The Persiantranslator felt it to be his duty to decline translatingit without the order of the Governor-general.GeneralCBAr.X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 551General Clavering took the following oath as 1777.Governor-general, "I swear that I will faithfully ^«"*»^'-and diligently discharge the duties of Governor-generalof this presidency of Fort William." Indictating the minutes of council he designatedhimself as Governor-general. It was also resolvedthat the commandants of stations should bedirected to send their returns to the Governor-general,until a new commander-in-chief wasappointed.On the 22d June, the Council being assembledby Mr. Hastings, they resolved that GeneralClavering had actually superseded, assumed, andtaken possession of the place and office of Governor-general,and of the Presidency of Fort William.That he had relinquished, resigned, surrendered,and vacated the oflSce of second member of council,andThat he had also relinquished, resigned, surrendered,and vacated the office of commander-in-chief.Mr. Hastings then preferred a charge againstMr. Auriol, for having acted as secretary to theCouncil, without instructions from him as ,and it was made a standing orderthat in future all principal secretaries shouldattend the Governor-general and Council whenassembled, and that they should not attend officiallyor receive orders from any individual memberof the Board.When552 RUE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. X.1777. When any member should call for the .j^gg^ ^^^ Qf jjjg deputy secretaries, or one of theclerks was to attend him. The members presentat this meeting of the Council were, Mr. Hastings,Mr. Barwell, and Mr. Francis.On the 24th June, Mr. Francis recorded aminute in which he remarked *' every thing is atstake, every thing has been hazarded, I fear, bysome degree of passion and a great degree of precipitation;much may be retrieved by prudenceand moderation. I trust it will appear that I havegiven a signal example of both, not only in myimmediate and implicit acquiescence in the decisionof the judges, but in my present attendancehere. Let me have the honour and happiness ofassuming the character of mediator."This judicious and well-timed minute, and thefurther opinion of the judges which had beensought on the occasion of General Clavering's assumingthe office of Governor-general, and therebyvacating that of commander-in^hief, led Mr.Hastings to move in council on the 25th : ^'That,under the advice of the judges, the Council dorecede from putting into execution all their resolutionspassed since the 20th instant, and that allparties should be placed in the same situation inwhich they stood before the receipt of thoseorders. This resolution was unanimously agreedto. Thus terminated a matter which, but for theopinion of the bench and the interposition of Mr.Francis,Chap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 553Francis, might have involved the settlement in 1777-manarchy and confusion. Bbkoal.Mr. Hastings addressed the Court of Directorson the subject, on the 16th August.No event of my life ever befel me for which I was solittle prepared as the news of the notification made byColonel Macleanee. Your acceptance of that notification,your nomination of Mr. Wheler, your application to theKing for its approval, and his Majesty's approval thereof —acts so solemn in their profession, so important in respectto their object, and concluded by an authority so sacred,that although I knew them to be invalid, the grounds onwhich they were built being defective, yet my confidenceforsook me, and I thought of nothing but to submitmyself to the hard lot which had been imposed upon me.I could not disavow the declaration made by ColonelMacleanee, without appearing adverse to a man who hadgiven me the most undoubted proofs of his friendship,and even in this instance in which he exceeded his powers,had been actuated, I knew, by a sincere and honest, thougha mistaken and too precipitate zeal to serve me. I couldnot arraign the justice of those whose approbation I haveever sought as the first reward of my fidelity and incessanttoils for their service; neither would the high respect whichI bear to an instrument having his Majesty ''s royal signature,however obtained, allow me without the greatest reluctanceto disclaim the principle on which its effects depended.On the other hand, I could not ratify the promise whichhad been made in my name, without making an ungratefulreturn to the Company for the honourable support whichthey had so successfully bestowed upon me, nor withoutbranding my own character with falsehood and deception,after the repeated protestations publicly and loudly madeby me, that no consideration of private convenience nor impatience554 RISE AND Progress OF THE [CuAr. X.1777.7a patience of injury should prevail upon me, to make a luxury surrender of the trust which had been committed tome; but that I would retain my seat in this Governmentuntil a clear decision was passed between me and my opponentsin it, or until I should be removed fitmi it byauthority''Not having been able to learn the authoritiesupon which so uncommon a measure had beenconcluded, he observed,^< I am compelled to declare, that I do not hold myselfbound by the notification of Mr. Macleanee, nor by anyof the acts consequent of it''In support of his decision, as one which hadbeen governed by the sentiments he invariablyexpressed regarding his intention, notwithstandingthe measures of his opponents, to retain his officeuntil removed from it by competent authority, hereferred to various extracts from his former lettersas corroborative of such a determination : andthen remarked,<^ From what had passed here and in England once theconstitution of the new government of Bengal, my mindhad been framed to the expectation and patient enduranceof any event which I thought could have befallen me; butI must own that it was unequal to the last, for surelynothing can exceed the humiliation of being deprived of atrust of the first importance perhaps under the BritishEmpire, by an imputed act of my own, without even theformality to verify it, which would have been requiredfor the acceptance of a common note of exchange*"ThroughoutBengal Revenue Consultations, June 1777.Cup. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 555Throughout the whole of this extraordinary i777-7aproceeding, the Court of Directors appear to have Bengal.been governed by a simple desire to give effect towhat they believed to be the express wish of Mr,Hastings. They j justly deemed it a matter of suchvery great importance that they thought fit toobtain all the proof they could of Mr. Macleanee'sauthority. They were satisfied with the proofadduced in support of it; and, in order to avoidall error in framing the commission under whichthey for the first time exercised the power of appointinga new councillor subject to the approvalof the Crown, they submitted the instrument forthe opinion of counsel under whose sanction itwas issued, never, however, for a moment contemplatingthat the subject would become matter forjudicial decision in India. This circumstancepresented another instance of the inexpediency ofacting in matters of grave importance, affectingboth the interest of individuals and the welfare ofthe Government, upon mere private authority,however apparently sanctioned. The Court publiclyanimadverted upon a course which had ledthem, as well as Mr. Hastings* agents, into a mosterroneous conception of his meaning, and theyexpressed their decided opinion that Mr. Macleaneehad been invested with full powers by Mr.Hastings, who, it was clear, had evidently specifiedsome distinct propositions requiring somethingto be done or performed as the condition of theGovernorsRISE AND Progress OF THE [Chat. X.i777-7a Governor-general being confirmed in the Government.Bengal, ipjj^ Court remarked that Mr. Hastings was atthat time, and had been for many years in fullpossession of the Government, and be had also beenactually recently confirmed therein by a mostsolemn Act of Parliament, which Act was fall andcomplete, and stood in no need of confirmation,of which he must* have been aware when he gaveinstructions to his agents.*General Sir John Clavering, after an illness offourteen days, expired on the 30th of August, andwas succeeded in the temporary command of thearmy by General Stibbert. The Court of Directors,before official accounts reached them of the event,addressed the Supreme Government, stating that,to their inexpressible concern, they had receivedundoubted intelligence of the death of Sir JohnClavering. They passed a warm eulogium on hispublic conduct, which they felt had entitled himto their highest esteem and confidence, and theyconsidered his death a great public loss to the East-indiaCompany and to his countryLieutenant-general Sir Eyre Coote was nominatedto the Bengal Council, and commander-in*chief of all the Company's forces in India.The decease of Colonel Monson and GeneralClavering, both of whom had been instrumentalin promoting the treaty concluded by ColonelUpton,Letter to Bengal December 1778.t Letter to Bengal, May 1778.Chas. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 657Upton, left the majority of the Supreme Council i777-7aand the presidency of Bombay agreed as to the b*»«^**course to be followed with regard to the Mahrattass.The Supreme Government resolved, that theBombay presidency were warranted by the treatyof Porringer in supporting Ragobah ; that theBritish government were also entitled to anyfurtheradvantages that might be obtained by negotiation,as a compensation for the hazard and expense incurredby their interposition and assistance. TheCourt of Directors, in a despatch to Bengal of the5th February 1777, expressed their concern thatthe cession of Bassein by Ragobah had not beeneffected. The defeat of Hurry Punt the Mahrattaby Hyderr, and the intestine broils at Poonahh,determined the Council at Calcutta to despatch aforce under Colonel Leslie, overland, from Bengalto Bombay. It commenced its march from on the 4th May 1778. Captain Munro, witha detachment of the force, was cut off* by someravaging horse a short distance from that place.The progress of the force was so slow, andColonel Leslie manifested such want of judgmentin forming an unauthorized treaty with somenative chiefs on the route, that the Governmentappointed Colonel Goddard to take charge of it.He was also authorized to supply the place of Mr.Elliott, a civilian, who died as he was proceedingon a mission to Berar, in order to effect a treatywith the rajah of that province, in furtherance ofthe558 Rise Ani PROGRESS O^ THE [Chat. X.1777.7a the policy determined upon, to enable him to .force his claims to the throne of the Ram Rajah ;and also by establishing himself in the Mahrattaempire, to give him effectual support against theNizam.In November 1778, the Bombay Council sentforward Captain Stuart with a detachment of grenadiersepoy to take possession of the Born Ghaut,a pass through the mountains of much importanceas opening the way to Poonahh, which was withinfifty miles of it. The object was effected, and thepass fortified.The remainder of the forces left Bombay on the23d November. They took possession of the fort ofBillapore, which guarded the entrance of Panelsriver, where they were joined by Colonel Egerton,who assumed the chief command of the army,consisting of 100 European artillery, 539 Europeaninfantry, and 2,689 sepoy, together with 600 artillerylascars. The forces arrived at Panels onthe 25th, and on the 13th December reached Cam-holy,at the foot of the ghaut, where Messrs.Mostyn and Carnac joined Colonel Egerton, withwhom they formed a committee for the generalconduct of the expedition.On the 1st January they marched from Conceal,a village immediately beyond the pass. On theroute they were harassed by the enemy, who appearedwith a body of 10,000 horse. Lieutenant-colonelCay was mortally wounded by a rocket.OnChap. X.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 559On the 4th, the army advanced towards Poonahh, im-is.where they suffered a great loss in the death of b«»«^"-Captain Stuart.Colonel Egerton shortly afterwards relinquishedthe command from ill-health, and was succeededby Lieutenant-colonel Cockbum. On the 9th theyreached Corrygaum, a considerable town aboutsixteen miles from Poonahh, but which had been previouslyburnt and abandoned. Instead of findingsupporters of the pretensions of Ragobah, it wasdiscovered that the enemy were in great force underthe orders of the Poonahh ministers. It wasaccordingly determined to fall back, as far as mightbe requisite to secure supplies and to preserve acommunication with the Concan, or the countrybelow the Ghauts. They were attacked in theretreatonthe morning of the 11th before daylight,by the enemy, who had received intelligence oftheir intended movement. The attack was continueduntil four o'clock in the afternoon, whenthe army effected its retreat to Organum.On the 14th, Messrs. Holmes and Farmer weredespatched to the Mahratta camp to propose termsof accommodation. Nothing short of the surrenderof Kagobah could induce the enemy to enterupon the consideration of terms. Ragobah desired,in the hope of effecting an arrangement, toproceed to the Mahrattass. Madajee Scindiahalso declared that a new treaty must be enteredinto, as that concluded by Colonel Upton had beencompletely560 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chaf.X.1777-78. completely broken. A convention was signed atnroAi« Organum,* by which Ragobah was to be givenup, and Salsette and the other conquered countriesrestored to the Mahrattass ; Messrs. Farmerand Stuart remaining as hostages until the treatywas confirmed by the Bombay Government. Theyrefused to ratify it : and in this refusal they weresupported by the Supreme Government.Moodajee Bhonsla, the rajah of Berar, althoughaware of the object entertained by the SupremeGovernment in supporting his pretensions to thethrone of the Ram Rajab, used every exertion toproduce a friendly understanding between thecourts of Poonahh and Calcutta, and effected thedismissal of some French officers of note from theformer city. At the same time he expostulatedwith the Governor general against the expeditionof Colonel Goddard, and pointed out the dangerto which the detachment would necessarily beexposed in passing through the Mahratta states.His representation was ineffectual. ColonelGoddard was sent forward, and though made acquaintedon his route with the convention of Organum,by which he was to return to Calcutta, heproceeded on his march, and reached Surat inFebruary 1779, with full powers to treat with theMahrattass for the restoration of peace on thatside of India, but with strict injunctions againstadmitting the French, or giving up any of theconquestsVide Printed Treaties page 552.CuAY.X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 561conquests or accessions. Colonel Goddard had i77s-79.been advanced to the rank of brigadier-general. Bkhoal.Before entering upon his mission, a circumstanceunexpectedly occurred which it was conjecturedmight lead to very important results.Ragobah, since his separation from the Englishforces at Telligaum, had remained under chargeof Madame Scindiah, who, though desirous ofretaining possession of his person with a view topolitical advantages, treated him with every markof respect, and even left his artillery and most ofthe forces he had brought with him from Bombay,to accompany him on the march to the placedestined for his reception, Scindiah's dewan, with4,000 horse, being appointed to escort him. Theyreached the Nerbuddah : when, preparing to crossthat river, Ragobah attempted to make his escape.An action ensued between his forces and those ofthe Dewan : the latter was mortally wounded,and his troops totally routed. Ragobah immediatelyproceeded towards Broach with 4,000horse and twenty guns, and joined General goddardcamp on the 13th June 1779.The Supreme Government, anticipating theprobability of the Poonahh durbar protracting thenegotiation with General Goddard, desired himto demand, within twenty-four hours, a definitiveanswer to the propositions then under discussion ;and to intimate that refusal or delay would beconstrued into a declaration of war. The vakeelVOL. I. 2 o from562 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. X.1780. from Poonahh declared that no peace would beBcKOAt. made unless Salsette was relinquished and Rago-bah delivered up: hostilities were accordinglydetermined upon.*At the instance of the Bombay Council, Goddardconcluded a treaty with Futty Sing Guicowar, onthe 26th January 1780, who ceded to the Companya portion of Guzerat, south of the Tapped, knownby the name of Attaveezy, with their share of therevenues of Surat and engaged to supply 3,000horse ; in return for which he was to have Ahmedabadand other possessions, from which thegovernment of Poonahh was to be entirely excluded.Goddard besieged and took Ahmedabad, the capitalof Guzerat, by storm on the 15th February 1780,and on the 28th, in pursuance of the treaty, FuttySing was put in possession of the city and countryof Ahmedabad. After concluding this arrangement,Goddard proposed moving with all expeditionto meet the combined army, which hadbetween twenty and thirty thousand horse. Forthis purpose he sent off his heavy artillery andstores to Surat. He left Ahmedabad on the 2dMarch, and moved with such rapidity, that on the8th he arrived within two miles of Barodaiund sixteenof the camp of Scindiaand Holkar, which heintended to have attacked that night had not overturesbeen made by Scindia through Messrs. Farmer♦ Letter from Bengal, 14th January 1780.f Fide Printed Treaties, page 555.CiiAr. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 563met and Stuart, the hostages, who had been re- ito.leased from the M mahratta camp to treat with the •'®«"*'^'-English. The aggrandizement of Scindia and thepossession of Ragobah appearing to be the objects,the overtures were rejected, and on the 3d Aprilthe Mahratta force was completely defeated byGoddard. Subsequent engagements took placewith various English detachments, in which theM mahratta were repulsed and dispersed. The mostimportant was the surrender of Bassein to theforces under Goddard, on the 20th December,after which the English army went into quarters forthe rainy season. During these operations the suppliesremitted from Bengal to Madras and Bombayamounted to nearly a crore of rupees.In order to improve the financial resources of sait monopolythe Government, Mr. Hastings proposed that the ^^^^^'salt monopoly should be resumed in behalf of theCompany. This article was supplied to the inhabitantsfrom what was obtained from the earthimpregnated with sea-salt at the mouth of theGanges, betwen Balasore and Chittagong. Theinland trade in salt had been vested in an exclusivecompany for the benefit of the European servants,but discontinued by the Court's orders of 1766.Restrictions had been introduced to secure theinterests of the natives. The trade was thrownopen, but regulations were framed to preserve thepublic• Letter from Bengal, 6th January 1781.2 025G4 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. X.1T78-79. public against the monopoly of opulent nativesBncAu combining to oppress the manufacturers. In 1772,the salt in every part of the province was placedon the same footing : it was to be manufacturedfor the Company, and the manufactories in eachdistrict were let for five years. A certain quantitywas to be delivered to the Company at a givenprice, to be dealt out to the native conductors ofthe inland trade, who had made advances to aidthe farmers in the payment of their labourers employedin the manufacture. In 1777, the practiceof farming was continued, but the produce wasleft to the farmer's disposal. As the amount ofrevenue was not equal to what a more judiciousmanagement would yield, a new system was suggestedby Mr. Hastings,* under which all the saltwas to be manufactured for the Company, andsold for ready money at moderate fixed rates, to beascertained and published at the beginning ofevery season by the Governor-general in council.The suggestion of Mr. Hastings was strongly opposedby the Council, but the result more thanjustified the Governor-general's anticipations.The first three years yielded a net revenue of£464,000, and the three years before the governmentof Lord Cornwallis, of £522,450.Parties of the Seiks, having crossed the Ganges,entered Rohilcund and commenced depredations ;butConsultations, September, October, and November 1780.Letter from Bengal, November 1782.CflAY. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 565but were soon repulsed by the temporary brigade, 177879.a portion of which was detached to the Ghauts for ®*"«^'"the purpose. Fyzula Can at this time offeredto raise and maintain a force in aid of the Companyduring the war with France, and without hesitationimmediately formed a body of five hundred men.The Rana of Gohud, then described as ''a Treaty withchief south of Agra," made overtures for effecting hud.a treaty with the Company to secure himselfagainst the Mahrattass. The terms were agreedto and signed on the 2d December. The Companywere to furnish a force for the defence of hiscountry on paying 20,000 Muchildar rupees foreach battalion of sepoy ; nine-sixteenths of anyacquisitions were to go to the Company. TheRana was to furnish 10,000 horse, whose combinedoperations might be determined on againstthe Mahrattass. Whenever peace took placebetween the Company and the Mahrattass, theRana was to be included, and his present possessions,with the fort of Gwalior, were to be guaranteedto him.*The state of the national interests at home had Difficulties ofat all times a material influence on those of the Imr^l^^y^Company ; who derived temporary pecuniary aid Jfh^me.***'"at particular junctures by advances under votes ofParliament, which advances were invariably repaidto the country. It was not, however, so much fromthe want of money, as in the supply of physicalforce,• Treaty, 2d December 1779.566 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. X.1778-79. force that they experienced the greatest difficulty.bbkoal. Their commerce suffered from the inadequacy ofnaval protection, and their European arm wasessentially crippled in India, from the impossibilityof procuring a sufficient number of recruits.Never were these effects more seriously feltthan in the years 1778-9. Great Britain had tocontend with her revolted colonies ; the attemptto detach France from America failed, and Britishships were seized in French ports without thecountry possessing the means of retaliation. Theinefficient force placed at the command of AdmiralRepel constrained him to return to port in theface of the enemy, and ultimately led to his trialand highly honourable acquittal by a court-martialat Portsmouth, followed by the thanks ofParliament ; where a motion was made to removeEarl Sandwich from the head of the Admiralty.The effect of such a state of things could not failto reach India. It was severely felt from thesuperiority of the French fleet in that quarter.The Government of Bengal devised all possiblemeans to add to the force under Admiral SirEdward Vernon. The Company's ship Resolutionwas equipped as a vessel of war, and mountedwith forty guns ; the ship Charlotte yt^s purchasedby the Council, and fitted in the samemanner; and a marine was prepared for thedefence of the river, consisting of one forty-gunChap. X.] BRITISH POW£R IN INDIA. 567gun frigate, three cruisers, and some pilot 1778-79.vessels. ^•''°"'-The secret committee of the Court of Directorsforwarded intelligence overland, vit Cairo, of thedeclaration of war in London on the 18th Marchandat Paris on the 30th. They also issued ordersto the Supreme Council to take immediate measuresfor the reduction of Pondicherry.* A negotiationwas also to be opened with Hyderr, whohad evinced a disposition to enter into an alliancewith the Company ; and such was the criticalsituation of national affairs, and so strong was theapprehension of an invasion from the inveterateenemies of the realm, that the energies of thecountry were called forth in every quarter, andthe very existence of the constitution was consideredto depend upon the maintenance of itsnaval superiority against the combined forces ofFrance and Spain.The East-india Company, at this juncture, ^^"^""laifi.passed a resolution in General Court, to give threeguineas each to the first 2,000 able-bodied seamen; two guineas to each of the 2,000 ordinaryseamen ;In April 1779, the General Court of Proprietors votedunanimous thanks to the Secret Committee, for the spiritedorders they issued for operations against Pondicherry and theFrench, and presented them with five hundred and three hundredguineas for-the purchase of plate. Thanks were also votedto Sir Hector M unto and Admiral Sir Edward Vernon, to eachof whom a sword set with diamonds was presented, valued at750 guineas.^C8RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Cmat.X1778-79.seamen ; and one-and*a-ba1f to each 2,000 able-bodiedlandsman who should voluntarily enter toserve on board his Majesty *s fleet, over and aboveall other bounties. They further resolved to build,with all possible despatch, three ships of war ofseventy-four guns each, with masts and yards, tobe delivered to such officer as his Majesty shouldappoint to receive them. This is one of the numerousinstances in which the Company's extendedmeans enabled them to come forward, andeffectually aid the national resources in periods ofgreat difficulty.tncureioniofthe Muggi.Some of the districts on the frontiers betweenChittagong and Luckypore, as well as the islandof Dundee, had been infested with a set ofpeople called MuggSj who inhabited the kingdomof African. They supported themselves byplundering their neighbours, and seizing and carryingoff the riots who fell in their way. Theirappearance cast a dread into the inhabitants, andproduced the desertion of many families.Efforts were made to repress them by means ofthe troops at Dacca and Chittagong, with the assistanceof armed boats from Dacca, and a cruiseron the coast of African. The government alsoproposed a plan for making reprisals on thecountry of the Mugs, in the hope that, at allevents, it would deter them for a time from repeatingtheir invasion.TheClay. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 569The Nabob of Bengal, Mobarek-ul-Dowla, was 1778-79.at this time admitted to the full control and b«»oa"-management of his own affairs. They had hitherto Bengal.been conducted by Mahomed Reza Can.Mr. Hastings, in the midst of his other variedand important avocations, did not lose sight of theinterests of science and literature.A copy of the Mahometan laws had beentranslated by Mr. Anderson, under the sanctionand patronage of the Government, and sent hometo the Court, together with the Bengal Grammar,prepared by Messrs. Haled and Wilkins, fivehundred copies being taken by the Government atthirty rupees a copy, as an encouragement totheir labours. Mr. Wilkins * was also supportedin erecting and working a press for the purposeof printing official papers, &c.The Madrissa or Mahometan college, for theeducation of the natives, was established by theGovernment. In order to open a communicationby the Red Sea with Europe, the Governmentbuilt a vessel at Mocha, having been assured thatevery endeavour would be made to secure theprivilege of despatches, with the Company's seal,being forwarded with facility ; the trade with Suezhaving been prohibited to all British subjects, ona complaint to the King's ministers by the OttomanPorte.That• Th late Sir Charles Wilkins, the much respected librarianto the Court of Directors.RISE AND Progress OP THE[CaiAr.X.1778-TO.BemqauMandarinsfrom CochinChina.That distinguished servant of the Company,Major Kennel, was at this time brought to thespecial notice of the Court of Directors. Hiswell known abilities, in promoting the success ofnavigation, had secured great advantage to the publicinterests. His employment as surveyor-generalhad too much exposed him to the effects of theclimate, and as the dangerous wounds which hehad received in the course of surveys from theDynasties obliged him to quit India, the Governmentrecommended him in the strongest manner tothe favourable consideration of the Court. HisMemoir of Bengal, with his Atlas of that country,his Geography of Herodotus, and his Retreat ofthe Ten Thousand, formed part of his valuablelabours. After his return to England, he filled anappointment in immediate connexion with theCourt of Directors, until his death, which tookplace at a very advanced age.Two mandarins of rank having been driventhrough stress of weather, from the coast of CochinChina, attended by a Portuguese missionary,reached Calcutta. They were treated with everymark of attention by the Government, and providedwith attendants and residence. The Governmentavailed themselves of the opportunity, to attemptopening a commercial intercourse with CochinChina. They ordered the Amazon, snow, to be inreadiness to convey back the mandarins, withwhom they determined to send Mr. Chapman,ofCsAY. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 571of the civil service, with a letter to the prince 1778-79.of the country, and authorized him to avail ^"'"^himself of any opening for securing a treaty ofcommerce,*Letter from Bengal, April 1778.572 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Craf.XI.I779U80.CHAPTER XI.The affairs of the Company at this timeengaged much of the attention of parliament. In1779, an Act had been passed, declaring that the£1,400,000, borrowed of the public, had beenrepaid by the Company, and that as theirbond debt was reduced to £1,500,000, theywere authorized to declare a dividend of 8 percent.The territorial acquisitions and revenues,were also to remain with them for another year,and the persons, who, at the passing of the Act,were in the offices of Governor-general and Councillors,in Bengal, were to hold the same duringits continuance. In the following session. LordNorth acquainted the House, that the Companyhad not made such proposals for a general of theirCharter as were deemed satisfactory, and hetherefore moved, that the Speaker should give thethree years' notice required by the Act, previouslyto the cessation of their exclusive privileges oftrade. Mr. Fox and Mr. Burke strongly opposedthe minister, and asked whether he was not contentwith having lost America ? Whether he couldpoint out a single benefit which his motion wascapable of producing, and whether he desired tobeholdChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 573behold those scenes of anarchy, confusion, distress it7».^.and ruin, which his idle and impotent threatmight produce in the Company's possessions andaffairs in India. Mr. Fox enquired of the ministerhow he was to secure and bring home the revenue,but through the Company, and whether his presentproposition manifested that gratitude to theEast India Company, to whom his country was sohighly indebted. He imputed the bad understandingbetween the Company and the noblelord, to his having attempted to possess himself ofthe patronage of the Company. This latter remarkcalled up Lord North, who denied having had anyintention to secure the patronage, " It was anassertion wholly unmerited, and not founded infact"*In order to give further time for deliberation, anAct was passed continuing the same privileges tothe Company as in the preceding year, to be computedas commencing from the 5th April ITSO.fWhilst these measures were in progress at Bikoai.home, the Company's affairs in India were dailyincreasing in interest, and called for the exerciseof proportional judgment on the part of those whowere entrusted with their management. Somedetachments of troops having arrived at FortSt. George, on their way to Calcutta, the necessities• Parliamentary History, 1780, vol. xxi. f 20 Geo. Ill, cap. 66.574 Ri AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. XI.1779-80. cities of the Madras Presidency were such, as to^MUDAr** iu^d^ce them to retain a portion of the men. TheSupreme Government complained in the strongestmanner, against what they termed such unwarrantableconduct on the part of the SubordinatePresidency. They dwelt upon the offensive modein which they had, without the slightest previousintimation, been deprived of those military meansso essential to enable them to fulfil their variousengagements. The embarrassment occasioned bythis proceeding, added to the drain which hadbeen made upon their finances in supplying thewants both of Madras and Bombay, was aggravatedby the conduct of the Supreme Court at Calcutta.Complaint The Couucil bccamc involved in serious discus-againstconductof Supreme pious With the Bcuch, who desired to have theirpower acknowledged as co-extensive with that ofthe Government. A process of contempt had beenissued against the Naib Nazim, the chief nativemagistrate of criminal jurisdiction of the Provinces.*It was clear that there was a wide andessential difference between the nature of pleasto the jurisdiction of the courts of law in England,and of the court established in India : thedesign of the former being to mark the linesof separation between the different courts administeringthe same law to the same people, andof the latter, to release from the jurisdiction of theSupreme♦ December 1779.CiiAr. XI ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 576Supreme Court, persons over whom it had no legal ittqso.right of jurisdiction, who were strangers to the law ^^^^^-^which it administered, and were defined by the Actunder which it was constituted, to be a differentpeople, and aliens from the government of England.A process had been issued against the Rajah ofCossijurah, which would have required bail to theextent of £30,000, or, in default of such bail,imprisonment for twelve months. To parties unacquaintedwith the country, and with the characterof its inhabitants, it was impossible to forman adequate conception of the probable effects ofsuch a proceeding. Amongst the stubborn andalmost immutable usages of a people whom it wasattempted to drag within the pale of our laws,there were not any so intimately blended withtheir natures, so interwoven with their veryexistence, or so likely to drive them to desperation,as those which respected their women. And yetit was attempted to direct a mandatory process ofthe Court to a woman of the highest caste andrank — the Ranee of Rajeshye, who possessed inher own right the first great zemindar in theprovinces. Secluded as women of her superior rankare — equally ignorant of the language, and of thepurpose of the process, it would certainly havebeen disobeyed. A capias would have followed, theexecution would have been committed to a bandof armed ruffians, her house pillaged, her templepolluted, the most secret recesses of her familyviolated576 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. XI.1779-80. violated, and that sanctity of character trampledBiiroAL. upQu^ which throughout the East, even in times ofthe fiercest hostility, the most barbarous nationsrevere in women. This extraordinary state ofthings was caused by the hasty introduction of ajudicial system, ill adapted to the country, andwholly unfitted to secure the objects contemplatedby those who originated the measure.Petitions were presented to Parliament from theCompany, from the Supreme Government, andfrom the British inhabitants in Bengal, settingforth the injurious results, and representing thatunless relief were given, " the Company wouldhave ports without trade, possessions withoutrevenue, and provinces and laws without inhabitants."Madras. The Carnatic, which had already suffered sodreadfully from the irruptions of Hyderr, was againto become the scene of severe struggles, for themaintenance of the Company's very existence.Sir Thomas Rumbold had intimated to theDirectors his intention to relinquish the governmentof Madras, on account of his health, inJanuary 1780. Mr. Whitehill being the seniorCouncillor, succeeded to the chair. This gentlemanhad been a party with his predecessor, inabolishing the Commission of Circuit, which hadbeen established under orders from home, therebyimposing upon the Rajahs and Zemindarss,theChap. XI] BRITISH POWER IN India 577the trouble, expense, and delay of resorting to ms-si.Madras, for the settlement of points in dispute, B»'^«At,that would have been decided by the commissionon the spot. They had also entered into anagreement with Sitters Raze, for renting theheavily lands for a term of ten years, and hadappointed him dewan of the Vizianagram district,a measure which the Directors considered to inflicta cruel and unnecessary degradation on his brother.They had likewise disposed of the Guntoor circato the Nabob for a term of ten years. This circahad, by treaty, been delivered to the Companyby Bazalet Jung, in 1779, he receiving from thema permanent rent, equal to what his aumils hadpaid to him.These proceedings were diametrically opposed Diamiwai of1 ^ ^ t % . rwi. '^ ^^ SirThomiwto the orders of the Directors. The motives and Rumbow andprinciples by which the parties had been governedin their adoption appeared so very questionable,that Sir Thomas Rumbold, Mr. Whitehill, and Mr.Peering were dismissed the Company's service ;*and on the 17th of January 1781, Lord Macartneywas appointed governor of Madras. His lordship,as was then customary, expressed his acknowledgmentto the Court of Directors, and to theCompany, in a General Court of Proprietors. Onthe 18th January, the Proprietors being met toconsider the conduct of Mr. Paul Benfield, Mr.Burke,Letter to Madras 10th January 1781.VOL. I. 2 P678 RISE AND PROGREflB OP THE [CBAr. XI.177ML Burke, as proprietor, delivered in a paper, entitledBznQAu heads of objections to be enquired into bdbre Mr.Benfield should be allowed to return to India.Leave was ultimately granted for that purpose,by a vote of 368 to 302.The Supreme Government were equally opposedwith the Directors to the conduct of Mr. Whitehill.The Government were represented to have countenancedthe treaty concluded by that gentlemanwith Bazalet Jung, whether to the extent allegedby the Madras Council was not apparent, but itwas clear that orders had been subsequently sentfrom Bengal for relinquishing the cirear. TheMadras government were accused of pertinaciouslyrefusing to obey such orders, and of retaining thecirear in defiance of the peremptory instructionsfrom Calcutta. On a previous occasion, in a matterconnected with the Nizam, the Council at Fort St.George disputed the controlling power attemptedto be exercised by the Supreme Government, andhad expressed an opinion that the latter possessedonly a negative power, and that confined to twopoints, viz. orders for declaring war, or for makingtreaties, and not a positive and compelling power,extending to all political affairs.Hostile views Considerable jealousy had been created in the^ *'' minds of Hyderr and the Nizam by the treaty ;both Bazalet Jung and Hyderr manifested decidedintentions of hostility.TheChap. XI.] BKITIftH POWER IN INBIA. 579Tbe Nabob, notwithstanding this demonstration, ?77awas wholly inert and indifferent to the preparation B«MG*r.of any force to co-operate with that of the Companyin the defence of his country. The Madrasarmy, although consisting of thirty thousand effectivemen, was broken and dispersed in variousdetached services ; some had been sent to joinGreneral Goddard ; others to the garrisons on theMalabar coast ; and a valuable detachment was inthe Guntoor circa, under Colonel Bailie. Hyderrhad for some months been assembling a large armyon the frontiers. Aware of the dissensions in theCouncil of Madras, and still alive to the indispositionmanifested by the English to assist himagainst the Mahrattass under the treaty of 1769,he determined to resent their conduct.* He accordinglycommenced operations in the month ofJuly 1780, bursting like a torrent into rheumatic,accompanied by the French officers and troopswhom he had obtained from the Nizam. Terrorand consternation prevailed at the Presidency.The danger became immediate. Sir Hector Munroproceeded to take the command of the army at theMount, and an express was sent to Colonel Bailie,then in the Guntoor circa, to march towards thePresidency, at the same time directing him to takesuch a course as might afford him an opportunityof cutting off some of the enemy's convoys.Conjeveram was ultimately fixed upon as thespot• Fide page 250.2 p2580 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CsAr. XL1779. spot of rendezvous; thither Sir Hector Munro,BzKOAt. ^jtjj jjjg army, amounting altogether only to 6,000troops, marched from the Mount.Hyderr, who was before Arcot, raised the siege,and managed to throw his army across the coursewhich he supposed Colonel Baillie would take tojoin the main body : by other movements evincinggreat dexterity, he induced Sir Hector Munro toalter his position, whilst at the same time he determinedto make a decided attack on ColonelBaillie's detachment ; for which purpose TippooSaid, Hyderr's son, was sent with a large force,consisting of 6,000 infantry, 18,000 cavalry, andtwelve pieces of cannon. A severe conflict tookplace at Peerambaucum, Tippoo being completelyrepulsed. In consequence of a communicationfrom Colonel Baillie after he had defeated Tippoo,a force under Colonel Fletcher was sent to hisrelief. Its progress, though conducted in thenight and with great secrecy, was attempted to beintercepted by Hyderr, who had exact information,through spies, of what was passing; ColonelFletcher changed his route, and effected a junctionwith Colonel Baillie : this point, coupled withthe defeat of Tippoo, spread dismay through theColonel Baillie Mysore army. After much discussion, and in oppositionto M. Tally, Hyderr planned an ambuscadethrough the route Colonel Baillie was to pass,enfilading the road with batteries of cannon. Thecommander and men evinced heroic courage, sustainingCrap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 581training the contest against an overwhelming force, 1779.82.until they were literally borne down and trampled Bengal.upon by the horse and elephants; Colonel Bailliehimself being severely wounded, and two hundredEuropeans made prisoners. Sir Hector Munroretreated to Chingleput.The Governor-general at this critical moment Mr. Hastingsaddressed the Court in order to explain his conduct m. '^""'"'^on the occasion of pecuniary aid which had beengiven to the Rajah of Berar, •* as well as to avoidall appearance of ostentation on his own part."He represented that << an unusual tender had been made tohim on the eth June 1780, of means to supply the detachmentunder Major Camac, on the invasion of the Mahrattadominions beyond Gohud. The money was not his own ; hehad, in act, no means nor any right to the sum in question, norwould have received it but for the occasion which promptedhim to avail himself of the accidental means at that instantoffered to him ; it was converted to the use of the Company :a renewed occasion had now arrived on which he had givenfurther aid to the Rajah of Berar to the extent of three lacs,two on his own account, and one on account of the Company.The extreme state of pecuniary distress to which the Governmentwere reduced, led him to express his apprehensionsof the necessity of stopping the provision of an investmentin the season 1780. If the measure should be adoptedit would be the result of unavoidable necessity, in which nooption could be left but the sacrifice of the Company^sprofits, or the hazarding for ever the existence of the Company'spossessions for the purpose of retaining those profits.It was impossible to provide for the vast expense requiredfor the subsistence and defence of the other Presidencies, andfor an investment, in addition to the increasing exigencies offor582 RISE AND PSOGfiBSS OF THE [Chap. Xf.)779-8e. Bengal, and all to be ndoed finn its own insisted n-BKNiiAL. sources. They had already been obliged to boitow fiftylacs at interest : but such resource would so<hi cease, whilstthe exigency would remain the same. Exclusive of foreigncalls, their wants had increased, and would still further increase,notwithstanding all the care and economy applied tocheck them, as the places of the troops whom they had beenconstrained to send into the Camatic, must be supplied forservice in Bengal. This exertion was demanded for the preservationof Madras. The whole necessity appearing, by dieextorted and palliated confession of the Nizam, to have beenoccasioned by his having instigated the confederacy in consequenceof the conduct of the Madras government towardshim**After this statement regarding the finances]Vlr. Hastings referred to a measure he had devisedfor drawing off Madame Scindia from theMahrattass, and for extending the Company'sdominion, which plan he was constrained toabandon in consequence of the dreadful calamitythat had befallen the Madras arms, and to changehis object to one of preservation.*The Supreme Council, in support of their controllingauthority, and to evince the same to thenative posters, especially to the Nizam, who hadbeen impressed with a belief that they did notpossess such control, passed a resolution bywhich Mr. Whitehall was removed from the chairat Fort St. George, together with Mr. Sadler,a• Letter to Court, December 1780.f Mr. Whitehill would have been removed by the orders ofthe Directors, vide page 577.CiiAr. XI.] BBTTISU POWER IN INDIA. 583a member of the counciL These wders were en 17S0.82.trusted to lieutenant-general Sir Eyre Coote, who ^ ma^^d""^had been requested by the Bengal government sir Eyre contein consequence of the unfortunate state of affairs ue^toMa^on the coast, to proceed thither and assume the "^chief command of the army, and the direction ofthe military operations. The General was accompaniedby a force consisting of eight battalions ofsepoy for the deface of the Northern Circars ; asupply of specie was likewise sent with him,amounting to fifteen lacs, and a considerablequantity of grain. Mr. Smith, the senior civilcouncillor, took the chair on the removal of Mr.Whitehill. The Guntoor circa was now restoredto Bazalet Jung. Mr. John Holland, who hadbeen suspended from the post of Resident withthe Nizam by the late Madras government, wasre-appointed to it by the Bengal government in thecharacter of their agent to his highness.The siege of Arcot was renewed by Hyderr, andcapitulated to him on the 3d November 1780.Preparations were made for the march of thetroops under Sir Eyre Coote immediately therains could admit of their moving. The general'sconduct in the preparatory measures which headopted, justified the unlimited confidence reposedin his skill and judgment. The taskcommitted to him was most arduous ; not onlythe fate of the British interests in the Carnatic,but the very safety of Madras, rested upon the judicious584 RISE AND PBOORESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1781-82. vicious application of the comparatively triflingukmoal. means which he possessed — not 10,000 men, ofwhom 1 ,700 only were Europeans, opposed to anenemy's army of between 90,000 and 100,000.It was first determined to attempt the relief ofVellore, Wandewash, Permacoil, and Chingleput.Sir Eyre Coote marched from the Mount on the17th January at the head of the army to Whitewash.Hyderr, on learning his approach, raisedthe siege of that place. The admirable energyof the general obliged him as rapidly to abandonPermacoil and Vellore.The siege of Trichinopoly being meditated byHyderr, Sir Eyre Coote marched to Forth Novo,the wants of the army being supplied with storesfrom the fleet under Sir Edward Hughes, who hadalready rendered most effectual service by destroyingHyderr's shipping on the coast of Malabar.Proceeding! in The petitions which had been presented toParliament ■■ -^ • t»ti the conduct Parliament,* complaining of the conduct of theCourt Supreme Court at Calcutta, were referred to aSelect Committee of the blouse, appointed onthe 12th January 1781, to enquire into the allegations.On the 27th April the attention of theHouse being drawn to the progress of the warin the Carnatic, Mr. Burke stated, that he hadfor a long time been engaged in examining andsearching into the affairs of India ; he knew fromexperience, that they were at once too extendedand• /'fWr page 576.CBAr. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 585and too complicated, and that the views and pas susa.sons and interests of too many different men, ^^^^^^were connected and blended with them, to beeasily developed or tolerably understood on asudden. A motion was submitted by Lord Northfor the appointment of a Secret committee toenquire into the causes of the war. Mr. Burkedesired that it might be an open committee, andobserved. Let me fight with Jupiter, as said Ajax,but give me the day-light." A Secret Committeewas nominated and authorized to meet inthe India House, and to adjourn from time to timeand place to place.On the 9th May, Lord North having stated thatno agreement had yet been made with the Companyas to their charter, Mr. Burke with greatasperity deprecated the delay, and observed theymight be called upon to decide to whom theacquisitions and revenues belonged, and they hadnot a document before them to proceed upon.Lord North remarked, that the Company haddemanded the full enjoyment of their charteredrights, by which he did not know exactly whatwas meant. It might mean only the exclusive tradefor the term of the charter ; but if it meant theexclusive right of superintending all their concerns,free from all control, then he contendedagainst it. It was the duty of Parliament neverto renounce that power. He again deprecated warin the Carnatic as a great national calamity, andadverted586 Bib AMB TWOGMSMS OF THE [Gkuj*. XI.i98i.». adverted to a system of peculation which he believedto have prevailed in India to a great extent.At length the two Acts were passed : the oneconcluding an agreement between the public andthe Company ;* the other to redress and pre*vit the recurrence of the contains against theSupreme Court at Calcutta, fBj the first-mentioned Act the Company's exclusive privilegewere continued till 1791) with dire yean* notice;during which time the territorial acquisition and revenueswere to remain in their possession.After a dividend of eight per cent on the capital of^SySOOyOOOy three-fourths of the surplus profits were to gotothe public, and one-fourth to the Company.Accounts of the state of the Company^s affairs were to belaid before the Lords of the Treasury and the General Court.During the war with France, Spain, and Holland, theCompany were to pay one-fourth of the expense of hisMajesty's ships in India.After peace, the Company were to bear the whole.The Company were allowed to recruit and to have 2,000men at one time ready for embarkation during war, butonly 1,000 in peace.The parties filling the olBoes of CrovemcNr-general, Com-mander-in-chief, and members of council, were to be removeableonly by the King on representation of the Directors,who might appoint to vacancies on the approbation ofthe Crown. The Commander-in-chief, if appointed by theDirectors a member of council, was to take rank as twomembers, but was not to succeed to the Government unlessspecially appointed.British♦ 21 Geo. III. cap. 65. f ^^ Geo. IIL cap. 70.Chap. XL] BKITUH Power IN Inn. 587British subjects were nol to reside more than ten miles 1781^82.from the Presidency, without license from the Government. BmmoAuTwo important provisions were also inserted.In addition to the enactment of 1773 which requiredthe Directors to send to his Majesty'sGovernment copies of all letters/rom India relatingto the political, military, or revenue affairs ofthe Company a provision was now inserted thatcopies of all letters proposed to be sent by theDirectors to India relating to the said subjects,should first be submitted for his Majesty's approval,and if no disapprobation was expressedwithin fourteen days to the proposed despatch,the same might be forwarded to India.The other was a clause suggested by theheavy drafts which had, at a schemer period,been drawn from India, and nearly ruined theCompany, being, the minister remarked, " theprivate fortunes of Asiatic plunderers," who wouldagain seize upon the opportunity of doing sowith avidity. Lord North, in alluding to theacceptance of presents, observed* that it wouldbe proper to interdict their receipt entirely, forwhich purpose it would be well to form a court ofjudicature in this country for the trial of offencescommitted in India. This suggestion, thoughnot acted upon at that time, was adopted at alater period.The other Act related to the Supreme Court, andwas passed to appease the minds of many personswho588 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuff. XI.1781-82. who had been disquieted by fears and apprehendsons of further mischiefs from the extension ofthe powers exercised by the Bench at Calcutta.The Governor-general and Council were not to be subjectto the Supreme Court, but to a competent court in England,and if a bond was given to prosecute them, the party mightcompel the production of pipers, and authenticated copieswere to be received at Westminster.The Supreme Court was not to have jurisdiction in mattersof revenue.No person was to be amenable to the Supreme Court onaccount of his being a farmer or landowner, or because hewas employed by the Company.The name of every native employed in the service of theCompany, in any judicial office, was to be entered, and thedeath of any one so employed was to be recorded.All native servants, stewards, or agents, employed by anybritish subject, were to be specified by name in a book, andunder a penalty. The names of all native partners were tobe likewise entered, under a penalty for omission.The Supreme Court were to hear and determine suits betweennatives ; the Mahomedans by the laws and usagesof Mahomedans, and the Gentooss by the laws and usages ofGentooss ; where there was only one party, by the lawsand usages of the defendant.The rights and authorities of fathers and masters of familieswere to be preserved to them within their said families ;nor was any act in consequence of the law of caste to beadjudged a crime, although the same might not be heldjustifiable by the laws of England.The Supreme Court might frame such process, and makesuch rules and orders for the execution of suits against nativesof Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, as would accommodatetheCras. XT.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 589the same to the religion and manners of the natives. The 1781.82.same to be sent home for his Majesty's approval. BbkgauThe Governor-general and Council might determine appealsto the extent of <f 5,000 in civil cases.The Govemoi^general and Council were to frame regulationsfor the Provincial Courts.The judicial officers in the Provincial Courts were not tobe answerable to the Supreme Court for error in their decrees.Certain natives in prison at Patna were ordered to be discharged;andThe Grosvenor-general and Council were indemnified foropposition to the process of the Supreme Court.Whilst the Parliament was engaged in devising Appointmentmeans for remedying the defects of the Supreme imply to theCourt, the Governor-general had attempted to re- lut.concile the differences with the Judges, by proposingto Sir Elijah Impey, the office of judge ofthe Sudder Dewanny Adawlut, with a salary of£6,000 a year. Mr. Hastings believed that itwould be the means of lessening the distance betweenthe Government and the Supreme Court, andwould also prove an instrument of reconciliation.Sir Robert Chambers, one of the puisne judges,accepted the post of president of the court ofjustice at Chinsara.The provisions contained in the Acts whichhave been noticed were of great importance, asregarded both the Company and their native subjects.Like the legislative measures passed fromtime to time to perfect or repair the constitutionof our own country, those which relate to IndiahaveRISE AMD FSOGUSS OF THB[ChaiwXLBjnraAX*bave been called for by the events d the times.As the effect and working of the syMmm underwhich such a vast empire has been acquired andgoverned, is progressively traced out, it will beseen that some master mind has, at the neededmoment, invariably taken a leading part in subjectswhich offered little attraction to the generalpolitician who, engaged in the afiairsof Burape» orthe internal concerns of his own nation, felt littledisposition to dive into a mass of matter relatingto a country and a corporation, in either of whichthe kingdom at large, or, unless under particularpolitical circumstances, took but little interest.At the close of the session in July 1781, hisMajesty's speech contained the following passage: —'' Your deliberations on the affairs of the East-indiaCompany have terminated in such measuresas will, I trust, 'produce great and essential advantagesto my kingdom."Madras.Lord Macart-ney.Lord Macartney, whose appointment as Grover-norof Madras has been noticed,* reached thatPresidency in June 1781, during the height ofhostilities in the Camatic. Having assumedcharge of the Government, he proceeded to inquireinto the general state of the affairs, and onthe 31st July, he communicated his sentiments totht;♦ r«if page 677.Chap. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA* 591the Directors. His Lordship represented that itbi-ss.there was not a lac in the treasury ; that there Mabel*was not any cavalry, an arm so important in conductingoperations against such an enemy asHyderr, who could attack or refrain from operationsat his pleasure, and who declined all overturesfor peace. No assistance whatever couldbe obtained from the Nabob of the Carnatic, whopleaded some new understanding with the SupremeGovernment.The battle of Porto Novo had been fought onthe 1st July. The position chosen by Sir E3rreCoote on that occasion evinced his usual judgment.He was ably supported by GeneralsStuart and Sir Hector Munro, and the enemywere totally defeated. Hyderr retreated to Arcot.Reinforcements were sent from Bengal, withwhich Sir Eyre Coote attacked and carried, onthe 23d August, Tripassore. Hyderr fell back onthe spot where he had defeated Colonel Baillie,whither he was followed by the English army.A hardly contested battle took place on the27th, which lasted from nine in the morning untilsun-set. Hyderr was again completely defeatedbut the English suffered severely. GeneralStuart lost a leg by the same shot that killedColonel Brown; and Captain Bishop, one ofGeneral Stuart's aides-de-camp, fell close by hisside. On the 28th September, Hyderr sustainedanother defeat during Sir Eyre Coote's movementwith592 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Crap. XI.1781.88. with the army towards Vellore. The principalmadras. Polygars who were at this time in Hyderr's interest,came over to the Company's army. Hyderr,however, was by no means dismayed at thesereverses.BsKOAL. During these operations on the coast, theb^Iks'Lmi Governor-general became involved in a seriouscheyne Sing, affray at Benares, when on his journey to visit theVizier, who had expressed a particular desire forapersonal interview. Under the treaty concludedwith Shuja Dowlah in August 1765, it wasstipulated that Bulwunt Sing, a tributary of theVizier, and Rajah of Benares, should be continuedin that province. On Shuja Dowlah'sdeath in 1776, a treaty was concluded by Mr.Bristow with his successor, Ausuff-ud-Dowlab,by which all the districts dependent on RajahCheyte Sing, the successor of Bulwunt Sing,were transferred in full sovereignty to the Company,an arrangement which had apparently givengreat satisfaction to Cheyte Sing and his family.When intelligence reached India, in 1778, of thewar with France, Spain, and America, the SupremeGovernment were constrained to deviseevery means to augment the financial resources ofthe Company, in order to meet the unavoidableincrease of charge. As the Rajah's provincesderived the advantage of the Company's protection,to whom he had, in point of fact, becometributaryCflAF.XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 593tributary, he was called upon to aid in the gene itsi-ss.oral exigency. He very reluctantly assented to a »«"*'*^-contribution of five lacs. This indisposition createdan unfavourable impression on the mind ofthe government.Having been again applied to for aid during thewar in the Carnatic, in the prosecution of whichthe government of Bengal had drained their treasuryin supplies to Madras, he evinced a decideddisinclination to come forward ; and although hepromised to contribute some aid in cavalry, notone man was forthcoming. These and other circumstancesarising out of the deputation of aparty from the Rajah to Calcutta, determined Mr.Hastings to make known his mind to CheyteSing, for which purpose he proceeded to Benareson his route to meet the Vizier, where he arrivedon the 14th August 1781. It was the Rajah'swish to have paid the Governor-general a visitthat evening, but he desired it might be postponeduntil a wish to that effect was communicated tothe Rajah.In the interim, the Governor general caused a checkingarrested andpaper to be forwarded to Cheyte Sing, recapitulatehating the points upon which he felt it necessaryto animadvert. The reply of the Rajah was sounsatisfactory, that orders were given to Mr.Markham, the resident, on the 15th, at ten atnight, to place him in arrest the following morning: should opposition arise, he was to await theVOL. I. 2 Q arrival594 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Car. XL1781.89. arrival of two companies of sepoy. Mr. ham, with the troops, the following morning executedhis orders. The Rajah addressed a letter toMr. Hastings, asking ** what need there was forguards ? He was the Governor-general's slave*'In consequence of the desire of the Rajah, Mr.Markham proceeded to visit him ; previous to hisarrival, large bodies of armed men had crossedthe river from Ramnagur. Unfortunately, thetwo companies who were with the resident hadtaken no ammunition with them. They weresuddenly attacked by the assembled body ofarmed men and fired upon ; at this moment theRajah made his escape, letting himself down thesteep banks of the river, by turbans tied together,into a boat which was waiting for him. Thosewho effected his escape followed him. Of the twocompanies commanded by Lieutenant Stalkerfew remained alive, and those were severelywounded ; Lieutenants Stalker, Scott, and Sineslying within a short distance of each other. TheRajah fled from Ramnagur with his zenana toLateefgur, a strong fort ten miles from Chunar,accompanied by every member of the family*whocould claim any right of succession to the raj.In this state of affairs, Mr. Hastings selectedBaboo Assam Sing, who had been dewan underBulwunt Sing, to take charge of the revenues, inquality of Naib, until it should be legally determinedto whom the revenues belonged. TheGovernorChap. XI.] British Power IN INDIA. 595Governor went to Chunar, from whence requisite 178182.tons were issued for succour from all quarters. b»»o^»*Little aid could be effectually given, as the wholeof the • country was in arms, the provinces ofBenares, Ramnagur, and Patent being in a stateof war. Troops ultimately arrived under MajorPoplar from Cawnpore ; the exertions and gallantryof that officer rescued the zemindar ofBenares from the power and influence of the disaffectedRajah and his adherents. His last strongfortress of Bejieghur, from which he had escaped,was reduced and brought under subjection to theCompany. Baboo Narrain, a grandson of Bul-wentSing, was proclaimed rajah in the room ofCheyte Sing.The nomination of a resident at Benares was Resident at/•I . 1 • 1 ,./v 1 •. Benares.one of the questions upon which a difference hadarisen between the majority of the Council andMr. Hastings, before the death of General Clavering,who had expressed his opinion to the Directorson the conduct of the Governor-general inremoving Mr. Fowke from Benares, and nominatingtwo persons to supply his place, viz. Mr.Thomas Graham and Mr. D. Barwell, as hisagents, and withdrawing Mr. Bristow from Lucknow,and nominating Mr. Middleton in his room.The Directors animadverted in strong terms uponthe act of the Governor-general, who had removedMr. Fowke on the ground that the matter uponwhich he had been deputed to Benares was cbn-2 Q 2 eluded.596 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chav.XI.1781.88. eluded, and yet, within twenty days only, heDsKoAf appointed a resident, with an assistant, where oneparty had been sufficient. The Court directedthe restoration of Mr. Fowke. Their orders * didnot reach Calcutta until the death of GeneralClavering, and as Mr. Hastings considered thatevent might make an alteration in his position, andthat the removal of Mr. Graham would be tantamountto his resignation, the matter was postponedfor reference home.Mr. Fowke, aware of the orders for his restoration,appealed to the Government to have themcarried into effect ; the Board informed that gentleman,that they had no reason to be dissatisfiedwith his public conduct. Mr. Francis havingdeclared that Sir Eyre Goose, on succeedingGeneral Clavering, would oppose Mr. Hastings,made a direct motion that the orders of the Courtshould be immediately acted upon. Sir Eyre Cootestated, that as he had been nominated by his kingand country to fill a high station in so distant apart of the world, and well knowing the great^ difficulties he should have to encounter, from theunfortunate differences which had arisen, declaredthat he had determined to take no part in thosedifferences, and that he should accordingly agreeto the motion for postponing the consideration ofthe question to the next Council. At that meetinghe declared, that had he been present whenthe♦ seth January 1778.Cha*. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 597the Court's orders arrived he should have voted iTsi-sa.for their immediate execution ; but the matter was ®*«°^'-now retrospective, he should therefore leave thequestion to be decided on the reference alreadymade to the home authorities ; but whatever theirorders might be on that reference, he should supportthem. The Directors expressed their astonishmentat the delay that had taken place, anddesired that Mr. Fowke should be appointed,which was forthwith done.* In February 1781,Mr. Fowke was recalled by the Government, andnominated agent for boats, Mr. Markham succeedingas Resident at Benares, with Mr. Been ashis assistant. This arrangement was made underthe necessity of the Governor-general having theagent of his choice.Mr. Hastings at this time intimated to the chair Mr. Hastingsman of the Court of Directors, that he had thought ^t at homeproper to appoint an agent at home, for the pur intents.pose of attending to his political interests, andthat he had selected Major John Scott, to whomhe had given instructions, but had particularlyprovided that he would suffer no person whateverto perform any act in his name, that could be construedto imply a resignation of his authority, protestingagainst it, (as on a former occasion) as mostunwarrantable.The Vizier met Mr. Hastings at Chunar, on the Meets thenth• Proceedings, Council, February 1780.RISE AND Progress OP THE[CsAP.XL1781.82.BlXOAL.Treaty withScindiah.11th September, when he evinced the strongestfeelings of attachment to the Company and theirinterests. The arrangement then concluded withhim led to the withdrawal of the temporarybrigade, and three regiments of cavalry, and thestationing odc regiment of sepoy at Lucknow, ata charge of 25,000 rupees per month. The armyfor Cawnpore was limited to the strength prescribedby the treaty of 1773. All British officersand pensioners were to be withdrawn, and certainjaghires resumed. The result was, an immediatesupply of fifty-five lacs of ready money to theCompany, and a stipulation for the payment of anadditional twenty lacs, to complete the liquidationof his debt to them. The Vizier returned to hiscapital on the 25th September 1781.During the Governor-general's residence at Chunar,an overture for peace reached him fromMadajee Scindiah. It led to a separate treatywith that chief, effected through the agency ofColonel Muir, under instructions fromMr. Hastingsof the 13th October.Scindiah was to act as mediator in endeavouringto effect a peace between the Company andHyderr.* Mr. Anderson, on the part of the Governproceeded with full powers to theMahratta camp.In order to secure an additional military force atMadras, Mr. Hastings suggested the expediencyof♦ Printed Treaties.Chap. XL]British POWER IN INDIA.of exchanging the circles for the loan of a con nsiss.miserable body of cavalry from the Nizam: the ®*«°'^'"idea was not adopted by the Presidency of FortSt. George, who at the same time stated, that asno money could be got from the Nabob, he hadconsented to assign over his revenues of theCarnatic, during the war, a formal deed beingexecuted by his highness for the term of fiveyears.* The Company's finances at this momentwere at the lowest ebb: the army, the civilestablishments, and all the public offices beinggreatly in arrear. The Poligars, who were theNabob's dependants, had gone over to the enemy ;and the Rajah of Travancore, so far from affordingrelief, had not given sufficient means to dischargethe pay of the troops employed in his ownterritories. In this state of affairs, the intelligencefrom Bengal, that there was a prospect of peacewith the Mahrattass, led the Madras governmentto congratulate the Court. They at the sametime expressed their sense of the aid, both inmoney and provisions, which had been extended tothem by the Supreme Government-tIn order more effectually to reduce Hyderr'spower. Lord Macartney suggested to Sir EyreCoote the expediency of attacking Negapatam. JJ^**'^'"^^,The commander-in-chief was opposed to the measure,♦ Letter from Madras, 16th December 1781.t Letter from Madras, 30th and Slst December 1781.Madras.Lord Macart-ney resolves onRISE AND Progress OF THE[Cbaf. XI.1781.82.Other open*tons.sure, upon which Lord Macartney determined totake the whole responsibility of it upon himself.The joint forces under Admiral Sir EdwardHughes and Sir Eyre Coote were accordinglydirected to the object. Negapatam surrendered onthe 12th November, vrith 6,551 prisoners of war,causing Hyderr to evacuate all the strong posts inthe Tanjore country. Sir Eyre Coote, althoughlabouring under severe ill-health, persevered inconducting the military operations. To facilitatethe means of obtaining supplies for the army, therenot being a day's rice for the troops, Colonel Owenwas despatched, in October, with one company ofEuropean grenadiers, one Bengal regiment, fourbattalions of sepoy, with two field pieces, intothe Cbittoor country, to intercept grain from thePoligars, and to throw in supplies to aid thegarrisonof Vellore, which had been invested by Hyderr forsome months. Accounts having reached Sir EyreCoote that Colonel Owen's detachment was likelyto be attacked, he immediately advanced to itssupport ; but before he could join the Colonel,Hyderr, with most of his forces, and all his lightguns, had attacked him. The little band displayedthe utmost gallantry, and its leader greatjudgment and discretion. After a day's severefighting, Colonel Owen made a retreat in goodorder, with but comparatively small loss aftercontending with so overwhelming a force. Thegeneral, apprehensive that if Hyderr obtainedpossessionChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 601possession of Vellore, his expulsion from the Car i78i.sanati would be rendered far more difficult, pushed ^^*^on towards that fortress, in the hope of meetingwith the enemy, and by defeating him, relievingthe garrison. His attempt to bring Hyderr to anengagement failed, but he reached Vellore on themorning of the 3d November, to the great joy ofthe troops, who had been confined there sixteenmonths, and would shortly have been constrainedto surrender. Sir Eyre Coote felt called uponto address the Court in testimony of the distinguishedconduct of Colonel Lang, the commandant,and his spirited support of the garrison,amidst such accumulated difficulties, for so protracteda period. On the 8th November, thegeneral appeared before Chittoor, then in possessionof the enemy. The garrison were obstinate in itsdefence, and had been much strengthened. SirEyre Coote made preparations for the storm,having previously declared that, in the event ofhis being obliged to proceed to extremities, everyman in the garrison should be put to the sword.He was wounded in the course of the operationsby a splinter from a stone shot. The garrisonshortly capitulated. The army returned tocantonments, and the general having arrivedat Madras, addressed a letter to the Court ofDirectors, in which he described the state of hishealth to be such as scarcely to admit of his turninghimself in his bed. He then alluded to thechange602 RISE AMB PROGRESS OF THE lC«Ar. XJ.1781-88. change in what he termed the military affairs inMadeai. Bengal, referring to the measures of the Governor-generalwith the troops at Benares, and expressedhis persuasion that no good could result fromthem. '' Speaking from experience' he declared** that the versatility of the measures of the severalCompany's governments was such, that no com*mander-in-chief could act effectually, or withhonour to himself, unless invested with moreample powers." Adverting to a mission sent byLord Macartney to the King of Kandy, he statedthat he knew nothing of it. He then commentedupon the extraordinary act of the Governor-generalin proceeding to the upper provinces, andon the folly of his not having seen that thedetachment with him possessed ammunition,* asheought to have been alive to the '' contumacioustemper of the Rajah," Cheyte Sing. Much allowancewas to be made for the general's state ofhealth, and the effect which it had upon his mind :whilst thus animadverting upon the Govemor-general's assumption of military power, he unconsciouslyjustifies Mr. Hastings, in the opinionhe had formed of the Rajah's disposition to throwoff allegiance to the Company's government.Other instances arose, in which Sir Eyre Cooteevinced an irritability of temper that led him toput constructions on the conduct of the Governmentwhom he was then serving, which tended towidenFide page 594.Chas. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 603widen the misunderstanding that had arisen be 1781-88.tween the Supreme Council and that of Madras. Madras.These differences were heightened by the course intrigues qtof duplicity and intrigue practised on the part of ^ngt loithe Nabob. When the assignment of his re- ^^"^^y-venues took place,* the Madras Presidency appointeda Board of Revenue Commissioners tomanage the territories. The accounts were to bekept by the Commissioners, and submitted forthe satisfaction of the Government and of theNabob. Honour and integrity were indispensablein the transaction of so delicate and responsible atrust. In the month of August 1782, the Nabobaddressed letters to several of the members of theMadras Council, in which he reviled the conductof the governor. Lord Macartney, and chargedhim with mismanaging his country. He at thesame time exerted all means of secret influence toundermine his Lordship's character and authority.The enmity of the Nabob was increased by LordMacartney having expressed a decided opinionthat, with reference to the nature and extent ofthe Nabob's pecuniary engagements, the assignmentof his revenues ought to continue until hisdebts were liquidated. One of the methods whichthe Nabob took to effect his object, was that ofpreferring serious complaints against his Lordshipto the Supreme Government, alleging, as theground for such complaints, the mismanagementof• riif^ page 599.604 BISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CsAr. XI.1781-92. of his revenues. In these attempts he was aidedmadras. i^y |jjg gg^Qu^ gojj Ameer-ul-omrah, a base intriguingcharacter, who attempted to ingratiatehimself with his father to the prejudice of hiselder brother Omdut-ul-Omrah. In furtheranceof his scheme, he caused a charge to be preferredagainst Mr. David Haliburton, the Persiantranslator to the Government, and one of the commissionersfor the management of the assignedterritory, knowing that if he succeeded in provingwant of integrity in an individual filling a postwhich demanded the most scrupulous conduct, itwould strengthen the claim of the Nabob to havehis country restored to him. The attempt wascommunicated to the Grovemment by Mr. Warburton'sown representation. He stated that hehad received a letter, written by Mr. Ellis, anattorney of the Mayor's Court at Madras, demandingof him, in the name of Conary Rowthe sum of 500 pagodas, which that native hadgiven him in consideration of certain servicesto be rendered in his favour, but which engagementhad not been fulfilled by Mr. Warburton.This gentleman not only denied upon oathhaving either directly or indirectly received anysum of money from Conary Row, but daredthat he never had any pecuniary dealings withhim; he moreover produced a deposition madeby the native himself, that every exertion hadbeen used by Ameer-ul-omrah to induce him toaccuseCHAr.XI.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 605accuse Mr. Haliburton of having accepted a bribe. iTSi «t.The Government felt called upon to address the ^^'^*^*-Nabob, and caution him against these attempts onthe part of his Highness Ameer-ul-omrah to traducethe character of one of the Company's servants.The reply of the Nabob was couched interms of violent abuse. He complained of thedisgrace attempted to be charged upon his son,and openly declared that Mr. Haliburton hadtaken the money, and had kept Conary Row inprison for two days without food, under a guard,in order to compel him to give false evidence.With reference to this last charge, the fact appearedto be, that the native himself apprehensiveof the prince's enmity when he made the deposition,had requested a guard to protect him fromhis vengeance I The Government assured theNabob that there was no desire to conceal thematter ; that Mr. Haliburton had himself broughtit forward, and that Conary Row had been summonedbefore the Council, where, on his examination,he gave the most complete refutation to everythingthat had been asserted in the letters from theNabob, and had likewise earnestly entreated theguard might be continued, to ensure his personalsafety. Mr. Haliburton requested to retire fromthe offices of Persian translator and commissionerof the assigned revenue, until a full and completeenquiry bad taken place, and a decision passedthereon by the Government; but they felt thecharge606 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE IChaf. XT.iTSLse. charge to be so totally unfounded, that theresolved not to deprive themselves of his services.Notwithstanding these facts an action was subsequentlybrought against Mr. Haliburton by theattorney in the Madras Court for unlawfully receivingmoney from Gooary Row. The chargenot only completely failed, but the Court actuallyawarded triple damages to Mr. Haliburton.* ItisLetter finn Madras, Sit August 1782.Mr. Haliburton appears to haTe been again exposed tothe perilous effects of jealousy and intrigue, during the briefgovernment of Mr. John Holland. A cole had been grantedfor the preceding thirty years for the exclusive vend of betel-nutand tobacco within certain limits; in the cole issuedby Mr. Holland's government, the limits had been greatly extended.General complaints were urged against this measureby the natives who inhabited the districts to which the extendedright of monopoly applied. Mr. Haliburton was reportedto have urged them to resistance, in consequence of>^hich the Government suspended him frcHn the office of Persiantranslator and member of the Board of Revenue. Thisproceeding was founded upon the declaration of two natives,one of whom deposed that the conversation he had with Mr.Haliburton was in English which he confessed he did not understand,and yet three days afterwards he swore to the truthof the contents of a petition which was entirely in English, andcontained the very words in which Mr. Haliburton was supposedto have encouraged them to resist ; and he also swore atthe same time to the truth of the particulars of his previousexamination, when he declared that he did not and now does notunderstand English. Upon this extraordinary evidence, withoutfurther inquiry into the character of the accusers, was Mr.Haliburton suspended. He was prepared to make the mostsolemn assertion of his innocence, and earnestly but ineffectuallysolicited investigation. The Directors, on being apprised of alltheChas. XI.} BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 607,IS scarcely possible to believe that such a state of i78i-82.things could have existed as is shewn, from perusal *^">»^«-of the records, to have been the case at the periodin question.*Intelligence of the appointment of Sir Elijah Proceedings inImpey to the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut reached to siHstyahEngland in October 1781. Doubts immediately ^^^^'arose in the minds of the Directors on the legalityof the measure. The subject was forthwith takenupthe circumstances ccmdeiiuied the conduct of the Governmentin the strongest terms. They observed, *' even if we had notcause to suspect the purity of almost every measure of the shortadministration of Mr. John Holland, the single proceeding respectingthe removal of Mr. Haliburton upon perjured evidenceto drive him fi'om the settlement to some remote corner wassufficient to establish the strongest suspicions of corruption onthe part of the Government." The Court ordered his immediaterestoration to office. — Letter to Madras, 6th May 1791.'* When Mr. Haliburton resigned the service and returned toEngland in March 1795^ the Madras Government bore honourabletestimony to his merits and services as a faithful zealousand intelligent servant of the Company"— Z.«</«r^^iom Madras4/A March 1795.'' The Directors expressed their conviction that the eulogiumpassed on Mr. Haliburton was well merited. His conduct, firstin acquiring, by an early and a laborious attention, a knowledgeof the languages and of the customs of the country, and ofmatters relating to the revenue — and secondly, in exercising thatknowledge in furthering the interests of his employers, whilsthe held a conspicuous situation at the Revenue Board, waswell worthy of applause, and we recommend it to the imitationof our servants"— Le/Zcr to Madras, Uh October 1797.♦ The late Sir Nathaniel Wraxall^ of posthumous notoriety,appears to have been brought into parliament by the Nabob ashis agent, to advocate, as a British senator, the unworthy jobsof such a flagitious principal as Mahomed Ali.608 RISE AND Progress OT THE [Cult. XI.1781-82. up by the House of Commons, who appointed a*'^'**^*' select committee to investigate the proceedings.They directed their attention, not only to thequestion of legality, but to the authority whichhad been exercised by the Governor-general, andto the effects it was calculated to produce uponthe minds of the people of India.In the interval between the appointment of theCommittee and their Report, a change of ministrytook place. Lord North resigned. The Marquisof Rockingham became first lord of the Treasury,Earl Shelburneand Mr. Fox being appointedthe two secretaries of state, the oflSce of the thirdsecretary of state being abolished. Lord JohnCavendish was chancellor of the Exchequer, theDuke of Portland lord-lieutenant of Ireland, Mr.Sheridan one of the under-secretaries of state.Admiral Repel at the head of the Admiralty,and Mr. Burke was appointed paymaster of theforces and made a privy councillor.Mr. Burke appears, from an early period of hispolitical life, to have paid more attention to theaffairs of India than almost any other subject.It is affirmed, that when the idea of a secondcommission to India was in agitation in 1769, anoffer was made to him, in the event of its appointment,to be at its head, as his success in parliamentmight be doubtful, *' few knowing whatthey are capable of when entering the House ofCommons, and few coming out from thence withoutQiAF. Xh] BSmSH POWfiH IN India. 609out having found their just weight in the political I78i-a2.balance." This circumstance accounts in some ^'^o^''measure for his attention to India affairs.The Report of the Committee was presented tothe House on the 18th April 1782. It was takenup in a Committee of the whole House, by whomit was reported, that Sir Elijah Impey's appointmentwas wholly at variance with the beneficialpurposes intended by the Act of 1773, and madethe Supreme Court dependent upon the very authoritieswhose acts it was meant to control. Thatsuch appointments ought to be held as null andvoid, and that the Directors should order the sameto be annulled. The Directors passed an unanimousresolution on the 24th April, removing SirElijah Impey. An address to the Throne on the9th May was voted by the House of Commons forhis recall from India, to answer to the charge ofhis accepting the office.About the same time Reports were presented Reporte on, * Camatic war.from the Secret Committee appointed to enquireinto the causes of the Camatic war. Mr. duncan,the lord advocate of Scotland, had acted aschairman of the Committee, and to him was giventhe credit of having prepared those voluminousdocuments which were considered to be drawn upwith the greatest judgment and ability.Mr. Dundas submitted to the House one hundredand eleven resolutions, founded on the Reportsin question. The resolutions were dividedVOL. I. 2 R610 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. IX.1781-82. into three classes, each class containing three .^^^^^ Jj^g^Jg^The First regarded the general system of government; it censured the conduct of Mr. Hastings,the governor-general, and that of Mr. Hornby,governor of Bombay, and declared it to be the dutyof the Directors to recall them.The second and third classes related to theaffairs of the Camatic. On these a bill of painsand penalties was brought in against Sir ThomasRumbold, J. Whitehill, and P. Peering, Esqrs.,for breaches of public trust and high crimes andmisdemeanors.*On the 28th May, the House of Commons cameto the following resolution : —Resolved, That Warren Hastings, Esq., govemcnr-general, and William Hornby, £sq, president of theCouncil at Bombay, having in sundry instances acted in «manner repugnant to the honour and pdicy of this nation,and thereby brought great calamities on India, and enormousexpenses on the Company, it is the duty of theDirectors to pursue all legal and effectual means for theremoval of the said Grosvenor-general and President fromtheir respective offices, and to recall them to Great Britain'sThe Court of Directors entered into a considerationof the various documents connected with theadministrationLittle progress was made in prosecuting the matter duringthat session. The unsettled state of affairs in 1783 preventedthe House of Commons taking it up until late in that year.At the close of the session a motion to adjourn the questionuntil October was carried by which the matter fell to theground and was never resumed.CiiAP.XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. GHadministration of Mr Hastings and Mr. Hornby, stoatsix separate meetings, from the 31st May to ®''**»^'^-the 18th June. On the 19th of that month, aSpecial General Court met at the requisition ofnine proprietors, when it wasResolved, That it is the opinion of this Court, thatthe removing of Warren Hastings, Esq. the governor-generalof Baikal, or any servants of the Company, merely in compliancewith a vote of the House of Commons, withoutbeing satisfied that the grounds of delinquency against thesaid Warren Hastings, or such other servants, are sufficientof themselves to vindicate the Directors in coming to suchresolution, would weaken the confidence which the servantsof the Company ought to entertain of the justice of theiremployers, and will tend to destroy that independency,which the proprietors of East-india Stock ought to enjoyin the management of their own affairsIt was alsoResolved, That it be recommended to the Court ofDirectors not to carry into effect any resolution they maycome to relative to the removal of Warren Hastings, Esq.till such resolution shall have been approved by a GeneralCourt''At eleven subsequent meetings of the Court ofDirectors, held between the 20th June and the2d October, the consideration of the resolutionof the House of Commons, and of the dispatchesconnected therewith, from India, was resumed.On the 9th of October, four separate motions weresubmitted by the chairman, from the Committeeof Correspondence, and having been discussed on2 R 2 the6 12 Ri£ AND PSOOUaS OP TUB [C«tf. XI.im. the 16th, 17th, and 22d of that month, the Court*'^*" of Directors on the latter<< Resolved, That the orders sent by the Directors to theirservants in India, to abstain from schemes of conquest andextension of dominion, and to confine their views to a systemof defence, forbidding all unnecessary interference in thequarrels with the country powers, or the entering into newengagements with them in oiFevisiTe alliances, recommendingat the same time the preservation ai peace, and themaintenance of an inviolable character for moderation andgood faith, by a steady adherence to treaties founded inwisdom and sound policy, and entirely consonant to theinterests of the Company and the nation.hed. <« That it appears to this Court, that a omtmrysystem of police has been adopted and pursued by theCompany's servants in India, in disobedience to those wenadvised orders of their superiors, whereby they have involvedthemselves in impolitic and contradictory negotiations, promotedand entered into offensive treaties, and carried onunnecessary and complicated wars, attended with an enormousexpense, and by these and other instances of erroneousconduct, the Company have been loaded with large andheavy debts at all their settlements, and our national influenceand reputation declined throughout Hindostan, whilstthese measures have given birth to combinations among thecountry powers, dangerous to the safety of the Company^sterritories.Sd. <* That it is incumbent on this Court to give adecisive confirmation to that system of conduct enjoined bythe Directors, and heretofore ratified by a General Court,and in order to quiet the native princes in Hindostan, torestore confidence, and to shew the sincerity of our intentions,that an immediate stop be put to a system of policysoOmap.XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDLL, 61390 ruinous in its consequences to this Company and the 17B2.piUic. Bbhoal.4th. ^ That it is the opinion of this Court, that a steadypersevere in the system of conduct so frequently enjoinedby the Court of Directors, cannot be expected from thoseservants, whose ideas of extension of dominion, either bynegotiation or conquest, have led them to depart fromorders so often enforced, and therefore that it is expedientto icmove Warren Hastings, Esq from the office of Cover*nor-general of Bengal."^Seven Directors recorded a dissent from theresolution of recall. On the 21st October, anotherSpecial General Court was held at the instance ofnine proprietors, when the following motion wasmade:—*< That it appears to this Court, from incontestable evil Court of prudence,drawn arran the records of the Company, and sup hU^reSllT^^^ported by the unanimous opinion of the House of Commons,that the war in which we are now engaged with theMahrattass was evidently founded on the sentiments of theCourt of Directors, conveying demands on the Mahrattaadministration greatly exceeding the conditions of the treatyof Poorunder, which sentiments of the Court of Directorsopened the first design of sending a detachment fromBengal to the Malabar coast, and that consequently itwoidd be the height of injustice to lay the blame of thatwar, or the evils which have flowed from it, upon MrHastings, when it appears that the dissatisfaction of theCourt of Directors, expressed at the treaty of Poorunder,in their letters to Bengal of the 6th of February, and toBombay t)f the 16th of April 1777, gave the strongestencouragement to both presidencies to seize the slightestpretence of provocation from the ministers of the Mahrattastates,614 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuff. XL1782. states, to renew their engagements with Ragobah. NeitherBiiHOAL. jj^y^ ^j^^ measures adopted by Mr. Hastings, in consequenceof such instnictiiHiSy ever received the slightest censure fW>mthe Court of Directors. In consideration whereof, it is nowrecommended to the Court of Directors to rescind their lateresolution, respecting the removal of Warren Hastings, Esq.governor-general of Bengal, more especially as it appearsto this Court that, according to the late official despatchesfrom Bengal, dated the 8th of April 1785^ the prospect ofpeace with the Mahrattass was then propitious, because itseemed to be wished for by the Mahratta states, becausehostilities with them had ceased for many months, and thata peace had actually been concluded with MahdajeeScindia, one of the principal chiefs of that confederacy ;and further, that the Government-general of Bengal wereusing every means in their power to effect a general pacification,and that the conduct of the said Government-generalwas tending to produce a general pacification, or to uniteand support, by powerful resources, a general confederacyof the country powers, to defeat the combination of HyderrAlly and the French, (supposing the said Hyderr Ally shallnot accept of the reasonable terms of accommodation whichhave been offered to him in consequence of his proposals forpeace,) merits the warmest approbation of this Court, andthat therefore it would be evidently injurious to the interestof the Company, and the nation, to remove any of thoseprincipal servants of the Company, now discharging theirduty with such uncommon exertions, ability, and unanimity,or to shake the authority reposed in them by the Legislatureand the Company, at a period so critical, when the prosperityof the British interests in India will depend in a greatmeasure on the confidence which the native princes of thecountry may place in the Government of Bengal."The question being put by the ballot, on the31stCnAT. XL] BBinSH POWER IN INDIA. 61631st October 1782, there were, out of 503 votes, ^'^2.a majority of 363 in favour of the resolution. RccaiTrf*Mr.The Court of Directors having satisfied them Hastings.selves that, in the opinion of the Company'scounsel, the proprietors possessed a subsistingpower of control in the removal of a governor-general,'^ Resolved, That in compliance with the direction of theCourt of Proprietors, the resolution of the Court of Directorsof the Sed October, respecting the removal of Mr.Hastings, be. rescinded." .A general letter to India, announcing the Court'sdetermination, was then approved, but as the clausein the Act>of 1781 required that all proposedletters from the Company to their Government inIndia should be subject to the approval of theCrown, the dispatch in question was transmittedto Mr. Secretary Townshend for the King's approbation.On the 1 6th of November, a letter wasreceived by the Court from Mr. Townshend, intimatingthat the resolution of the Directors, formedin compliance with the directions of the GeneralCourt of Proprietors, was so directly repugnant tothe sense of the House of Commons, that he hadreceived his Majesty's commands to withhold anyapprobation to the draft, and that it was hisMajesty's intention to order the whole of the proceedingsrelative to the business in question to belaid before Parliament ; he was also to instructthe Chairs to suspend sending the draft to India.WhenB18B And PBOCOtESS OFTHE[CkAr.XLi78K-da When the proprietor were acquainted with ibisMajesty's pleasure, they rested to appoint acommittee of nine of their body to watch over therights of the Company.Leuerfrom During the discussions at home respecting Mr.Ai to A lum of Hastings, he addressed the Court from Patna in^ January 1782, representing that when he was atChunar, in the preceding year,* an osier of a considerablesum of money was made to him by theVizier and by his minister.<< I accepted it without hesitation, and gladly, being entirelydestitute both of means and credit, whether for yourservice or the relief of my own necessities. It was made,not in specie, but in bills. What I have received has beenlaid out in the public service, the rest shall be applied tothe same account. The nominal sum is ten lacs of rupees,Oude currency. As soon as the whole is completed, I shallsend you a faithful account of it, resigning the disposal ofit entirely to the pleasure of your Honourable Court. If youshall adjudge the disposal to me, I shall consider it as themost honourable apportionment and reward of my laboursand I wish to owe my fortune to your bounty. I am nowin my fiftieth year : I have passed thirty-ene years in yourservice. My conscience allows me boldly to claim themerit of zeal and integrity, nor has fortune been unpropitiousto their exertions. To these qualities I bound mypretensions. I shall not repine if you shall deem otherwiseof my services ; nor ought your decisicHi, however it maydisappoint my hope of a retreat adequate to the consequenceand elevation of the office which I now possess, to lessen mygratitude for having been so long permitted to hold it, since• rt<fe page 597.itCba».xl] BitmsH tH)W£ft in iimtA. 617it has at least penetrated me to iHy up a pK^Tifl0n> irish 1788-83.whk^ I can be contented in a more humble stations* BsvaAt.In fulfilment of the promise contained in theforegoing letter, Mr* Hastings wrote to the Courton the 22d May frolA Calcutta, and entered intoan explanation of the several sums received byhim and applied to the Company's use, amountingin the aggregate to nineteen lacs sixty-fourthousand rupees, or nearly £200,000, from themonth of October 1780 to August 1781.These letters gave no indication of any expectationon the part of Mr. Hastings that his conductas governor-general could have formedgrounds for the displeasure either of Parliamentor of the Directors. The one written by him inMay was intended to have been sent by theLively y then under despatch for Europe ; but, bysome cause, her departure was delayed, and withher the transmission of the letter also, as will beseen by a subsequent communication from MnHastings, on learning the proceedings that hadtaken place in Parliament.The fleets of France and England, the former Maori.under M. Suffrein, had various skirmishes off thecoast of Coromandel. In the month of February1 782, a French fleet of twelve sail of the line,withThe Directors, in a letter of the 15th January 1783, statedthat they were precluded by the Act of Parliament from appropriatingthe ten last as suggested in Mr. Hastings' letter ofJanuary 1782.6t8 Bias Ashy pboobess of the [c^at.xi.1782-88. M^ith frigates and transports, appeared' off Pulling^^j q^ ^Jj^ g^l^ gjj. Edward Hughes arrived atNaval engage ^mcntoffTriu- Madras from Trincomalee, with the Superb JELrc-fer. Monarch, Bedford Worcester ^ Eagle, and theSea-horse frigate. , On the 10th he was joined byCommodore Alms with three ships of the line,and one transport containing General Meadowsand Colonel Fullerton, with four hundred King'stroops. On the 15th the French fleet appeared offMadras, and on the 16th stood to the southward.The English admiral weighed, and followed theenemy till they were separated from their frigatesand transports. Sir Edward Hughes made thesignal for chasing the latter, in which the IsUbeing the foremost, came up with and re-took theLauriston, a large transport laden with militarystores and three hundred troops, together withseveral English vessels with grain which hadbeen captured by the enemy on the coast. Theenemy's fleet bore dowuj and having the advantageof the wind, brought eight of their shipsto engage five of the English, the other ships oneither side not being able to get into action. Theengagement lasted from four until half-past six,when the French ceased firing, and hauled theirwind. The Superb and Exeter were much damaged,having many shot between wind andwater. Sir Edward Hughes went to Trincomaleeto refit, and returned to Madras on the lOth Marchto renew the attack on the enemy, whose ships had-beenCHAf.Xl.]BRITISH POWER IN Media.been dispersed during: the action. Their hospitalship, the Dttc de Tosca^ine, having come to anchorin the roads of Negapatam, in the belief that itwas a friendly port, was captured by the ChapmanIndiamen.On the 8th April, Sir Edward Hughes cameagain in sight of the French squadron, then consistingof eighteen sail. On the 12th, the French,having the wind, engaged him ; the action commencedat half-past one p. m., and ended at fortyminutes past six. Both fleets anchored withinfive miles of each other until the 1 9th. In theinterval. Sir Edward Hughes had refitted all hisfleet, with the exception of the Monmouth, whichhad lost her main and mizen-masts, their placesbeing supplied with good jury-masts. The enemymade a shew of renewing the engagement ; Sir£. Hughes waited, with springs on his cables, butthe enemy, after approaching within two miles,stood out to sea, and was seen no more. Sir E.Hughes' force consisted of twelve ships, in whichthere were 247 killed, and 320 wounded. Thenumber in the French ship Hero, the flag-ship,killed and wounded, was 200; the admiral-beingobliged to shift his flag from her to the Aja.i\1788-88.BXXOAUMalabarCoast.On the Malabar coast, the blockade of Telli-cherryby Hyderr's troops was raised by the arrival ^ ^^*^^ theof a force under Major Abingdon from Bombay.After a severe action, Hyderr's army inter SudassCanVreiicli.620 RISK AND Possess OP THE [CkAi^ XLinst. Can was defeated, the whole of his treasure andMamas. ^^ tnaUricl of his army falling into possessionof the British, and a communication opened oneither side of Tellicherry, the country beingcleared of the enemy. This check to Hyderr onthe coast of Malabar was met by the defeat ofthe detachment under Colonel Braithwaite, onthe borders of the kingdom of Tanjore, by TippooSaid ; on which occasion the interference of M.Tally saved the force from annihilation : many ofthe captives, however, suffered a long imprisonmentat Seringapatam.A detachment of French troops having beenlanded at Pondicherry in March 1782, they werejoined by a body of Hyderr's forces. In the monthof April, M. Du Chemin, the commanding officerof the French forces at Porto Novo, appeared beforeCuddalore, which surrendered to him, theinhabitants having no means of defence. Theprisoners were exchanged against an equal numberof French. As this was an act wholly independentof any communication with Hyderr, M.Du Chemin desired to become possessed ofCuddalore in right of his own nation ; understandingthat he was also to be put in immediatepossession of Chillembrum, one of the Frenchofficers demanded the surrender of the keys fromthe sepoy guard, who refused to deliver them upwithout orders from his commanding officer; uponwhich the Frenchman struck the sepoy with hissword.cur. XL] BmnaH power in indu. 021sword. The matter being reported to Hyderr, he vkslanswered, " Turn the French and their stores out »"'«^'-from Chillembnim." In consequence of whichorder, they were not only obliged to quit the fort,but for want of bullocks were constrained to dragtheir artillery back to Porto Novo 1* Permacoilwas besieged and taken in May by Hyderr, andan attack meditated on Wandewash. The latterwas however prevented by the advance of SirEyre Goose, who discovered the enemy's encampmentabout twenty miles on the road from Per-macoil, the French having joined it that morning.Whilst the force under Sir £• Coote was markingout the camp at Arne, Hyderr suddenly appeared.An engagement ensued on the 2d June; theenemy were repulsed, and Sir Eyre Coote returnedto the presidency, it being the last occasion onwhich he was opposed to Hyderr.Peace was concluded with the Mahrattass by the combat.treaty of Salbey. the 17th May 1782, through 2^^^^'^"the mediation of Madajee Scindia.f Hagobah,to whom was to be attributed the lengthened hostilitiesin which the two powers had been engaged,had a fixed allowance secured to him of25,000 rupees per month. The forts and districtsof Billapore and Calling, the authors adjoiningSalsette, the fort and island of Bassein and itsdependencies,Letter fW>m Bengal, May 1782.f Vide Printed Treaties, page 99.622 Rise AND PBOtittESS OF THE [Ch4k XI.178& dependencies, and the valuable districts in the^Sllfiir.'"* Guzerat country annexed to the chieftains ofSurat and Broach, were formally surrendered tothe Poonahh government and Putty Sing Guico^var. The city and pergunnah of Broach beingput in the possession of Madajee Scindia, conformablywith the grant from the Governor-generalin Council, who observed that his conduct inthe negociation, as well as his claim founded onthe treaty of Organum, recommended the cession.They considered that it would effect theimportant object of attaching so distinguished achief to the Company's interests. They werealso of opinion that the possession of Broach wasno advantage to the Company, whatever it mightbe in the estimation of the Council at Bombay.The expenses of the establishment were nearlyequal to its revenues ; future troubles would ariseabout the boundaries, and the price of cotton, thestaple of the district, rose in Bombay with ourpossession of the place. '' The natural consequencesof a commercial place possessed by menwho are dealers in the specific article of tradewhich it produces**hZH^S? The Bombay Council, as anticipated by theSupreme Government, observed in their despatchesto the Court of Directors, that 'thewhole of your possessions to the westward arenow reduced to the castle and dependent revenuesLetter from Bengal, 15th July 1782.Chap. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 623nues of Surat, as held since the first acquisition 1^88.of them in 1769. A powerful and dangerous ®«"«***neighbour is now placed close to this remainingpossession, which it will be necessary to guardwith a watchful eye ; but it will be equally unavailingand mortifying to expatiate on this subject,or the value of the countries you have lostby this treaty. We shall rejoice should we havefuture occasion to enumerate the benefits resultingfrom it. This presidency must, from henceforward,require from the Bengal treasury a largeand annual supply of money for the indispensableoccasions of the Company's concerns under ourmanagement."After adverting to the heavy charges incurredon account of increased establishment, they remarked: ** In forming the new arrangementsfor this presidency, it will be a question wellworthy of serious consideration,, whether an extraordinarymilitary force, kept up at Bombay,will not conduce, in a greater degree, to ensurethe peace of India and the general safety of theHonourable Company's possessions, than a muchlarger force maintained in any other quarter ;and whether an increase of force at Bombaywill not permit of a proportional decrease inthe establishments and military expenses atthe other presidencies. This is a question ofgeneral, not of partial concern, and of thehighest importance to the Honourable Company'swelfare.UaBAM>or THE[OiAr.XI.198B.Blabwelfare* According to the idea we have formedupon the subject the Company's means shouldbe employed in such a manner as may best contributeto the defence of their estate, without toonice distinctions whether the money is expendedat Bengal, Madras, or Bombay'By the treaty of Salbey the Paishwa boundhimself, for the whole of the Mahrattass, not tosuffer other European nations to establish factoriesin their dominions. Nana Fumavese, thePaishwa's prime minister, and Madajee Scindia,were the two great parties who now governed theMahratta empire.1782.83.Bbwoal andMADEAa-Effort to firetbeCumtie.Every efibrt was now to be made to free theCamatic from the forces of Hyderr. At this importantjuncture, serious differences arose betweenLord Macartney and Sir Eyre Coote. The latterappealed to the Supreme Government against theacts of the Council at Madras ; he desired to beleft to the free and uncontrolled exercise of ibisown judgment in following out the militaryoperations which he deemed best calculated toeffect the great end in view, he sent his Persianinterpreter to Bengal for the purpose of givinga full explanation on all points of difference.Lord Macartney likewise deputed his private secretaryto counteract the effects that might beproduced by the mission of Mr. Graham. As theSupreme Government felt that their decision mustbeChat. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INBIA. 625be condemnatory of one of the parties, they de i7«2-8s.termined to abstain frown entering into the merits ®'*«^^of the question, a course which Lord Macartneydescribed to be prejudging the matter.As the Council in Bengal considered the Carnaticto be in a state of actual invasion, they feltthat every deference should be paid to the zeal,exertion, and circumspection of Sir Eyre Coote,who, in despite of a most severe illness, had perseveredin the discharge of the most arduous duties,and had attached to him the army, who reposedimplicit confidence in him. Under these circumstances,the Supreme Council felt that his wishesshould be gratified to the fullest extent. Theyaccordingly directed the Madras Government toconcede to him the entire and participatedcommand of all the forces under their presidency,with the exception of the garrison of FortSt. George. They enforced the recommendationby placing all the Bengal troops on foreign serviceunder his control, observing, *' that every governmentmust of course possess an ultimate andoverruling authority ; and the right of exercisingsuch authority, which is inherent in it, must bealso invariable and perpetuate, notwithstandingany restrictions which it may impose upon itselffor particular purposes." They then offeredvarious suggestions as to supplies and moving thearmy.*ThLetter from Bengal, November 1782,VOL. I. 2 s626 Else AND Progress OF THE [Cbat. XL17BM3. The President and Select Committee at MadrasBrn^Au intimated that they should pay implicit obedienceto the orders of the Supreme Government, andapprised Sir Eyre Coote that they had investedhim with ** all the powers, authorities, and responsibilitiesderived from Bengal' Bitter and acrimoniousfeelings arose between them and theCommander-in-chief. They remarked to the SupremeCouncil, that the ancient constitutionalsystem of the government of Madras had beensubverted by the power delegated to Sir EyreCoote. The general was shortly afterwards constrained,on account of his health, to embark forCalcutta.In the month of December 1782, Mr. Hastings,ignorant of the proceedings of the Court of Proprietorsregarding him, addressed the Directorswith reference to the parliamentary inquiry. Headverted to the letter which had been written byhim in May, but not forwarded to England.* Heaccordingly transmitted it, accompanied by anaffidavit of Mr. Lurking, the accountant-general,to the effect, that the letter in question hadbeen sealed in that month, and delivered fortransmission to the Court. ' ' The despatch havingbeen protracted, I send the affidavit, and feelthat the parliamentary inquiry has placed me inan unfortunate position, because it exposes meto the incorrect imputations from the occasionthat• Fide page 617.Chap. XI.] British POWER IN INDIA. 627that enquiry has since furnished, but which 1782.88.were well known when that letter was written, b«»'o*'-and written in conformity to former promises.He then referred to the affidavit of Mr. Lurking,and expressed the mortification he felt at beingreduced to the necessity of any such precautionfor guarding his reputation against dishonour.If I had at any time possessed that degree of confidencefrom my immediate employers which they have never withheldfrom the meanest of my predecessors, I should havedisdained to use these attestations. How I have drawnupon me a different treatment I know not — sit is sufficientthat I have not merited it in the course of thirty-two yearsservice, ten of them employed in maintaining the powersand discharging the duties of the first office of the BritishGrovemment in India. The Honourable Company ought toknow whether I possess the integrity and honour which arethe first requisites for such a station. If I wanted these, theywould have afforded me but too powerful incentives to suppressthe information, which I now convey to them throughyou, and to appropriate to my own use the sums which I havealready passed to their credit by the unworthy, and pardonme if I add, dangerous reflections which they have passed uponme, for the first communication of this kind, and your ownexperience will suggest to you there are persons who wouldprofit by the warning. The exigency of the public servicerequired them. I could have concealed them, had I wrongmotives, from you anS the public eye, for ever ; and I knowthe difficulty to which a spirit of injustice "may subject mefor my candour and avowal, are greater than any possibleinconvenience that could have attended the concealment,except the dissatisfaction of my own mind : these difficultiesare but a few of those which I have suffered in your service.2 s 2 The628 BI8E AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. XI.1782-83. The applause of my own breast is the surest reward, andBbkoal. was the support of my mind in meeting them ; your applauseand that of my country are my next wishes in life.The Company were at this time relieved fromone of their most powerful enemies. Hyderr diedbetween the 4th and 7th December. Meer Kur-seem, his second son, was. with him at the timewith Mahomed Ally, one of the generals in commandof the main army. Tippoo, his eldest sonwho inherited his father's enmity against the Company,and who became so formidable a foe, wasdetached against Colonel Humberstone, who hadbeen sent from Bombay to the Malabar coast, buthad taken possession of Calicut and other inferiorplaces. His instructions confined him to defensivemeasures; but having commenced offensiveoperations, the Bombay Government dispatchedBrigadier-general Matthews to support him.Tippoo, incensed at the proceedings of ColonelHumberstone, departed rapidly from the Camaticfor the purpose of cutting him off at HungaryCottahh. Humberstone being apprized of 'sintention, blew up the fortifications, and fellback to Ramgerry ; from whence, on hearing ofTippoo's approach, he also retired, first destroyingthe works. On reaching Panany, he deliveredover the command to Colonel Macleod, who hadarrived from Madras. That officer found himselfsurrounded by a formidable enemy ; but the positionof the English army was naturally strong,andChap. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN India 629and was improved by works thrown up for the anaspurpose. The enemy, led by M. Tally at thehead of his Europeans, made a vigorous and regularattack on the 28th November, but was entirelydefeated. Tippoo recrossed the Poltroonon the 12th December, and suddenly decamped,proceeding by rapid marches to Palacatcherry.Brigadier-general Matthews, who was to havereinforced Colonel Humberstone, joined ColonelMacleod, and took Onore by storm on the 6thJanuary 1783. The Bombay Government having its.received accounts of Hyderr's death, ordered GeneralMatthews to penetrate through the Ghautsto the Bednore country. The general passed theGhauts, and gained possession of Bednore inFebruary. There the misunderstanding arose onthe subject of prize and other points, in whichColonels Humberstone, Macleod, and MajorShaw, differed so widely from General Matthews,that they quitted him, and returned to Bombay.On their representation, General Matthews, whohad kept the Bombay Government in utter ignoranceof thewhole of his measures, was superseded,and Colonel Macleod appointed to the command.Accompanied by Colonel Humberstone and MajorShaw, he proceeded from Bombay in the Rangerto join the troops. The vessel was attacked offGheria by a Mahratta fleet. Lieutenant Pruen,the commander of the Ranger, fought his vesselwith the greatest courage until all on boardwere630 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chat. XL1TO3. were either killed or wounded. Major Shaw wasBombay, j^m^d by a shot ; Colonel Humberstone was shotthrough the lungs; Lieutenant John Taylor, ofthe Bombay troops, was shot through the body ;Lieutenant Seton, of the Bombay artillery, andLieutenant Pruen, were wounded on boarding.In the beginning of the action, Lieutenant-colonelMacleod received two wounds in his left hand andshoulder, and a little before the close a musket*ball passed through his lungs and spleen. Theywere carried into Gheria, where Colonel Humber-stonedied of his wounds ; but Colonel Macleod,after a considerable period, recovered.Tippoo Sultaun determined to relinquish allother objects for the recovery of the favouritepossessions which he had lost in the Bednorecountry. Colonel Macleod being a prisoner, renderedit necessary to appoint a provisional successor.Major Campbell, of His Majesty's 42d regiment,was nominated, to whom Brigadier-generalMatthews was directed to deliver over the commandof the troops collected to oppose the enemy.The Madras government had little hope of beingable to support the force in the Bednore country >they nevertheless desired Colonel Lang to useevery exertion to join the troops under GeneralMatthews, who had sent advice of the enemy'sapproach with a body of fifty thousand men, andtwenty-five guns, to the eastward of Bedn<»e.The conduct of Matthews was inexplicable : hedispatchedChap. XI.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 631dispatched the most contradictory statements from its.time to time, as to the approach, as well as to the ^*''**-strength of Tippoo's army, and instead of returningto the Ghauts, marched out of Bednore witha force of little more than two thousand men tomeet the enemy. He was immediately drivenback into the fort by a French detachment, withthe loss of five hundred of his men. The reportof the disaster reaching Cundapore, the garrison,panic-struck, fled without even the appearance ofthe enemy, some of the fugitives taking refuge inthe fort of Onore. The firmness and prudence ofthe late Major (then Captain) Torriano, who commandedat Onore, not only preserved the troops inthe fort from being infected with the panic, but,through his spirited exertions, an attempt wasmade to recover the artillery which had beenabandoned at Cundapore.In April 1783 the garrison at Bednore capitulatedto Tippoo ; the survivors suffered the mostcruel indignities. General Matthews, with manyof his officers, being marched into the interior.A general belief existed, that they had been poisonedby Tippoo*s orders, but the Supreme Government,upon the reports from Matthews himselfas well as from other grounds, were of opinionthat he fell a sacrifice to his own violent disposition,and to the groundless apprehension that meant to cut him off.* After the reduction♦ Letter from Bengal, 20th October 1784.632 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XL17S8. of Bednore, Tippoo appeared before Mangalore,Bombay. which fort was commanded by Major Campbell.During the siege accounts were received, in July,of the peace between England and France. TheFrench commander, on learning the event, positivelyrefused to permit his troops to act in anymanner against the English ; the siege of Mangalorewas accordingly converted into a blockade.The garrisons of Mangalore and Onore had beenreduced to the greatest distress ; but, under theexertions of their gallant commanders, stood outuntil relief was afforded by the arrival of a forcefrom Bombay.The command of the army on the coast, afterthe departure of Sir Eyre Coote, had devolvedupon General Stuart. That officer was impressedwith a belief that the powers which had beenspecially vested by the Supreme Government inSir Eyre Coote naturally devolved upon him.Throughout the discussions with the Governor andCouncil of Madras, as to the best course of proceedingsto be adopted on the death of Hyderr, torid the Carnatic of Tippoo, he not only differedfrom the Governor, but disputed the powers of thecivil authority over the King's troops, which ledLord Macartney to record his views in the followingterms :His Majesty has been graciously pleased to send outtroops to the assistance of the Company ; he has expresslydeclared them to be for their service, and they are actuallyinCrap. XL] British POWER IN INDIA. 633in their pay. The King has formed regulations for their 17B3.interior discipline, and has reserved to himself to fill up thevacancies which may happen in them ; but how they are tobe employed, and when and where their services are to beperformed, must depend on those whom they are sent toserve. The authority to conduct all military operationslodged in the Company^s representatives, cannot be sparrated from the authority over the troops which are to executethem.The King gives, therefore, to officers coming to India,and the Secretary of State afterwards transmits to them, noinstructions as to any military operations. They are notofficially told from home what war they are to wage, whatcountry to attack, or what expedition to undertake : theyare simply informed, that they are sent to the assistance ofthe India Company, to whom the obedience of the officersas well as troops is, by this very act, transferred while theyremain in India. The military laws, which do not say thatthe King^s troops in India are to obey the Company and itsrepresentatives, do not say that the King^s troops in Englandare to obey the King or his commands signified by hisSecretaries of State or of War, but both are equally understood.The senior officer of the King's troops in India isvested with no unlimited power. He must receive ordersbefore he is empowered to act ; he has got no orders fromthe Crown, he must therefore necessarily take them from theauthority commanding where he is sent.Before the India Company had any extensive possessions,when the war that was to be waged in India was chieflyintended against an European and a national enemy, yet theinstructions of the commanding officer of the reinforcementsent by the Crown, expressly directed him to follow thedeterminations of the Company's representatives ; nor wasa failure considered justifiable on his part, unless a councilofBombay.634 BISE AND Progress OP THE [Cat. XLI783L of ofl5oer% particularly named in the instructions, should^'^'' deem the plan proposed to be impracticable.You will observe by what is above stated, that the oom-mander-in-chief of your forces, in addition to the power andinfluence which that station confers, asserts and maintains,in a separate capacity, an independent authority over theKing^s troops, which now constitute the principal strengthof your army, and avows an obedience to another authority,superior and piefaraUe to that which he owes to your representatives.We conceive that there is but a slight translation fiverefusal to employ the King*s troops upon a requisition hamthe evil government, to the employing them without a re-quisiticHi ; and we submit to you, to what uses such anauthority might be implied, and where the consequencemight end.It would avail but little towards the retrieval of thoseconsequences, that his character, property, or life, wasanswerable : the forfeiture of any or all of these would beapoor compensation for your loss*General Stuart having, contrary to the expressorders of the council at Madras, sent private instructionsto the force under Colonel Fullerton,he was positively required to abstain from issuingorders or instructions to any of the King's orCompany's officers employed at a distance fromthe presidency, excepting on matters of detail orthe discipline of the troops, without previouslycommunicating such orders or instructions to theSelect Committee for their approbation.The state of affairs on the coast induced SirEyre Coote to make an offer of )his service, and toproceedMackay.Chas. XI.] BSmSH POWER IN INDIA* 635proceed again to Madras. He sailed from Calcutta its.in the private ship Resolution, on the 7th March. Madras.The French Admiral, aware of his intention, keptfour of his best sailing ships, two of the line and twofrigates, cruising off the roads of Madras to interceptthem. They fell in with the Resolution, andchased her for four days and four nights incessantly,it being moonlight. They were sometimeswithin a league of the Resolution. The Generalfelt all the anxiety that could be suffered by anactive mind in such a situation under such circumstances.He was almost perpetually watchingupon deck, and could not enjoy any rest, frequentlyfainting from fatigue. The enemy atlength gave over the chase, and the ship reachedMadras the 24th April ; but ** the good old Generalhad sustained too severe a shock, and died fourdays afterwards"*The French were strongly fortified at Cudda-lore. The Marquis de Bussy had arrived to takethe command, and had brought with him a forcefrom the Mauritius, consisting of fifteen thousandvolunteers, besides three hundred Cares for theguns, and two thousand sepoy. Various discussionstook place, in which General Stuart expressedhis doubts as to the correctness of thereports of Hyderr's death, and dissented from thepresident regarding the course to be pursued insupport of the force opposed to Tippoo in theBednore• Letter from Bengal, 20th October 1783.636 RISE AND Progress OF THE LCsaf^XI.178a Before country, as well as in the operations toMadras. be followed in the Camatic. The army havingoccupied five weeks, and expended 19,000 bagsof rice in accomplishing a march of about seventymiles, approached Cuddalore in the month ofJune. The attack on the outworks was confidedto General Bruce, by whom it was conductedwith great skill and bravery. The engagementbecoming general, the reserve under the commandwas brought up. The French foughtwith such determined valour that the assailantswere repulsed ; and a sortie was made by thegarrison to drive oflF the reserve. In the eagernessof pursuit, the French advanced too far fromthe works, when the Bengal sepoy grenadiersturned, and "with the most determined bravery"gained possession of a strong-hold that had beenthe point of contention, upon which the enemyabandoned the whole of their outworks and retiredwithin the fortress.The French fleet under M. Suffirein appearedin the month of June off Cuddalore, at the sametime with Sir Edward Hughes commanding theEnglish fleet : some cannonading passed, but noclose engagement took place.At this period, intelligence arrived that preliminaryarticles of peace with France, Spain,Holland, and America, had been agreed to. Onthe 24th June, the President and Select Committeesent a deputation to the officer command-chap.XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 637ing the French forces, with a proposal for a ipsacessation of arms, until peace was regularly con Madras.finned. Mr. Sadler, senior member of the SelectCommittee, and Mr. Staunton, private secretaryto Lord Macartney, formed the deputation toCuddalore, where they were well received byM. de Bussy and the Chevalier de Suffrein.Serious differences arose between the SupremeGovernment and the President and Select Committeeat Madras, regarding both the negociationthrough the commissioners with Tippoo, and theproposition from Bengal for the restoration of therevenues of the Carnatic to the Nabob. Thelatter measure, although opposed to the ordersfrom home, was felt to be so important by theSupreme Government, that they contemplated theremoval of Lord Macartney, in the event of hisLordship persevering in maintaining his own views,of not relinquishing the assignment made by theNabob.*The whole course of General Stuart's proceedings,during the twelve months that he commandedthe army, had been such as to induce the Governmentof Madras to remove him from that station.His subsequent conduct led to his being placedin arrest, dismissed in general orders by theGovernment, and sent home. Sir John Burgoyne,the King's officer next in rank, having on thatoccasion signified his intention not to accept thepostBengal Secret Consultations, October 1783.638 RISE AND Progress OF Toe [Cras. XL1783. post of commander of the forces, to which theuai>%am. Madras government proposed to appoint him.Colonel Lang, a Company's officer, who so highlydistinguished himself at Vellore,* was promotedby the Government to the rank of lieutenant-general,and invested with the command. SirJohn Barg03rne was placed under arrest. Thedecided conduct of Lord Macartney infused ageneral spirit of obedience, and maintained thesupremacy of the civil power in the administrationcommitted to his charge.In October 1783, a letter was received by thegovernor of Madras from Tippoo Sultaun, indicatingin terms of moderation a desire for peace,and referring to his vakeel, Apparel Ram, for hissentiments on the subject; intimating at the sametime, that he had sent orders to his girders tocease hostilities, and to soften the rigours of confinementsuffered by the prisoners.The Supreme Government attributed to theresolution of Lord Macartney not to relinquish theassignment of the Camatic, the unfavourable impressioncreated in the mind of M. Bussy, whomthe commissioners met at Cuddalore. By amutual arrangement, the forts and districts ofCommon, in the Cuddapah country, were to berelinquished to the Company ; Chittaput in theCamatic being immediately evacuated on the partof Tippoo, who subsequently issued orders for theabandonmentFuse page 601.Chat, XL] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 639abandonment of the whole of the forts in that its.country. He then signified his wish that the ^^^^^commissioners should come to him, promisingthat he would release all the English prisoners.The Supreme Government observed ** that anypeace with Tippoo will be no longer lasting thanit is his interest to permit it"*A report having reached Colonel FuUarton^ thatTippoo had recommenced hostilities against Mangalore,he moved towards Palachacherry, andreduced it on the 14th November, and Coimbatoreon the 25th of that month.In consequence of a difference of opinionbetween Messrs. Sadler and Staunton, regardingTippoo's demand that Mangalore should be deliveredup to him, John Hudleston, Esq. thesecretary to the President and Select Committee,was joined to the commission ; the majority was todecide, and the dissenting member to sign theagreement. Mr. Hudleston was accompanied bythe Rev. Mr. Schwartz, the Danish missionary,a gentleman of distinguished integrity and of greatskill in the languages of the country, who consentedto proceed with the commissioners. Theyreached Tippoo's camp on the 4th February. Theirfirst audience took place on the day following,and a conference on business on the 6th. Mangalorehaving capitulated under Colonel Campbell,on the 30th January, to Tippoo's forces, deprivedthe» Letter from Bengal, 31st December 1783.640 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LCbap-XL178a the commissioners of an important advantage inMadras. conducting the negociation. In the course of thediscussions, the Supreme Government had to meetvarious pretensions urged by Madajee Scindiah,on behalf of the Mahrattass. Mr. Hastings feltthat under the ninth article of the treaty of Salbey,their interests and the claims which they had tobe treated with every consideration in the eyes ofthe native powers generally, demanded the utmostattention. The personal claims of Madajee Scin-dial, who negociated on behalf of the Parish wa thetreaty above-mentioned, were also fully acknowledged.When, therefore, the basis of the treatyultimately agreed upon with Tippoo had beenframed, the Governor-general addressed MadajeeScindia, declaring that it was in every respectconformable to the article in question, and ascribedto him and to the Mahratta state, thatdegree of merit, on the completion of the negociation,which he felt to be simply their due.The Nizam at the same time compromised hisdispute with the Mahrattass for their clout, bypaying them thirty-two lacs of rupees.After various protracted discussions, in thecourse of which the temper of Tippoo was stronglymanifested, negociations terminated in the treatyof Mangalore. It consisted of ten articles. Itincluded the Rajahs of Tanjore, and Travancore —the Baby of Cannanore — the Rajah and Zemindaron the Malabar coast.TheChas. XL] British POWER IN INBIA. 641The Camatic was to he completely evacuated by Tippoo, 1783.and all the forts surrendered, with the exception of those of Mackay.Amboorgur and Latour. All the prisoners, European andnative, were to be immediately released. The forts ofOnore, Carrara and Sadaahevagar, were to be given up toTippoo, on the Malabar coast ; also the districts of Caroor,Aunachourchy, and Duraparam, and likewise the fortand district of Dindigul. The district of Cannanore wasto be delivered up to All Rajah Baby, the queen of thatcounty. No further claim was to be made by Tippoo onthe Camatic. The commercial privileges secured to theCompany by Hyderr, were to be confirmed to them by thepresent treaty ; and Calicut, which had been possessed bythe Company until 1T79> was to be restored. The treatywas to be ratified by the Supreme Government, and exchangedwith Tippoo Sultaun within three months.*During the progress of these important affairs bkkgal.on the coast, Mn Hastings had received the senti ^^^^^ofments of the Court of Directors on his proceed ^^^^ ^'°»'kings at BenaresThe Court passed a resolution declaratory thatthe treaty in 1775 confirmed the zemindarof Benares to the Company in perpetuity ; thatCheyte Sing was to have the management, subjectto the Company's sovereignty, on paying a certaintribute; that the Governor-general and council hadrecommended Cheyte Sing to keep up a body oftwo thousand horse, but at the same time declaredit was no obligation ; that the conduct ofthe Governor-general towards the Rajah whilstat^ Tune Printed Treaties, page 393.t Letter to Bengal, August 1782.VOL. I. 2 T642 fils AND Progress OF THE [Car. XI.1783. at Benares was improper, and that the imprisoninglent of his person, thereby disgracing him in theeyes of his subjects and others, was unwarrantableand highly impolitic, and might tend toweaken the confidence which the native princesof India ought to have in the justice and moderationof the Company's government. This announcementreached Mr. Hastings at a momentwhen his feelings were ill fitted to bear reproof: —he replied to the Court's dispatch in the followingterms :Reply of Mr. I understand that these resolutions regarding CheyteMtingfc g.^g ^^^ either published or intended for publication ; theauthority from whence they proceed leads to the beliefof the fact. Who are the readers? Not the proprietorsalone, whose interest is immediately concerned in them,and whose approbation I am impelled, by every motive ofpride and gratitude, to solicit, but the whole body of thepeople of England, whose passions have been excited on thegeneral subject of the conduct of their servants in India ;and before them I am arraigned and prejudged of a violationof the national faith in acts of such complicatedaggravation, that, if they were true, no punishment shortof death could atone for the injury which the interest andcredit of the public has sustained in them.He then gave the most unqualified denial tothe facts alleged as to Cheyte Sing's uncontrolledright; also as to his being free from any otherdemand, and likewise regarding the two thousandhorse. He stated that :It was not stipulated that Cheyte Sing should furnishany given number, but that what were maintained shouldbeCNAr.Xl.] BItrnSH POWER IN iNDtA. 643be for the defence of the generic state. He denied that I7a3.Chests Sing astound by no other tie than the payment Bengal.of his tribute, for he was bound by the fealty of obedienceto every order of the government which he served, his ownletters being referred to as affording proofs. He deniedthat Cheyte Sing was a native prince of India, tor he wasthe son of a collector of the revenue of that province, whichhis acts, and the misfortunes of his master, enabled him toconvert to his own permanent and hereditary possession.** The man whom you have thus ranked among the princesof India will be astonished when he bears it— at an elevationso unlooked-for; nor less at the independent rights which hewill not know how to assert, unless the example you havethought it consistent with justice, however opposite topolicy to shew, of becoming his advocate against your owninterests, should inspire any of your own servants to be hisadvisers and instructors"" Mr. Hastings referred to hisnarrative as explanatory of all the circumstances, and thendwelt upon the injury likely to arise from the support ofa native against the Government ; remarking, ^^ it is nowa complete period of eleven years since I first received thenominal charge of your affairs ; in the course of that timeI have had invariably to contending only with ordinarydifficulties, but with such as most naturally arose from theopposition of those very powers from whom I primarilyderived my authority, and which were required for the supportof it. My exertions, though applied to an unweariedand consistent line of actions, have been occasional anddesultory ; yet I please myself with the hope that in theannals of your dominions which shall be written after theextinction of recent prejudice, this term of its administrationwill appear not the least conducive to the interests of theCompany, nor the least reflective of the honour of theBritish anie. Had sufficient support been given, what2x2 good644 RISE AND P£OOBBS8 OF THE lC«AP.Xf.ITBSI good might have been done ! You Hoooimble Sin, canBswcAu attest the patience and temper with wbich^I have submittedto all the indignities heaped upcm me in a long service* Itwas the duty of fidelity which I essentially owed to it ; itwas the return of gratitude which I owed, even with thesacrifice of life, had that been exacted, to the Company, myoriginal masters and most indulgent patrons. That wasan interval during which my authority was wholly destroyed;but another was substituted, Mid that, thoughirregular, was armed with the public brief of an influenceinvariably upholding it, which gave it a vigour scared lesseffectual than that of a constitutional power*. Besides, yourgovernment had no external danger to agitate and discoverthe looseness of its composition.The case is now widely different ; while your executivewas threatened by wars with the most formidable powers ofEurope, added to your Indian enemies, and while you confessedlyowed its preservation to the seasonable and vigorousexertions of this govemmoit, you chose that season toannihilate its constitutional powers. You annihilated theinfluence of its executive members. You proclaimed itsannihilation — you have substituted no other, unless yousuppose it may exist, and can be effectually exercised in thebody of your council at large possessing no power ofmotion, but an inert submission to your commands. Ittherefore remains for me to perform the duty which I hadassigned myself, as the final purpose of this letter, to declare,as I now most formally do, that it is my desire thatyou will be pleased to obtain the early nomination of a personto succeed me in the government of Fort William ; todeclare that it is my intention to resign your service so soonas I can do it without prejudice to your affairs, after theallowance of a competent time for your choice of a personto succeed me ; and to declare that if, in the intermediatetinip.CitAr.XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 645time you shall proceed to order the restoration of Rajah 1783.Chests Sing to tHe zemindar, from which he was dispose Bvna^i^seated for crimes of the greatest enormity, and your councilriiall resolve to execute the order, I will instantly give i:^my station and the service. I am morally certain that mysucceBBKO^ whoever he may be, will be allowed to possess andexercise the necessary power of his station, with the confidenceand support of those who, by their choice of him, willbe interested in his success.*The support, by the Court, of the MadrasGovernment, in opposition to the views of theSupreme Government, their objection to the appointmentof Mr. R. J. Sulivan by the Governor-generalto Hyderabad, a nomination made solelyon account of his abilities and qualifications, andtheir support of Mr. Bristow at Oude, led Mr.Hastings to observe, on again addressing theCourt,At whatever period your decision may arrive, may thegovernment fall into the hands of a person invested withthe powers of the office, not disgraced, as I have been, withan unsubstantial title, without authority, and with a responsibilitywithout the means of discharging it. May he, atleast, possess such a portion ci exclusive control as mayenable him to interpose with effect on occasions which maytend to the sacrifice of your political creditsHe appealed in strong terms in favour of Mr.Sulivan, who had been dismissed by the Court :Among the many mortifications to which I have beencontinually subjected, there is none which I so severely feelasLetter to Court, 20th March 1783.t October 1783.646 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LCaaf. XI.1783. as my concern in the sufferings of those whom my selectionBengal. fOT the most important trusts in your service has exposedto persecution, and to censures, fines, deprivations, and dismissionfrom home. It is hard to be loaded with a weightyresponsibility without power, to be compelled to work withinstruments which I cannot trust, and to see the terrors ofhigh authority held over the heads of such as I mysdf employin the discharge of my public duties.*In another letter he stated, that during a periodof five years the Supreme Government had maintaineda continued and desperate state of war inevery part of India.We have supported the other presidencies, not by scantyand ineffectual supplies, but by an anxious anticipation ofall their wants, and by a most prompt and liberal relief ofthem We have assisted the China trade, and have providedlarger investments from the Presidency than it hasever furnished in any given period of the same length, fiiomthe first hour of its establishment to the present, and amplereturns of wealth have been sent to England at a time whenall the Company's possessions in India were bearing withaccumulated weight on Bengal for support against nativeand European enemies.Anticipating a termination of hostilities withTippoo, from the state of all parties opposed tohim, he adverted to the Company's political relationswith their two principal allies, the Nabob ofth Carnatic and the Vizier of Oude, and observedthat they both groaned under the yoke ofthe most oppressive servitude, no less injurious tothe Company's interests than to credit, faith,andNovember 1783.CsAF.XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 647and justice. * ' I have^ontended against it by i^ss-every means in my power, but without effect"* B^^o^t.alluding to the removal of bis own agent, andthe substitution of Mr. Bristow under the views ofthe Court and the majority of the Council.^ Letter, December 1783.648 RISE AND PB0GBS8S OF THE [Chat. XII.CHAPTER XII.178a While the Company were contending withp!!ribmenruid such fearful adversaries abroad, they were doomedMfj^Fox** India ^^ experience the assaults of still more powerfulenemies at home, whose formidable attack, had itsucceeded, would have effected their annihilation.The rapid succession of changes that had takenplace in the Ministry, precluded any permanentagreement with the Company.Lord North retired from his Majesty's Councilsin March 1782, being succeeded by the Marquisof Rockingham, as premier, whose lamenteddeath, occasioned by influenza, the then prevailingdisease, occurred in the following July. EarlShelbume, contrary to the expectation of Mr. Fox,became prime minister, and Mr. Pitt chancellorof the exchequer. Mr. Fox entered the lists ofdecided opposition, until another ministry wasformed in the spring of 1783, by his coalitionwith Lord North, on which occasion Mr. Burkeresumed the office of paymaster of the forces,which he had filled under Lord Rockingham'sadministration.AllCsAF. XII.] BBinSH POWER IN INDIA. 649All parties were agreed that some change its.was called for. Mr. Dimdas, whose laborious Sl^SSlSI? '"researches connected with the enquiry into thecauses of the war in the Camatic had enabled himto acquire such extensive information on subjectsrelating to India, and who had prepared thereports which exhibited so much talent, obtainedleave to bring in a bill for the better governmentof that country. It was submitted to the Housein April, 1783. It proposed to give a controllingpower to the Governor-general over the otherpresidencies, with authority to act in oppositionto his council, upon his sole responsibility. Therights of the zemindar and riots were to beenquired into, it being strongly suspected thatthose of the latter had been greatly infringed.The debts of the Rajah of Tanjore and ofthe Nabob of the Camatic were to be investigated.Mr. Hastings was to be recalled, andEarl Cornwallis, upon whose character andqualifications Mr. Dorcas passed a high anddeserved eulogium, was proposed as GovernorsThe bill was rejected, as it was thoughtproper so important a measure should emanatefrom the Minister, with whom the responsibilityof the plan would then necessarily rest.The King's speech from the throne at theopening of Parliament contained the followingpassage :Th situation of the East-india Company wil requirethe650 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chjlt. XII.1783. the utmost exertions of your wisdom, to maintain andProceedings ia improve the valuable , advantages derived from our Indianpossessions, and to promote and secure the happiness ofthe native inhabitants of those provinces.The pressure of business did not admit ofthe Minister taking the question up until the terminationof the session. The recess was, however,occupied in concocting the celebrated IndiaBill. It appears to have been the joint productionof Mr. Fox and Mr. Burke ; the latter being theonly member of the government, who knew muchof the matter, before it came publicly forward :it was submitted to his revision, but the greatand leading principles were considered, beyond alldoubt, to have been those of Mr. Fox, who, itis represented, was so much taken up with itspreparation, that he could attend to nothingelse. The bill is alleged to have been the realsecret of the unpopularity of the Coalition Ministry.On the 18th of November Mr. Fox submittedhis bill. He readily admitted the interest whichthe Company had in the decision, in a financialpoint of view ; but he contended the country hada much larger interest. The dividends on thecapital stock were £260,000 a year ; but theduties derivable to the state, from its connexionwith India, amounted to £1,300,000 per annum,and the interests of Great Britain would be involvedin the administration of the Governmentabroad ;Chap. XII.] British POWER IN INDIA. 651abroad ; mismanagement would be to the last ipsadegree dangerous to Great Britain. SS^Sf"He ascribed all the difficulty and distress thathad occurred in India to disobedience of theorders of the Court of Directors. He referredto the vote for the recall of Mr. Hastings,as confirming the necessity of some alteration inthe constitution of the Company. The wholecontinent of India was acquainted with thatresolution, whilst the resolution of the Proprietorswhich secured him in the Government was keptback, so that he was in a place of eminencewithout authority, and of power without energy.Thus the Governor-general, although derivinghis appointment under an Act of Parliament, coulddispute the power of the Courts of Directors andProprietors, of Parliament, and of the King. Thebills which he proposed had no retrospect ; buthe frankly declared, that it depended upon thereadiness of the House to receive them, whetherthey should be retrospective or not : an intimationsomewhat arbitrary, and inconsistent with anavowed desire to maintain the full liberty ofthe subject, yet coercing or tying up the mouthsof their representatives.* At present, he observed,there was no connexion between the bills and Mr.Hastings. If influence should manifest itself onthis occasion, the consequences might be alarming;no future governor would ever go to J[ndiawithoutParliamentary Debates, 1783.652 Rise Arp PBOGBBB8 OF THE [Cmav. Nilitt. without looking to influence in that house; andpIdiuMnr™ if the day should come when the whole force ofpatronage in India should be employed for thepurpose of creating influence in tint House, whatwould become of India tHe thanked God, the influence of the Grownhad been diminished ; but in its most alarmingand enormous state, it was nothing to be comparedto the boundless patronage of the Indiagovernment, if conceded to this House. Suchwere the grounds upon which he supportedhis proposition for vesting the political affairsin the hands of seven commissioners, to beremovable only by the Crown.* He allowedthat individuals might possess unlimited andsuperior abilities, with soundness of heart, andintegrity the most unquestionable. Yet, if thedispensers of the plan of governing India hadnot a greater stability in their situations thanaBritish ministry, adieu to all hopes of renderingour Eastern territories of real advantage to thiscountry. Never was any reasoning more at variancewith the proposition with which it concluded.On the 18th of November in that year, leavewas given to bring in a bill for vesting the affairsof the Company in the hands of commissioners, forthe benefit of the proprietors and the public ; andalso another bill for the better government of theterritorialVide printed note.FirliMMnC.Car. XII.] BBITISH POWER IN BMJOVL 653territorial possessions and dependents in India. I'M-thesebills were subsequently formed into one,well known as "Mr. Fox's East-india Bill'The following is a brief outline of the nature ofthe bills, their objects, and the grounds uponwhich they were brought forward and opposed.B J the former of these hills the whole government andmanagement of the territorial possessions, revenues, and commerceof the Company, togetbo* with all the powers beforevested in the Courts of Directors or Proprietors, was tohe vested in Seven Direetare named in the act, for fouryears.*Nine JseUtant-DireetorSf being proprietors of iP2,000stock each, wine to be appointed, for the sole purpose ofmanaging the commercial concerns of the Company — toact under the orders of, and be subject to the seven Directorsbefore named.All vacancies in the office of Directors were to be fledby his Majesty, ad those of the Assistant-Directors bythe Proprietors, at mx action by even poU.fThe Assistant-Directors were to be memorable by fiveDirectors; the Directors and Assistant-Directors were tobe removable by his Majesty, upon an address of eitherHouse of Parliament.The Directors were to have authority to remove, suspend,appoint,*■ The persons nominated to be Directors were, Earl Fitz-william Mr. Frederick Montagu, Lord Lewisham Mr. Geo.Aug. North, Sir Gilbert Elliott, Sir Henry Fletcher, and Mr.Gregory.t This was a departure from the system of Ballot whichhad existed : a system which is now so strongly advocated forelecting members of Parliament.654 RISE AND PROGRESS OP THE [Chap. XII.17S3. appoint, or restore any of the officers in the Company '*s in vioe^ either civil or military.It provided for the speedy and effectual trial of all personscharged with offences in India, and for the preventionof all parties so charged from returning to India before anexamination had taken place :—-each Director was to enterupon the journals and subscribe his name, with the specificreasons for his vote on the particular case. A decision wasto be had on any differences or doubts which might ariseamongst the members of the Governments in India, withinthree months after the account should have readied theDirectors. If any delay in such decision, their reasonswere to be entered for not coming to a determination.The Directors and Assistant-Directors were not to holdany office whatever in the service of the Company, or anyplace of profit from the Crown, during pleasure. TheDirectors were not disqualified from sitting in the House ofCommons. Each Assistants Director was to receive a salaryof ^500 per annum from the Company.The second bill went to explain the powers vested in theGovernor-general and Council by the act of 1778» and forbadthe exchange, acquisition, or invasion of any territoryin India; declared the acceptance of presents illegal ; prescribeda mode for adjusting the disputes between the Nabobof Arcot and the Rajah of Tanjore, or between them andtheir British creditors ; explained the powers of the Cover*nor-general in Council ova: the other presidencies as towar, peace, and treaties ; disqualified the agent of any protectedprince, and all persons in the sasine of the Company,from sitting in the House of Commons during their continuancein such employment, and for a certain time aftertheir quitting such service; lastly, it directed that alloffences against the proposed act might be prosecuted in thecourts in India, or in the Court of King's Bench.TheCiiAP.XII.1 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 655The arguments urged in opposition to the bills were, first, ipsathe arbitrary defeasance of the chartered rights of the Proceedings inCourts of Proprietors and Directors, without a justifiableplea of necessity ; and, secondly, the dangerous powerlodged in the hands of the new commissioners.The supporters of the hill with regard to thefirst objection, referred to the Acts of 1773, deprivingthe £500 stock-holders of the right ofvoting, and to the Act of 1781, which, it was contended,all interfered, more or less, with the Company'schartered rights. On the other side it wasalleged that, though some reform was necessary,the extent of the remedy went infinitelybeyond the extent of the necessity ; that the disfranchisementof the members of the Company,and the confiscation of their property, could onlybe justified by acts of delinquency legally established.It was replied, that the bill vested it inthe Company in trust for the sole benefit of theProprietors.But to whom, it was asked, were the Proprietorsto apply for relief, in cases of the grossest abuseof the trust ? It could only be to Parliament ;where, in any dispute, the corrupt influencecreated by the bills would readily procure to anyminister a majority in his favour.In support of the bills, accounts were broughtforward to shew that the Company were on theverge of bankruptcy : whilst, on the other side/itwas averred that these accounts were absolutelyfalse ;656 RWB AND PROGRESS OP THE [Cbat. XII.1788. false ; and another account ym^ presented to the'" House prepared by the Court of Directors, shewinga balance of nearly four millions in the Company'sfavour.The aecxmd head of abuses brought forward related tothe government in lydia. Three points wot noticed asaffected by the prevailing system : first, the independentpower of that country, against whom, it was contended, extravagantprojects and expensive wars had been enteredinto by the Company, for the purpose of extending theirdominions ; secondly, the states in alliance with us, ordependent on us, towards whom a ruinous interference hadbeen exercised, their rights invaded, aids and tribute unjustlyexacted, and the enormous peculations of the Companiesservants, and disorders and rapacity of the military ; and,thirdly, our own territorial possessions, governed with thesingle view of transmitting wealth to Europe.Although the evils were allowed to exist, stillthe picture drawn of them was deemed to bemuch exaggerated; but, whilst remedies wereadmitted to be necessary, a total change of systemwas most strongly opposed. It was insisted on,that the Company's despatches to India were, forthe most part, consonant to policy and humanity ;and, as a check upon any collusion between theservants of the Company and their masters, hadbeen given by act of Parliament : by amending afew errors and supplying a few defects, a controlmight be established over the Company sufficientfor the purpose of good government, without theviolent demolition of its rights, as aimed at by theproposedChap, XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 657proposed bill. The argument most strongly ipsainsisted upon was, the creation of a new andunconstitutional power— a kind of fourth estate inthe realm ; and of the enormous influence itlodged in the hands of a minister for four years,which might, in the end, annihilate the powerof the Crown and subvert the constitution.The Company petitioned against the bill.In the debate on the 27th November 1783, Mr.Pitt stated that he had pledged himself to theHouse, and to the world at large, to point out thetendency of the bill on every thing dear andsacred to Englishmen, to prove its inimical influenceon the constitution and liberties of the country,and to establish, by undeniable evidence, thefalse and pernicious principles on which it wasfounded. The alleged bankruptcy of the East-indiaCompany, he contended, was not proved.He described the measure as the boldest, mostunprecedented, most desperate and alarming attemptat the exercise of tyranny that ever disgracedthe annals of this or any other country.Alluding to Mr. Fox, he observed, *the righthonourable gentleman, whose eloquence and whoseabilities would lend a grace to deformity, hasappealed to the passions, and pressed home thedistressed situation of the unhappy natives ofIndia, a situation which every man must deeply deploreand anxiously wish to relieve : but ought theright honourable gentleman to proceed to theVOL. I. 2 u protection658 RISE AND Chooses OF THE [Cxiir. Nili7B3w protection of the oppressed abroad, by enforcingthe most unparalleled oppression at home ? Wasthe relief to be administered in Asia, to be groundedon violence and injustice in Europe'"Mr. Burke's The Celebrated speech of Mr. Burke in supportspeech in supportof the bill, of the bill, was made on the second reading the 3dDecember. He represented the rapacity the Companyfor the extension both of power and dominionto be unbounded. He declared that of the states,with whom the Company had come into contact,there was not one which they had not sold norwas there a single treaty that they had not brdcen.The Mogul, the descendant of Tamerlane, hedescribed as a personage as high as human venerationcould look at ; amiable, pious, and accomplished,in whose name money was coined, andjustice administered, and for whom prayers wereoffered up throughout the countries we possessed ;but he had been sold !The Rohillas, the Nabob of Bengal, the polygamy,the Mahratta, the Pretender to that empireRagobah, and the Soubah of the Deccan had beensold!Tbe people were declared to have been for agescivilized and cultivated by all the arts of polishedKfe whilst we were in the woods, and if the passionsor avarice of their Tartar lords had driventhem to acts of rapacity or tyranny, there hadbeen time enough in the short life of man to repairthe desolations of war by the arts of magnificenceandChap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA 659and peace ; but under the English Government all nss.this order had been reversed. Alluding to Mr.Hastings, he described him as having been loadedfor years with the execrations of the natives andthe censures of the Directors, and although struckand blasted with resolutions of that house, he stillmaintained the most despotic power ever knownin India. The conduct of the Company as merchantswas ridiculed, and declared to be not awhit better or more judicious than their course asstatesmen.Had such been a true picture of the Company'sproceedings, the measure for confiscating theirproperty and annihilating their power, would havebeen richly deserved. Their longer tolerationwould have been a disgrace to the nation, and theproposition should have been passed as an act ofhomage due to its author, of whom it was remarkedby one of his political friends when thebill was first laid before the House : ''He may livelong,he may do much, but here is the summit, henever can exceed what he has done this day."But what were the sober facts ? The Company Remarks on14*,-.^ „-, Mr. Burke'shad been incorporated for 185 years. Whatever speech.had been their management of their commercialconcerns, they stood prominent as the first mercantilecorporation in the world. Rival Companiesin this and other kingdoms, had fallen beforethem, and the very arguments urged against themby their opponents afforded the strongest proofs2 u2 of660 Vice AND Progress OF THE [Chap. XII.iTML of their good management ; for it was stated theirdividend amounted to £260,000 a year ; but therevenue derived by the public from their commerce,was £1,300,000!Supposing it to have been bad ; was it likelythat the measure proposed as a substitute wouldhave produced more auspicious results ? Was acommittee of noblemen and gentlemen ignorant ofthe first principles of commercial matters, an instrumentwhich promised to make things better orwork more profitably?With regard to the political branch of the question,the conduct of some of the Company'sservants, high in station abroad, had laid thesystem open to strong animadversion, caused moreby the want of adequate power to apply correction,than indisposition or insensibility on the partof the Directors to the evils that demanded theirinterference. Any one who may have taken thetrouble to read the preceding part of this volumemust have been satisfied that territorial aggrandizementor ambitious designs formed no part of thesystem which the home authorities laid down forthe guidance of their servants. With regard tothe conduct of their representatives abroad, theirposition was frequently one of great difficulty andembarrassment. It appears to have been the convictionof almost every succeeding government,from that of the great Lord Clive to the administrationof Mr. Hastings, that it was impossible to fix aboundaryCult. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 661boundary, beyond which, under no circumstances, 1783.were they to advance, and within which the Companycould have safely entrenched themselves. Asto the observance of treaties, it was the unceasingdesire of the Company to keep good faits towardsevery prince or chief with whom they had enteredinto aqy engagement. The great Mogul, of whom60 transcendant a description was given, had in factlost his kingdom. It had been torn by intestinecommotions; his power and influence were merenames : be was subject to the will and caprice ofbis Vizier at one time, and at another to that ofthe Mahrattass, who possessed themselves of hisperson in order to advance their ambitious projects,and in conjunction with other powers, to overthrowthe Company.The conduct of the Tartarean invaders of Hindostanw^ declared to merit eulogy, when comparedwith that which had been observed by theEast India Company, who were represented tohave treated with such ignominy the illustriousdescendant of the immortal Tamerlane !History, unfortunately, has not left us ignorantof the facts, ** The Tartars who poured into thatunfortunate country, were generally soldiers offortune, bringing nothing but their swords, withwhich they carved their way to dignity andempire. Power was their darling object, and theyscrupled at nothing to obtain it."The scenes of barbarity which accompanied theinroad662 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1783. inroad of this immortal Tamerlane, are almostincredible. The invasion occurred in 1397, when100,000 persons were murdered in cold blood, onhis advance before Delhi, and after he had enteredthat city, the barbarity was repeated to a stillgreater extent. So late as 1739, that feted citywas again doomed to suffer all the horrors of aruthless invader : Nadir Sha, having been firedat after entering the city, caused 100,000 humanbeings, sparing neither sex nor age, to be massacred.One Persian soldier was reported to have butchereda whole family, whilst numerous Hindoos, toescape the sword, shut themselves up with theirfamilies, and set fire to their houses, perishing inthe flames.Ahmed Sha, the Mogul, in 1749 had granted toGhazi-ood-deen, the soubaship of the Deccan.Ghazi-ul-deen the Soubah's son being suspectedby the Mogul of looking to the throne, the latteraddressed the Jauts, urging them by promises offavour to aid him in supporting his authority asMogul. The letter falling into the hands of ,he first deprived his monarch of sight andthen of life. In 1760, Aulumghire succeeded, andraised the murderer, Ghazi-ul-deen, to the vizerat,who repaid his master's confidence by hiringtwo assassins, who murdered him, and then threwhis remains out of the palace window ! His unfortunatesuccessor, Sha Jehan— the personagedignified by Mr. Burke as the descendant ofTamerlaneChat. XII.] BBITISH Power IN INDIA. 663Tamerlane — had lost Oude, together with the ipsaallegiance of the Jauts and Rohillas. He hadjoined his vizier in attacking the Company, andbeing completely defeated, threw himself on theirprotection, which was readily extended, the Company'sservices being acknowledged by the grantof the Dewanny, In the natural desire to re-establishhimself on the throne of his ancestors, the Kingwished to repair to Delhi, then in the possessionof the Mahrattass, the avowed enemies of the Vizier,with whom we had formed an alliance. TheMahrattass were also most unfavourably disposedtowards the Company. Contrary to the entreatiesof the government, the King left the Company'sarmy, and threw himself into the arms of theMahrattass, to whom his Majesty granted theterritories secured to him by the Company forhis revenue; and the Mahrattass used him asan instrument for their own aggrandizement,scarcely supplying him with the bare necessariesof life, and lastly depriving him of vision !Such are the details of a nation, its sovereignsand invaders, within the history of the Company'stime, who are nevertheless described as despoilersof the country, as faithless towards its sovereigns,and even worse than the ruthless butchers, whoseatrocities have been fully described by variouswriters on Indian history.From the sovereign we descend to the people,who were held up to Parliament and the nation ascivilizedlives.664 RISE ANP PROGRESS OF THE [Ckav.XII.ipsa civilized and cultivated by all the arts of polishedlife ; but what is the testimony of an eye-witnesswho had resided amongst them for years?Grant*! chanc They are a people exceedingly depraved, the nadyester of e na fj^iy acknowledge this of each other; they are in a mostdegraded and humiliating state. Justice with them is atraffic in venality. The domestic state was one of despoticlife, the husband as lord, the wife a servant, and polygamyprevailing. The Hindoo writers and Hindoo laws place allreliance on vigilance and none on principle. The systemone of imperious dominion, between seclusion and terror,whilst the universality of great depravity is admitted. Thewhole fabric was declared to be the work of a crafty andimperious priesthood, who feigned a divine revelation andappointment to invest their own order in perpetuity, withthe most absolute empire over the civil state of the Hindooss.The Brahmins, by an ordinance of the Veda, prohibitingthe people from reading the sacred books. By the interpositionof the Company's government, a stop was put tothe barbarous practices of certain Hindooss, and sanctionedby their Shatter, in devoting the life of infants to the sacredwaters ; of certain Hindooss of high caste in Benares, whoon a prospect of inability to provide suitably for theirfemale children, were induced, not unfrequently, to putthem to death ; and of other castes of Hindooss, who with aview to deter the execution of legal process, or in revengefor a supposed injury, would murder their females or theirchildren, under a persuasion that by such means they couldcommand and direct spiritual vengeance against their adversaries.But in regard to immolations in the various modespractised by self-devoted victims, who are invariably hindoo,no further interference is permitted to take place onthe part of the magistrate, than may be necessary to ascertainCbat. XII.] BRITISH Power IN INIXLL 665tain from the party that the resolution has been voluntary 1783.and in no wise influenced by improper means.*The state of justice under the native government wasdescribed as an instrument of power rather than of justice,not only unavailing to protect the people, but often themeans of the most grievous oppression under the oak ofjudicial character.The late Lord Teignmouth, when Mr. Shore,at the period of these parliamentary discussionsmade the following remark :*' When we consider the nature and magnitudeof this acquisition (the Dewanny), the characterof the people placed under our dominion, theirdifference of language, and dissimilarity of manners,that we entered upon the administration of thegovernment ignorant of its former constitution,and with little practical experience in Asiaticfinance, it will not be deemed surprising that weshould have fallen into errors, or that any at thistime should require correction."The bill passed the Commons, on a division oftwo hundred and eight to one hundred and two, ^'^^ p««" theCommons*on the 8th December, and was the next daycarried to the Lords.It had been remarked, that on the division,several of the members well known as the friendsofThis alludes to the practice of suttee, the suppression ofwhich rite forms a distinguishing feature in the government ofLord William Bentinck, which will be given in the secondvolume of this work.666 BISE AND Profess OF THE [Cuff. XII.1783. of his Majesty gave their votes on the side ofopposition. It was, however, generally imaginedthat ministers were too strong to be affected, andit was deemed to the last degree improbable thatthey should have adopted a measure of such infiniteimportance, either without knowing, or contraryto, the inclinations of the King. The Companylost no time in presenting a petition to the Houseof Lords, similar in import to that which had beenlaid before the House of Commons ; and here theappeal was more successful. On the first reading,which took place the 1 th December, Earl Temple,Lord Thurlowy and the Duke of Richmond, expressedtheir abhorrence of the measure in themost unqualified terms. The second reading wasfixed for Monday the 15th December. Variousrumours began to circulate. It was confidentlyaffirmed that Earl Temple had been ordered toattend the King, and that a written note had beenput into his hands, in which his Majesty declaredthat '' he should deem those who should vote forit, not only not his friends but his enemies, andthat, if Lord Temple could put it in stronger words,he had full authority to do so." Circumstanceswhich took place on the second reading of theBill, on the 15th December, appeared to confirmthe truth of the reports. — Several peers who hadentrusted their proxies to the minister and hisfriends, withdrew them only a few hours beforethe House met, and others voted .in opposition tohim.CHAr. XII.1 British POWER IN INDIA. 667him, so that he was left in a minority of seventy I's.nine to eighty-seven. In the debate, on thequestion for adjournment moved by the Duke ofChances, for the purpose of hearing counsel, LordTemple acknowledged that he had been admittedto an audience of the King, and contended that, asapeer of the realm, he had a right to offer hisMajesty such advice as he might think proper. Hehad, he said, given his advice ; what that was hewould not say — it was lodged in the breast of theKing ; nor would he declare the purport of it withouthis Majesty's consent, or till he saw a properoccasion. But though he would not declare affirmativelywhat his advice to his sovereign was, hewould tell their Lordships, negatively, what it wasnot — it was not friendly to the principles andobjects of the bill.In the House of Commons, reference was madeto the above-mentioned reports, and a motion wassubmitted by Mr. Baker, '' That it is now necessaryto declare, that to report any opinion, or pretendedopinion of his Majesty, upon any bill orother proceedings depending in either House ofParliament, with a view to influence the votes ofthe members, is a high crime and misdemeanor,derogatory to the honour of the Crown, a breachof the fundamental privileges of Parliament, andsubversive of the constitution'* Lord Maitlandseconded the motion : which was strongly opposedby Mr. Pitt, who, with reference to the criminalityof668 RISE AND Progress OP THE [Chat. XII.17IB. of the facts which were the subjects of thesereports, denied that it was criminal in any of thepeers, who were the acknowledged hereditarycounsellors of the Crown, to give his advice to theKing, in any case whatever. After a warm debate,the motion was carried by one hundred and fifty-threeto eighty. It was then resolved, that on theMonday following the House would resolve itselfinto a committee of the whole House, to take intoconsideration the present state of the nation.As a change of ministers appeared to be determinedon, a dissolution pf Parliament was consequentlyexpected. Immediately, therefore, afterthese resolutions Mr. Erskine moved, ** that it isnecessary to the most essential interests of thiskingdom, and peculiarly incumbent oa this House,to pursue with unremitting attention the considerationof a suitable remedy for the abuseswhich have prevailed in the government of theBritish dominions in the east-Indies ; and thatthis House will consider as an enemy to his countryany person who shall presume to advise hisMajesty to prevent, or in any manner interruptthe discharge of this important duty." Themotion was opposed as factious, and touching onthe undoubted prerogative of the Crown withoutany justifiable cause. A member observed, thatthe true meaning and intent of the motion was,'' that it is necessary, for securing the presentadministration's continuance in oflSce, that nodissolutionCbat. XII.] British Power IN INDIA. 669dissolution of Parliament should take place at i?^present."The motion was, however, carried by the same Bin rej«rtedby^ the Lords.majority as the former. On Wednesday, the 17thDecember, the bill was rejected by the Lords, ona division of ninety-five to seventy-six.A change took place in the ministry, Mr. Pitt change of Mi-wasappointed First Lord of the Treasury andChancellor of the Exchequer, and Earl GowerPresident of the Council.*A report being prevalent of an intended dissolutionof Parliament, the House of Commonswent into a committee on the State of the Nation,on the 22d of December 1783, and agreed tosupplicate his Majesty not to dissolve the Parliament;urging, among other considerations, thenecessity for ** reformation in the government ofthe East-indies at home and abroad."His Majesty was pleased, on the 24th December1783, to signify his acquiescence in the requestof the House of Commons ; and, in hisreply, his Majesty observed, ** the state of theEatonthe 22d, Lord Temple resigned the seals of office andthey were delivered to Lord Sydney, as Secretary of State forthe Home Department, and also to the Marquess of Carmarthenfor the Foreign. Lord Throw was appointed Lord Chancellor;the Duke of Rutland, Lord Privy-seal; ViscountHowe, First Lord of the Admiralty; and the Duke of Richmond,Master-general of the Ordnance ; Mr. William Grenvilleand Lord Margrave succeeded Mr. Burke in the Pay-office ;and Mr. Henry Dundas was appointed Treasurer of the Navy.670 BI8E AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.17B4. East-indies is an object of as much delicacy andimportance as can exercise the wisdom and justiceof Parliament."A naoltttioD having been proposed by LordBeauchamp, and agreed to by the House, restrictingthe Company from accepting bills of exchangebut under certain conditions, and anotherresolution moved by the Earl of Surrey for anaddress to his Majesty, praying that his Majestywould not grant the office of Chancellor ofthe Duchy of Lancaster to any person, otherwisethan during pleasure, before the 20thJanuary, the House adjourned to the 12th of thatmonth.Conferences had been held between his Majesty'sministers and the Court of Directors, withthe view of framing a bill to be submitted toParliament for the future government of theCompany.Mr. Pitted flat On the 14th January, four days after resolu*bui rejected. ^^^^^ ^^ y^^^^ agreed to by the Proprietors,Mr. Pitt moved for leave to bring in a bill, *' forthe better Government and Management of theAffairs of the East India Company'* Such billwas accordingly introduced on the 16th of January1784, and read a second time on the 23d ; but,on the motion for its being committed, was lost :the numbers having been, 214 for, and 222 againstthe motion.No sooner had this decision taken place, thanMr.Chap.XIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 671Mr. Fox gave notice of his intention to bring in iw*.another bill, '' for the better Regulation andManagement of the Affairs of the East-indiaCompany.On the following day as an impresaiisi pre Fh>ceeding« inTailed that a dissolution of Parliament would takeplace, Mr. Powys asked the minister whetherhe could ]ridge himself that the House shouldmeet there in Parliament on Monday next. Theminister was also called upon to give the Housesome satisfactory reasons for his continuing inoffice, after repeated resolutions had passed againsthim. Mr. Pitt observed, that although a ministercontinuing at his post after the House of Commonshad declared him undeserving of their confidencewas novel and extraordinary, yet it was by nomeans unconstitutional. He conceived that, by theconstitution, neither the appointment or removal ofa minister rested with that House. That he neithercould or ought to remain long in such a situation ;but it behoved him to consider who were likely tobe his successors; and he was bound in honourand duty so far, to support the prerogativeof the Crown, as not to quit a situation becauseit was become difficult or dangerous, tillhe saw some prospect of its being filled in amanner more acceptable to all the parties concerned.Mr. Pitt declining to resign, either virtually oractually, as a preliminary to a negociation : inthe672 RISE AND Possess OF THE [Cha». XII.1784. the House of Lords, on the 4th of February,Lord Effingham brought forward a motion, declaring** that, according to the known principlesof this excellent constitution, the undoubtedauthority of appointing to the great offices of theexecutive government is solely vested in hisMajesty, aid that this House has every reasonto place the firmest reliance in his Majesty'swisdom in the exercise of this prerogative." Itpassed without a division ; and an address foundedthereon, was presented to the King.Kta?toMr.^* His Majesty wrote to Mr. Pitt on the day this^^ address was expected to be moved in the Houseof Lords. After lamenting the length to whichthe House of Commons had gone :I trust the House of Lords will this day fed that thehour is come for which the wisdom of our ancestors establishedthat respectable corps in the state, to prevent eitherthe Crown or the Commons from encroaching on each other.Indeed, should not the Lords-stand boldly forth, this constitutionmust soon he changed ; for if the only two remainingprivileges of the Crown are infringed, that of negativingbills which have passed both Houses of Parliament, and thatof naming the ministers to be employed, I cannot but feel,as far as regards my person, that I can be no longer ofutility to this country, nor can with honour continue in thisisland.On the Uti of February, in a debate in theHouse of Commons, on the necessity of a ministrybeing formed which should embrace members ofbothGtiAf. XII.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 673both administration, Mr. Fox avowed bis opinion I'TSi-that the House of Commons had, and ought tohave, a real and substantial negative in thenomination of ministers of state. Mr. Pitt declaredthat he would not recede from his formerdetermination. He denied that there were anyconstitutional means to force him to resign ;the proper method was by an address to theCrown.During these transactions, addresses from thecorporation and merchants of London, and fromvarious parts of the country, were presented tothe King, strongly expressive of their confidencein the ministers, condemning the violent proceedingsof the House of Commons in consequence ofMr. Fox's dismissal from office, and promisingsupport to his Majesty in the exercise of his constitutionalprerogative.Endeavours to bring about an amicable negociationbeing still persevered in, it was suggested thatthe Duke of Portland should be requested by theKing to have a conference with Mr. Pitt, for thepurpose of forming a new administration. Thisproposition was reluctantly acceded to by theKing, wbo on the 15th February 1784 wrote toMr. Pitt :My present situation is, perhaps, the most singular that Further letterever occurred, either in the annals of this or any other counter Pkt."*try; for the House, of Lords, by a not less majority thannear two to one, have declared in my favour, and my sub-vol.I. 2 X sectsRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. Nil178i.Filamentprorogued.PariiaiDeptdissolved.sects at large, in a much more considerable proportion, arenot less decided ; to combat which Opposition have only amajority of twenty, or at most thirty, in the House of Commons,who, I am sorry to add, seem as yet willing to preventthe public supplies. Though I certainly have nevermuch valued popularity, yet I do not think it is to bedespised when arising from a rectitude of conduct, and whenit is to be retained by following the same respectable pathwhich conviction makes me esteem — that of duty ; as calculatedto prevent one branch of the legislature from annihilatingthe other two, and seizing also the executive power, towhich it has no claim.The attempt at a reconciliation of partiesfailed, and after various efforts to induce the ministersto resign, the King prorogued Parliament inperson on the 24th March. In the speech fromthe throne was the following passage : —On a full consideration of the present situation ofaffairs, and of the extraordinary circumstances which haveproduced it, I am induced to put an end to this session ofParliament, I fed it a duty which I owe to the constitutionand to the country, in such a situation, to recur asspeedily as possible to the sense of my people by calling anew Parliament. I can have no other object but to preservethe true principles of our free and happy constitution, andto employ the powers entrusted to me by law for the onlyand for which they were given, the good of my people.The dissolution took place on the 25th Marchandthe new Parliament was summoned to meeton the 18th May.Chap.XIII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 675CHAPTER XIII.The necessity for some revision in the system nss-s*.for governing India became daily more apparent.The Supreme Council pressed upon the Homeauthorities the extraordinary state of affairs atMadras, and remarked that the Court would havebeen prepared for the refusal of that presidency tocarry into execution the repeated orders given forrestoring to the Nabob of the Carnatic his countryand revenues. The Supreme Government hadissued orders for this purpose, on the allegedground that the Directors had dissolved the treatyof April 1781, and that Lord Macartney hadviolated the conditions of the assignments made inthe month of December following ; yet, from thelast despatches received by the Supreme Governmentfrom the Select Committee at Madras, it appearedthat the Court had expressed a wish, intheir letter of September 1782, that the assignmentmight be rendered effectual, and that theNabob and the Bengal Government should becalled upon to effect that object.The Supreme Council dwelt upon the embarrasmentand distress occasioned by the igno-2x2 raneeRISE AND Possess OF THE [CaAr.XIII.1788-81. ranee in which they were kept on these points,BsiroAL. g^jj J represented that their authority was contemnedby* the other presidencies. They alluded againto the case of Mr. Sulivan, and to the Court'sobjection to his appointment as Resident atHyderabad, which nomination had been conferredupon him on the ground of his abilities and integrity.In so strong a light did the Governor-generalview the matter of restoring the revenuesto the Nabob, that he submitted a proposition tothe Council for suspending Lord Macartney andthe other members of the Select Committee whohad opposed the measure.^ie?te?bf Notwithstanding the opinion expressed by thei^^n^hTui^ House of Commons,* the Court of ProprietorsGovernment, passed a resolution on the 7th November 1783,approving of the conduct of the Supreme Government,and requesting that Mr. Hastings wouldnot resign his office until tranquillity had beenrestored in India. It was the wish of the Courtof Directors to have forwarded the resolution toIndia, but Lord North intimated that the affairsof the Company were immediately to be laidbefore Parliament, and that the transmission wastherefore inexpedientThe despatch in which the Directors announcedthat result to the Bengal Government, commencedwith• Ftrftf page 610.f Proceedings of the Courts of Directors and Proprietors,November and December 1783,Chat. XIII.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 677with a reply to the letter from Mr. Hastings iwa-ss.regarding the Court's animadversions on his con court almadarelative to Cheyte Sing. They observed :. ]^J^on masterregardingWe cannot pass over in silence the letter from our Cheyte Sing.Grosvenor-general on our resolution, bearing as it does theappearance of animadversion on the conduct of his superiors,not to be justice in his situation. The Court have notonly an undoubted riot, but their duty calls upon them tocondemn any measures that shall appear of a dangeroustendency. The conduct towards Cheyte Sing was in oureyes liable to destroy thcU confidence so necessary to bepreserved with the coimtty powers; the Court, therefore,hoped by their marked disapprobation to prevent anyrecurrence of such a proceeding. After the resistance whichthe Rajah had made, no countenance could consistently beshewn him, nor was any measure for his restoration everproposed. As the Gt>vem(n:-general^8 letter, expressed insuch unguarded warmth, must carry with it the appearanceof resistance to those whom it is his duty to 'obey, we courside him to have been in that respect very blameable.The Court then observed :We turn aside from this disagreeable subject to express Applaudgreat reprobation at the extraordinary exertions of our ^reme^Governor-general and Council to counteract the designs of Govemmetttour numerous enemies, and to furnish such large assistanceand supplies for the Camatic in its wasted and desolatecondition.It is to the abilities of our late commander-in-chief,*whose loss we sincerely lament, aided by your vigilance andsupport, we owe the preservation of that country, as thepowerful irruptions of Hyderr had disabled our GovernorandLieut, General Sir £lyre Coote.RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. XIII.11H3-S^. and Council of Fort St. George from defending the .sessions of our ally the Nabob of Arcot.We could have wished the treaty with the Mahrattato have been less humiliating, but we are truly sensible otthe difficulties and embarrassments you had to encounterthe jarring interests that prevailed, the situation of theCamatic, and the burthensome expenses which combined tomake it absolutely necessary to come to terms of accommodationwith so powerful a body of enemies as the Mahrattastates compose.They then alluded to the India Bill which hadbeen rejected by the House of Lords.A Bill has lately been under discussion in Parliament,by which, had the same passed into a law, the Companywould have been totally changed, and divested of all authority.But we are happy to inform you that, though theHouse of Commons passed this Bill, the House of Lordsthought proper to reject it*Mr. Hustings The Supreme Council concurred in the expelto j* <• • y-iLucknow. diency of the Governor-general acceding to arequisition from the Vizier, that he would visit himat Lucknow for the purpose of devising a plan ofreform to extricate him from the embarrassmentsinto which his affairs had been plunged. Thetroops were greatly in arrears, his debts wereincreased in the further sum of £500,000, and hiscountry threatened with famine. Mr. Hastingsleft Calcutta in February 1784, on his way toLucknow. Before his departure he forwarded tothe Court a memorial from a committee of theCompany'sLetter to Bengal, 28th January 1784.Chap. XIIL] British POWER IN INDIA. 679Company's officers, relative to their suppression i783-9i.by five officers in His Majesty's service. He Bbhoal.expressed his sense of their merits and services ;he felt it peculiarly incumbent upon him to becomethe advocate of the Company's army, as he hadbeen an early and a nearer witness of its desertsthan any other member of the Council. He hadseen it in its infancy, and had beheld almost allthe important services which it had performed inthe progress of the Company's growing power ;it had been the principal instrument of all theCompany's acquisitions, and the means of advancingthe British name to a greater height ofsplendour and renown through every part of Indiathan that of any other nation known to it.Mr. Hastings reached Lucknow on the 27thMarch 1784, and on the 30th April he detailed to fH^I!^ *'the Court of Directors the measures that hadoccupied his attention. His first object was toeffect a liquidation of the Vizier's debt to theCompany ; the second was to induce his ministersto appoint bodies of regular troops to ensure thecollections and the internal defence of his country,thereby precluding the necessity for calling in aid,and releasing the Nabob from the charge of anextraordinary and undefined subsidy.The third object was to put a final close to thedisreputable and ruinous system of interference,whether avowed or secret, in the affairs of theNabob, and the withdrawal for ever of the influence680 BSE AND PBOOIIB88 OP THE [Chat. Killi784-a&. once by which it was maintained. The specieBuMAu applied in supporting his own troops, would thenflow back into circulation. If a profitable systemof connexion with Oude was to be maintainedthe claims of the British Government should beconfined to the line marked out ; if it were transgressed,the distribution of patronage might be extended,and the fortunes of individuals increased,as well as the nominal riches of Great Britain ;but, observed Mr. Hastings, '* your own interestswill suffer by it, and the ruin of a once great andflourishing country will be recorded. Justice andgood faith cut off every pretext for your exercisingany power or authority in the country, whilst thesovereign of it fulfils the engagement which hehas contracted with the Company."When at Lucknow, he hinted, in his communicationsto the Council, at a proposal for effecting atreaty with the Mogul, then at Delhi. The Councilurged the necessity of avoiding any committalof the Company, which put a stop to the idea.Mr. Hastings During his tour, he received intelligence ofon treaty with . , . • m- t .Tippoo. the proposed treaty with Tippoo; he immediatelydispatched instructions with a new ratificationof the treaty, accompanied by a declarationon the part of the Madras government,that they understood the Nabob of Arcot to be aparty to the treaty, and desiring that the Councilat Fort St. George should use their most strenuousendeavours with Tippoo to get his acknowledgmentChap. XIII.] BElTIMi POWER IN INDIA. 681ment of the understanding. The Government of i^^ss.Fort St, George were apprised, that should they **^*"counteract, resist, or disobey the orders whichthey had received from Bengal, they would do soat their peril, and be responsible to the nation, tothe Company, and to the Supreme Government.*The proposition for acting in accordance with Lord Macvuthe instructions from Bengal was rejected by the ^Dvenior.ge-casting vote of Lord Macartney. The Court had "*" " ^'*^''already nominated his Lordship in succession tothe government of Bengal, when Mr. Hastingsshould retire ; but immediately they receivedaccounts of this difference of opinion between thetwo governments, they dispatched the followingorders to Madras : —We are sorry to observe the height to which disputes court's ordershave arisen between our Grosvenor-general in Council and **'*'*<>"•the President and Select Committee of Fort St. George,insomuch as to create a suspicion with some whether theformer may not have proceeded to the suspension of LordMacartney, in consequence of his Lordship and the SelectCommittees declining to comply with the orders of theBengal government for opening a new negociation withTippoo Sultan, to procure from him a declaration in thetreaty respecting the Nabob of Arcot. We do not supposesuch an event has taken place ; but in order to guardAgainst the possibility thereof, and to remove any doubtswhich may exist in the minds of any of our servantswhether, after such a suspension, his Lordship ought to beallowed to resume the government of Madras, or to beadmitted to the office of Governor-general of Bengal, wethinkBengal Secret Consultations, ISth August 1783.682 RISE AND Progress OF THE [CiiAr. XIII.I7M-8& think it right hereby to declare it to be our express order,Bknoal, f\^ should such an event have happened (of which our lateadvices from Fort St Greorge express some apprehension),in consequence, as before observed, of his Lordship'sdeclining to comply with the orders of the Bengal Government,for opening a new negotiation with Tippoo Sultaun,to procure from him a declaration in the treaty respectingthe Nabob of Arcot, Lord Macartney be neverthelessallowed to resume the government of Madras, and beadmitted to the office of Grosvenor-general of Bengal, inlike manner as if no such suspension had take placesInterview with Mr. Hastings was met at Lucknow by PrinceMirza Jewar Leander Shah, the heir apparentof the Mogul. His object was to be enabled toreturn to his father's court with suitable attendants,and to have a jaghire equal to theamount granted to him during the administrationof Meerza NudjifF Gawn, and to be employedagainst the Seiks. In order to preclude the appearanceof a distinction to which the Mogul'sknown affection for his younger son, Meerza AkbarShah, might raise some objection, he requestedhis brother might be employed in a similar servicein some other quarter. Mr. Hastings being constrainedto quit Benares, left his body guard to supportthe prince. The Vizier also agreed to allowhim four lacs per annum. It appeared that theMogul had received but one lac and a half for ibissupport in the preceding year, and that it was theobject of the prince to obtain some increase ofallowance for his father. Mr. Hastings then explainedChap. XIII.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 683planned the feelings which had operated on his iTSi-ss.mind. He was persuaded that the Court wouldhave experienced the same.Or let it be, if it is such, the same weakness of compassionthat I did when I first met the prince on the plains ofMower, without state, without attendance, with scarce atent for his covering, or a change of raiment, but that whichthe recent effect of hospitality had furnished him, and withthe expression of a mind evidently struggling between thepride of inherent dignity, and the conscious sense of presentindigence and dependence. Had his subsequent conductdeveloped a character unworthy of his high birth, had heappeared vain, haughty, mean, insolent, or debased hy thevices which almost invariably grow on the minds of men bonto great pretensions, unpractised in the difficulties of commonlife, and not only bred, but by necessity of politicalcaution familiarised to the habits of sloth and dissipation, Icould have contented myself with bestowing on him the merecompliment of external respect, and consulted only the proprietyof my own conduct, nor yielded to the impulse of amore generous sentiment. I saw him almost daily for sixmonths, in which we were either participators of the samedues of hospitality, or he of mine. I found him gentle,lively, possessed of a high sense of honour, of a sound judgment,an uncommon quick penetration, and a well cultivatedunderstanding, with a spirit of resignation, and an equanimityof temper almost exceeding any within the reach ofknowledge or recollection.On reaching Benares, after quitting Lucknow, Mr. HastingsMr. Hastings again wrote the Court on the affairs Mx?on^"hof Oude. He trusted that the system which he ^'*^**had formed for the administration of that countrywouldUSB AND PBOOBE88 OP THE [Csaiw XIII.Bw^ would be followed up, and a principle of forbearancefrom interference observed.I leave the Nabobs affairs in charge of agents whoseinterests, ambition, and every prospect in life are interwovenwith their success, and the hand of heaven has visiblyblessed the soil with every elementary source of progressivevegetation. If a different policy shall be adopted, if newagents are sit into the country and armed with authorityfor the purpose of vengeance or corruption, sot no otherwil they be applied ; if new demands are raised on theVizier, and accounts overcharged on one side, with a widelatitude taken on the other to swell his debts beyond themeans of payment, if political dangers are portended onwhich to ground the plea of burthening his country withunnecessary defences and enormous subsidies, the resultswould be fatal.*Returns toCalcutta.On reaching Calcutta in November, be receiveda despatch from the Court of Directors of the4th June, strongly animadverting upon the measureof drawing bills on the home treasury in aidof funds for the investment, and desiring that theGovernment would take immediate steps toarrange with the holders of the bills, as the stateof the Company's means, added to the prohibitoryclause in the act of Parliament against unauthorizeddrafts on the Court, precluded their acceptingthe bills if presented. On the 22d November1784, Mr. Hastings again addressed the Court,referring to his letter of the 30th March 1783, inwhich he requested that a successor might benominated,Consultations Slst December 1784.Chavu XIII.] BftinSIf POWER IN INDIA. 685nominated, and observed that the affairs of Made itb^^.had since detained him.If the next regular advice shall contain either the ex* Intends topress acoq[>tanoe of my resignation of the service, or jour Go?mmentrtacit acquiescence, I shall relinquish my office to the gentlemanwho stands next to me in the prescribed order of succession,and return to England as soon as the ship Bearing*ton can be made ready to sail. My constitution thoughnaturally not of the strongest texture, yet for many yearsretained so uniform an exemption from positive disorder asnot to require one day of grace from my official employment,is now so much enfeebled by the severe illness withwhich I was attacked in the year 1782, that it is no longercapable in any degree of those exertions to which it was formerlyequal, and which were at no time sufficient for thedischarge of all the duties which my place exacted of me.Nor am I the only diseased part of it. It is itself distempered.Witness the cruel necessity which compelled me fornine months to abandon the seat of government itself (referringto his visit to Lucknow), and all the weighty occupationsof it, to attend to one portion of its charge, which,under a sounder constitution, might have been better conductedand with fuller effect by orders known to proceedfrom competent authority to enforce them. I do not believethis government will ever be invested with its proper powerstill I am removed from it, nor can it much longer subsistwithout them. I am therefore a hurtful incumbrance onit, and my removal, whenever or however effected, will be arelief to it.At the close of 1784, the usual revenue reports Mr. shore onwere made between the months of February andSeptember. The Revenue Committee forwarded areport from Mr. Shore, when on deputation toPatna,HISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. XIILi78i^. Patna, regarding the alienated lands in Bahar,Bengal, amounting to 13,08,786 rupees. It being impossiblefor him, compatibly with his other occupations,to investigate the abuses to which thegovernment was liable, he suggested the establishmentof a regular officer of registry for suchlands, in order that the extent of abuse might bediscovered, and the recurrence prevented.The Government entirely concurred in the suggestion,and nominated Mr. Bushy to the office.At the same time they entirely approved of theNew Revenue general mode recommended by the Revenue Com-Settlement. ''mitted for the new settlement for the year,'* giving the preference to the zemindar in allinstances where no immediate causes existed torender them ineligible. In the instances of knownincapacity of the zemindar to manage his districtwith safety to Government, they adopted, as theyproposed, nearly the same mode as with femalesand minors, which was to conclude the settlementin the name of the zemindar, but to vest in a dewan,or the most responsible and creditable of thezemindar's relations, the sole charge and authorityto hold the same, under strict obligations, in hisperson and property, to a just discharge of thetrust reposed in him by Government as well asby his principal ; the order of the Court ofDirectors of January 1783, which limited theperiod of leases to one year, being attended to inall instances, the zemindar being continued in theleaseChakXIIL] BBITISH power in INDIA. 687lease of his district from year to year, so long as iw^^-he paid the revenue with regularity, and otherwiseconducted himself to the satisfaction of theGovernment. The Council referred to the correspondencewith the Board of Revenue, as repletewith much interesting information on the generalquestion of the term for which leases should begranted, adding, however, that they had actuallygranted leases only for one year, the orders of theCourt of Directors being their guide.*Mr. Shore returned to Europe in January 1785, Mr. shore*^ ./ ' retuniBtoon which occasion the Government expressed the England,strongest sense of his merits and services.Madajee Scindia had gained such an ascend Adigeany over the Mogul, that he obtained for thePaishwa the high office of Vakeel-ul-Mulluck,which gave him a right of supremacy and controlin the management of the Mogul's administration.The Mahrattass had long aimed at obtaining thatoffice, as a favourite object of their policy. MadameScindia expected to be appointed Naib orDeputyCourt having pressed upon the attention ofthe Supreme Government the necessity of diminishingthe general charges of the public establishments,and of curtailing every unnecessaryexpense,Revenue Consultations, March 1784. Letter to Court, IstDecember 1784.t Letter, 17th Jan. 1785. J: Letter to Bengal, March 1783.688 RISK AND PROQKBiS OP THE ICmat. XIILi7dM& expense, a secret committee of inspection wasBsMOAfc. nominated in Bengal, to carry into effect a resolutetion that a reduction of all expenses be made,and extended as far as possible to every department,allowing to each a fair compensation forlabour*That all offices that could be dispensed withshould be abolished, and no more officers employedin any office than necessity required.That the salaries be proportioned to the dutyand responsibility of each office.Mr. Hastings wrote to the Court in January1785, stating that some authentic advices* fromEngland having reached him, he had determinedto quit the government at the close of that month.On the 10th he again addressed the Court:I monody it now to be impossible for your commands torequire my stay on the terms on which I might have had thepresumption to suppose within the line of possibility : weresuch to be your pleasure, it is scanty possible for yourcovenants, on any subject which could concon my stay,to arrive before the season required for my departure. Irather feel the wish to avoid the receipt of them, than toawait their coming ; and I consider myself in this act asthe fortunate instrument of dissolving the frame of an inefficientgovernment, pernicious to your interests and disgracefulto the national character, and of leaving one in itsstead,Major Scott Mr. Hastings' confidential agent, was in Parliament,and the proceedings regarding the India his had nodoubt reached that country.Chap.XIIT.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 689stead, such as my zeal for your service prompts me to wish 1784r85.perpetual, in its construction to every purpose efficient* Bewail.Mr. Hastings delivered up the keys of FortWilliam and of the treasury to Mr. Macphersonin the Council-chamber on the 1st February.That gentleman succeeded as Governor-generalunder the provisions of the Acts of the 13 and21 Geo. III., and took his seat on the 3d. Frommotives of respect to Mr. Hastings, the Councildetermined that the ceremonial of successionshould not take place until the Barrington hadsailed. A letter from Mr. Hastings, dated onboard,the 8th February, announcing her departure,having been received at Calcutta, the proclamationof the new government was made with theusual formalities.The administration of Mr. Hastings, althoughnot distinguished by those brilliant achievementswhich marked the course of the noble founderof the British empire in India, forms an epoch inthe history of the Company and of his country towhich great interest must always attach, whetherviewed in connexion with those eminent namesthat stand prominent amidst the principal actorsin the chequered and trying scenes which sorapidly followed each other abroad, or with thestate of parties at home, to whom the affairs ofthat country and the conduct of the Company'sservants• lOth January 1785.VOL. I. 2 rG90 Bias AND PBOOBESS OP TBS [Chap.XIII.rnua. genranto presented such fertile ground for politicaldifferences : those differences being carried to suchextremities as to lead our revered Monarch tomake the communication to the minister whichhas been already noticed.*Few public servants have been placed inmore trying positions than Mr. Hastings. Thevery commencement of his government was markedby instructions of a character repugnant to hisfeelings, and which placed him before the Britishpublic in a questionable light. The negociationswith the Mogul and the Vizier unavoidablybrought his government in contact with theRohillas and Mahrattass, and gave rise to thosegrounds of difference which occurred on theopening of the new government at the close of1774. The parties selected for councillors hadtheir minds prepossessed with the unfavourableviews that had been formed at home regardingthe conduct of the Company's servants. Theiropposition to Mr. Hastings .was systematic andunceasing. He endured with unshaken firmnessa series of personal attacks, that partook of avirulence, equalled only by the subsequent conductof his still more powerful enemy, in the originand progress of the celebrated impeachment.The lengthened period during which Mr. Hastingspresided over the Company's affairs in India,may be designated as one of experimental legislation.• Tfrfe page 672-3.csAB. XIII.1 BnnmH powbb ik iitdul 691latioD. Measures devised by Parliament with the I'musuview of securing the rights and advancing the unhappinessof the people, failed of the desiredeffect from having been framed in ignorance ofthe laws, customs, and usages of the peopleto whom they were applied. The embarrassmentsconsequent upon such a state of affairsnaturally followed, until the jarring elements of adiscordant system constrained the Legislature toenter upon a general revisicxi.The measure brought forward by Mr. Fox borethe stamp of a great and energetic mind, inventivebut arbitrary to a degree, and would have investedthe Legislature with a power unknown to the constitution.The East-india Company would havebeen swept away; their property taken withouteven the shadow of a compromise being offered, oranattempt made to soothe either objection or prejudice.It had the effect of uniting the Sovereignand the people against a majority of the House ofCommons. Of this measure Mr. Burke, who sostrongly charged Mr. Hastings with a thirst forarbitrary power, was a most strenuous supporter.His zeal helped it through the Cannons, and itis said that he stood on the steps of the throneduring the discussion in the Lords, anxious andagitated, and desirous to give every aid in carryingit through. The loss of the Bill was to him theloss of place, the pecuniary effect of which wasnot repaired until he became a pensioner on the2 Y 2 state692 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cbap. XIII.19BM5. state ia 1795. This circumstance is not advertedBwMQAu jQ y^'^^ g^jjy invidious intention, for it was justlyobserved by Lord Macartney on the occasion, thata pension was a far more honourable reward thanthe maintenance of a sinecure office under a hypocriticalpretence of having supposed duties todischarge.Mr. Hastings reached England in June 1785:on the 28th of that month he attended the Court,and received the thanks of the Directors for his servicesto the Company.Shortly after the opening of the ParliamentarySession in January 1786, Major Scott observing Mr.Burke in his place, reminded the House that Mr.Hastings had arrived in England some months, andhe therefore called upon Mr. Burke to produce thecharges which he had pledged himself to bringforward, and to fix the earliest day possible for thediscussion of them. Mr. Burke replied by relatingan anecdote of the great Duke of Parma, who,being challenged by Henry the Fourth of Franceto bring his forces into the open field and instantlydecide their disputes, answered,'^ that he knew verywell what he had to do, and was not come so farto be directed by an enemy." Various documentswere moved for, and in the following year theHouse of Commons passed the resolution of impeachment,which extended to every act of aGovernment of thirteen years, civil, military,political, and financial.InCiiAr. XIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 693In February 1796 the East-india Company n&tss.granted an annuity to Mr. Hastings of £4,000 ®''**»^'^-for twenty-eight years and a-half, commencingfrom the year 1786, when he arrived from India.This resolution was confirmed by the Board ofCommissioners for the Affairs of India, of whichMr. Dundas was president. It was that gentlemanwho moved the original resolution recalling Mr.Hastings, and who subsequently introduced theBill with his recall as a part of it.* His signaturewas to the approval of the grant : it was not ahasty, but a deliberate act, for the original voteby the Company was £6,000., to which the Boardcould not agree. This is a strong presumptiveproof that, whatever opinion Mr. Dundas mightentertain of Mr. Hastings' policy, he did not believehim to have been in any degree corrupt.After the lapse of thirty years from the periodof Mr. Hastings' return to his native country, andeighteen from the termination of his impeachment,he appeared before the House of Commons to giveevidence on the renewal of the Company's charterin 1813. It was a gratifying sight to witness therespect manifested by the Commons of Englandtowards that venerable public servant, by themembers rising simultaneously on his retiring fromthe bar at the close of his examination. fThroughout• Tirftf pages 610, 649.f The Author was under the gallery of the House on thatoccasion, the Lord Chief Commissioner, now in Scotland,being694 His AND PBOOEBSS OF THE [Ciu& Xiii78i-8«k Throughout his eventful career, the East-indiaCompany were his undeviating supporters. Heappears to have cherished this conviction to thelatest hour of his life. When only within a fewhours of his decease, he wrote to a member * of theCourt of Directors in the following terms : —^ Daylesford House, 9d Aug. 1818.I impose upon myself the last office of communicationbetween jouand me toinfonn you, that a few hours remain,which are to separate os from each other for eyer. Theinfliction that nest end me is a total privation of the functionof deglutition, which is equivalent to the extremities ofhunger, by the inability to take nourishment. I have calledyou by the only appellation that language can express me,Var Wooffadar^ my profitable friend ; for such, withevery other quality of friendship, I have ever experiencedyours in all our mutual intercourse, and my heart has returnedit (unprofitably I own), but with equal sentiments ofthe purest affection. My own conscience assuredly atteststhat I nysdf have not been wanting in my duty to my respectableemployers. I quit the world, and ther service, towhich I shall conceive myself, to the latest moment that Idraw my breath, still devotedly attached, and in the firmbelief that in the efficient body of Directors I have not oneindividual ill affected towards me. I do not express my fullfeelings;being counsel for the Company. The opposing counsel in thecourse of the examination, having asked Mr. Hastings how hereconciled the evidence he then gave with an opinion he formerlyentertained, he replied : '< I do not come here to defend myinconsistencies but to declare what my opinion is, formed onmature reflection."The late Colonel Tone.Chas. XIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 695feelings; I breve them all to be kindly, generously difr- indisposedtowards me ; and to the larger and constituent body Bkvoal.I can only express a hope, that if there are any of a differentsentiment, the number is but few ; for they have supportedme, when I thought myself abandoned by all other powers,from whom 1 ever thought myself entitled to any benefit.My latest prayers shall be offered for their service for thatof my beloved country, and for that also whose interest bothhave so long committed to my partial guardianship, and forwhich I feel a sentiment in my departing hours, not alienfrom that which is due from every subject to its own*"It appears, in the correspondence which passedbetween Mr. Burke and Dr. French Laurence, thecivilian, who was counsel to the managers of theimpeachment (a circumstance which led to hisintroduction to Mr. Burke, and subsequentlyto a seat in Parliament), that Mr. Burke, evenat the close of his life, when suffering undersevere domestic affliction in the loss of his son,still retained the strongest feeling against Mr.Hastings, and the idea that he was to be rewardedwith a peerage seems literally to have haunted hisimagination. The only honour conferred uponMr. Hastings was that of being made a privycouncillor a short time before his death. Heappears to have possessed great moral courage*and a vigorous mind; to have been simple andunostentatious in manner, and sensibly alive tokindness. He had a perfect knowledge of thelanguages, laws, customs, and manners of thepeople of India. He improved its revenues; heincreased696 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chaf.XIII.iTSi-a"*. increased its resources, and extended the influx^Q^g Qf jjjg British power.In January 1820, a proposition was submittedto the Court of Proprietors, to place his statue inthe General Court-room at the India-house.The motion originated with the Chairman,* who,after expatiating upon the services of Mr, Hastings,asked :How were those great services rewarded ? He was notallowed even to repose in dignified retirement — but wasdragged forward to contend with public accusations, andrewarded with then y-two articles of impeachment It wasnot his intention to enter into any examination of the conductof Parliament on that occasion — he meant not to impugnits wisdom in instituting the proceedings which distressedand harassed the feelings of that great man — theywere at an end, the feelings which excited them and thatgreat man himself were now no more ! but this he thoughthimself allowed to say, that those proceedings were contraryto the practice and spirit of the laws of this happy nation*"The Deputy Chairman stated :That part of his life had been passed on the spot in Indiawhen the government was placed in the hands of Mr.Hastings. He never seconded a motion in the propriety ofwhich his mind and disposition more strongly coincided.It wasResolved, That as the last testimony of approbation ofthe long, zealous, and successful services of the late RightHonourable Warren Hastings, in maintaining without diminutionthe British possessions in India against the combinedefforts• Campbell Marjoribanks, Esq.t The late Sir George (then Mr.) Robinson, Bart.CuAr. XIII.] British POWER IN INDIA. 897^efforts of European, Mahometan and Mahratta enemies, 1784^85.the statue of that distinguished servant of the East-india '"^^i*Company be placed among the statesmen and heroes whohave contributed in their several stations to the recovery,preservation, and security of the British power and authorityin India.In closing this volume it may be remarked,that although the East*India Company had beenincorporated nearly two centuries, it was duringthe last ten years only of the period comprised inthe preceding pages that Parliament had legislatedfor the direction of their affairs. Withinthat timeA regular Government had been established mIndia.A Supreme Court of Judicature had been instituted.The Receipt of Presents had been prohibited.The Rate of Interest had been defined.Rules, Ordinances, and Regulations had beenordained.Justices of the Peace had been appointed.Appeals had been provided for to the King inCouncil.The King had authority to disapprove of Dispatchesfrom the Court of Directors to India.The Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court hadbeen defined ; andVOL. I. 2 z The696 RISE AND PBOOBE8S OF THE [CBAr.XIIL1784.85. The Natives were secured in their Religion,shoal. La^g^ m^j Usages.But something more was required. The discussionswhich occurred in 1783, awakened thepublic mind to the affairs of India. The greatand essential provision still wanting in the systemwas the existence of a controlling power, competentto give effect to such measures as shouldbe clearly beneficial, when determined upon.The Sovereign,The Parliament,The Court of Directors andThe Court of Proprietors,were each possessed of separate and independentpowers, which if exercised by either might renderany measure nugatory, although based on thewisest principles of government, and calculated toensure the greatest possible benefit to this countryand to India.The Crown might disapprove a proposed dispatchby the Court of Directors, or it might amend it ;but when so amended, could not enforce its transmissionto India.The Parliament might vote a declaratory resolution,but it had not the means of giving it effect.The Court of Directors might prepare a dispatch,and the Crown might fully approve of it ;but the Proprietors might prohibit its being forwarded.Such a state of things called loudly for someremedy.CHA7.XIII.] BBITISH POWER IN INDIA. 699remedy. The difficulty was to devise a scheme iwi-ss.which should preserve the East-india Company,who had been found a valuable instrument in administeringthe affairs of India, and at the sametime infuse a vigour into the system, and impart apower to some constituted branch of it, whichshould be effectual for all the purposes of goodgovernment, without endangering the constitution.How far the object was attained, will be seenin the measure submitted to Parliament by theMinister, and ultimately passed into a law withthe concurrence of all parties interested in itscompletion.END OF VOLUME I.J. L. Cox and Soars* Preston, 7A« Great Queen Street,LlDcofai't-Iim Fi«l«b.