RISE AND PROGRESSBRITISH POWER IN INDIA.VOL. II.RISE AND PROGRESSBRITISH POWER IN INDIABy peter AUBER, M.R.A.S.,LATE SECRETARY TO THE HONOURABLE THE COURT OF DIRECTORS OF THEEast-india COMPANY.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:Wm. H. ALLEN & CO.,^ooftgellers to tl&e honourable time east=J[ntria C'otttpanj).LEADENHALL STREET.1837.^ CAMBBAYAOO.LONDON:Printed by J. L. Cox & Sons,75, Great Queen Street.TOTHE QUEEN'SMOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY,MADAM, ^IK.His late Most Gracious Majesty havingbeen pleased to countenance this attempt tocomprise, within a moderate compass, a politicalnarrative of the Rise and Progress of theBritish Power in India, I was permitted toplace in his Majesty's hands, in the month ofMay last, the first Volume of the present work.Your Majesty having smce been calledby Providence to the Throne of these Realms,I beg humbly to lay before Your Majesty aVIcopy of the Work, the second Volume of whichis now completed, and contains a brief reviewof the services of some of the most eminentStatesmen and Soldiers, and of the earlyachievements of Your Majesty's most illustriousGeneral, in the acquisition of thatEmpire which has been described as one ofthe " brightest jewels in the British Crown."That Your Majesty may long continue toreign over a free and a happy people, is theearnest prayer ofYour Majesty'sMost dutiful andLoyal Subject,PETER AUBER.CONTENTS.CHAPTER I.1784. Page 1 to 25.Preliminary Introduction to Mr. Pitt's Bill.Remarks on the Bill by the Directors, and their suggestionsgenerally adopted by the Minister.Establishment of the Board of Control.Governor-general and Commander-in-chief may be united inone person.Wisdom of the Company in acceding to the proposed measure.The Board of Control becomes an efficient responsible authority.Revision of establishments in England and India.Declaration against wars for conquest.Carnatic debts.CHAPTER II.1785 to 1786. Page 26 to 45.Ambition of Madajee Scindiah.Overture from the Seeks.Mr. Malett appointed Resident at Poonahh ; his route to Scin-diah's camp, and thence to Calcutta.\ IIICONTENTS.Tippoo Sultaun's cruelty to the Hindoo.Lord Macarntey resigns the government of Madras ; proceedsto Calcutta; declines the appointment of ; returns to England ; is granted a pension ; fights a(liul with General Stuart, and is wounded.Reiluctioiis in Bengal approved.CHAPTER III.1786 to 1793. Page 46 to 132.Earl Cornwallis appointed Governor-general and Com-mander-in-chief.Assumes the government.Financial embarrassments.Native Chiefs repair to Calcutta.Decennial settlement postponed.Affairs of Ode.Mines in Ramghur, and Salt in Assam.Overland communication with India.Political aspects in India and Europe.Differences between his Majesty's Government and the Directors,on sending King's troops to India : the four RegimentsBill to authorize.Guntoor Circa.(General Medows appointed to Madras.Directors anticipate further reductions.Ajiprclnn^ions as to Tippoo.Rkvknuk Settlement. Minutes of ]vir. Shore and LordCornwallis; horror.PbRMANRNT Si: I II. im km iDiiU'iiipIated.Stand 0|)iiiiM luxt'imes.AoMiNihinATioN OF Justice, with the various Courts.War with Tippoo.CONTENTS. IXLord Cornwallis proceeds in person to Madras.General Medows, commander-in-chief at Madras — His letterto the Court.Lord Cornwallis determines to remain in India; reachesMadras ; takes immediate measures against Tippoo.Directors and Parliament approve Lord Cornwallis's conduct.Mr. Malett and Capt. Kennaway created Baronets, at the instanceof the Court.Army advances against Seringapatam. Col. Morehouse killed.Lord Cornwallis falls back on Bangalore. His Lordship's dangeroussituation. — ^Tippoo defeated.Preliminary for peace. Lord Cornwallis returns to Bengal.Treaty with Nabob of the Carnatic.Mr. Shore appointed to succeed as Governor-general.Nepaul and Lassa.Annuity of £5^000 granted to Lord Cornwallis.CHAPTER IV.1793 to 1798. Page 138 to 155.State of Europe and Great Britain when the Company's charterexpired.Judicious conduct of the Company.Board op Control revised. Salaries granted to Commissioners.Interests of India made subservient to views at home.Mr. Burke objects to Mr. Shore's appointment.Sir John Shore enters upon the office of Governor-general.Lord Hobart appointed Governor of Madras.Restoration of Tippoo's Sons.Deaths of Madajee Scindiah and of Sir William Jones.Hostilities between the Nizam and Mahratta.Deaths of Nabob of Bengal, and Madoo Rao the Peishwa.CONTENTS.Mr. Duncan appointed Governor of Bombay.Nepaul subject to China.Revision of the Military Establishment.Suspicious conduct of Tippoo.Affairs of Ode.Sir John Shore contemplates retiring from the Government.Leaves Bengal in March 1798, having been created BaronTeignmouth in October preceding.CHAPTER V.1797 to 1799. Pages 156 to 202.Proceedings of the Court of Directors in anticipation of LordTeignmouth's retiring, and Lord Hobart's quitting India.Lord Cornwallis consents to proceed again to India j hisdestination changed to that of Viceroy in Ireland.The Earl of Mornington, afterwards Marquis Wellesley,appointed Governor-general.His Lordship's education at Eton superintended by ArchbishopCornwallis. Appointed a Lord of the Treasury, and a Commissionerfor the Affairs of India. Embarks for India. Stopsat the Cape. His interview with Major Kirkpatrick. ReachesMadras. Assumes the Supreme Government.Lord Hobart retires from Madras ; is granted a pension of£1,500 per annum, and thanked for his services.Marquis Wellesley. State of Affairs on his Lordship'sarrival — Measures to reduce the French influence in India.—Effects reduction of their force at Hyderabad.Long Clive appointed Governor of Madras.Loiil Wellesley's letter to the Government of Madras.Asserts lies powers as Governor-general.Treaty will tin Nizam.TiFi'oo declines negotiation.CONTENTS. XIWar with Mysore. — Governor-general proceeds to Madras.General Harris commands the Army.The Hon. Colonel Wellesley arrives with his regiment atMadras.Peishwa declines subsidiary alliance.Commissioners in Mysore.Fall of Seringapatam. — Opinion on that event.Settlement of Mysore.The Hon. Colonel Wellesley appointed to command atSeringapatam.Thanks voted to Marquis Wellesley. His Lordship'shonourable and disinterested conduct regarding Prize Money.Granted an annuity of £5,000.CHAPTER VI.1 799 to 1801. Page 203 to 231.oMarquis Wellesley returns to Calcutta.Addresses presented. — General Sir James Craig discouragesaddress from the Military. — His reasons highly approved.Affairs of Persia. — Surat. — Poonahh. — Malabar and Canara.Conduct of Nabob of the Carnatic. — Administration of thatcountry vested in the Company.Measures proposed against Batavia.Hon. Colonel Wellesley, his presence desired at Mysore. —He attacks and defeats Doondiah Waugh. — His opinions ofproceedings in India. — Intended expeditions — He proceedsto Trincomalee; and from thence to Bombay in H.M.S.Suffolk Captain Malcolm — His expectations disappointed. —General Baird commands expedition to Egypt. — ColonelWellesley returns to Mysore.Affairs of Oude. Treaty with.Sir John Anstruther's opinion of that country.Xii . CONTENTS.CHAPTER VII.1801 to 1803. Page 232 to 270.Marquis Wellesley and Lord Clive meditate retiringfrom their Governments. — Causes. — Constitution of the Company.— Shipping Interest. — Private Trade. — Calcutta College.— Court's interference in appointments. — Lord Dartmouth,President of the Board, to Lord Wellesley. — Mr.[Bo-banquet Deputy Chairman o£ the Court of Directors. — Hisletters to Lords Dartmouth and Wellesley. — Lord Castlereaghappointed President of the Board. — Letter to Lord Wellesley.Peace with France.Buonaparte provokes hostilities.Expectations that Lord Wellesley may remain in India.Differences between Board and Court.Lord Castlereagh to Lord Wellesley.French views regarding India.CHAPTER Vii1 803 to 1 804. Pages 271 to 342.Mahratta war, and hostilities in Europe.Company's Possessions.Scindiah and Holkar.— Ahalya Baee administers the Holkarterritory.— Her character.— Hostilities between Scindiah andHolkar.The Peishwa makes overtures for a subsidiary treaty.Treaty of Bassein.The Hon. General Wellesley appointed to command inHindostan and the Deccan, with plenary powers Rapidmarch towards P(K)nali — Restores the Peishwa to his capital.—Conduct of Scindiah-general Wellesley determines toCONTENTS. Xlllbring him to an understanding. — His evasions. — Activity andoccupation of General Wellesley. — Attacks Ahmednuggur,which surrenders.General Lake in Bengal. His plenary powers.Mr. Barlow's views in support of Lord Wellesley's policy.—-Operations in Cuttack. — Juggernaut. — Politic reservation ofLord Wellesley regarding the collections at the Pagoda. —French force at Allyghur. — Battle of Delhi. — Interview betweenGeneral Lake and the Mogul.Lord William Bentinck appointed Governor of Madras —the Governor-general's letter to him, and his Lordship'sreply.General Wellesley's operations in the Deccan. — Battle ofAssay ; the General's horse shot under him, and the horsesof his staff. — The General's rapid movements, and conductof official matters. — Surrender of Asseerghur. — Armisticewith Scindiah. — Battle of Argaum. — Affairs in Guzerat. —Deficiency of information. — Siege of Gawilghur. — Efforts ofthe troops. — Appoints the Hon. Mountstuart Elphinstone toNagpore. — Interview between the Vakeel of the Nizam andGeneral Wellesley. — Peace of Surjee Anjengaum,Bengali Agra reduced. — Encouragement given by Lord Wellesleyto the several executive authorities.— Affairs of .— Battle of Laswarree. — Holkar.— Communicationfrom Lord Castlereagh to Lord Wellesley on his remainingin India. — Lord Wellesley addresses the Court on the subject.— Difference between the Board and Court regardingthe Calcutta College. — China fleet defeats Admiral Illinois.CHAPTER IX.1804 to 1805. Pag 343 to 393.^General Wellesley engaged in forming Treaties with Scin-dial and the Rajah of Berar — Subsidiary System.— ^Guzerat.He proceeds to Calcutta. ^ ^ ,Xiv CONTENTS.Colonel Monson's retreat. — Col. Murray's movements.General Wellesley's Memoranda on various public points.Testimony to his parental care in the administration of'Mysore, by Colonel Wilks. — Leaves Calcutta, and returns tothe Deccan. — Contemplates returning to Europe, — His Letterto Poorness. — Addresses him on his Departure from Madras.Embarks for England. — Lord William Bentinck's testimonyto merits of Sir Arthur Wellesley.Siege of Bhurtporb.— Four different Failures. — Surrenders.Scindiah. — Letterfrom Courts Directors, animadverting onLord Wellesley 's measures. — His Lordship's Reply, and thatof the Government. — Provision for the Mogul. — Affairs of thePeishwa and the Guicowar. — Marquis Cornwallis appointedGovernor-general and Commander-in-chief.Remarks on Marquis Wellesley 's Administration. — Chargesbrought against his Lordship, respecting Oude, by Mr. Paulll ,who had been protected by his Lordship in India. — The Duelof that individual with Sir Francis Burdett. — His failure as aCandidate for Westminster. — His Death. — Marquis Wellesleyproceeds as Ambassador to Spain, and meets his brotherthere. — Appointed Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, andafterwards Viceroy of Ireland.CHAPTER X.1805 and 1806 page 394 to 409-Marquis Cornwallis again proceeds as Governor-general andCommander-in-chief. — His policy, ill health, and death. —Sir George Barlow succeeds. — His course of policy. — HisAppointment vacated by the Crown. — Lord Minto nominatedGovernor-general, and Sir George Barlow nominated to Madras.CONTENTS. XVCHAPTER XI.1803 to 1807. Page 410 to 449.Lord William Bentinck Governor of Madras. — His measuresas to Tanjore. — His disinterested proceeding regardingMilitary Patronage — Malabar and Canara. — His zeal for theInterests of the Company. — French Interests. — Revenue andJudicial Systems. — Proposed Tour to Canara and Malabar :prevented by Public Affairs.— His Lordship's Minute. — SupportsColonel Munro's principles. — Deputes Mr. Thackerayto proceed on the Tour. — Mutiny at Vellore. — His Lordshipwholly free from any participation in the cause. — His lenientviews towards the prisoners. — Admirable conduct of Pur-neal,the Dewan of Mysore. — Infatuated conduct of theCommandant at Palamcottah. — Intelligence reaches England.Resolution of Recall by the Court of Directors. — His Lordship'sabrupt removal. — His appeal to the Court, and theirResolution thereon.CHAPTER XII.1807 to 1813. Page 450 to 487.Lord Minto, who, as President of the Board, had announcedthe revocation of Sir George Barlow's appointment, proceedsas Governor-general. — Confirms Lord William Bentinck'slenient measures towards the prisoners at Madras, and proceedsto Bengal. — State of Affairs. — His course of policy.Political Negotiations. — Hydrabad. — Poonahh. — AmeerKhan. — Holkar, — Baroda and Guzerat. — Oude. — Missionto Scinde and Persia. —Sir John Malcolm. — Sir HartfordJones proceeds as Minister Plenipotentiary from Englandto Persia. — Embassy to Caubul. — Unmeet Sing — Nepaul.Xvi CONTENTS.Arracan. — Affairs at Madras. — Lieut-general Hay McDowall appointed Commander-in-chief, but not to Council.Effects of the Exclusion. — Places the Quarter-master Generalunder Arrest, — Proceedings in consequence.— Resolutiondismissing General Mcdowell. — Commotions in the Army. —Purneah again evinces the most honourable conduct. — LordMinto proceeds to Madras. — Reduction of the Mauritius. —The Spice Islands. — Java. — Administration of Mr. Raffles,highly honourable to British rule.CHAPTER XIII.1813. Page 488 to 499.Proceedings on renewal of the Charter. — Resolutions of theHouse of Commons. — Trade with India thrown open. —Episcopal Establishment. — Early measures of the Companyto disseminate Christianity, — General remarks thereon. —Interesting villages in Tinnevelley. — Opinions of Sir ThomasMunro, — Incumbent on British Government to aid inspreading the Scriptures.CHAPTER XIV.1813 to 1823. Page 500 to 567.Earl of Moira, afterwards Marquis op Hastings, appointedGovernor-general.Affairs of Nepaul. — Hostilities with the Ghoorkas. — Operations.— termination of war, and treaty.Affairs of Oude. — Loans from the Vizier,Affairs in Hindostan. — Cutch — Poonah.—Guicowar's ministermurdered— Pindaric war.— Marquis Hastings takes thefield.— Sir Thomas Hislop commands the army of the Dec-contents.XVllcan. — Scindiah's duplicity. — Treachery of the Peishwa. —Terms with him. — Outrage on British officers. — Admirableconduct of Mr. Elphinstone. — Peishwa defeated. — CaptainVaughan and his brother murdered. — Ameer Khan. — Mr.Metcalfe and Holkar. — Dherma Kower. — Battle of Maids— Siege of Hatrass and Moorsaum. — Affairs of Nagpore.Animated conduct of Mr. Jenkins. — Death of his assistantin the action of Seetabulda. — Appa Sahib sent to Allahabadfrom Nagpore — escapes, and is ultimately dethroned. — BajeeRao, the ex-Peishwa, pursued. — Surrenders to Sir JohnMalcolm. — Gallant affair at Corrygaura. — Active conduct ofGeneral Munro. — Rajah of Sattarah restored by Mr. Elphin-stone. — Killed of Taller put to death. — TrimbuckjeeGanglia sent to Chunar. — Conduct of Scindiah. — MarquisHastings' Revenue and Judicial Minutes— Voted £60,000 —Affairs of Hydrabad, and Messrs, Wm. Palmer and Co. —Marquis Hastings resigns. — Sends home a summary of hisadministration.— His family voted £20,000.CHAPTER XV.1822 to 1827. Pages 568 to 601.Right Hon. George Canning appointed Governor-general.State of affairs at Home. — Death of Marquis Londonderry. —Mr. Canning appointed Secretary of State. — Resigns hisnomination as Governor-general.Lord Amherst appointed Governor-general. — Lord WilliamBentinck a candidate for the appointment.Ava war. — Proclamation of Governor-general. —-sir ArchibaldCampbellnominated to command the troops. — Operations of thearmy. — Negotiations for peace. — Broken off. — Renewed andratified. — Valuable aid of the Madras Government and hisMajesty's Navy.— Efficiency of steam vessels. — Affairs ofVOL. II. b **Xviii CONTENTSBhurtpore. — The siege successful, and Dorian Sal madeprisoner.Fortifications of Bhurtpore destroyed.Differences with the Rajah of Colambre.Death of Sir Thomas Munro. — His early services. — VisitsEngland in 1807. — His appointment at the head of a JudicialCommission. — Successful services. — Again visits England. —Appointed Governor of Madras.— His desire to resign. —Remains, in consequence of the Ava war. — His great aid inthat war. — Lady Munro leaves India with her family. — Themotives of public duty which impelled Sir Thomas to remain.His death. — Court's resolution thereon.CHAPTER XVI.1827 to 1835. Page 602 to 657.The Right Hon. Lord William Bentinck appointed GovernState of affairs on his Lordship's arrival in India.Financial difficulties. — Measures of economy indispensable —Retrenchments enforced from home. — Committees of Financeappointed.His Lordship's determination to judge for himself. — Odiumincurred by measures of retrenchment.Tour to the interior — and to Prince Wales* Island, Malacca,and Singapore.Questions as to residencies, and regarding central India.Abolition of suttee. — Affecting instance of, in Malwa. — Remarkson prevalence of idolatry.Short tour to the Upper Provinces.Affairs in China.Legislative Council. — Question as to powers of Council whenabsent from the seat of Government.Proceeds to the Upper Provinces.— Interview with UnmeetCONTENTS. XIXSing. — Mission of Lieutenant Burnes. — Of Colonel Porringerto Scinde. — Affairs of Delhi, and mission of Ram MohunRoy to England. — Congress at Ajmere.The Earl of Clare's judicious policy at Baroda.Lord William Bentinck appointed Commander-in-chief.Affairs of Oude and Hydrabad. — Defers assuming the governmentof Oude. — Judicial and Revenue systems. — His Lordship'sdisapproval of financial arrangements, which are alsocondemned by the Court. — Steam navigation. — Deplorablestate of the agency houses and commercial interests at Calcutta.State of the civil service. — Proceeds to Madras. — The Coorgwar. — Affairs of Mysore. — Failure of agency houses productiveof injurious effects on the minds of the servants,Civil and Military. — Remarks on his Lordship's Administration.— Opinions of the community at Calcutta. — Nativeand commercial community present addresses to his Lordship.Embarks for Europe.CHAPTER EvilPage 658 to 713.Measures consequent on the Charter Act of 1813Measures preliminary to the Negotiation in 1833.Conference of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman with theDuke of Wellington and Lord Ellenborough.— Change ofMinistry. — Dissolution of Parliament.Parliamentary Committees on India Affairs.Company's accounts disputed : their integrity maintained.Negotiation and final agreement.Company surrender all their rights, property, &c. for anAnnuity of £630,000 and a Guarantee Fund. — Retainingtheir political character towards India.Concluding remarks.EXPLANATION OF THE MAP.Ik a map on so small a scale, it is impossible to give even a tolerable outlineof the vast countries comprised in the kingdoms, either subject to, orinimmediate alliance with, and also contiguous to the British territories.The colours have been introduced for the purpose of indicating the possessionsacquired under the respective Governors-general.Red, those acquired by Lord Clive.Indian ink,dittoMr. Hastings.Blue,dittoMarquis Cornwallis.Yellow,dittoMarquis Wellesley.Brown,dittoMarquis Hastings.Purple,dittoEarl Amherst.Green,dittoLord Wm. Bentinck.From Cape Comorin to the Sutlej, and from Assam to the Indus, theBritish power may be said to be paramount. Advancing from the southernmostpoint : — Travancore is a subsidiary state ; Mysore is under Britishadministration ; Sahara, the Nizam, and Berar, are all dependent upon theBritish power, by subsidy or otherwise.Crossing to the north of the Nerbuddah, we enter Malwa, or CentralIndia, a country comprising Guzerat and Bundlecund, with the variousRajpoot Princes. Originally under the Hindoo power, it became subject tothat of the Mogul, until the invasion of the Mahrattass. The rivers Humbugand Since running through the centre and falling into the Jumna. Passingthe line of hills to the north-west of Oodeypoore, we enter Joudpore orMarwar, contiguous to which lie Buccaneer and Jessulmer, from whencewe reach the territories of Bawhalpore, bounded by the rivers Indus andBarra, having the Protected Seik States to the north-east.RISE AND PROGRESSBRITISH POWER IN INDIA.CHAPTER I. ^We are now to consider the measure introduced 1784.by the Minister to Parliament in 1784, which f;^l'rkl"t7thedrew so marked a line in the character of the i5r''^p"t't',s°^ijfEast-india Company, and placed such an extensivepower of control over the future exercise oftheir political functions.It was supposed that sufficient authority todirect that branch of the Company's affairs hadbeen vested in the Ministers of the Crown. Butso little care had been paid in framing the enactments,or the powers of the Company were solittle understood, that when the Crown hadresolved upon a measure deemed essential to thesafety and good government of India, in whichmeasure the Court of Directors had concurred,VOL. II.* B theITW.2 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.the very body whose powers it had been intendedto limit effectually defeated the views both of theCrown and the Directors.The new Parliament met on the 19th of May,and the speech from the throne contained the followingpassage :King's speech. Whilst the affairs of the East-india Company form anobject of deliberation deeply connected with the generalinterests of the country, whilst you feel a just anxiety toprovide for the good government of our possessions in thatpart of the world, you will, I trust, never lose sight of theeffect which any measures to he adopted for the purposemay have on our constitution, and on our dearest interests athome.The Minister felt that he should act mostwisely by introducing a measure which carriedconviction to the mind of the Company,rather than press forward any plan by mere violenceor power. The measure which he contemplatedwas intended to secure an effectual controlin the hands of his Majesty's Ministers, as theconstitutional executive of the country. As theattempt to grasp at patronage vas the ground uponwhich the bill of Mr. Fox was thrown out, Mr.Pitt cautiously abstained from any apparent intentionto acquire additional power from that source ;and to strengthen the objections taken to the billof 1783 he now alleged, that the rise or downfallof the Company was an event intimately connectedwith the vigour or decline of the Britishconstitution,.Chas. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 3constitution, although he admitted that no charter 1784.ought to stand in the way of a reform for the generalgood and safety of the country.It was fortunate for the Company that theirinterests had been made a party question.The objects to be provided for were, the securingthe Company's commerce to the country, peaceand tranquillity to the inhabitants of India, andobedience on the part of the Company's servants.To effect these objects an accession of power w^sessential, but where to lodge it in a mode theleast liable to abuse, was the point to be decided.The Minister did not propose a system absolutelynew, but desired rather to improve the old.From the extreme distance, which enhanced thedifficulty of governing India, it was suggestedthat the accession of authority should rather bein that country where the executive power mustbe lodged than here : that the power to possess itshould be active and on the spot, but still so constitutedas to secure obedience to the measuresdictated from home, and capable at the same timeof preventing extortion abroad, and of frustratingall improper views of ambition or despotism ; thepatronage being separated from the executive orministerial influence, and kept free from the handsof any political body of men whatever.The powers possessed by the Secretaries ofI State had remained a dead letter, from other highand important duties which those officers had toB 2 perform.RISE AND Progress THE[Cjiap. I.nat.Bill brought in.Remarks thereon,by the Directors.perform : those powers were accordingly to beplaced in the hands of a distinct Board. Itsmembers were not to be permanently nominated,because such commission might be hostile to theadministration, and a permanent body directingthe India department of the state, independent ofthe existing administration, would be an evil.The members of the Board were to be privycouncillors ; and, to avoid any additional charge,they were to be selected from parties holding otherhigh offices at the nomination of the Crown, withlarge emoluments and no great employment, whoseleisure therefore would amply allow of their undertakingthe office of Commissioner.Their duties were to be purely political, andas they were to have no power of appointing tooffice, nor any patronage, there would consequentlybe no motive to deviate from publicduty.The Minister obtained leave to bring in his billonthe 2d of July. A copy with the blanks filledup being submitted to the Directors, they offereda series of remarks which merit attention, as theyled to the introduction of some of the most importantprovisions of the act.The bill provided that copies of all despatcheswhich the Court of Directors might receive, shouldbe transmitted to the Board.The Court expressed in unequivocal terms, that it hadbeen the Company's firm determination to reserve to themselvesChai'. I] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 5selves the entire control of their trade, and only to give to 1784. ;Government a control respecting the civil or military go ]government and revenues of India. iThe bill left it to the Board to transmit, when ]ever they might see fit, to the Court, draughts ofdespatches for India, without waiting for any ^copies of despatches intended or proposed to be isent by the Court. |The Court observed, that whilst the government of the ICompany's possessions in India remained vested in the Com- ']pany, and administered in their name, under pany degree of \control whatsoever, a power to originate orders and instructor contend ]tions could not be vested in any other body of men, con originate. \silently with the principle of such a government, or withoutat once annihilating the executive power of the Company. ]The power proposed to bereft with the Board would not only Idestroy the principle before mentioned, but tend to introducea doubt which of the two bodies would stand respondbible for delay or negligence, and might become highly ■dangerous in times of political contest and unsteady admitdistractions, when it might be very inexpedient that new men, Jjust vested with authority to control the most important acts ]of the Company, should decide upon materials il-digested, ]and without the aid of those reasons and explanations which ja previous discussion, by men of experience, would always \afford. IThe bill vested in the Board a power to sendsecret orders to the Government in India, on any |subject relating the civil or military government, ias well as respecting peace or war, and to withholdthe knowledge of the same from the Court ^of IRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. I.178*. of Directors, as well as of the replies whichmight be received from India, as the Board mightsee fit.The Court remarked, that powers given to the extentstated in the clause would, at one blow, annihilate theCompany's government. They were ready to recommendto the Proprietors to consent to vest powers in his Majesty ""sMinisters to issue secret orders, such orders being^rs^ communicatedto, and afterwards transmitted through theSecret Committee of the Court, concerning the levying ofwar or making of peace, or negociations respecting war andpeace, to the several governments or presidencies in India,and binding those presidencies to obey the same, in likemanner as if they had been issued by the Directors : butbeyond this there was no case in which such power[would beuseful, but many in which it would be improper and dangerous; they specially observed, that the giving orders atany time, or on any subject, to the commander-in-chief ofthe Company's forces, otherwise than through the mediumof the executive government of the presidency in which heserves, could hardly fail of producing the most dangerousconvulsions in such government, and hazarding the Company'spossessions in India.The bill gave the King the absolute appointmentof commander-in-chief, and also of thesecond in command, with something like independentauthority.The Court earnestly requested that the subordination ofroiJitary power these officers to the supreme civil authority, of which theycondemned. , ^ ^ .were constituted members, in all cases and under all circumstanceswhatsoever, might be ascertained by some clausein the bill, so as to obviate all future claims of any officerinIndependentChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 7in his Majesty's service to an independent command or 1784.authority ; the Court felt that the second in commandbeing appointed by the Crown would be a great discouragementto the officers in the Company's service, as well as aheavy expense, and they therefore submitted whether thepoint might not be given up.The power of recall was originally confined tothe sign-manual, and withhold from the Directors.The Court contended, that the power of recalling every Court contendofficer appointed by the Company was essential to the le^.^ff*^^^^ ^*existence of their authority over their servants abroad, andthat it ought not to be taken away.The powers originally proposed to be given tothe Supreme Government extended to making-regulationsfor the subordinate presidencies, andto empower them to interfere in all matters connectedwith the internal administration of suchsettlements.The Court observed, that the clause rendered the orders Court suggestof the Bengal Government paramount to those which might troi'of "^bT"" ihave been sent out to the presidencies by the Court under <>ver subordinatesuperintendence of the Board of Control, which it was ments.presumed could not be intended, and that an exceptionought to be introduced accordingly. They considered thatit would be improper to subject presidencies so distant agthose of Madras and Bombay to the interference of theBengal Government in the interior detail of their administration.Such a regulation would reduce those presidenciesto mere subordinate factories, and deprive them of all thatrespect and energy which in many instances, it might bevery8 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.1784. very necessary for the public welfare that they should possessand exercise, in instances where the Bengal Governmentwas precluded by its distant situation from an efficientinterference. The Court submitted, whether it mightnot be better to confine the control of the Bengal Governmentto matters relating to war and peace, and the applicationof their resources in time of war, and transactions withthe country powers, provided the orders of the Court shouldnot have previously been given thereon.If it was meant to give legislative authority to the BengalGovernment in matters relating to the interior policeand administration of the affairs of the other presidencies,it was submitted that the same regulations could by nomeans apply to the manners or circumstances of the differentplaces, and that all such legislative regulations should hedigested and proposed hy the respective presidents andcouncils : and whether the final sanction thereto might notmore usefully be reserved to the home authorities, thanvested in the government of Bengal.The provision for presents being brought toaccount was enlarged at the suggestion of theCourt, so as to include ceremonial presents. Thebill precluded absolutely the reappointment ofany person who had been absent five years fromIndia.Court suggest The Court readily admitted the salutary tendency of theshould^be^al- restriction ; but they recollected cases in which it had beentoTndk after ^^^^^ expedient, and might again be expedient, to sendfine years' ab out, in cases of emergency, men of eminent merit, reputation,and services : and they therefore suggested whether powershould not be lodged somewhere, upon the application ofthe Company, to dispense with that regulation.Provisionsence.hChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 9 jProvision was made for establishing a jurisdic- ^'^^^- ition, for the trial of offences committed in India, jmore effectually than proceeding by common law, 1]for prosecuting and bringing to speedy and con isign punishment persons guilty of extortion or ]other misdemeanour. '{The Court were of opinion that it was more particularlyan object of attention for the Legislature at large than for Jthe Directors, who felt the odium that would attend any :\interposition they might presume to offer against the parti iocular clauses in the bill respecting delinquents, by it being 1alleged that they were unwilling to assist in establishing any ]effectual mode for punishing the servants of the Company \offending. |On the clauses which related to the Nabob of {Arcot and the Rajah of Tanjore, the Court sub Imitted that their power, under the superintendence Iof the Board of Control, would be adequate to the Isettlement of those affairs ; and they entertained \great doubt whether the clauses would answer the ]purpose intended. jThe greater portion of the suggestions thrown court's suggest1 ita 1 11 in/r tons generallyout by the Directors were adopted by the Maister, adopted. ,and sanctioned by Parliament. ]The Act of the 24th George III. cap. 25, which \was founded on this bill, formed a new era in theIndian system. The Board of Commissioners was Board of con \trol established, jnest established, and vested '* with a superiortendance and control over all the British territorial ]possessions in India, and over the affairs of theCompany in England." They were authorized Iand10 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai. I.178*. and empowered to direct and control all acts,Their powers. Operations, and concerns, which in any wayrelated to the civil or military government orrevenues in India. The members of the Boardwhere to have access to all papers and munimentsof the Company, and to be furnished with copiesor extracts thereof as they might require.Copies of the proceedings of the Courts of Proprietorsand Directors were to be sent to theBoard within eight days after the holding of suchCourts. Proposed despatches were to be sent uptothe Board for approval, and to be returned,approved or altered, within fourteen days : and,for the readier despatch of the civil and militaryconcerns of the Company, whenever the Court ofDirectors failed to forward to the Board, withinfourteen days after requisition, any despatch on asubject connected with the civil or military governmentor revenues, the Board might frame anddirect the transmission thereof to India.The Secret Committee was first established.They were required to send to India, in duplicate,such despatches as they might receive from theBoard; and answers from the governments inIndia were to be forwarded to the Board throughthe Court of Directors, who remained ignorant oftheir contents. The government of Bengal wasto consist of three councillors instead of four,and the commander-in-chief was to be the secondmember.TheChap. I] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 1 1The presidencies of Madras and Bombay were 1784-,first established as governments. The Governor-generaland Governors were to have the castingvote in council. The King might remove or recallany British subject holding office under the Companyin India.All vacancies, with the exception of Governor-general,Governors, and Commanders-in-chief,were to be filled up from amongst the covenantedservants of the Company. If the Court of Directorsneglected to supply vacancies within two monthsfrom the notification of such vacancies beingreceived by the Court, his Majesty might supplythe same, and the party appointed was then subjectto recall by the King only. Orders or resolutions,when agreed upon by the Court of Directorsand Board of Commissioners, were not revokableby the Court of Proprietors.The Supreme Government was to control theother governments. Schemes of conquest weredeclared to be repugnant to the wish, honour, andpolicy of the nation ; and the Governor generalwas not to make war against any Indian power,except hostilities shall have been commenced, orpreparation made for such, against the Britishpower. The Governors, &c. of the subordinatepresidencies were liable to be suspended fromoffice by the Governor-general. The Court ofDirectors were required to take into considerationall the establishments in India, with the view toevery12 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.1784. every possible reduction ; and a list of all offices inthe civil and military establishments of the Company,with the emoluments of such, was to be laidbefore Parliament within fourteen days after thecommencement of each session. Officers and servantsof the Company were to be promoted in regularsuccession ; where the rule was deviated from,the Government were to record the reasons fullyon the minutes and proceedings of Council.Company's servants dismissed by any competentcourts were not to be restored ; and they wererequired, on returning from India, to make a disclosureof all their property upon oath.The Governor-general in Council might issuewarrants for seizing persons suspected of illicitcorrespondence. The rights of the Company andCrown as to the territorial acquisitions were againreserved.The Proprietors had hitherto taken an activepart in almost every question, whether connectedwith the foreign or domestic affairs of the Company.They had conferred and revoked appointments ofgovernors, councillors, and commanders-in-chief.The commissions of Government were also submittedto their approval. They restored servantswho had been suspended or dismissed for improperand reprehensible conduct, and passed resolutionsstaying prosecutions instituted by order of theDirectors against their servants. They relievedcommanders from penalties incurred for flagrantbreachesChap. I] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 1 3breaches of trust and gross dereliction of duty : ^'^^'and had frequently defeated measures recommendedby the Court of Directors as essential tothe well-being of the Company's interests, and tothe support of their authority in India.It was accordingly declared that no order orresolution of the Court of Directors, touching thepoints of government contained in the Act, shouldbe liable to be rescinded, suspended, revoked, orvaried by any General Court of the said Company,after the same had been approved by the Boardof Commissioners.In 1786, the Act of the 26th Geo. III. cap. 16, Actofnsetoamend Act ofwas passed, for the purpose of amending ceram i784,aiidaiiow•I'lA n T ^ A ^ ret <^f Commander-provisionscontained in the Act or the 24th Geo. in-cinefandIII. It confirmed several appointments (made by genl^ai'beingthe Court of Directors) of persons then resident in persoZ*'"^Europe, to be councillors, and ordained that, infuture, no persons should be appointed to councilunder twelve years' service. It also repealed somuch of the 24th Geo. III. as ordained that thecommander-in-chief should be second memberof council, and left it at the option of the Court ofDirectors to appoint him to such office. It empoweredthe Court, should they see fit, to unitein one person the offices of governor-general andcommander-in-chief. These special provisionshad reference to the appointment of Lord Cornwallis,and appear to have been framed withoutdue consideration to the effect that might beproduced14 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.1786. produced by the option being left, when thetwo offices were not united in the same party.It conferred on the governor-general and governorsthe power to act, in certain cases, withoutthe concurrence of their respective councils, andall orders of Government were to be expressed asmade by the governor-general, or the governorin council. It regulated the emoluments to bederived by civil servants according to length ofservice : and it provided that the members of theSecret Committee, established by the Act of 1784,should be sworn.The additional powers conferred on the governwere strongly opposed by Parliamentas arbitrary and despotic ; but were supported onthe ground that cases of emergency might arisein which it would be of the last importance tothe interests of India that the governor-generalshould have such power, and it was asked howarbitrary government depended more upon oneperson governing than two. If the party wereinvested with greater power, his responsibilitywas proportionably increased, whilst he had alsohis council to advise with, and they were alwaysabout him as checks, and a control on his conduct.It was admitted (an admission that spokestrongly in favour of the plea urged by Mr. Hastings,of the inefficiency of his power when governthat most of the mischiefs which hadarisenChapel.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 15arisen for years past in India, had been caused i786.entirely from the effect of party principles indulgedin by the members of the respective councils,and the factious scenes which those differentcouncils presented. Two other acts were passedin the same year (26 Geo. III. cap. 25), declaringthat his Majesty's approbation was not necessaryto the appointment by the Court of Directors ofgovernor general, governors, and members ofcouncil. The other amending the provisions ofthe Act of 1784, for appointing a distinct courtof judicature to be chosen in each session of Parliament,for the trial of persons accused of offencescommitted in India. A clause was also inserted,declaring that offences against the Company'sexclusive right of trade, which could only betried at Westminster, might be tried in the East-indies.Persons whose licenses of residence hadexpired, were to be subject to the same penaltiesas unlicensed persons, and power was vested inthe governments to seize unlicensed persons andships.We may learn from these proceedings on the wisdom of theT T /-\ • 1 1 1 r Company inIndia Question, that the rulers of a country are yielding to pro-bothwise and prudent in yielding a judicious and Lies.timely acquiescence in measures indispensable forrepairing the defects occasioned by the inroads oftime16 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. I.1786. time on its institutions, or for remedying the evilswhich experience has shown to exist, in the workingof any given system.Mr. Pitt, both before and after he became acabinet minister, brought forward the question ofParliamentary Reform . The last occasion shortlyfollowed the decision on the India Question. Hethen declared that his object was to introduce amoderate reform, to remedy defects which threatenedto destroy the most beautiful fabric of governmentin the world. He stated, that ** theHouse of Commons itself had been base enoughto feed the influence that fed its members, andhe regretted to perceive a band of gentlemenpresenting a hostile phalanx, who with a sort ofsuperstitious awe revered the constitution so muchas to be fearful of touching even its defects." —The Minister had himself adduced, in the progressof the very measure he had just carried throughParliament, one of the strongest proofs of thenecessity for reform, viz. the existence of individualsof rank drawing large incomes from thecountry from mere sinecure offices. His propositionswere nevertheless rejected, and we havelived to see the representative system far moreextensively reformed than was proposed in 1785 ;and by some persons it is even considered to havebeen profusely reformed. The prudent coursepursued by the East-india Company secured tothem the possession of their exclusive commercialprivileges.Chap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 17privileges, and their regulated political functions nse. ifor the further period of half a century.The newly constituted Board evinced a deter t^f^'oar^of \mention to become an efficient and responsible Control w^o ^^ act up to their ^instrument. The Commissioners immediately powers. |called upon the Court of Directors to furnish an jaccount of all the establishments in India, and of caiifbrac- \- . .11 1 • i ^ i 1 counts and ithe increase there, with the authority lor the same, statement of |They particularly adverted to the revenue depart ^^ "" " '"^" ^' jments, and to the charge incurred in securing the \collections of revenue, and stated that they made |these requisitions under a sense of the trust }reposed in them by Parliament, cf a regard for \the public weal, and for the good government of iIndia. The interests of individuals, with respect Ito their incomes, demanded a full examination 1into the propriety of the retrenchments that had \been proposed, as well as whether others couldbe properly and fairly made. In alluding to the ^military, the Board observed, ** With regard to a 1soldier, the first principle is to take care that henever have just cause of complaint; if he be not 1warranted in a grievance, he is easily restrained ; jbut the case is very different when originating in iinjustice." ]They called for a statement of the Committees jappointed by the Court of Directors, the respecttime duties of such Committees, and the number \of the officers on the Home establishment, with a Istatement of the duties which they had to perform. ^VOL. II. c As :18 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.1786. As respected India, the instructions to the gal Government enforced a system of economyabroad. ^^^ Revision of establishments, as recognised bythe Act. The whole of the official arrangementswere left to the Government, whose conduct inthe reductions already introduced, as announcedin their letter to the Court of January 1785, werefully approved. An adequate military establishmentwas to be maintained. To promote the successof military operations, the corps at the threepresidencies of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay,were to be so formed as to enable them to takethe field at the shortest notice ; and, to act witheffect whenever they might happen to be united,one uniform system was to be introduced. Thecorps of every denomination at each of the presidencieswere to be of the same strength in pointof officers, non-commissioned officers, and privates; the number and strength of the respectiveregiments and species of force were to be likewisefixed, from which no deviation was to bemade without express orders from home.The civil officers of the Government might havebeen reduced to a very small number, had theexigency alone determined the list of covenantedservants. It consisted of no less than 252 members,many of them the sons of the first familiesin the kingdom of Great Britain, and every oneaspiring to the rapid acquisition of lacs, and toreturn to pass the prime of their lives at home, asmultitudesChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 19multitudes had done before them. *' The revenue i786.of the country," it was observed, *' v^ould not sufficefor such boundless pretensions, nor were thosepretensions compatible with the interests of thenation, or those of the Company, which mightsuffer as certain ruin from the effects of privatecompetition and the claims of patronage, as fromthe more dreaded calamities of war, or the otherordinary causes which lead to the decline of dominion.In one word, we enjoin you to allowno such embarrassing reflection to occupy yourthoughts on the consideration of your establishments.Your sole rule is to be, the exigency ofthe public service, and you are not to continueupon the establishment of any one departmentany one officer, or any one salary, not warrantedby the real exigency of the service." The principleof gradation, where not absolutely prejudicialto the public service, was to be observed. Asmany duties could be performed by monthlywriters equally well, and at infinitely less expense,than by European servants, it was desiredthat if such were the foundation of the number ofmonthly writers then in employment, the principleshould be acted upon. It will be perceivedno half measures were contemplated by the foregoingorders, and that the newly constituted authoritiesdetermined to follow the principles recognisedby Parliament, for relieving the revenues ofIndia from all unnecessary charges.c 2 Toin India.20 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.1786. To simplify the mode of carrying on the publicJuWic^B^dl business, and to avoid the practice of sendinghome despatches of an interminable length, andeach letter or despatch containing various heads,certain Boards were to be formed, under the denominationof —1. The Board of Council.2. A Military Board.3. A Board of Revenue.4. A Board of Trade.The first to comprise in its correspondence thematters coming under the provision of the Boardof Control, as well as all political matters.The Military Board was to possess no power orauthority exclusive of and independent of thesupreme civil government. It was in all respectsto act under the Government, and through themedium of their authority.The Board of Revenue was formed for the purposeof superintending, under the orders of theGovernment, that branch of the public servicedesignated by its appointment. Various planshad been ineffectually devised, during the precedingfifteen years, for the collection of the revenues.The new Board was to reside at Calcutta, and toconsist of one of the junior members of council,without any addition to his salary, and fourother of the most intelligent of the Company'sservants, to whom the whole administration, settlement,and collection of every branch of therevenueChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 21revenue was to be confided. It was to possess no nse.power to issue money, and expectation was expressedthat the extent of charge on account ofthe revenue department, would be confined withinseventy-two lacs, or about £700,000 to £800,000per annum.As an essential part of the conduct of that Boardwould be connected with a steady adherence tojust and uniform principles in its transactionswith the zemindars and other landholders, theHome authorities apprized the Government thatthey had bestowed much time with the view ofintroducing a final settlement. Despatches fromthe Court to the Governments abroad were infuture to be addressed in thePublic,Secret,Military,Revenue, andCommercialdepartments ; the same principle being observedin India when writing home.In addition to a general revision of establish Declarationments, the Act of 1784 had peculiar reference to quests or wars,1 • r* n x^ J . of ambition.the repression of all attempts at conquest, orwars of ambition and aggrandisement, it beingdeclared by the Act that '' to pursue schemes ofconquest, and extension of dominion in India, aremeasures repugnant to the wish, the honour, andthe policy of the nation." In connexion with thisdeclaration22 RISE-and PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.I.i784w declaration is the singular fact, that with the exceptionof the cessions agreed to by the Mogulin 1764, of the country of Ghazeepore, and therest of the zemindar of Blunt Sing, whichwas stipulated for on the part of the Council, todefray the expenses of the war caused by the advanceof the Mogul and the vizier, Shuja Dowlas,all the Company's territorial possessions acquiredup to 1784, including the Denny in 1765, withPalette and Bassein, had been effected by amicablegrant or cession. Not a began* of land hadbeen gained by conquest during the governmentof Mr. Hastings.Carnatic debts. To promote a Settlement with the Nabob of theCarnatic, a letter was addressed to his highnessin December 1784, expressive of the Court's concernat the difference that had arisen between hishighness and Lord Macartney. In proof of the highesteem in which the Court of Directors held hislordship, they acquainted his highness that theyhad re-appointed him to the government of Madras.He was then apprised of the establishment ofthe Board of Control, under the authority of anAct of Parliament, by which appointment all thetransactions of the Court became immediatelyconnected with the executive authorities andgovernment of the British nation ; and that, consequently,the present, and every other communicationthe Court might henceforth address tohisThe third of an acre.Chap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 23his highness, would be with the knowledge and i784.concurrence of the Board of Control, whose sentimentsthe Court stated they spoke jointly withtheir own; and that, consequently, the honour,not only of the Company, but the faith of theBritish nation, was pledged to preserve inviolateevery stipulation or agreement that should takeplace between the Company and his highness.He was then advised, that the same solemn acthad made provision for settling upon a permanentfoundation the rights and pretensions of his highness,and those of the Rajah of Tanjore, whichwere to be ascertained and settled upon the termsand stipulations of the treaty of 1762. The restitutionof the assignment of the revenues of theCarnatic made in 1781, was then adverted to inthe following terms: '' With respect to the assignmentyour highness was pleased to make of therevenues of your country in December 1781, weconsider that transaction as a proof of your highnessbeing impressed with the necessity of thedefence of the Carnatic ; but having by the cessionof the assignment, manifested to your highness,and to all India, how little we wished to encroachon the rights or possessions of the native princes,it is just we take effectual care to guard our own.By the peculiar relation which the BritishGovernment and possessions in the Carnatic bearto those of your highness and the Rajah of Tanjore,as well as by several specific agreements,the24 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. I.i784v the sword for the general defence of that countryis placed in our hands, and no consideration willinduce us for a moment to surrender it. Towardsits support in peace and defence in war, it isreasonable that country should contribute to itsprotection. The provisional assignment of certaindistricts is therefore required, only to be enteredupon in the event of your highness, or yourdescendants, not paying the monthly contributionto be agreed upon, regularly."The necessary orders to the Government ofMadras were at the same time forwarded, formaking restitution of the assignment. Againstthe measure for settling the Nabob's debts, asproposed by the Board, the Directors made anearnest but ineffectual remonstrance. The subjectwas also taken up in Parliament. The billof 1783 had a clause in it providing for theexamination of the debts of the Nabob. The Actof 1784 declared the expediency of sending outorders for completing the investigation, and dischargingthe debts. Their character was morethan questionable — their amount enormous. Itwas remarked, that what corrupt men in thefond imagination of a sanguine avarice had notthe confidence to propose, they found a ministerof England hardy enough to undertake for them.Touched with pity for bribery, so long tormentedwith a fruitless itching of its palms, his bowelsyearned for usury that had long missed the harvestofChap. I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 25of its returning months : and by the proposed 1784*.mode of settling the claims of extortion, thepublic and private debts were made to play intoeach other's hands — a game of utter perdition tothe unhappy natives of India. At the expirationof half a century from this interference, a finaladjudication has been made under the Carnaticcommission, appointed by deed in 1805 by Parliamentarysanction ; the result being the admissionof only two millions, out of claims amountingto thirty-two millions sterling !Such is an outline of the most important measuresconnected with the introduction of what isgenerally termed the India system ; the institutionof the Board of Commissions, the remodellingof the Supreme Government, the formation of thenew governments of Madras and Bombay, therevision of the Indian establishments, and thearrangements relating to the Nabob of the Carnaticand the Rajah of Tanjore. Those connectedwith the revenue and judicial systems will benoticed on the appointment of a Governor-generalunder the provisions of the Acts of 1784 and 1786.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IL1785.Bengal.Proceedingsafter retirementof Mr. Hastings.CHAPTER II.To preserve a correct chain of events connectedwith the measures of the Supreme Government, itis now necessary to revert to those which followedthe succession of Mr. Macpherson to the office ofGovernor-general, on the retirement of Mr. Hastings.Ambition ofMadajee Scin-dial.Overture fromthe Seeks.The Shazada remained at Lucknow. Mr.Anderson, whose meritorious conduct in concludingthe peace with the Mahrattass had receivedthe unanimous thanks of the General Court, wasappointed Resident with the Mogul, then at thecamp of Madajee Scindiah, to whom Agra hadsurrendered on the 27th of March. That chieftainproceeded with the Mogul on his way toDelhi, but stopped at Mutra for the purpose ofreconnoitring the fortress of Allyghur, which hefound strongly fortified, and victualled for twelvemonths.At this period Mr. Anderson apprized theGovernment that a person in the character of amerchant had come to his moolavee, and afteroffering to sell him some cloths, represented thatheChaf.II.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 27he had some jewels to show him in private. On i'^^^-their retiring for the purpose, he discovered himselfto be a confidential servant of Dooljah Sing,the Seik chieftain, who had lately arrived in thecamp. He stated that his master was desirous offorming a friendship and connexion with theEnglish, as he entertained great apprehensions ofthe Mahrattass, and that a body of thirty thousandSeiks had arrived between Panniput and Delhi.The part which Madajee Scindiah had taken inpromoting a peace between the British Governmentand the Mahrattass in 1782,* and his subsequentappointment as deputy to the Pasha, inthe high office of Vakeel-ul-mulluk, had raised hispretensions in the eyes of the native chiefs, andled him not only to expostulate against the appointmentof a British Resident with the Pasha, butto observe such a bearing towards Mr. Andersonas induced that gentleman to prepare for quittingthe Mahratta camp : a resolution which he onlyconsented to abandon on the Mahratta chief disavowingthe most distant idea of treating himuncourteous, Scindiah at the same time declaring,*aby my sword I have no intention of war."Mr. Malet,t of the Bombay civil service, was Mr. Maietap-selected by the Supreme Government for the office dens atPoonah.of Resident atPoonah. He received instructions torepair to Calcutta for the purpose of conferring ontheVide vol. i. page 621.f Afterwards Sir Charles Malett, Bart. |28 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.1785. the general state of Mahratta politics. InfluencedBengal. i^y ^ desire to extend the geographical knowledgeof Hindostan already possessed by the Company,he proceeded by the route of Oojeen, a tract thenunknown to European travellers, where he arrivedon the 10th of April, having left Bombay on the27th of January preceding, without encounteringany difficulty or meeting with the slightest impelOojeen. dicit : a progress, however, which would beconsidered somewhat tedious at the present day,for a distance of 479 miles. He described Oojeenas erroneously laid down by Kennel. After givingan account of the fort of Bheroodghur, abouttwo miles distant from Oojeen, he proceeded amile and a-half further, where he discovered a veryAncient water large gloomy edifice of peculiar Strength, and stillin very good repair, erected on an artificial island,formed for the purpose by a diversion of the streamof the Lesser, and connected with the westernbank by abridge of sixteen arches. In the westernstream, which he considered to be an artificialone were a surprising multitude of various apartments,constructed on a level with the water, andin the midst of it, the water being conveyed roundthem in various channels into reservoirs contrivedfor its reception, whence it was conveyed by properinlets from the bed of the river, into which itwas again discharged by little artificial cascades.It was stated to have been built by Sultan Nasic-ul-deen-Gighee, who ascended the throne of Mai wainChap. II.]BRITISH POWER IN INDIA.in the year of the Hijrah 905, and reigned elevenyears. He was represented as cruel and oppressive; he had contracted an intolerable heat inhis habit by eating fixed quicksilver, and found somuch relief within these watery abodes from theircoolness, that he spent the whole of his time there,where he also carried on the business of hisgovernment. The works were stated to be threehundred years old.In addition to this relation, which from the circumstanceof its being the first European who hadtaken the route, is a sufficient matter of interestto warrant notice, the table which Mr. Malettformed for giving a description of the country hepassed through, offers an useful suggestion to other1785.Bengal.regionIS.Date.From what place.Coss.Nature of Road.Whose Territory.Quality,Place.AccordnotationTreatment.Remarks.''Under these several heads he entered his diary,which has been placed upon record.Mr. Anderson, writing to the Council* at Calcutta Mr. Andersonfrom Allahabad, described the Company's armies cinaTat A^iia-as having for a series of years crossed and re- ^'^^^^"crossed a canal cut from the Jumna, which includes8th May 1783.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. II.1785.BkmoaiTippoo Sultan'scrueltyto Mahrattass.eludes the town and fortress of Allahabad, withoutits being known that such a communicationexisted. ** During the last few days I was at thatquarter, I casually lit, to my utter astonishment,upon this canal, which Shujah Dowlas caused tobe excavated in 1764, either to obstruct the enterprisesof the approaching English, or to impedethe invasion of the Abdallees, of both of whichhe was then apprehensive. Of all the strongholdsI have met with in India, Allahabad appears tobe the best calculated for a provisionary magazine,for a military station for our frontier troops, andfor their retreat in case of any untoward event.Possessing this, our forces would become littleliable to check or repulse."It appeared by a report from Madajee Scin-dial, that a rupture was expected between Tippooand the Mahrattass. Tippoo had behaved in amost oppressive and insulting manner, forciblyconverting fifty thousand Hindoos in the Mahrattaterritory, and had murdered two thousand Brahminsof a particular caste, many of whom weresubjects of the Mahratta Government, whilst manyothers had put themselves to death to escape hisvengeance. Scindiah referred to the treaty ofSalbey,t under which he stated that he was sureof the co-operation of the Nizam against Tippoo.Mr. Malett reached the camp of Scindiah, viaAgra,♦ Vide vol. i. page 621.t Bengal Consultations, May 1785.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 31 ]Agra, on the 17th May, where he met Mr. An i785. \person with two chiefs and a large party of Madam ^[n jil^.f ^'see's cavalry. On the 20th, the ceremonial being ^^™p- isettled, he paid his formal visit to Scindiah, who ^manifested an indisposition to receive him in the ^character of Resident at Poonahh. ?The Mahratta chief was connected with the Com- Mahrattaany by a double tie : first as a distinct ally by a pof[,^c^"^ \separate treaty ; and next, as a member of the 5Mahratta empire, and as such was included in the ]general alliance with that state. It was, there .]fore, deemed most extraordinary that he should !wish to confine all communication with Poonahh jthrough himself. If as a member of the Mahratta 1empire, and in that character as mediator of thepeace, he meant to engross the whole of the Eng- jwish negotiations at eight hundred miles from the \scene of business, it was felt to be absurd ; ex helusive of the impossibility of submitting to dicta jtion by a member of the Mahratta government, \or of encountering his prejudices, passions, and \jealousies, and numberless intrigues ; besides pamperingthe ambition, and promoting the grandeur jof a chieftain, already too powerful. jThe character of prime minister to the Rajah |of the Deccan and the King of Hindostan, rested jwith the members of the Mahratta state, under \which strange junction of power was united the {absolute and executive management of the Mogul Iand Mahratta empires. From the force of the Ione, ;iRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. II.1785.Bengal.1785.Madras.Nabob of theCarnatic.Lord Macart-ney resigns.one, and the claims of the other, every thingwas to be apprehended by the Company and theirallies. This extraordinary concentration of powerand title not only laid the Company's own possessionsopen to vexatious demands, or absolute resumptionat a convenient season, by the Mogul,but the safety of their allies rested on the will andpower of the Mahrattass, who from the rapaciousturn of their politics were not likely to be slow intheir operations, especially under such a chief asScindiah, who, in his new character of ,would partake of the largest benefitderived by any new acquisition. Moreover, theintercourse between Poonahh and Bombay, andtheir dependencies, was so frequent, and the causesof complaint and demands for reparation were sonumerous, that individuals were frequently subjectedto great loss, and the Company's flag todiscredit, through the want of proper and authoritativerepresentations. Upon these grounds, itwas determined to maintain a resident at Poonahh.The letter addressed by the Directors to theNabob of the Carnatic, in December 1784, hasbeen noticed.* The instructions to the MadrasGovernment for the surrender of the assignmentto the Nabob reached that presidency in June,in which month Lord Macartney wrote to theCourt, that his health had been so affected by repeatedattacks of the gout, as to determine him toproceed♦ Vide page 22,Chapel] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 33proceed to Europe, that he had been strengthened nss.in that determination by the Court's orders, and ^^^'^^^by the appointment of Mr. Holland as his successor,and that he could be no party to carry into effectthe instructions for the restoration, which he feltto be impolitic and unwise.The Madras Council intimated to the Court,that they had made it a particular request to LordMacartney that he would proceed to Bengal, forthe purpose of representing that Soucar* securitycould never be obtained from the Nabob for thefulfilment of his engagements. The new demandson his revenue greatly exceeding his receipts.The pleasure of the Court was, however, madeknown by Lord Macartney to the Nabob, with anexpression of their confidence in his highness'swisdom and honour for the performance of thosesolemn engagements which were to take place inconsequenceof the surrender of the assignment.His lordship took the opportunity to offer hiswishes for the Nabob's prosperity, and for ahappy continuance of the blessings he had so longenjoyed under the powerful protection of theCompany and of the English nation.Lord Macartney was impressed with an idea thatthe Court's orders implied a want of confidence inhim; he, nevertheless, consented to meet the wishesof the Council, and proceed to Bengal in his waytoMerchant, banker, or money-lender.VOL. 11. D34 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.J785. to England, to endeavour, by a personal representNation of the state of affairs at Madras, to drawsuch a decided and effectual support from theSupreme Government, as should be adequate tothe relief of its embarrassments. His lordshipstated, ** This offer proceeds solely from a wishto employ my services in any v^^ay that may beacceptable or useful, to the very last moment ofmy stay in India. I have no other concern whichcould induce me to visit Bengal, and particularlyat this unhealthy season of the year ; but if theBoard should be of opinion otherwise, I shallproceed in the Glutton, now under despatch forEngland"*The Nabob addressed the Bengal Governmentin the following terms, on receiving the intelligenceregarding the assignment : —** In what words shall I declare my acknowledgmentsto my friends for this mark of their justice,and how shall I express the obligations Iam under to the Governor-general Hastings, toyou, and to the rest of the Council in Bengal."Lord Macart- Lord Macartucy embarked in the Greyhoundgal. sloop of war for Calcutta, where he arrived inJune, being received with every mark of honourby the Governor-general, to whom he repeated hisconviction of the injurious tendency of the surrenderof the assignment. The Bengal Council, afterthe maturest deliberation, and notwithstanding thegreat♦ Madras Communications, 27th Maw 1785.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 35 tgreat force of the arguments urged by his lordship, nso. ifelt that they could not, consistently with the ad ^^^«^''- jvices from home and a proper discharge of their jduty, suspend the execution of the Court's orders. jPreliminary articles of agreement were accord Iingle entered into between the Nabob and the ]Government, at the head of which was Mr. David 1son, who succeeded Lord Macartney. \The Nabob was to pay on account of the cur irent charges, four lacs of pagodas per annum ; and ltwelve lacs on account of his debts to the Com- \any and private creditors. Certain districts were igiven as security for the payment, in failure whereof jthe Company might possess themselves of such ;districts.* ]During Lord Macartney's stay in Bengal, a ]letter from the Court of Directors | had been ]received at Madras and forwarded to Calcutta, ]where it arrived on the 1st of August ; on the 3d ofwhich month the Governor general received a idespatch from the Court, advising the Supreme iGovernment that Mr. Hastings having in his letter Declines office. of Governorsthe 20th March 1783 :j: signified his desire that general. ^a successor should be nominated, they had ap ^pointed Lord Macartney to succeed as governor ■]general. Having taken into consideration the long,faithful, and able services of Mr. Hastings, the ;Court unanimously resolved that he be permitted jto jPrinted Treaties, page 397. f lath March 1785. ]J Vide vol, i. page 644. id2 iI36 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Ghap.II.1785 to resign the government of Bengal. They did notfix any particular day for his quitting the government,but directed that he should take the firstconvenient opportunity in the ensuing season, commencingin October, to return to Europe. Instructionshad been sent to Lord Macartney to holdhimself in readiness to proceed to Bengal immediatelyafter Mr. Hastings' departure. The seniormember of the Supreme Council was to lose notime in conveying to Lord Macartney the earliestintimation of that event.The Court had not anticipated that the departureof Mr. Hastings would have taken place, anevent which was announced in his letter of January.*Mr. Macpherson, as senior councillor, hadalready succeeded.A certified copy of the Court's letter was accordinglytransmitted to Lord Macartney by the SupremeGovernment. His lordship did not acknowledgeits receipt until the 13th August, after hehad embarked : when he addressed to the Governmentthe following reply : —** So distinguished a mark of honour conferredupon me by the Court of Directors, being entirelyspontaneous, without any solicitation from me ormy friends, I must ever set a high value upon ; butI have many reasons, which, I flatter myself, willbe satisfactory to the Court, why I wish at presentto decline entering upon this government.Very♦ Fide vol. i. page 088.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 37Very early after my arrival, I stated, that were I 1785. \appointed, it was not my intention to remain in ^India. My reasons were then strong, they are inow stronger. ]On board the Swallow, \'' 13th August 1785." I1786.Lord Macartney arrived in London on the 9th Lord Macart- :•^ 1 • 1 "^y arrives inof January 1786, and on the folio wig day he England. \. T%/r • 1 Thanked andreceived a communication from Major-general granted opensr\ ^ ' ^ n ••111 ^^•^"' Duel JStuart,* with extracts from a petition he had pre with General iseated to the King, in which he complained *' of "*^' jthe falsehood and injustice of Lord Macartney." 1His lordship replied on the 11th, intimating that 1** if General Stuart had any drift not expressed, he Iis desired to make it known, in direct terms, through 1any gentleman by whom he may choose to convey \it to Lord Macartney, who will take no notice of |communications in any other manner, from Gene \ral Stuart." On the 12th, General Stuart stated, 1the drift of his original note was to remind Lord iMacartney of the atrocious injuries and injustice !done to him ; that he was happy to find the cones \quinces had occurred to his lordship, and that \he would be ready to meet them ; and requestedthat, in the interval, this settled conclusion mightremain secret. \His lordship's services, and his honourable conduct,JThe proceedings of that officer, and the measures of the \Madras Government in consequence, will be found in vol. i. ipages 632 to 638.38 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.1786. duct, in giving in a statement of the fortune he hadacquired during his residence in India, althoughnot required by the Act, received the marked approbationof the Court of Proprietors, who passeda Resolution on the 12th April 1786, declaratoryof his lordship's having, upon all occasions, manifestedthe greatest zeal in support of the interests ofthe Company ; and that he faithfully dischargedhis duty as governor of Madras, more especially byhis adhering strictly to his covenants and engagementswith the Company, in declining to acceptany present from the country powers, or from anyperson whatever in India. In order to mark thefullest approbation of such upright and disinterestedconduct, the Company granted his lordshipan annuity of £1,500.It was not until the 27th May that Lord Ma-partnerheard further from General Stuart. Inthe evening of that day, on his lordship's returnfrom the Opera, he found a note from ColonelGordon, wishing to see him when convenient.His lordship waited on that officer the followingday, at twelve, when a packet was delivered to himfrom General Stuart, containing ** A statement offacts." His lordship intimated that he wouldmeet the General with great alacrity, but wishedto have a few days to settle some private concerns.On the 8th June a meeting took place near Kingston.His lordship and General Stuart firedtogether. The former was attended by ColonelFu liar ton.Chap II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 39Fullerton, the latter by Colonel Gordon ; accom- 1786.panted by Messrs. Hunter and Home, the celebratedsurgeons. The seconds observed that LordMacartney was wounded : General Stuart said,** this is not satisfaction," and asked if his lordshipcould not fire. Lord Macartney replied, he wouldtry with pleasure, and urged Colonel Fullerton toproceed. The affair was, however, happily terminated,in this stage of the proceeding. It was thesecond in which his lordship had been involved,the former having taken place at Madras, withMr. Sadler, a member of council, on which occasionLord Macartney was also wounded. Mr. Macphersonhad likewise been called out by MajorBrown, on the Bengal establishment, for someoffence taken to Mr. Macpherson's proceedings,in his station as governor-general.The frequency of these events, induced the DirectorsCA. rt' J. 2. ' 1 • solution Iourtoi Directors to pass an unanimous resolution, duelling.reprobating the practice, and determining to dismissfrom the Company's service every party whoshould presume to make any personal call uponmembers of the Government, or other officers, onaccount of matters arising out of the discharge oftheir official duties.resolutionagainst1785-86.Madajee Scindiah, in the month of July, Bengal.made a proposal for an alliance between the Peish- vfews'ag^^^^^^wa, the Nizam, and the Company, against Tippoo : j'^'p^^" ''■but the Supreme Government, under the resolutioni■ '440 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Ciiaf. II.1785. tion contained in the new Act, declined to take anypart. Hostilities ensued, in which the Mahrattasswere entirely defeated. Mr. Malett was deputedto the Poonahh durbar, and a treaty was concludedbetween Scindiah and the Seiks, under which thelatter were to supply five thousand horse, for whicha jaghire was conferred upon them, valued at tenlacs.Scindiah was recalled by the Peishwa to Poonahh,but he remained, notwithstanding this summons,at Allyghur, in the midst of great difficulties, andinvolved with the Raja of Jeypore ; whilst Tippoolaid siege to Merits, in the province of Bejapoor,on the banks of the Krishna ; which place had beenthe capital of different Mahratta chieftains. surrendered to Scindiah at the commencementof 1786, when the government were constrainedto make a conditional promise of aid tothe Mahrattass, against Tippoo, but avoided becomingparties to a treaty formed between themand the Nizam, in the month of June.Prince of Priucc of Wales' Island, in the Straits of Malacca,was taken possession of during Mr. Macpherson'sadministration. The necessity of havinga port where British ships might meet the easternmerchants, and a windward station for refreshmentand the repair of the King's ships as well asthose of the Company, were the principal reasonswith the Government in obtaining that settlement,through Capt. Light.RawsonChap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 41Rawson Hart Boddam, Esq. was appointed, 1785-86.by the Court, governor of Bombay, with Messrs.Sparkles and Church as members of council, andBrigadier Nelson was nominated commander-in-chiefat that presidency.In connexion with Bengal, the Directors ap Oude.proved of the resolution of the Supreme Governmentto withdraw the Residency from Lucknow,and to accept the offer of the Vizier and his ministerto give the security of banks of knowncredit and responsibility, for the payment of thebalances due to the Company, and for the currentkiss. They sanctioned the continuance of anaccountant or receiver at Lucknow, so long asany of the Company's troops should remain in theVizier's dominions ; his business was to be simply,keeping the accounts between the Nabob and theCompany, receiving the stipulated subsidy, andappropriating it under the orders of the Government.The Supreme Government were to exercisetheir own discretion in appointing residents at therespective courts of the Nizam, Madam ee Scindiah,and other chiefs.In consequence of the reductions in the civilservice, the Court had refrained from appointingand sending out writers to the several presidenciessince 1782 : and under the 40th and 41st clausesof the Act of 1784, they were precluded fromappointing any additional number until accountshad been received from Bengal. They felt that theeffects42 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II.1785-86. effects would be very mortifying to the service,but the altered circumstances of the Companyrequired the strictest economy, and they trustedthat openings would gradually occur for theiremployment. It was anticipated that the savingswould effect the immediate discharge of arrears tothe army, to which point all the means were firstto be directed ; and the Court took the opportunityto declare it to be a leading principle of the Company'sgovernment, that the pay of the soldierought never to be in arrear; while there was arupee in the treasury, he was to be paid ; everyother article of expenditure being postponed tothat consideration.Regulations were made for the relief of invalidednative officers and sepoys, by allotting tothem lands to cultivate, agreeably to their respectiveranks, within the districts under Boglepore.By this measure the population would be increased,and a considerable portion of the extensivedistricts brought into cultivation, and thusprovide means for their maintenance.*In alluding to a proposition which had beenmade by the Nizam for a surrender to him of theCarnatic, the Home authorities expressed theirfull approbation of the decided negative given toso monstrous an idea, the fundamental principleupon which it was desired to rest the Company'sgovernment, being the preservation of treatiesinviolate.letter to Bengal, April 1785.Chap. II.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 43inviolate. While the Government continued inva- 1785-86.riably to act upon that principle, they felt warrantedto insist on holding every right to whichthe Company were entitled by treaty. Theyviewed Scindiah's conduct as confirming the opinion,that it was wise to refrain from all unnecessaryinterference in the contentions of the Indianpowers, so long as they left the Company andtheir allies in quiet possession of their own territories.The Government were to be pacific, butcareful observers of the movements of otherpowers, and never without absolute necessity totake part in their differences. The determinationof Government to appoint a resident at the courtof Poonahh was approved, as a point that could notbe surrendered without compromising their dignityand importance in the eyes of the nativepowers. With regard to the desire expressed byScandal for the return of the Shazada to hisfather's dominions, the Court had no wish, in thedistracted state of the Mogul empire, that theyoung prince should be induced to withdraw himselffrom their protection ; neither could they givethe least encouragement to any idea of engagingin warlike enterprizes, for the purpose of re-establishingthe ancient dignity of that empire ; andalthough it might be attended with some charge,the expense would be fully compensated by theprince being^afe, and under the protection of theCompany.*A highLetter to Bengal. September 1785.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. II.1785.86.Conduct ofBengal Governmentapprovedinreductions.Thanks votedto Mr. Macpherson.A high sense was entertained of the zeal of theGovernment, as shown in the measures of reductionwhich they had adopted, and the mannerin which the servants in general had met thecircumstances of the case. A hope was expressedthat, with minds liberally framed and honourablydisposed, the servants, who admitted that therewere great abuses, would ultimately have no causeto regret the temporary interference with theirprospects.The Court then referred to further measuresin contemplation under the Acts of 1784 and 1786,and observed that the latter conferred large andincreased powers upon the Governor-general.The Court's unanimous thanks were voted toJohn Macpherson Esq. for his meritorious conductduring the time he had presided in the SupremeGovernment, and to the other members of theCouncil.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 45CHAPTER III.Th e nobleman selected for the purpose of carry 1786-87.ing into effect the important measures contemplated iis%)pdntld 'in the Act of 1784, and for assuming the offices of geneTarandgovernor-general and commander-in-chief, under i^!ch?ef"^^'^"the provisions of the Act of 1786, was Earl cornwallis.His rank and birth were felt to be pledgesfor his good conduct and personal honour ; hisindependent fortune was a guarantee against itsneeding repair from the spoils of the natives. Thetwo offices could be united in his person, a pointstrongly recommended by Lord Macartney ; andhis integrity, prudence, valour, patriotism, andeconomy, were qualifications that would enablehim to sustain with the greatest possible advantagethe highest appointment in India.As the arrangement affected the interest of tension toGeneral SloperGeneral Sloper, who had been nominated com-mander-in-chief, the expense of which officerwould now be saved, the Court resolved, in revokingthat nomination, to grant him an annuity of£1,500, and to defray the expense of his passage toEurope.LordRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1786-87.Lord Cornwallisarrives atCalcutta.Lord Cornwallis touched at Madras on his outwardvoyage, and landed at Calcutta on the 12thSeptember. A meeting of the Council was immediatelyheld, at which he took the usual oathsand assumed charge of the Government. On the13th of November his lordship addressed theCourt. He first adverted to the financial state ofaffairs, and represented that the Company's paperwas at a discount that could only be reduced bya strict adherence to their engagements with thepublic, and by as early a discharge of old obligationsas possible. He called on the RevenueBoard to account for the extraordinary discrepancybetween the estimated and actual receipts. Theformer having been stated at 92 lacs 59,000 rupees,whereas the receipt into the khalsa was expectedto be only 66 lacs 12,000 rupees. The debt was6 crore 24 lacs, at 8f per cent. He then referredto the unsatisfactory state of the Court of Appeal,which had in fact become quite inefficient, and tohis determination to hold regular meetings of theGovernor-general in Council, in that capacity.In a second letter, written after another month'sinvestigation into the affairs of the Governmentand their financial resources, his Lordship repeatedthat they would call for primary attention. Hefelt it needless to enlarge upon the discernmentwhich the Directors must possess, and of whichthey daily experienced the effects, that while theunavoidable expenses of the establishments, theinterestChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 47 ]interest due upon the debts, and the demand from 1786-87.the other presidencies, absorbed the produce of the \revenue, considerable investment could only be ^^made by fresh issues of paper, by which mode the ]evil might be protracted, but would only be ulti- ]lately increased. It exhibited a delusive appear 'once of wealth which could not be supported, and 'lby a temporary accommodation entailed permianwent distresses. Such were the sound views which }his lordship expressed in those comparatively ^early days of Indian commercial dealings. He ]assured the Court that they might depend upon ^the strictest attention to rigid economy in all publicdisbursements, and in obtaining the different iarticles of supply required for the public service ; Ibut he could not flatter them with any expectedtion of drawing new resources by the further ]retrenchment of salaries in establishments. It didnot appear that the Company could look for relief |in India. Foreigners maintained a very successful \commercial competition against the Company in '■the aurungs, where they were sovereigns, to the \prejudice of the commerce and the revenues; it ]therefore behoved the Company to facilitate the imeans of remittance. ]Many of the principal native chiefs connected Native chiefs iwith the Government desired to come in person to 7uv^. ^ * ^pay their respects to the Governor-general. The \Vizier had sent his minister, Hyderr Beg Khan \upon whom his lordship particularly pressed the Jimportance43 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1786-87. importance of attending to the state of the financesin Oude, and also to the courts of justice. MahomedRea Cawn, the Nabob Mobarek-ul-Dowlah, the Shazada, each sought a personalinterview ; but he felt it impossible to show theoutward ceremonials which ** were considered tobe due to the princes of the house of Timor."Supplies and The Govcmor- general resolved that all suppliesshould in future be made by contract, instead ofby agencies. He described the European recruitsas dreadful in character and low in standard,the natives were far better — but a wavering dispositionwas manifested by some portion of them.Decennial fois lordship found it necessary to postpone tillsettlement ^ ^ j i lpostponed. the following year the decennial settlement.Notwithstanding the uncommon abilities and experienceof Mr. Shore, the time was too shortto admit of instituting the additional enquiries,whilst the differences between the King's andCompany's troops demanded his earliest attention,likewise abuses in the silk department, whichcalled for some severe examples.The Nizam, the Vizier of Oude, and the Nabobof the Carnatic, were the chief native states withwhom his lordship had political negotiations, untilthe rupture with Tippoo.Notwithstanding the agreement on the surrenderof the assignment to the Nabob, in June 1785,*a treaty was entered into with his highness bySir Archibald Campbell in February 1787, forsettlingChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 49 |settling an arrangement for the future defence of 1786-87. ^the Carnatic* The Nabob was to contribute nine jlacs of pagodas annually towards the peace establishment,beyond which the Company were toprovide what might be needed. In the event of |war, the Company were to charge themselves ]with the direction, order, and conduct of the Car jnati, the Nabob making the collections ; and Iparties were to be nominated by his highness to !inspect the accounts kept by the Company of ]the receipts and payments. The same power was ]to be exercised by the Company with reference ]to the receipts by the Nabob : four-fifths thereof 1being applied to the military expenses. Other ']ulterior arrangements were also prescribed in the ltreaty. Thus the whole direction and defence of \the Carnatic, in the event of war, was devolved 1upon the Company, and all the embarrassments ;anticipated from conflicting councils and divided ;forces were obviated. iA treaty of a similar effect, only differing in theamount of the sums to be paid by the rajah of iTanjore, Ameer Sing, was entered into with his 1highness, by Sir Archibald Campbell.The Governor-general's attention had been ode. ^earnestly directed, to bring to a satisfactory terms lnation the Company's political relations with the \Vizier of Oude. He had declared to Hyderr Beg |Khan, ]Vide page 33. jVOL. II. E i50 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.i787-8a Khan, as minister, the principles upon which ithiN.jAi ^qq1(J be mutually expedient to continue thefriendly connexion between the Vizier and theCompany. The negotiations terminated in a treatywith AusufF-ul-Dowlah on the 21st of July.The first formal communication was from theGovernor-general to the Nabob Vizier, on the 15thof April, in which, after reference to the treatywith Shujah Dowlah, Lord Cornwallis stated :** As I consider the Company's territories andthose of your Excellency as the same, the protectionof your Excellency's dominions is absolutelynecessary, as from its situation the boundary ofthe whole is more exposed to foreign attacks.This protection cannot be afforded in a propermanner without the aid of the Company's troops.With respect to the troops stationed at Putty Ghur,which had been withdrawn, as stipulated in thetreaty of Chunar of 1781, I advise that they shallnot be recalled, but continued.'* Your Excellency must be sensible that thereis no comparison between the troops of the Companyand those in your Excellency's service, andthat without the assistance of the former, yourdominions and authority would be insecure.*' It is my firm intention not to embarrass youwith further expense than that incurred by theCompany from their connexion with your Excellency,and for the protection of your country,which by the accounts I find amounts to fifty lacsofChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 51of Fyzabad rupees per year. It is my intention 1787-88.from the date of this agreement that your Excellencyshall not be charged with any excess onthis sum, and that no further demand shall bemade ; any additional aid by the Company is tobe supplied on a fair estimate."The most important part then followed, in referenceto the non-interference of the Company :*' A resident, as at present, will remain at yourExcellency's court ; but as it is the intention ofthe Company, and my firm resolution, that nointerference shall take place in the details of yourgovernment, strict orders shall be sent to him thathe shall neither interfere himself nor suffer interferenceby public or private claims of exemptionsof duties, or any other mode, for any Britishsubject or person under the authority of thisGovernment. In short, leaving the whole managementof your country to your Excellency and yourministers, I will put a stop to the interference ofothers, and in order to carry this effectually intoexecution, I propose to your Excellency not tosuffer any European to reside in your dominionswithout my written permission. In case thatshall be granted, a copy of it will be transmittedto you.*' A retrospect into past transactions, and thefriendship known so well to exist between yourExcellency and the Company, induce me to stateE 2 the52 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.i787-8a the following circumstances : that for several yearspast the inhabitants of your Excellency's dominions |from motives of self-interest, have appealed to thisgovernment, and this has been a source of injury ;to your government. I am determined to put a Istop to this practice, and to disregard the applies \cations; but as the connexion between the two jgovernments is universally known, strict attention ito justice on your part will add credit and renown ;to both. i** By the accounts subsisting between your Ex :excellency and the Company, a considerable balanceis due from you. I am unwilling to embarrass Iyou with any other demands than what are ab?o- |lately necessary." After certain payments of ^arrears to the troops, to Statut Ally, and to theRohillas, the balance was to be struck off. |Lord Cornwallis then referred to Hyderr Beg ;Khan for further information on other points, andadded, '* Your Excellency may have the most as jsured confidence that I will faithfully abide by all tthe engagements on the part of the Honourable |Company." ^The whole of the Governor-generals proposetons were readily acceded to by the Nabob \Vizier, and concluded through Hyderr Beg Khanon the 21st July. jA treaty of commerce with the state of Oude \was concluded in the following year, by which jtheIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 531787-88.the power of exacting duties was defined, as wellas other points, in order to remove all grounds forjealousy on the part of either government.The Court of Directors having occasion to refer ^^^- ^^*'^^-to the services of Mr. Shore, ordered that in theevent of his succeeding to a seat in the SupremeCouncil, he should be appointed to preside overthe revenue department, that the Company's Governmentmight have the full benefit of the knowledgehe so eminently possessed in that importantbranch of their general concerns. The attentionof the Government was called to the state of the ^2^' %f^(^-mines in Rams^hur, of which a lease had been with Assam~ ' and in salt.granted to Mr. Prince for thirty years ; andto the trade with Assam in salt, and the advantageousreturns that might be made in gold dustand other articles, as originally suggested in aletter from Mr. Baillie in 1773, during his residenceof eight years at Gualparah. It was alsoconsidered that broad-cloth and other Europeancommodities might be disposed of to the nativesof Assam, who were represented as carrying onconsiderable traffic with the colder countries,situated to the north-east, from whence returnsin silk, pepper, and specie, might be obtained.*The Supreme Court at Calcutta having mani supreme court^ adverse to re-rested an indisposition to enter into the measures frenchmen.of retrenchment and economy, the Governmentwere directed to suggest what they might thinkproper,Letter to Bengal, March 1787.medication.54 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.J787-68. proper, and measures would be taken to obtainthe direction and authority of Parliament foreffecting them.Overland com- As it was deemed important to secure aregular communication with India overland, theCourt advised the Supreme Government that theyhad appointed Mr. Baldwin, his Majesty's consul-generalin Egypt, the Company's agent at Cairo,for forwarding dispatches to and from India. TheGovernment were directed to despatch annuallyon the 3d November one of the Company's armedcruisers to Suez, with orders to call and remaintwo days at Fort St. George, from whence shewas to sail to Bombay, and there to remain onlytwo days, and then to proceed to Suez, Mr.Baldwin taking the necessary measures for returningher to India with the Company's despatches,agreeably to the orders from the Courtof Directors. Private letters were permitted tobe sent with the Company's despatches : eachsingle letter, not exceeding a quarter of an ounce,was to pay three sicca rupees. The packets wereto be made up in tin boxes and soldered, so as toavoid quarantine, to which cloth would be subject.Mr. Baldwin had not yet made arrangements withthe bashaw for opening the communication throughSuez to the English, but he had an agent at Alexandria.The postmaster in London had agreed toforward letters to Leghorn ; no goods whateverwere to be put on board the cruiser.ThisChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 55This commencement of a system for overland 1787-88.communication, presents a striking contrast tothe measures of 1836, and the application of thepower of steam, which is to secure a monthlymail, and the accomplishment of the passage inless than fifty days.As it was intended to introduce the practice of Finance submittingan India budget annually to Partial bulSgeL*^'^ment, directions were given for the preparationand transmission of the several accounts, actualand in estimate.*Overtures by the Seiks to obtain military aid Restrictive po-fromthe Government, and to form an alliance ancerapproved.with the Company, were declined. The Directorsstated that they could not applaud too highly theconduct of the Supreme Council in abstainingfrom all such measures, as they were firmly persuadedthat to protect their own territories, andthe territories of those with whom they wereallied, without taking any part in the contentionsof others, which did not affect either the Companyor their allies, was, on every account, thesoundest policy that could be adopted.The district of Benares was placed under the Benares.superintendence of Mr. Jonathan Duncan, whosedisposition and abilities eminently qualified himto carry into effect the plan framed for relievingtheAnnual budgets were submitted to Parliament from theyear 1788 to 1805.56 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.178a the body of the inhabitants from many of theoppressions to which they had been subjected.Political as. Alluding to the political relations, Lord "*wallis observed that ** all the neighbouring powerscontinued to profess the most pacific dispositiontowards the Company's governments, but theambition and real inclination of Tippoo are sowell known, that should, unluckily, any differencearise with the French nation, we must layour account that the Carnatic will immediatelyafter become the scene of a dangerous war."The possibility of a rupture with France hadsuggested itself to Lord Cornwallis by the stateof politics in Europe, and especially the generalfeeling that had been exhibited in France to discussand to oppose measures, upon principles thathad scarcely been before advanced, still less recognisedor supported by the aristocracy of thatkingdom. The greater degree of intercourse thathad existed between this country and the continent,the admiration with which our constitutionwas viewed, whilst the principles upon which itwas based were little comprehended, infused intothe minds of our continental neighbours a desireto secure for themselves equal advantages as apeople. They saw the liberty which the subjectenjoyed in England of expressing opinions andfreely canvassing the measures of the government,whilst Frenchmen were subjected to lettres-detached,to imprisonment, and banishment withoutlegalChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 57legal trial, which called forth strong feelings of nss.disgust and dissatisfaction. An opportunity forgivingvent to this state of the public mind aroseout of the discussions occasioned by the immenseadditional weight to the national debt of France,(already gigantic in amount,) the consequence oftheir having taken part in the American war. Agreat portion of the money raised had been expendedfrom home, and sunk in distant andunprofitable enterprises. To supply the publicexigencies, innumerable taxes, intolerable inamount and obnoxious in principle, roused thepopular feeling, — a prelude to those disastrousscenes which involved Europe in troubles andunceasing discord for nearly a quarter of a century.The establishment of the French influence in Indiahad always been a favourite design with theirgovernment, and as their political projects hadfailed in the West, they contemplated the East asafield in which they might once more display acareer that would gratify the French nation, andpresent an object of ambition to the people.These views, coupled with the known dispositionon the part of the native states to encourageand foster our European rivals, in the hope ofemancipating themselves from British rule or interference,led Lord Cornwallis, with his naturalprudence, to watch Tippoo's designs with distrustand suspicion.A question arose at home at this period, betweenhis58 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1788. his Majesty's Government and the East-india Com-Differences any, which led to much difference of opinionDirectore"and and ami discussions in Parliament. It relatedGovernment. ^^ ^^^ expediency of detaching four King's regimentsto India. The first King's force was sentthither at the instance of the Company, in the year1778, in consequence of the state of the Mahrattapowers, and the probability of hostilities withFrance, owing to the interference of that nationagainst England in the American war.In 1781, Parliament decided that for everyregiment of one thousand men sent to India at therequest of the Company, they should pay to hisMajesty the sum of two lacs of current rupees perannum.A correspondence between the Board of Commissionersand the Court of Directors took placein 1785, respecting the European forces, and withthe Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Pitt, in1786, as to the demands against the Company onaccount of the expenses of the King's troops, butit was not till 1787 that those measures wereadopted which led to the declaratory Act of the followingyear. In the latter part of 1787, it was apprehendedthat Great Britain would have been involvedin war, and that a blow would be struck at ourEastern possessions ; an intimation was accordinglymade in the month of October by Mr. Dundas,that the King had been graciously pleased toorder four regiments to be immediately raised forserviceChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 59service in India, and that his Majesty permitted i788.the Company to present for nomination seventy -five officers. The regiments were —The 74th, Sir A. Campbell ;75th, Colonel Abercrombie ;76th, Colonel Margrave ;nth, Colonel March ;to consist, in the whole, of 2,840 Europeans.The Court's grateful sense of his Majesty's graciousattention to the safety of the Company's possessionswas conveyed through Mr. Dundas, and acommittee of general officers was appointed bythe Court of Directors to meet at the India House,for the purpose of devising the most eligible modeof carrying into effect the appointments which theCourt were permitted to make, as, by the Act of27th Geo. II. cap. 9, under which the articles ofwar were framed officers bearing his Majesty'scommission ranked over those of the Company,although the King's bore a later date than theCompany's commission. A petition from theCompany's Bengal officers, praying that the Courtwould intercede with his Majesty to remove allpartiality as to rank, was presented to the Directors.So great were the embarrassments apprehendedif the measure was persevered in, that onthe 21st of November the Chairman and Deputywere requested to wait on the Board of Commissioners,and consult with them upon some modeof obviating the contemplated difficulties, eitherby60 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chaf.III.178a by an application to his Majesty to grant an equalrank, or for withdrawing the regiments intendedfor India. The chairs had an interview with theBoard, when they were informed by Mr. Dundas,that a reply to the representation would be transmittedto the Court in writing. On the 4th ofDecember the reply was communicated to theCourt, in which some observations were made asto the point of rank ; but it was intimated that theidea of diminishing any part of the British forcescontemplated to be sent to India was so adverseto what the Board conceived to be for the welfareand security of that country, that they could notallow such an idea to enter into any further discussionbetween the Board and the Court. TheCourt of Directors beheld with the deepest concernthe determined manner in which the Commissionershad thought proper to wave all furtherdiscussion, upon the subject of withdrawing entirelythe four regiments intended to be raised forIndia. They pointed out that as the apprehensionof impending war had ceased, it was wholly unnecessaryto entail so heavy a charge upon theCompany : under this consideration, therefore,and with reference to the principle of economy sostrongly enjoined by the Act of the 24th Geo.III. and to the alteration in public affairs, theytrusted the Board would concur in a representationto the King, to enable the Company to increasetheir European force in India, in a mode less destructiveChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 6 1eruptive to their welfare, and thereby remove from i788.the minds of 1,100 gallant officers the disgust andindignation which they would feel, from a mostcruel and unmerited suppression. The Boardexplicitly declined to concur in any such representation,and stated, that the subject would bebrought before his Majesty's confidential advisers.On the 28th of December the Chairman laid beforethe Court a note from Lord Sydney, acquaintingthe Court that his Majesty's servants did not proposeto advise his Majesty to alter the resolutionof sending the four regiments to India.The Court of Directors accordingly petitionedthe King to withdraw the regiments : they expressedthe readiness of the Company to pay all expensesoccasioned " in consequence of his Majesty's orderfor raising the four regiments ; and being persuadedthat, with the aid of his Majesty's ministers,they should be able to raise any force that mightbe thought necessary for the defence of India, uponterms infinitely less burthensome to the Company,they felt impelled by every consideration of publicduty, by a necessary attention to the finances ofthe Company, by a sense of justice to individuals,by a willing obedience to the Legislature, but aboveall by their alarming apprehension of the effect themeasure would produce in India, to pray that, thesaid regiments might be withdrawn."The petition was delivered to Lord Sydney, wholaid the same before the King: and on the 1st ofFebruary,62 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1788. February, his lordship informed the Court that hisMajesty did not judge proper to change his resolutionof sending four regiments to India.It appearing that the Court might legally withdrawtheir consent to the regiments proceeding toIndia, and that they were not liable to defray theexpenses of the four regiments if sent to Indiawithout their requisition, but that the State mustbear the same, they rescinded their resolution ofthe 17th of October 1787.On the 23d of February the Court received intimationfrom the Board, that a motion would bemade in Parliament for leave to bring in a bill forremoving all doubt as to the power of the Boardto order payment of any expenses which might beincurred in sending out and maintaining such troopsas should be judged necessary for the security ofthe British territories and possessions in India.On the 25th, Mr. Pitt accordingly moved theHouse of Commons for leave to bring in such bill.He stated, that he was at a loss to imagine on whatprinciple doubts were entertained by several highlegal characters as to the powers of the Board ;and contended, that there was not one step whichthe Court of Directors could take, prior to the Actof 1784, establishing the Board, which that Boardmight not now take touching the political andmilitary concerns and revenues of India. In thisMr. Dundas concurred, adding, that if it shouldappear necessary for the security of our Indianpossessions,Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 63possessions, the Board had power to apply the i^ss.whole of the revenue of India to that purpose,without leaving a single rupee for the Company'sinvestment.The unfavourable reception the bill met with inthe House, and even from many of the minister'sown friends, was apparent through the whole progress.Some of his friends suggested, that he hadbeen led into the measure by persons of whoseprinciples they did not much approve, and withwhom they were sorry to see him so intimatelyconnected. Clauses were moved by the Chancellorof the Exchequer on the re-commitment of thebill. To render it less objectionable, he first limitedthe number of King's forces, for the payment ofwhich the Board of Commissioners were empoweredto issue their orders, to 8,045, includingcommissioned and non-commissioned officers, and12,000 of European forces in the Company's service; the second was to prevent their increasingthe established salary of any officer in the serviceof the Company, unless proposed by the Directorsand laid before Parliament; the third was to preventthe Commissioners from ordering the payment ofany extraordinary allowance to any person onaccount of services in India, except proposedby the Directors : the fourth required the Directorsto lay sundry accounts before Parliamentannually.On the third reading, on the 19th of March, intheGuntoor Circa.64 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. Cuap. III.]178a the Lords, the bill was supported by Lords Camden,Coventry, Hopetoun, and the Lord Chancellor: it passed by a majority of 71 to 28. A strongprotest was entered, and signed by sixteen of thedissentient peers.Thus was established the first legislative provision,fixing the number of King's troops whichmight be sent to India, and maintained out of therevenue of that country, by orders of the Board ofCommissioners for the Affairs of India.Nizam. Under the treaty concluded with the Nizam inFebruary 1768, the Guntoor Circarr was to be cededto the Company, a certain peshcush being securedto the Nizam; it was also agreed, that a corps oftwo battalions of sepoy, with guns, should befurnished by the Company on his requisition tothat effect. The corps had never been requiredby the Nizam, and the connexion between thatprince and the Company being of an unsettlednature, Lord Cornwallis deputed Captain Kenna-way to Hyderabad in the character of British resident,with the view of obtaining the Circarr andeffecting a settlement of the peshcush. The Nizamdelivered to Capt. Kennaway, on the 18th September1788, an order for the immediate surrenderof the Guntoor Circarr to the Company. Heshortly afterwards despatched Meer Abul Cousinto Calcutta, to make known his sentiments to theGovernor-general on various points connected withhis personal interests.InChap. HI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 65In July 1789 Lord Cornwallis addressed a i788.letter to the Nizam, referring to the mattersstated in the verbal communication of Meer AbulCossim on behalf of his highness in reference tosome articles in the treaty of 1768. His lordshipexpressed his satisfaction at the readiness withwhich the Guntoor Circarr had been surrendered,in conformity with the provisions of that treaty.He entered into a full discussion with Meer AbulCossim on some doubtful points in that treaty,and offered such explanations as should removethe necessity of any future difficulty. In adoptingthat rule of conduct he declared that he didno more than fulfil the intention of the King ofEngland and the British nation, who, by the systemlately established for the government of India,had in view the important end of giving efficacyto the existing treaties between the English andthe powers of Hindostan, and of securing a dueperformance of them in future. His lordship, however,declined the proposal of Meer Abul Cossimto reopen the stipulation for the payment of fivelacs by the Company from the 1st January 1774,if the circa of Concave was then in their possession,by now mortgaging a portion of the circlesto his highness ; and in proof of the sincerity>f his intentions, Lord Cornwallis consented thatthe words *' whenever the situation of affairs willlIIow of such a body of troops to march into thedeccan" from the Company, should be under-vol.II. F stoodG6 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1^88. stood to mean that the force should be of a givenstrength, and grafted whenever his highnessJ should apply for it, upon condition that it wasnot to be employed against any power in alliancewith the Company, viz. Pundit Purdhaum, thePeishwa, Ragojee Bhoosla the Rajah of Berar,Madajee Scindiah and the other Mahratta chiefs,the Nabob of Arcot, the Nabob Vizier, and theRajahs of Tanjore and Travancore.The Nizam also pressed for the fulfilment of thethe provisions of the articles in the treaty of 1768,by which the Company would pay him a certainpeshcush on sopfe portion of the Carnatic, Bha-lagaut then belonging to Hyderr, and now toTippoo.Lord Cornwallis stated, that *' his highness mustbe aware circumstances had wholly prevented thepossibility of such stipulation being fulfilled, andthat an attempt to deprive Tippoo of any part ofhis possessions would naturally create in his mindsuspicions unfavourable to his highness, and tothe character of the Company. His lordship expressedhis desire to fulfil or explain every articlein the treaty of 1768, and assured the Nizam, thatalthough he felt precluded by the injunctions ofthe King of England, and the Company to makenew treaties, yet his present letter was to beconsidered equally binding as a treaty, the membersof the Council having given their cheerfulacquiescence in its contents."TheChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. (37The Directors having attentively perused all the ^^^^•Directors ap'papers on the subject of the Governor-general s prove Govern1 1 Tt • r r^ 1 t nor-general'sagreement v^^itn the Vizier oi Quae, expressed measures re-their approbation of the general settlement, and of ^^^ ^the principles upon which it was founded ; theyconsidered that it accurately defined the relationof the British Government towards that state, thedefence of which was assigned to the British troopsunder a fixed subsidy, the internal government ofthe country remaining with the Nabob. They,however, observed that, from Lord Cornwallis'sMinute of April 1787, the Government did notconsider themselves precluded from making representationsto the Vizier on the subject of hisadministration whenever they might think itnecessary ; or that they were precluded fromproposing such general arrangements, as shouldappear likely to contribute to the prosperity ofboth governments. A watchful eye was to be kepton Hyderr Beg Khan, who was, in fact, the rulerof the country.*The Directors, in August 1789, announced to Gen. Meadow;the Supreme Government that they had appointed Governor ofMajor-general William Medows, then at Bombay, ^^^^^^'governor and commander-in-chief at Madras, inthe room of Sir Archibald Campbell, and thatColonel Robert Abercromby had been nominatedgovernor and commander-in-chief at Bombay.F 2 TheyLetter to Bengal, April 1789.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1789.Court of Directorsanticipatefurtherretrenchmentspossible.They also stated, at the close of the season,that they could not allow of the departure of thelast ship without again calling the attention ofthe Government to the Company's possessions inIndia, and to their establishments.With regard to the civil establishments, itappeared, from an extensive examination, that theyhad been brought down as low as possible. Theyconcurred with Lord Cornwallis, that persons inresponsible situations should be provided withadequate salaries. As to the military establishment,the situation of affairs appeared to bedifferent from what they were in 1785, both inIndia and Europe. Great Britain was in perfectamity with the Republic of Holland. France hadin a great measure withdrawn the military forcefrom Pondicherry, and they inferred from recentdespatches from India, that there was no reason toapprehend hostilities in that country. Under allthese circumstances, the Court expected that theGovernor-general, before he left India, wouldaccurately inform himself how far there was anyprospect of effecting other reductions in parts ofthe expensive establishments ; and if he should beof opinion that any could be effected, he was atfull liberty to carry them into effect, withoutreference to Europe.Whilst the Court were thus anticipating theresults of a further system of judicious economyon the part of the Government, for which theyconsidered•]iChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 69 Jconsidered a period of peace most favourable, 1788-89.events were arising in India that proved with how \little certainty any calculation could be made of ^the disposition and views of the native states. iThe arrangement concluded by Lord Cornwallis Apprehensionsregardingin July 1789 with the Nizam, stipulated that the Tippoo.corps to be supplied his highness by the Company ^at his demand should not be employed againstany of the powers in alliance with the Company. jThe several powers were named, but no mention \was made of Tippoo. The treaty of 1784 with iTippoo provided that peace and friendship should jimmediately take place between the contracting ]parties and their allies, including particularly the ]Rajahs of Tanjore and Travancore, as friends of the \English. !What passed in the verbal communications \between Lord Cornwallis and Meer Abul Cossim, \that led to the letter written by his lordship to \the Nizam in July 1789, which was declared by \the House of Commons to have the full force of \a treaty,* does not clearly appear. Comparing \its contents with the conduct of Tippoo in 1788, iwhen he advanced towards the Malabar coast \with hostile intentions towards the Rajah of Trapencore ; when he also stirred up the Rajah of \Cochin to lay claim to part of the ground on \which the lines of Travancore were built, it is IEvident that the Governor-general was satisfied ]that \Journals of the House of Commons, 13th March 1792. ^RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1788-89. that the period was not far distant when theywould have to unite in one common cause againstthe chief of Mysore, who was himself quite aliveto his being an object of jealousy, both towardsthe Mahrattass and the Nizam. Indeed, the Rajahof Travancore had despatched a message to SirArchibald Campbell at Madras for some assistance; which being afforded, led to Tippoo's withdrawingto Seringapatam.Revenue settlement.The interval occasioned by the return of theMysore chief to his capital, admitted of LordCornwallis directing his attention to the postponedquestion of a Revenue Settlement.His lordship had taken measures for remodellingthe various establishments ; he had endeavouredto extend the commercial investment to Europefor the purpose of ameliorating the state of theCompany's finances ; he had given encouragementto the various productions of silk, indigo,and opium ; the manufactures of Oude formed anobject of solicitude, and Mr. Barlow had beennominated to report upon the productions of thatkingdom, and upon the trade of the district ofBenares.His lordship had visited the interior of thecountry, and inspected the several districts, togetherwith the army, at the most distant stations : a measureIChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 71sure which was highly approved by the Court of 1788-89.Directors, to whom he had expressed his sentimentson the condition of the European branch oftheir forces.His lordship entered upon the general questionof a revenue system, with the view of ultimatelyfixing a permanent settlement ; a most importantsubject, and one deeply affecting the happinessof the people, the prosperity of the country, andthe interests of the state. After the lapse of halfa century, the changed condition of the Company,the extended territorial possessions of Great Britainin the East, and the increasing importance of renderingthem most productive to the people andtheir rulers, will be a sufficient reason for enteringat some length into principles, which form thefoundation of that important and much debatedmeasure.The Court of Directors disapproved of the infrequent• 1 changes frequentchanges that had taken place m that system, dated by di-andcondemned the ineffectual attempts made to their views onincrease the amount of the assessment, which hadentailed a heavy tax on the zemindar in providingfor the introduction of farmers and others, who,having no permanent interest in the lands, drainedthe country of its resources. They disapproved ofthe rule prohibiting the collector from having anyconcern in the formation of the settlement of hisdistrict. They noticed the heavy arrears of outstandingbalances, and expressed an opinion thatthe72 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1788-89. the most effectual mode to prevent a recurrenceof such defalcations would be the introduction ofa permanent settlement of revenue, its amountbeing estimated on reasonable principles, and thebest security for its regular payment being thehereditary tenure of the possessor, who in theiropinion was the zemindar. The Court were ofopinion that sufficient data had been obtained,upon which a settlement might be made withoutfurther minute local scrutinies, the average of agiven number of former years being the guide. Amoderate assessment, collected punctually, wouldmore effectually unite the interests of the statewith the happiness of the people than the enforcementof a high-strained and vexatious exaction.Although the late settlement might present sufficientgrounds for its permanent introduction afterconfirmation from home, yet it was consideredexpedient to conclude it, in the first instance, forten years only. In order to give effect to the provisionsof the Act of 1784 in favour of the landholders,they directed that, as far as possible,the rights and privileges of the zemindar andother landholders, and the services they werebound to perform under the ancient governments,should be as far as possible ascertained.It will be recollected that much surprise hadbeen expressed from home when Mr. Hastingsrepresented the necessity of farther investigation,to enable him to form a just opinion safe to a revenuesettlementChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 73 ]settlement.* But Lord Cornwallis found that Go 1788-89. [Information ongovernment did not possess, after ten years addi- revenue system jnational experience, sufficient information to warrant piece.their proceeding to the decennial settlement, with Ia view to its perpetuity ; constituting, as the land jrevenue did, the principal financial means of the ]Government. |The ancient laws, local usages, the nature of jthe land tenure, the relative situation and con 1edition of the natives connected with the revenue, Ihad not been sufficiently ascertained. Annual \settlements were, therefore, continued through ithe agency of the collectors of the different districts,under the superintendence of the Board of ]Revenue, whilst interrogatories were circulated ]amongst the oldest servants for the purpose of 1acquiring all possible information upon the interresting question.The first point was to determine the person with Revenue set jwhom the settlement was to be made ; the next, ]the amount of assessment to be fixed. «Upon the first, whatever difference of opinion 1existed amongst those officially consulted on the ]theoretical question of proprietary right in the soil, ia general concurrence prevailed in favour of the Isettlement being made with the zemindar where I10 disqualification existed. ^With regard to the second question, it appeared ;;hat means adequate to so desirable and important ia pridevol, i. page 545. j74 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.III.1788^9. a purpose were not to be found. A calculation hadbeen made by estimates extracted from the ancientrecords by the officer in charge of the khalsa, orexchequer, which created suspicions that concealmentshad been practised as to the real state andvalue of the lands, and that the confidence of theGovernment had been abused. The documentsafforded much interesting matter regarding theancient tenures under the Mahometan rule, butthe misconceptions which had arisen on the mostimportant branch, viz, the amount of revenue, werepointed out and explained in an able minute preparedby Mr. Shore.*He remarked, that if the arguments and observationshe advanced as to the rights and privilegesof the zemindar and talookdars, tended to confirmthe opinions adopted by the Directors thatthese descriptions of people were the proprietorsof the soil, one material point was gained. Itwould be, however, but one step towards theestablishment of order ; what remained to be done,relating to practice and detail, required a greatdegree of minute knowledge and local information.The Company had possessed the Denny authorityover the provinces for twenty-six years,and especial enquiries had been made, at differenttimes, into the state of the revenue and the conditionof the inhabitants : yet much uncertainty remainedin regard to the rights and usages of thepeopleJune 18th 1789.Chap. III. | BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 75people and the different orders connected with the 1788-89.the revenues. The ability and experience of Mr.Shore, nevertheless, enabled the Government toproceed in the decennial settlement. A mediumwas drawn from the scanty information which thecollectors had the means of obtaining of the actualproduce to Government in former years. Thisformed the basis on which the assessment on eachestate, whether large or small, was ultimatelyfixed. A moderate jumma was thus framed, uponthe principles laid down by the Directors, whichhad in view the happiness of the natives and thesecurity of the landholders, objects which couldnot have been obtained from an imperfect collectionof an exaggerated jumna, enforced with severityand exaction.Under the Mogul government, the scheme of internalpolicy, in the management the land revenueappeared to have been framed with the viewof providing for their financial resources, increasingwith the augmentation of their population and thecultivation of the land. A large proportion ofthe extensive plains of India, estimated in theCompany's provinces at one-third by Lord Cornwallis,at one-half by others, and by some at two-thirds,capable of cultivation, lay waste, and wasprobably never otherwise. When any portionwas brought into cultivation, the state derived itsadvantage from the progressive augmentations.This rule appears to have been a general principlethroughi76 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. 1 1 1.1788-89. through every part of the empire which had comeunder British dominion, its origin being anteriorto the conquest by the Mahometan power. By it,the produce of the land, whether taken in kind orestimated in money, was understood to be shared indistinctproportions between the cultivator and thegovernment. The shares varied when the land wasrecently cleared and required extraordinary labour,but where it was fully settled and productive, thecultivator had two-fifths and the government theremainder. The government share was again dividedwith the zemindar and the village officers insuch proportion that the zemindar retained no morethan one-tenth of this share, or little more thanthree-fiftieth parts of the whole; but in instancesof meritorious conduct, the deficiency was madeup to him by special grants of land, denominatednauncaur, or subsistence. The small portionswhich remained where divided between the ,or head cultivator of the village, who waseither supposed instrumental in originally settlingthe village, or derived his right by inheritance, orby purchase from that transaction, and had stillthe charge of promoting and directing its cultivation; the pausbauriy or gorayat, whose duty itwas to guard the crop ; and the outward, or villageaccountant, perhaps the only inhabitant whocould write. Besides these persons, who, fromthe zemindar downwards, were to be regarded asservants of the government, provision was madeeitherCH41-. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 77either by an allotted share of the produce, or by a 1788-89.special grant of land for the Canoongoe, or confidentialagent of the Government, whose name impliesthat he was the depositary and promulgatorof the established regulations, his office beingintended as a check in the conduct of the financialtransactions of the rest. Under this officer, or oneof his gomastahsy or appointed agents, were placeda certain number of adjacent villages, the accountsof which, as kept by the putvvaries, were constantlyopen to his inspection, and the transactionsin which, regarding the occupancy of land anddistinction of boundaries, came under his cognizancein a form that enabled him, at any timewhen called upon, to report to the Governmentthe quantity of land in cultivation, the nature ofthe produce, the amount of rent paid, and generallythe disposal of the produce, agreeably to theshares allotted by the rules, as above explained.Cases of contested boundaries, the use of rivers orreservoirs for irrigation, and, generally, all disputesconcerning permanent property or localusage, within the limits of his official range, werereferred to him.A certain number of villages with a society thusorganized, formed a pergunna ; a certain numberof these, equal to a moderate sized English county,iH^as denominated a chuckle ; of these, a certainslumber and extent formed a circa, and a few ofipse formed the last grand division, a soubah.TheRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.l?B8.8aOpinions ofLord Cornwallisand Mr.Shore on settlementof therevenue.Mr. Shore.The Company's collectors, to whom the task wasdevolved of assessing the lands, reported theirprogress in detail to the Board of Revenue, uponwhose recommendation, when approved by Government,the settlement was finally concludedwith the landholders for the term of ten years. Theamount of revenue realized for the year 1790-1,for Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, was £3,108,915,and from Benares, £400,615.The fear of confirming under a perpetual settlementabuses that might not have come to light, orif discovered could not be obviated, suggested atrial of the decennial settlement before an assurancewas given to the zemindar that it would beperpetual.The arguments advanced in favour of a decennialsettlement with the zemindar, without referenceto its possible confirmation in perpetuity, andthose urged in support of the announcement ofsuch a determination if sanctioned by the Courtof Directors, were contained in three minutes submittedby Mr. Shore, two on the 18th of September,and a third on the 8th December 1789 : whichwere replied to in minutes from Lord Cornwallis,the two first on the 18th of September, and thelast on the 3d of February 1790.Mr. Shore was of opinion that, whatever confidencethe Government themselves might have inthe propriety of the measures they meant to adopt,it would be impossible to pronounce absolutelyuponChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 79upon their success without experience, and that 1788-89.before they recommended the perpetual confirmationof a general measure of so much importance,the Government ought to have that experience ;neither was he sure that the plan would be executedwith such ability as to justify a recommendationfor its confirmation in perpetuity. He consideredthat the declaration would produce little, if any,advantage, whilst it might be attended with greatinconvenience. That it implied an attempt toreconcile the idea of a dubious perpetuity withan absolute engagement for a limited time, andthat the zemindar and talookdars would look tothe latter only, relying upon it from year to year,until experience should have shown that relianceto be well-founded. With respect to the past, hewas from his own observation, as far as it hadextended, authorized to affirm that, since theyear 1770, cultivation had progressively increasedunder all the disadvantages of a variable assessmentand personal charges ; and that with respectto the future, he had no hesitation in declaringthat those zemindar who under confirmed engagementswould bring their waste lands into cultivation,would not be deterred by a ten years'assignment from attempting it. He also consideredit important that some experience should be had ofthe sufficiency of the regulations which theGovern-lent meant to establish to correct the variousabuses existing in the detail of the collections.Having80 RrSE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1788-89. Having deliberated still further upon the generalquestion, he felt compelled to record, on theeve of Ms departure for Europe, the circumstanceswhich had suggested the doubts he had alreadyexpressed against declaring the assessment aboutto be made upon the country fixed and unalterable.Allowing for the common variations in thestate of society, in the improvement and in thedecline of agriculture, and admitting the probablealteration in the value of silver, from a large supplyof the precious metal from mines or otherwise,he felt that the constancy of the assessmentmight be of great inconvenience, and even ruinousto many of the contributors : consequently therewould be a necessity for some future alteration,which must always take place to the disadvantageof Government, if the assessment be declaredfixed for ever. Drought and inundation, and theconsequences attending them — scarcity and distress— would affect the annual revenue : couldit be declared that no allowances should be madefor calamities of this nature when they are greatand extensive? Should an earthquake happen,overflowing rivers deposit sand, or mistaken assessmentrender the village inadequate to bear theland-tax, was the proprietor to be at liberty toresign the estate, or might it be transferred to another? Was the estate of a proprietor to be forfeitedwithout any fault on his part, or the assessmentto be subject to diminution without a sufficientChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 81cent provision for the restoration of it ? It was 1788-89.allowed that the zemindar were, generally speaking,grossly ignorant of their true interests, and ofall that relates to their estates ; that the detail ofbusiness with their tenants was irregular and confused,exhibiting an intricate scene of collusionopposed to exaction, and of unlicensed demandsubstituted for methodised claims ; that the rulesby which the rents were demanded from the riotswere arbitrary, numerous, and indefinite ; that theofficers of Government possessing local controlwere imperfectly acquainted with them; whilsttheir superiors, further removed from the detail, havestill less information ; that the rights of the talook-tars dependent on the zemindar as well as of theryots are imperfectly understood and defined ;that in common cases, the Government oftenwanted sufficient data and experience to enablethem to decide with justice and policy upon claimsto exemption from taxes, and that a decision erroneouslymade might be followed by one or otherof these consequences, either a diminution of therevenues of Government, or a confirmation of oppressiveexaction.He was not of opinion that the revenues might,as some supposed, be prodigiously increased, buthe considered the proposed period as one ofexperiment and improvement, during which, by asystematical conduct regularly directed to oneobject, confidence was to be given to the gemini"" ^S2 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1788-89. tars, and a simplification procured of the complicatedrental of the riots. The foundation of theimprovement was to be laid in regulations to beestablished, and the proposed reform dependedupon the execution of them, without which, heventured to predict, no assessment could be permanent.If, at the end of the fifth, sixth, or eveneighth year of the assessment, it should be foundthat the desired improvement had been accomplished,that the relative rights of the talookdars,riots, and zemindar, were rendered precise anddefinite, and that the country flourished under theprescribed regulations and the superintendingcare of the revenue officers, the settlement mightbe again extended to ten or twenty years ; thedoubts suggested would be brought to a test, andthe question of a perpetual assessment might thenbe agitated with more accurate information, andif any errors had been committed in rating the valueof the different districts, they might be corrected.The relation of a zemindar to Government anda ryot to a zemindar, was neither that of a proprietornor a vassal, but a compound of both.The former performed acts of authority unconnectedwith proprietary right, the latter hadrights without real property ; and the property ofthe one, and the rights of the other, were in agreat measure held at discretion.Much time, he apprehended, would elapsebefore Government could establish a system perfectlyChap. hi.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 83 \fectly consistent in all its parts, and before they 1788-89.could reduce the compound relation of a zemindar :to government, and of a ryot to a zemindar, to the isimple principles of landlord and tenant. But he ;felt substance to be more important than forms. 'Were the propositions of the collectors for reform }ing abuses to be examined, they would be found jdefective, and the regulations vi^hich had been :established would, if examined, be found indefi- jnite where there ought to have been the utmost Iprecision. Orders which should have been posi- \time, were tempered by cautious conditions ; andhe was not ashamed to distrust his own know \ledge, since he had such frequent proofs that newinquiries lead to new information. ■Lord Cornwallis declared that the great ability X'^^' ^l ^^'^*-* "^ Cornwallis, and .;of Mr. Shore, his uncommon knowledge of every ^'^ ^^^^sy on '^ '^ Mr. Shore.part of the revenue system of the country, theliberality and fairness of his remarks, his personal 1regard and esteem for him, the obligations which ]he owed to him as a public man for his personal Iassistance in every branch of the business of the igovernment, rendered it peculiarly gratifying to Ihim to record his high respect for his talents, his Jwarmest sense of his public-spirited principles, Iwhich, in an impaired state of health, couldalone have supported him in executing a work of jsuch extraordinary labour as submitting his viewsin the given resolutions regarding the proposed jrevenue system. IG 2 His ]I84 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE I Chap. III.1788-89. His lordship then proceeded to meet the objectionsof Mr. Shore to notifying the intention of theCourt of Directors to make the decennial settlementpermanent and unalterable, if it should meetwith their approbation, a measure which he seemedto think would not at any time be advisable ; andlikewise the objections to Government taking intotheir own hands the collection of all internal dutieson commerce, and allowing to the zemindar andothers by whom those duties had been levied, adeduction equal to the amount which they thenrealized, a measure which was opposed on theground that the same advantages would not berealized, and that it was an invasion of private property.His lordship declared that, had he entertained adoubt of the expediency of fixing the demand ofGovernment upon the lands, he certainly shouldhave thought it his duty to withhold the notificationof the intention ; but he was still firmly persuadedthat a fixed and unalterable assessment ofthe land rents was best calculated to promote thesubstantial interests of the Company and of theBritish nation, as well as the happiness and prosperityof the inhabitants of our Indian territories.He was convinced that such a notification wouldrender the proprietors of land anxious to have themanagement of their own estates, and, in manyinstances, induce them to come forward with morefair and liberal offers, at the period of making thenewChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 85new settlement ; at the same time that even a dis 1788-89.appointment of their expectations would be thecause of no real injury to them, or place them in aworse situation than they were before such hopeswere held out to them. The notification had accordinglybeen made in the several collectorshipsof Bahar, and in the collectorship of Midnaporein Orissa, and, he proposed, should now be madin Bengal.The losses liable to arise from drought andinundation would afford a strong inducement tothe landholder to exert himself to repair, as speedilyas possible, the damages which his lands mighthave sustained from these calamities, as it was tobe expected that, when the public demand uponhis lands should be limited to a specific sum, hewould employ every means in his power to renderthem capable of again paying that sum, and aslarge a surplus as possible for his own use. Withregard to the incapacity of the zemindar, if lawswere enacted which should secure to them thefruits of their industry and economy, and at thesame time leave them to experience the consequenceof idleness and extravagance, they musteither render themselves capable of transactingtheir own business, or their necessities wouldoblige them to dispose of their lands to others, whowould cultivate and improve them. This his lordshipconceived to be the only effectual mode whichthe Indian; or any other government, could adopttoIii86 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1788^. to render the proprietors of the lands economicallandlords and prudent trustees of the public ■interests : he considered the detail of businessbetween the zemindar and their under-tenants ^and riots being in the intricate state that had been \described, as a proof that, the various attempts by \successive governments having failed, the necesse \city of having recourse to other means was consequentlyclearly established ; at the same time it iwas admitted that the interference of the government,in adjusting the demands of the zemindar jupon the riots, might be necessary. In supportof the proposed measure for taking into the hands 'of the Government the collection of the internal jduties, his lordship urged the inefficacy of any iattempt on the part of Government, to restrain the *zemindar from most oppressive exactions, whilstthey were allowed to possess the right of levyingtaxes of any kind upon commerce. The evil had j,been experienced in many shapes, and his lordship |considered that the total resumption of the right <could alone prevent its continuance. The general !interests of the country required that a regular fsystem of taxation upon the internal trade of the ^country should be established, and the constant |practice even in England, as well as in other na jtons, justified the Government in demanding from |individuals, on granting them full compensationfor their present value, the surrender of privileges,which would counteract the effects contemplatedby so beneficial a measure. j^ ;s views.Chap. Ill ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 87It was accordingly resolved, that the Board of I788 89.Revenue should be directed to notify to the land nou^y "in trendedholders that the settlement, if approved by the [leTent!"^ ^Court of Directors, would become permanent, andno alteration take place at the expiration of theten years. The same instructions were issued tothe collectors as to internal duties, &c.The views of Lord Cornwallis were highly ap reprovedby the Directors, who assented to the pro rectors approveT ^i A i.i.1 'Lord Cornwal-posedmeasures regarding the permanent settle hs',ment, but at the same time lamented that betterdata had not been discovered. Adverting to theextent of land that lay waste through the provinces,and to what had been the practice of thenative governments in participating in the resourcesderivable from its progressive cultivation, theyacquiesced in any arrangement which secured tothe Company a similar participation in the wealthderivable from such a source, provided it could beeffected without counteracting the principal objectof encouraging industry, and be reconciled withthe principle of the system about to be introduced.The demand from the land was the great and onlysource of revenue, and was now, with the exceptionof any addition which might be made fromresumption, or what might arise from uncultivatedlands, if that source should be available, fixed forever.** It presented a most serious argument forstrict economy in the expenditure of what was solimited, — for the utmost care that the knownresources88 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE IChav. III.1792. resources being, on the one hand, restrained fromincrease, might on the other, be preserved fromdiminution." *The whole subject of the revenue settlementhad been anxiously considered by Mr. Pitt, incommunicationwith the President of the Board.The information afforded by Mr. Shore had impressedthe Minister so strongly in favour of hismerits, that he desired to have some communicationwith the Chairs regarding that gentleman.What occurred, ultimately led to his being selectedas a fit successor to Lord Cornwallis.1793. On the receipt of the Court's despatch in Bengal,made S topers Lord Cornwallis notified by proclamation, on themanet settle. 22d March 1793, to the zemindar and others,that the jumna which had been, or might be,assessed under the Regulations of 1789 and 1790,were fixed for ever.Upon the policy of this most important step,opinions were much divided ; of the benevolentand enlightened views of its principal supporter,no doubt can be entertained, but experience hasgradually led to the conviction that nothing neara correct data had been arrived at when the assessmentsof 1789 and 1790 were made ; that theattempt to create a landed aristocracy out of thehereditary contract agency, in managing the landrevenue, was attended by a vast subversion of individualproperty, and the loss of a considerableportion♦ Letter to Bengal, August 1792.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 89 ]portion of revenue to the state, without securing 1793. \that relief to the cultivator of the soil which formed ione of the principal objects contemplated on the |introduction of the system. The comparative Jignorance in which legislation has been carried ^on, as regards India, is to be discovered in the ^measures originally contemplated upon this very \subject. When the bill of 1784 was laid before 1the Directors, with the blanks filled up, it con ]gained a clause which ordained that, to prevent ]future oppression, the Government were to be required,under the Act, toji.v an unalterable tribute \rent. This compulsory clause was omitted on a Irepresentation from the Directors. \As connected with the revenue, the regulations sait revenue. ^laid down for the manufacture of salt were revised. \The general plan introduced by Mr. Hastings* \was adhered to, but arrangements were made to jremove all compulsion from the manufacturers, 1and to guard them against the impositions of the \intermediate native agents, standing between the ncovenanted servants of the Company and the jlabourers in the manufactories. \The regulations under which the monopoly of Opium regular111 11 '111 r> tons revised.opium had been rendered available as a source of ,revenue were also revised. 1The \\\Vide vol. i. page 563. The result of these measures in- ]creased the revenue from salt to £1,360,180 in 1811, \90 RISE AND PROGRESS OP THE [CifAF,in %1793. The attention of Lord Cornwallis was now Justice, j.^^^^^ ^q tjje internal administration of the Govern |ment, and in framing regulations for dispensingcivil justice. As under the provisions of the Act jof 1834 a new system may be laid down, an out \line of that adopted by his lordship, and renderedby subsequent alterations applicable to the other jpresidencies, is given, in order to show what hasexisted. ]The Directors, in their letter to Bengal of the i12th April 1786, with reference to a plan for thecivil administration of justice among the natives, ^stated, ** that they had been actuated by the ne |necessity of accommodating their views and intereststo the subsisting manners and usages of the people,rather than by any abstract theories drawn fromother countries, or applicable to a different stateof things."Courts far the Provinces.District courts were established for the administrationof justice in the cities of Moorshedabad,Dacca, and Patna, superintended by a judge andmagistrate : the office of collector in those situationsnot being necessary. Appeals were allowedfrom the provincial courts to the Governor-generalin Council, in their capacity of judges of the suddendewanny adawlut.The Marquis Cornwallis determined, in 1793, toinvest the collection of revenue and administrationofChat III Bsrraaii^wgKiii ii— ■ ^1cf ju!!>iJL-Tr in sqBrate uflkjBU>»adowlu'^ fir Revenue comte,the collector of rE?vei«ie all judicial poplars,transferring the cogmzsnoe of all cases bitlieatotried bv the revenue officers to the dewanadawhat. He then observed — "The proposedarrangements aim at fflHaning a gemecal^b e d h Moeto the regulations we wmj iasfibite, asd. ait Aesame time impose sooie check upon oanelwesagainst passing such as may ultimately prcwedetrimental to onr own interest as well as dieprosperity of the country. Lie milites have beenaccustomed to despotic rule from lime immemorial,and are well acquainted with the miseries €ftheir own tyrannic administrations. When theyhave experienced the blessings of good government,there can be no doubt to which of the twithey will give the preference. We may, therefore,be ass-ed that the happiness of the people, andthe prosperity of the country, is the firmest basison which we can build our political security."Regulations in accordance with such views werepassed in May 1793, the forty-first of which wastermed, *' a Regulation for forming into a regularcode all Regulations that may be enacted for theinternal government of the British territories inBengal." The act of Parliament of 1797, whichwas passed on the 20th of July, incorporated thesubstance of the above regulation, by providing,that all regulations which should be issued andframed92 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1793. framed by the Governor-general in Council, affectingthe rights, persons, or property of the natives,or of any other individuals vv^ho might be amenableto the provincial courts of justice, should beregistered in the judicial department, and formedinto a regular code, and printed with translationsin the country languages, and that the groundsof each regulation should be prefixed to it. Allthe provincial courts of judicature where directedto be bound to regulate their decisions by suchrules and ordinances as should be contained inthe said regulations ; and the Governor-generalin Council to transmit annually to the Court ofDirectors of the East India Company ten copiesof such regulations as might be passed in eachyear, and the same number to the Board of Commissionersfor the affairs of India.The provisions of Regulation XLI. were extendedto Benares in 1 795, and to the Ceded andConquered Provinces in 1803.Civil Justice,The Courts established for the administration ofcivil justice may be stated in their relative orderof superiority, as follows :1. The court of sudden denny adawlut, orprincipal court of civil judicature at the presidency.2. The six provincial courts, viz. four in thelowerChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 93lower provinces of Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, and noatwo in the upper provinces, including Benares.3. The zillah and city denny adawluts, orcivil courts.4. Courts of the registers.5. The courts of native commissioners.As the sudden denny forms the ultimatecourt of appeal, the powers and duties of theseveral courts will be described, commencing withthe zillah and city courts, with the subordinatecourt of registers and native commissioners; thenthe provincial courts : and, lastly, the court ofsudden adawlut.Zillah, and City Civil Courts.These courts are all superintended by an Europeanjudge, assisted by a Mahomedanand Hindoolaw officer ; by a register, who, as well as thejudge, is a covenanted servant of the Company ;in some instances by an assistant to the register,being also a covenanted servant, and by an establishmentof native ministerial officers.The local jurisdiction of the court extended toall places included within the limits of the pillarsand cities in which they were respectively established.All natives, as well as Europeans andother persons, not British subjects, residing out ofCalcutta, are amenable to the jurisdiction of thezillah and city courts, which are further declaredto have jurisdiction over all British subjects, excepting94 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1793. meeting King's officers serving under the presidencyof Fort William, and the military officersand covenanted civil servants of the Company, sofaras not to allow them to reside vi^ithin their respectivejurisdictions at a greater distance than tenmiles from Calcutta, unless they execute abond,theform of which is prescribed in Regulation XXVIII.1793, to render themselves amenable to the courtwithin whose jurisdiction they may reside, in allsuits of a civil nature that may be instituted againstthem by natives or other persons, not British subjects,in which the amount claimed may not exceedfive hundred sicca rupees.The zillah and city courts were respectivelyempowered to take cognizance of all suits andcomplaints respecting the succession or right toreal or personal property, land-rents, revenues,debts, accounts, contracts, partnerships, marriage,caste, claims to damages for injuries ; andgenerally, of all suits and complaints of a civilnature in which the defendant may be amenableto their jurisdiction.Courts of Registers,To prevent the time of the zillah and city judgesfrom being occupied with the trial of petty suits,and consequently to enable them to determinecauses of magnitude with greater expedition, theregisters of their respective courts might try anddecide suits in which the amount or value contestedwasp°'Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 95was originally limited to two hundred rupees, but i'i93.subsequently extended : an appeal lay to the zil-lah or city court.Courts of Native Commissioners,For the further relief of the judge of the zillahand city courts in the trial of petty suits, as wellas to save the parties and witnesses, in such suits,from the inconvenience to which they would besubjected, by the necessity of attendance at thecourt of the zillah or city, for the general speedyadministration of civil justice, the additional subordinatejudicatures of the native commissionerswere established. These officers are selected bythe judges of the zillah and city courts, and submittedfor the approbation of the superior courts.The native commissioners are of two classes, thesudden amiens and moonsiffs. The sudden amiens,or head commissioners, are empowered to try anddetermine suits which maybe referred to them bythe zillah or city judges. Their jurisdiction wasoriginally limited to suits within one hundredrupees, but has since been extended. The zillahor city courts may refer suits in appeal from thedecision of the sudden amiens to the registers.The moonsiffs* receive, try, and determine suitspreferred to them against any native inhabitant oftheirA just and equitable man, — native justice or judge, whosewere do not extend further than to suits for personal propertyto a limited amount.96 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChap.III.nea their respective divisions for money or other personalproperty : their jurisdiction was originallylimited to fifty rupees, but has since been extended.From the decisions of the moonsifFs there is anappeal to the zillah or city judge, who is empoweredto refer it to the register or to the sudden amen.The claim must be for money really due, or forpersonal property, or for the value of such property,and not for damages on account of allegedpersonal injuries, or for personal damages of whatevernature.Provincial Courts.To provide against the possibility of unjust orerroneous decisions in the zillah and city courts,as well as to secure a strict regularity of proceedingin all such courts, their acts and decisions aresubjected to appeal and to revision by a superiorauthority, which authority was vested in the sixprovincial courts— the first four of which wereestablished in 1795 ; a fifth court was establishedat Benares; and in 1803-4 a sixth court, for theCeded and Conquered Provinces. These courtseach consisted of four judges, denominated first,second, third, and fourth judges: an appeal laidto them from decisions of the zillah and city courts,and they had primary jurisdiction within certainlimits. The Marquis Cornwallis, in his minuteof 1 th February 1793, considered that these courtswould be the great security to Government for thedueChap. Ill] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 97due execution of the Regulations, and barriers to i793.the rights and property of the people.Court of Sudden Denny Adaiclut,The highest civil court of appeal. It was fixedat the presidency, and consisted of a chief judge,and of as many puisne judges as the Governor-generalin Council might, from time to time, deemnecessary for the despatch of business of the court.Criminal Justice,In the administration of criminal justice thecourts are guided generally by the Mahometanhaw, excepting in cases wherein a deviation fromit may have been expressly authorised by the Regulationsof the British Government.The administration of criminal justice, was, forsome years after the Company's acquisition of thedenny (1765), left, as formerly, to the Nazim,and the influence only of the Company's servantswas exerted to remedy the deficiency of the law,or to promote the due execution of it, as appearedrequisite in the cases that occurred. The regulationswhich were proposed by the Committee ofCircuit, on the 15th August 1772, and adopted bythe president in council on the 21st of that month,for the establishment of a court of criminal judicature,have been already described.*InF«/e vol. i. page 425—428.VOL. II. H98 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CiiAr.III.1793, In 1790, the Marquis Corn wallis pointed out,first, the gross defects in the Mahometan law;and secondly, the defects in the constitution of thecourts established for the trial of offenders.Provisions to remedy the defects were includedin a regulation of fifty-two articles, for the administrationof justice in the boundary and criminalcourts in Bengal, Bahia, and Orissa, passed on the3d December 1790; the Nizamutut Adawlut beingagain removed from Moorshedabad, and permanentlyestablished at Calcutta. Instead of a nativejudge superintending the court, . it was to consistof the Governor-general and members of theSupreme Council, assisted by the kazi-ool-kazat,or head kali of the provinces, and two mooftees.The three several branches of authority for theadministration of criminal justice, were comprisedunder the following heads : —1. Magistrates (including joint and assistantmagistrates) and their assistants ;2. Courts of Circuit ;3. Courts of Nizamutut Adawlut.Magistrates.By the Regulations of 1793, the zillah and cityjudges were constituted magistrates for the pillarsand districts in which they were respectively stationed.In 1810, the magistrates in certain pillarswere vested with concurrent authority in contiguousChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 99sinuous or other jurisdictions as joint magistrates : 1793.and as in particular districts it was expected thepolice might be improved, and the discharge of thegeneral duties of the office of magistrate essentiallypromoted, by the appointment of assistantmagistrates, a regulation tcf that effect was accordinglypassed. The magistrates, and joint andassistant magistrates, are, to the best of their ability,to preserve the peace of their zillah under theprescribed regulations. The police and other establishmentsof native officers employed under a zil-lah or city magistrate, and not ordered to be placedunder the immediate authority of a joint or assistantmagistrate, continue under the control of thecity magistrate : at the same time they are to furnishevery information required from them, and toobey all orders issued to them by such joint orassistant magistrate.The established courts in the British provinceswere not authorized to take cognisance of anycharge against a native military officer, sepoy,trooper, or other person, for which he mightalready have been tried by court-martial. Europeansubjects resident in the territories subject tothe presidency of Fort William, before the enactmentsof the 53 Geo. 111. cap 155, were amenableonly to the Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta,for all acts of a criminal nature.H 2 Courts793.100 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.Courts of Circuit,There are six courts of circuit, each consistingof the four judges who compose the provincialcourt of appeal in the divisions already mentioned,under the head of civil justice, and of the kazeeand mooted attached to that court. The dutiesof the circuit, including the gaol deliveries at theprincipal stations, are in ordinary cases performedby the second, third, and fourth judges in regularsuccession, the first judge remaining fixed forconducting the public business at the principalstation, unless otherwise ordered by the Governor-generalin Council, or the Nizamutut Adawlut, whomay instruct the first judge to hold the session ofjail delivery. The utility and importance of thecircuits was represented to be, the provision therebysecured for the regular and impartial administrationof criminal justice by experienced judges, andas superintending and controlling the local magistrateswithin their respective divisions.Court of Nizamutut Adawlut.'^In 1793, the court of Nizamutut Adawlut consistedof the Governor-general and members ofthe Supreme Council, assisted by the head kazeeand two mooftees. Tn 1801, from the inabilityof the Governor-general, owing to the great pressureof public business, the Court was thenceforthtoSuperior court of criminal jurisdiction.Chap. Ill] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 101No consist of three judges, to be denominated ^^^s.respectively, chief judge, and second and thirdjudge of the Nizamutut Adawlut, assisted by thehead kazee of Bengal, Bahar, Orissa, and Benares,and by two mooftees.Police Establishment.In forming the decennial settlement, the landholdersand sudden farmers of lands, in conformitywith former usage, were bound, by a clause intheir engagements, to keep the peace, and in theevent of robbery being committed on their respectiveestates or farms, to produce the robbersand property plundered ; but the general impracticabilityof enforcing this engagement, renderedit of little effect. By the regulation of 1793, thepolice was accordingly declared to be under theexclusive charge of the officers who might beappointed to the superintendence of it on the partof the Government, and the landholders andfarmers of land, who were before bound to keepup establishments of police officers for the preservationof the peace, were required to dischargethem, and prohibited from entertaining such establishmentsin future. The zillah magistrates wereat the same time required to divide their respectivepillars, including the rent-free lands, intopolice jurisdictions, each jurisdiction to be tencoss (twenty miles) square, except where localcircumstances might render it advisable to formthem102 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuff. III.179a them of greater or less extent ; the guarding ofeach jurisdiction to be committed to a darogah ornative superintendant, with an establishment ofpolice officers to be paid by Government. Thepolice establishment of every zillah (or magistrate'sjurisdiction) may be stated to consist of adarogah,* v^ith from ten to fifty burkundazes,f forevery tanna or division of country, varying fromone hundred to three hundred square miles. Incities, the extent of jurisdiction was regulatedwith reference to the population, but every wherethese thanks, with the magistrate's office, formedthe stipendiary police establishments, introducedby the British Government in 1792, and maintainedto the present day, without any alterationin principle, and with only a late subsidiary addition.This addition is the extension of the choke-carrysystem of police. The principle uponwhich this addition was devised is, that everysociety should provide for its own internal protectionin minor cases, beyond what can be providedfor by Government from the general resources ofthe state, and whenever the society may not ofitself have already devised a plan for the purpose.Government are of course justified in coming-forwardto require that it should do so, as wellas in pointing out the form in which the objectcanA superintendant, or overseer,f Men armed with matchlocks.X Choked, a watchman.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 103can best be accomplished ; they did accordingly nos.require the members of the society to elect fromamongst themselves a certain number of managers,with an establishment of watch and patrol,sufficient to provide for those objects. Superintendentsof police are established for the divisionsof the lower and western provinces. It is theirduty to keep themselves constantly informed, bycommunication with the local magistrates, andwith the darogahs of police, and by every otherpracticable means of inquiry, of the actual stateof the police in the several pillars and citiescomprised within their respective jurisdictions.The suspicions which Lord Cornwallis had Tippoo's ag ientertained regarding the views of Tippoo Sultaun Tmv!m«)re. \were not without foundation, although the intenttons of that wary chief might have been precipicestated by the conduct of the Rajah of Travancore, 'who in 1789 was drawn into a negotiation by the \Dutch, when they offered to sell his highness the Itwo ports of Cranganore and Jaycottah, in the ]provinces of Malabar and Cochin. The Portusguess were possessed of a fort at Cochin at the \commencement of the sixteenth century, and in j1663 the Dutch became possessed of it by right Iof conquest. When Hyderr had overrun the Ma Ilahar coast in 1766, in writing to the Govern ]ment i104 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. 1 1 1.1793. ment of Bombay, he thanks God he had subduedall the coast, from the Cape of Ramo to Penny.Cochin, in which Cranganore is situated, liesmuch to the southward of Cape Penny; andalthough Tippoo in his immediate ravages mayhave exacted tribute from the province, there isnothing to establish that either Cranganore or Jay-cottawere subject to him, or that the Dutch hadnot the power of parting with possessions theyhad acquired for upwards of a century, beforeeven Hyderr, Tippoo's father, had become knownas a separate and powerful chief. It was goodpolicy of the Dutch to sell that which they apprehendedwould be taken from them by Tippoo ; butas a matter of discretion on the part of the Rajahof Travancore, it might have been prudent to haveabstained from any proceeding likely to involvehostilities with Mysore.The error, if it be one, was committed — it couldnot be repaired but by an humiliating concessionto Tippoo, which, after what had passed, wouldhave involved the character of the British Government.Tippoo determined to prevent, if possible, theoffer of the Dutch being accepted by the Rajah ofTravancore. He attacked the lines, but wasrepulsed on the 29th of December, and retired inorder to procure supplies to enable him to makeregular approaches against the forts. The late SirThomas Miinro, when writing to his father fromAmboor,Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 105Amboor, in January 1790, alluded to the transact i'^^-tons in the following terms : —A second attack is daily expected, and if the King isleft alone, all his exertions against a force so superior candelay but for a very short time his ruin. The English battalionswere behind the Knew, but not at the place attacked :and it is said they have orders not to act, even on the defensive.If such be the case, the Rajah ought to dismiss themwith scorn. The distinction made between recent acquisitionsand ancient territory appears to be a subterfuge ofGovernment to cloak their dread of war under a pretendedlove of peace, for Cranganore was a fair purchase of theDutch from the Rajah of Cochin, subject to an annual tributeof thirty-five rupees. Before we can assemble an armyto face the enemy, Tippoo may be in possession of Travancore.We have derived but little benefit from experienceand misfortune. The year 1790 sees us as little preparedas that of 1780, and before the war. We shall commencethe war under the disadvantage of a want of magazines.The distresses and difficulties which we then encounteredfrom them, has not cured us of the narrow policy of preferringa small present saving to a certain though future greatand essential advantage.Every word of this letter was almost prophetic.In the following spring Tippoo effected his objects.He subdued Travancore, laid waste the country,and took the fortresses of Cranganore and Jaycot-tai, possessing himself of all the northern portionsof the province of Travancore. The conduct of theMadras Government, during these proceedings,excited the strongest indignation in the mind ofLord Cornwallis. His lordship reprobated thesupinenessRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1790-91.General meadowsarrivesat Madras.His letter tothe Court.supineness which they had manifested in makingpreparations to support the Rajah, and advertingto the general state of the Company's affairs onthe coast, determined to take temporary charge ofthe government of Fort St. George, but relinquishedhis intentions on learning that GeneralMedows had been appointed to succeed Mr. Hollandas governor. The general reached Madrasby the Vestal frigate on the 20th of February 1790,from Bombay. On the 31st of March he wrote tothe Court of Directors in the following terms :I found things in that state of confusion that is generallyattendant on a change of systems. Whether a civil or amilitary governor is best, I shall not take upon me to determine;but either is certainly better, I conceive, than neither,or both. We have a long arrear both from and to us.His highness the Nabob is so backward in his payments, sooppressive to his poligars, that at this time it is so necessaryto have on our side, that I conceive it will be absolutelynecessary, upon his first material delay of payment, to takethe management of his country into your own hands : ameasure, in spite of the opposition to it, so advantageous toyou, the country, and even to his highness himself, when sowisely projected and ably executed by Lord Macartney. Icame here at a most critical period, with many things ofimportance to decide upon in a less time than many prudent}xx)ple would have thought necessary to decide upon one :but the approaching war with Tippoo was one of the mostimportant. I heard and read all upon the subject a shorttime would allow of, and then adopted the plan laid downby Colonel Musgravc, which I thought the best, and which,from circumstances, it was very probable he would have toexecuteChap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 107execute himself ; for in the present situation of this govern I790.9Lment it would be impossible I could leave it. Why, whenfour is allowed to be the best number for a government, yousubmit to there generally being but three, I cannot imagine ;but should this ever be put upon a proper footing, and Iwas sure I left people behind me upon whose assistance andsupport I could depend, I should naturally like best to bewhere I thought I was likeliest to be of most service, and thatis naturally in the field. I conceive the expense will be sixlacs of pagodas a month, and can conceive any thing buthow or where we shall get the money, even stopping investments,&c. &c. However unfortunate a war is, when inevitable,it should be made, if possible, short, brilliant, anddecisive ; and if ever there was an appearance of it, it is now,when the Nizam and the Mahrattass are in alliance with us,when the French cannot assist Tippoo, and when, if theinjured airs and oppressed poligars can be convinced wewill never a second time deceive them, they will be with us,and when with a detachment from Bombay, and above allthings, justice on our side, we may talk, without presumption,I hope, of treating with this tyrant in his capital,obliging him to restore the ancient limits of the Carnatic,and remain on his own side of the Ghauts, at least for ourtime. Zealous to contribute my mite towards it, and thoughI would give the world to have done, (for your annualappointment, handsome as it is, would not pay me daily forthe life I lead,) I will never leave the vessel in a storm whileyou think I can steer her.Since writing the foregoing, Lord Cornwallis havingsuspended Messrs. Holland and Taylor, and our havingappointed Mr. Irving and Mr. Saunders till your pleasureis known, in their place, I am enabled to go to the army,which I mean to do the middle of the month. If the rainsin October impede the army, I shall immediately return totheRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [ChapIII.1790.Army assembled.General meadowsjoins it.the presidency, which I think a governor should never quit ]but when he thinks the army in worse hands than his own, iwhich, with Colonel Margrave at the head, is far from being \my case. jiAn army of fifteen thousand men was assembled \in the Carnatic, under the command of General jMedows, and one of about eight thousand at Bombbay, under General Abercrombie, the latter to actagainst Tippoo's possessions in the Ghauts ; the jgrand army to march towards Coimbatore, and iafterwards to penetrate into Mysore, the Mahrattass \and the Nizam co-operating, by making a diversion ;on the north.The general proceeded to join the army on the \7th of May,* the council delegating to him the ]power of ordering and conducting the war, ofmaking agreements with the poligars of the Car ;nati, as well as with the airs and the other dependdents of Tippoo. The centre army, under Colonel jKelly, was ordered into the field in July, for the Iprotection of the country against the incursions of •Tippoo's cavalry. The command devolved upon !Lieutenant-colonel Maxwell, on the death of ;Colonel Kelly in the month of October ; the jmanagement of the Carnatic being assumed by ithe Company during the war. The arrears of )revenue to meet the charges in July amounted to inearly twenty two lacs of pagodas. The Directors \having been advised of these measures, felt that iit ILetters from Bengal, 16th Sept. 1790. ;Chap. III.] British POWER IN INDIA. 109it might be satisfactory to the Governor-general 1790.to know that the preparations he had made for a recuIrsVprovevigorous prosecution of the war against Tippoo LorTco"rnwai-Sultan had met with their entire approbation ; ^'^'and although they had no official advice of thetreaties in contemplation with the Nizam andMahrattass, yet they concurred in the general principleson which it was proposed they should bebased, and were thoroughly sensible of the zealandabilities which dictated a measure so consonantto every principle of sound policy. Undercircumstances so satisfactory, and in the firmestreliance on the professional talents of GeneralMedows, and on the bravery of the troops underhis command, they expected, with confidence, aspeedy and successful termination to the hostilities; and they signified their full approbation ofthe measure adopted by the Supreme Governmentfor suspending Mr. John Holland, and desiredthat he should be sent home. The Court at thesame time transmitted a copy of the conventionwith Spain, signed at the Escurial on the 28th ofOctober.General Medows took Caroor, Coimbatore, andDindigul. Tippoo surprised and attacked an expeditionunder Colonel Floyd, but was repulsedat Horror, after an obstinate engagement, hisbrother-in-law being killed. Avoiding a generalaction, he returned from the Ghauts, drawing offthe English forces from his own possessions ; andpassing110 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Car. III.1790-91. passing through the Carnatic, committed the mostdreadful ravages.Treatybetween A treaty of alliance between the Company, thethe Company, -n • i i i tvt* • nrthe Peishvva, Peishwa, and the Nizam, against hippo, wasan .e imam. ^j^|.gj.gj '^^^^^ ^^ ^^^ jg^ of Juno 1790. The friendshipexisting between the parties was to be increasedby the present treaty ; and it was declaredthat Tippoo having, notwithstanding engagementswith the contracting parties, acted with infidelityto all, they have united in a league to punish him,and to deprive him of the means of disturbing thegeneral tranquillity in future.Lord cordwain the month of November Lord Cornwallis,to remain in thou in Bengal, expressed his acknowledgmentsto the Court of Directors in the following terms,for the arrangements which had been made toenable him to resign : — *' Earnestly anxious as Iam, for many reasons, to return to the enjoymentof private life at home, and to the superintendenceof those family concerns that are most nearly interestingto me, I have not been able to reconcileit to my mind that, in the present situation of theCompany's affairs in this part of the globe, it wouldbe consistent with a due discharge of the dutywhich 1 owe to my country, if I should now perseverein carrying my original intention into execution,and I have therefore determined to postponemy resignation."After expressing the high opinion which heentertained of General Medows's professionalabilities,CttAP. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 1 1 1abilities, and the great confidence which he had 1790-91.in his zeal to promote the public good, his lordshipobserved, that it was not possible for him toimagine that the war would be conducted withmore success under his own immediate direction.Yet, as Tippoo might have an opportunity, duringour inactivity, to turn his whole force against ourallies, and, unless counteracted by us, he mightprevail upon them to treat for a separate peace ;he resolved to step beyond his regular line of duty,and to proceed to the coast, in order to convinceTippoo that it was the intention of Governmentto persevere in a vigorous prosecution of the war,and to endeavour to bring it to an honorable andsatisfactory termination. The Madras Council wereapprised of his lordship's intention, and on the19th of November he embarked at Calcutta, on Lord cornwallVestal frigate, and reached Fort St. George on Madras.the 13th December. A strong prejudice againstembarking on board ship had been created in theminds of the sepoy, in consequence of two grenadiersbelonging to detachments sent from Bengalto Madras in 1767, being lost returning by sea toCalcutta, in 1769. This circumstance, coupled withtheir religious prejudices, made such an impression, Reconcilesthat it required much conciliatory management to voyage. ^ '^ ^^*overcome. The firm and temperate conduct ofLord Cornwallis, with the encouragement whichhe extended to the native soldiers, surmounted theirscruples in 1789, when the four companies ofvolunteers112 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1790-91 volunteers were raised for service at Bencoolen,from three battalions of the four regiments, thenat Calcutta. The attention and marks of considerationgiven to the comfort of the troops, wereamply repaid by the zeal and alacrity displayedby the detachment throughout the service ; andon the present occasion, when his lordship proceededby sea to Madras, and again in 1791, whennine hundred volunteers were required to fill upthe battalions serving in Mysore, such was thespirit of emulation evinced by the troops, thatmore than the required number turned out forthwith,and reached Madras in eight days from therequisition.Measures for Having examined the condition of the army andagainst Mysore, the state of the supplies, and arranged a plan forthe ensuing campaign. Lord Cornwallis determinedto penetrate into Mysore, direct from Madras,and to attempt some of the passes about themiddle of the Carnatic.The Peishwa and the Nizam were to furnishnot less than twenty-five thousand men, and immediatelyto invade the territories of Tippoo, andreduce as much of his dominions as possible, beforeand during the rains, on Mr. Malett and CaptainKennaway, the residents at these courts, announcingto each that hostilities had commenced. Equaldivision was to be made of the acquisitions,should the joint forces be successful. If the Company'sforces made any acquisition from the enemypreviouslyChap. Ill] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 113previously to the commencement of hostilities by i79o.the other parties, those parties were not to beentitled to any share thereof. If certain polygamyand zemindar, dependent on the Peishwa orNizam, were dispossessed by any of the allies, theywere to be restored ; and should the polygars orzemindar act unfaithfully towards the Peishwaor the Nizam, the latter authorities were to treatthem as might be judged proper. A separateagreement was entered into with the Nizam andthe Bengal Government, under which, from fourto six battalions were to march from Bengal, tojoin his highness.*A signal victory had been obtained on the coastof Malabar over the enemy by Colonel Hartley,near Calicut. Cannanore and other places werecaptured, by which the Parian river was opened,and the whole of the Malabar coast cleared.TheIt was affirmed on the authority of M. de Melville, ministerof the marine department in France, and much in the confidenceof the royal family, that early in 1791 a secret message wasreceived by the King of France from Tippoo for the aid of sixthousand French troops he paying for their transport, clothing,and maintenance : Tippoo's object being to destroy the Britishpower and supplant it by that of their European rival. Whyshould this statement be doubted ? for within these two yearswe see M. Ballard from Unmeet Sing at Paris, it is true in noavowed character of diplomacy, but as a general in Unmeet'sservice ; we have also a mission from Oude, originally entrustedto a Colonel Du Bois. This officer's questionable pretensionshas led to the mission devolving on Mr. Ariel. What messages,or instructions, may not have been entrusted to these parties ?VOL. ir. I1 14 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai.III.1790. The Mahrattass were before Darwar, which wasdaily expected to fall. The Nizam's army hadtaken Summum, and was before Consul, the surrenderof which would effectually secure thenorthern circars. These operations were expectedto confine Tippoo within the Mysore country, andit was hoped that the ensuing campaign wouldterminate the war : 'the expenses of which," LordCornwallis remarked in a letter to the Court,*' would be a heavy burden on the Company forseveral years, even with the resources to be derivedfrom the management of the Carnatic and Tanjore;the prospect of relief will be very distant indeed,if the management of those countries goes backto the Nabob and Rajah, on whom the smallestdependance cannot be placed."1791. The Court of Directors expressed the high senseprove Lor which they entertained of the zeal of Lord Corn-conducted^ wallis in having waved all personal considerations,by determining, after the commencement of hostilities,to remain in his station so long as hethought his presence would prove of advantage tothe public interests. They repeated their approbationof the principles upon which the treatieswith the Nizam and the Mahrattass were framed,and received the intelligence of their final conclusionwith great pleasure and satisfaction. Thefollowing resolution of the House of Commons ofthe 2d March 1791, in connexion with those treaties,was forwarded to Bengal :Resolved,Chap. in.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 115Resolved, That it appears to this House that the treaties 1791.92.entered into with the Nizam on the 1st June, and with the Resolution ofMouse of Com-Mahrattass on the 7th July, are wisely calculated to add mons,vigour to the operations of war, and to promote the futuretranquillity of India, and that the faith of the British nationis pledged to the due performance of engagements containedin the said treaties.The Court, on referring to the papers connectedwith the affairs at Poonahh and Hyderabad, fullyconcurred with the Government in the opinionthey had expressed of the zeal and abilities ofMr. Malett and Captain Kennaway, the ministers Mr. Manet andat those respective courts, and they had great wafciea^ted^'pleasure in announcing that his Majesty, as a mark ^^^°"^^^-of his royal approbation of their conduct, and inconsiderationof the services rendered by theirexertions to the British interests in India, hadbeen graciously pleased to confer upon them thedignity of baronets. The Court were deeplypenetrated with a sense of his Majesty's mostgracious attention to the interests of the East-indiaCompany, in this mark of royal distinctiontowards two gentlemen, whose merits in the situationthey held in the Company's service hadbeen so eminently conspicuous.Tokajee Holkar having expressed a desire that Declines a resinp n 1" fita resident from the Company should be stationed Holkar Court.with him, the Directors concurred in the opinionof the Supreme Government, that it was inexpedientto meet the wishes of that chief. But atI 2 this1 IG RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1791-92. this time the authorities, neither at home nor inIndia, anticipated the rapid strides Holkar wouldmake to a station of eminence amongst the Mahrattapowers.The Court learned with satisfaction that thegreater part of the Mahratta artillery had crossedthe Kistna by August 1790, and that the remainder,with the whole of their force under PurserBhow, was to follow immediately.Tippoo's agents had received their dismissionfrom the Poonahh durbar on the 4th of the samemonth.Proceedings After an attentive consideration of the whole of?disapproved? the circumstances connected with the proceedingsof Tippoo against Travancore, the Court expresseda decided opinion that the Company were boundto defend the Rajah, Tippoo's conduct being aclear infraction of the treaty of Mangalore, andthey fully approved of the Government prosecutingthe war against him with the utmost vigour.The measures of the Bengal Government hadbeen brought under consideration of both Housesof Parliament, where eulogies were passed onLord Cornwallis : but it was stated that he was amilitary man ; that the course of politics at homewas bad as regarded India and Europe. Thepacific declaration in the act of 1784 was calledfor, and recited to the House, when a motion wasmade that it was contrary to the honour, policy,and wish of this nation, to enter into hostilitiesforChas. Ill] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 117 jifor conquest; that there was no just cause for 1791-92. ^war with Tippoo, and that it was the duty of the '\Board and of the Court to transmit orders to \India for the conclusion of a peace. Amongst the Ipeers who supported the motion was Lord Raw '^^'^^ Rawdon |^ condemns war ^don, who, at that period, little contemplated that against Tippoo \. as uncalled-for. 1on the same field, and under very similar circum \stances, he should at a future period be directing ithe councils, and commanding an army against '\the native chiefs, for which his motives, in a politiccal point of view, were questioned as closely as Jhis lordship now criticised those of Lord Corn ]wallis. Lord Rawdon reposed the utmost confirm ]hence in Lord Cornwallis, from his approved \worth, but he reprobated the war in the strongest imanner ; he considered our government there to \be founded in injustice, and originally established \by force, and that, erected by force, it could not Istand on confidence. Nevertheless, he confined \his support to the first part of the resolution, ■reserving his opinion as to the other portion for afuture opportunity. ]Lord Grenville stated that he would support so Lord Grenville \much of the resolution, were it needed, but the ^^^"^^^ ^ ^ ' '-Jprinciple had been recorded and repeatedly ad Imitted. He felt that it was only now brought \forward to introduce a violent censure on the jproceedings in India. The war had broken out \suddenly ; there had not been time to consult the !Home authorities, and had he been in Lord Cornwallis's\ikRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. III.1791-02.Parliamentapproves of it.Army advances.wallis's position, he should have followed a similarline of conduct.Parliament came to the following resolutions :Resolved, That it appears to this House, that the attacksmade hy Tippoo Sultan on the lines of Travancore on the29th December 1789, 6th March, and 15th April 1790,were unwarranted and unprovoked infractions of the treatyentered into at Mangalore on the 10th March 1784.Resolved, That it appears to this House, that theconduct of the Governor-general of Bengal, in determiningto prosecute with vigour the war against Tippoo Sultaun, inconsequenceof the attack on the territories of the Rajah ofTravancore, was highly meritorious.An Act was at this time passed, confirming thepowers vested in Lord Cornwallis by the Councilto act upon his own responsibility during the war,and sanctioning the acts already performed underthose powers.An offer had been made by the Rajah of Berarto aid the Company with a force of eight thousandcavalry, but on such exorbitant terms, as to causethe Government to reject the offer, which wasapproved by the Court.At the close of January 1791, Lord Cornwallismoved forward. On the 21st of February the grandarmy entered Mysore ; various forts successivelysurrendered on the approach of the troops. GeneralAbercrombie took possession of the Coorg passon the 27th of February. The advance, underColonel Hartley, was strongly posted on the top,aboutChai'. HI] liRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 119about fifty miles from Seringapatam. On the 5th 1791-92.March, the grand army, after experiencing a triflingopposition from the enemy, encamped withinsight of Bangalore. In the morning of the 7th thepetal of Bangalore was carried by assault, inwhich Colonel Morehouse fell. In testimony of Conti More1 • rye ? Ill 1 II house killed.respect for this ofncer s valuable and gallant services,his remains were taken to Madras, and interredwith military honours, a monument beingerected to his memory by the Company.On the 12th the batteries opened against thefort. On the 21st, a practicable breach beingeffected, Lord Cornwallis determined to storm theplace that night : and to prevent Tippoo learninghis intention, he did not niake it known till themoment of carrying it into execution. The assaultbegan at eleven at night : complete success attendedthe measure, and in two hours the Britishstandard floated on the ramparts. Lord Cornwallisthen moved northward, to meet a large reinforcementof the Nizam's cavalry, by which he wasjoined, and, in order to bring the war to a termination,notwithstanding the season was far advanced,pressed on towards Seringapatam, encounteringgreat difficulties and embarrassmentsfrom the nature of the roads. Tippoo had returnedand posted himself between his capital and theEnglish army. He made an overture for a separatepeace on the 27th of March, but was answered byLord Cornwallis, that he could encourage no propositions120 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. 1 1 1.1791-92. positions which did not include the allies of theCompany. A general engagement took place onthe 15th of May : the enemy were driven underthe guns of Seringapatam, and there was everyprospect of its falling into our hands, when scarcitybegan to appear in the camp, and the unexpecteddelay in the arrival of the Mahrattass, deprivedthe army of a covering force.Lord cornwall Lord Cornwallis determined to fall back onlis tails back. gangalorc. At the completion of the first day'smarch, the 26th May 1791, the appearance of alarge body of horse riding in on the baggage flankscreated great alarm ; it proved, however, to betheadvanced guard of the Mahratta army, themain body being at no great distance. With thisreinforcement, and all fear of want being removed,the army was again encamped before Seringapatam; but as the monsoon was expected to set in,the siege was deferred to the ensuing season, andLord Cornwallis retired northwards.In the interim, the strong fortresses of Nundy-droop and Savendroog were taken by assault, theformer in October, and the latter in December1791. The fort of Ryacottah, with various hillforts, also surrendered.Reply of Gen. At this period intelligence reached GeneralSheldon of Medows, whilst in camp near Savendroog, thatnientTGover- ^^c Court of Directors had nominated him to .^^^^ Lord Cornwallis whcu he should relinquishthe government in Bengal. The reply of the generalWar. Ill] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 121oral to this communication was characteristic of the 1791-2.frank and gallant soldier, whilst it at the same timeevinced a rectitude of principle highly honourable,at a period when suspicions had been so generallyexcited regarding the acts of former members ofCouncil at Madras.Though the elements, more faithful allies to Tippoothan either the Nizam's troops or the Mahrattass to us, haveobliged us to defer the siege of Seringapatam, I still flattermyself it is only postponed, and not put off farther thanfrom June to January, when, if he does not make a peace,which I take to be so much the interest of all parties, theloss of his capital, I hope and expect, will be soon followedby the loss of his kingdom. Lord Cornwallis, who seesevery thing, who does every thing, and who is every thing,will, I hope, have the peace in such forwardness by January,as to enable me to go home with propriety, while he staysanother year, to complete the great and arduous undertakinghe so happily began, has so nobly continued, and, Ihave no doubt, will so perfectly conclude, to his own honourand your satisfaction. But should things take another turn,and there should not be peace, though I beg leave to declinegoing to Bengal after January 1792, I will never quit thiscountry till I have commanded the storming party at Seringapatam,or until the war is over. When, after the handsomeand independent fortune I shall have made in yourservice ( I should guess about forty thousand pounds, butI will tell you the uttermost farthing the moment I knowit ), entirely by proper saving from your liberal appointments,if you shall think " the labourer worthy of hishire," I shall be most amply compensated.In February 1792, Lord Cornwallis arrived Second ad.before Seringapatam for the second time. Tippoo Seringapatam.was122 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1792. was with his army in a fortified camp on the riverCauvery. His lordship determined to dislodge himthe following night : after detailing the plan ofattack, his lordship commanding the centre. GeneralMedows the right, and Colonel Maxwell theleft, the army moved forward : the enemy weredriven across the Cauvery, which river surroundsSeringapatam, their redoubts taken, and a lodgmentmade in the island by a detachment from thecentre division. During the operations. Lord Cornwalliswas in imminent danger, the greater partof his detachment being separated from him in theconfusion of a nocturnal attack.Dangerous po The right column, by a concurrence of severalconwaiiis?^ of those untoward circumstances to which attacksin the night must ever be liable, was delayed, anddisappointed in executing the part of the generalarrangement that had been assigned to it.The route of its intended march was across aspace of country which, though apparently open,was cut by several difficult ravines, with a deepwatercourse running through it, the channel ofwhich wound so much, that the column was obligedto pass it two or three times in endeavouring tomarch straight to the point of attack; and theguides who conducted it, having been instructedto avoid the great roads, lost the proper directionof the march, and unluckily carried thehead of the column close to the east gate redoubt: before the mistake could be rectified >theCiiAP. Ill] BRITISH POW ER IN INDIA. 123the ardour of those that led engaged them in the 1792.assault.Great pains had been taken in constructing theredoubt and in providing it with cannon ; Tippoohad also entrusted the defence of it to a large bodyof the choicest of his infantry ; the struggle wastherefore violent, and for a short time almostdoubtful, for the first efforts of our troops, thoughgallant to the utmost degree, were unsuccessful :it was not carried at last without much effusion ofblood on both sides.General Medows immediately occupied the postwith a strong detachment, and being within thebound hedge, moved toward the point of the enemy'sposition, at which it had been intendedoriginally that he should penetrate. But thefiring having long before ceased, at the attacks ofthe other two columns, he concluded that the defeatof the enemy had been completed, and findinggreat difficulty from swamps and ravines in marchingwithin the bound hedge, he returned to the outsideof it, and proceeded along its front to the Ka-rightPagoda, where he expected to be in immediatecommunication with the other divisions of thearmy. In the mean time, however, part of theenemy's centre and left, having a little recoveredfrom the panic with which they had been struckby our success against their right, made a disposition,and advanced about an hour before the daybegan to break with a considerable degree oforder124 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1792. order and resolution, to attack the troops thatoccupied the ground at which we had first penetrated.Lord Cornwallis having luckily retainedwith himself near four battalions, for the securityof that point, the enemy were beaten and drivenback after a sharp conflict ; day approaching fast,and the ground on which his lordship stoodbeing commanded by the guns of the fort, it wasnecessary to move from thence soon after, leavinga detachment in possession of the redoubt on theenemy's right, which had been carried in thebeginning of the action.Great and repeated exertions were made byTippoo during the succeeding day to retake theredoubt, which the vicinity of the fort, and theexcessive fatigue of the troops, rendered it difficultfor us to succour : but his efforts proving fruitless,he desisted from the attempt in the afternoon.In the course of the following night he evacuatedall the other redoubts in his possession on the northside of the river, and retired within Seringapatam.The trenches against Seringapatam openedon the night of the 18th February, ample preparationshaving been made for the assault.*Orders were issued on the 22d February to desistPreliminaries from further hostilities ; negotiations for peacehaving been brought to a close by the signing ofpreliminaries on the 24th, by which Tippoo wastoLetter from Lord Cornwallis, Camp, 4th March 1792.Chap. III.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 125to cede half his dominions to the allied powers, 1792.viz. the British, the Nizam, and the Mahrattass ;to pay three crore and thirty lacs of rupees (nearly£3,500,000), to restore the whole of the prisonerswho had been captured from the time of Hyderr ;and to deliver two of his sons as hostages, for thefulfilment of the treaty. Tippoo procrastinatedthe negotiation as long as possible, and wasactually engaged, with increasing diligence, inrepairing the damages of the fort, absolutelyrefusing to yield up some territory on the bordersof the Coorg Rajah. Lord Cornwallis immediatelyissued orders for the recommencement ofthe siege, and for the two princes to be sent tothe Carnatic ; these determined and prompt proceedingsled to Tippoo's signing the definitivetreaty, on the 19th March 1792.His lordship reached Madras on the 29th of Lord comwai-May, and returned to Bengal 28th July 1792, Bengal.when he was fully engaged in completing thenew systems, already noticed, for the administrationof the revenue and judicial affairs of theCompany's territories, including those acquiredunder the treaty with Tippoo.In July 1792, Lord Cornwallis concluded a Treaty with the^^ll^rr^■^r^/^ . Nabob of thenew treaty With the Nabob 01 the Carnatic, Maho- Carnatic.med Ali. All former engagements were annulled,his highness having represented that the resourcesof the Carnatic were not adequate to meet thedemands arising out of the treaty of 1787. By thepresent126 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. II I.1792. present treaty, all the forts in the Carnatic wereto be garrisoned by the Company's troops, and inthe event of war breaking out in the country, theCompany were to possess full authority over it,they paying one fifth of the net revenue to theNabob. At the conclusion of hostilities the revenueswere to be restored to the Nabob.He was to pay nine lacs of star pagodas annually,as his share of the expense for the militaryforce, and six lacs 21,105 star pagodas for theliquidation of his debts, making an aggregate of15 lacs 21,105. The peshcush payable by thepolygamy, was to be collected by the Company attheir own expense and risk ; it amounted to2,64,704 star pagodas, and formed part of theaggregate before-mentioned.Allegiance on the part of the polygamy to theNabob was to be enforced by the Company.If the Nabob required troops to aid in the collectionof his revenues, they were to be suppliedby the Company, on a representation to theGovernment of Madras; it being left to the optionof the Nabob to reimburse the expense for suchtroops at the conclusion of the service, or to addit to the debit side of the account.The results of this treaty were by no meansdeemed satisfactory : — during the life of MahomedAli no effectual attempt was made to obtain a modificationof its provisions.Accounts of the success against Tippoo havingbeenCharlie] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 127been received by the Court of Directors, they i79i>.ex pressed their high sense of Lord Cornwallis's lis's conduct ingreat and noble exertions. They considered that applauded.the mode of prosecuting the war, could only beequalled by the wisdom that dictated the preciseperiod for the cessation of hostilities. They trustedthat the circumstances would be productive of agood effect upon all, and that even Tippoo himself,hitherto the formidable and restless enemy of theBritish interests in India, might be induced from thetransactions of the war and the acquisitions gainedfrom him by the peace, to pursue a line of conductmore consonant to his true interests, and thatin future they might experience in him a conversionfrom a bitter enemy to an useful ally. Withoutentering further into ar detailed considerationof the advantages that would result from the latedefinitive treaty by the valuable territory the Companyhad acquired, and the strength that hadbeen added to their frontier and to that of theirallies, or of the brilliant achievements that procuredit, the Court requested that Lord Cornwalliswould accept their unanimous thanks for thevery great and highly important services he hadrendered to the East-india Company.Thanks were voted to the army ; the gratuity proposedby the Bengal Government was ratified by theCourt, with a grant of six months' batt in addition.Unanimous thanks were also voted by the Proprietors.OnRISE AND PROGRESS OF THELCh^[IT.1792.Mr. Shore appointedto succeedas GovernSir RobertAbercrombyCommander-in-chiefinIndia.Nepaul andLassa.On the 21st September the Court, contemplatingthe probability of a vacancy in the offices ofGovernor-general and commander-in-chief, bythe return of Lord Cornwallis to Europe. Havingtaken into consideration the distinguished servicesof Mr. Shore in the various important stationshe had filled, under the government of Bengal,they resolved to appoint him successor to LordCornwallis ; as he vias in England at the time, itwas determined that he should draw ten thousandcurrent rupees per month, from the day of hisembarkation until he assumed the office of governMajor-general Sir Robert Abercromby, K.B.^^then Governor of Bombay, was appointed commanderin-chief in India, with a seat in thesupreme council on the first vacancy.A dispute having arisen between the Rajahs ofNepaul and Lassa, the former applied to theSupreme Government for military aid. The Governmentrecommended conciliatory measures, andoffered to mediate between the parties. Littlebeing known regarding Nepaul and Assam, CaptainKirkpatrick, with Lieutenants Scott andBelford were sent to make surveys, and toacquire information as to the population, manners,customs, trade, and manufactures of thosecountries. Messrs. Duncan and Boddam weredeputed, in the month of December, to the Malabarcoast, for the purpose of settling the jumna,andChap. TIT] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA, 1 29and the Governor-general at the same time ''''■^^'accepted the offer of Major Macdonald, then inthe service of the Nabob of Arcot, to proceed toEurope, via Egypt, for the purpose of obtaininginformation respecting the means of securing acommunication with Europe by the Red Sea. TheDirectors presented Major Macdonald with fifteenthousand rupees to defray his expenses. LordCornwall is announced to the several native powershis intention to relinquish the government in themonth of August. His Lordship adopted this stepfrom a desire to prepare their minds for the change,and for the succession of Mr. Shore as governor-general.His communication to the Nabob Vizierof Oude pressed upon his excellency's attentionthe embarrassed state of his affairs, arising froman immense accumulation of debt, and his disregardof every admonition to observe a systemof proper economy : ** I tell you what you wouldprobably never hear from those who consider flatteryas a duty : a little exertion may soon rectifythe evils which are now so many and so alarming."The important measure of the permanent revenuesettlement already noticed, was at this time carriedinto effect.* The Court had stated in their des Permanentpatch of September 1792, that they owed it to themeritorious conduct of the Governor-general, thathe should have the satisfaction, before leavingIndia,12th August 1793.VOL.11. K130 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.179a India, of announcing the final completion of aplan he had so much at heart.In promulgating the arrangement, every endeavourwas taken to impress upon the landholdersthe value of the privileges conferred upon them,and the right of the Company to re-establish theinland duties, and to assess all alienated lands thatmight revert to Government, as well as to interfereas sovereigns between the ryot and the landholder.Measures were adopted to effect a settlement onthe Andaman, by clearing the ground, in accordancewith the recommendation contained in thereports from Capt. Blair, it being anticipated thatthose islands would turn out very productive, andafford abundant supplies to the shipping.Lord companion the receipt of the declaration of war againstFranceTpro^' Fraucc, Lord Cornwallis proceeded to Madras, forMadra^s^rora^ the purpose of Superintending operations againstCalcutta. Pondicherry, and other measures calculated toreduce the French power in India. That settlementhad been besieged and taken before his lordshipreached the coast. As the state of public affairsdid not call for his lordship's presence again inBengal, he embarked from Madras for Europe inthe month of October 1793.The East-india Company, on the 23d January1793, resolved unanimously, that the statue of theMarquis Cornwallis should be placed in the court-roomat the India House, ** that his great servicesmightVis.Chap, iri] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 131mightbeeverhad in remembrance; "and they passed 1793.another unanimous resolution in the month of Junegranting to his lordship an annuity of £5,000, in Annuity ofconsideration of the zeal, ability, and disinterested Lord Comelinessmanifested by him in the conduct of the Company'saffairs. The annuity was to commencefrom the date of his quitting India, and was to bepaid to his lordship's heirs, executors, administratorsor assigns, for the term of twenty years.The first administration under the new systemcould not have been entrusted to a more distinguishednobleman, or to any personage better fittedto promote the objects for which it was framed,than Marquis Cornwallis.His unimpeachable honour and integrity securedto him the unlimited confidence of all parties, andthe unanimous support that's so cordially extendedto all his measures, presented a singular and beneficialcontrast to the turmoil and opposition whichhad been encountered by Mr. Hastings. Anotheradvantage was derived from his lordship's combining,in his own person, the two offices of governand commander-in-chief; a measurewhich has much to recommend its adoption, wherea fit instrument can be selected for so important,so delicate, and so responsible a trust.With the most anxious disposition to be governedby the Parliamentary declaration to avoid wars andconquests, his lordship still found that the characterand bearing of the native states, and the Com-K 2 any's132 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. III.1793. any's relations with them, compelled him tounsheathed the sword ; and although he successfullyterminated the hostilities in which he became unavoidablyinvolved, the result sowed the seeds ofenmity and distrust, which, coupled with nativeduplicity and foreign intrigue, paved the way tothose subsequent events, which are shortly to berecorded.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 133CHArTER IV.Nations, as well as individuals, may derive 1793.^ . 1 ii.1. 1 Reflections on-instructivelessons iron experience, and although the state ofsuch lessons be dearly purchased, the ultimate ^^^^^'benefit may be more than commensurate with theircost.The existence of the Commonwealth taughtEngland to appreciate the blessings of a regulatedmonarchy, whilst the Revolution still admonishesher people of the value which their forefathersplaced on a Protestant constitution.The vicious rule so long exercised over thepeople of France, with the profligacy and meretricioussplendour of the Court, sapped the foundationsof all sound morality ; whilst the politicalmeasures of the monarch constrained thousands ofis most valuable subjects to seek refuge in areign land from the effects of religious persecution.Thus the seeds were sown of that tremendousrevolution, the effects of which were feltthroughout Europe at the close of the eighteenthcentury.It would be in vain to discuss at the present daythe question, whether England might have acteda wiser]34 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1793. a wiser part in abstaining from all interference inthe domestic quarrel of her continental neighbour,or whether her rulers might not have rested herdefence against the inroads of infidelity and republicanismon the affections of the people to theirmonarch, and their attachment to the laws andconstitutions of their country. Amongst those whoadvocated the latter course were some of our mostdistinguished statesmen. They loved the constitutionbecause it was based on the belief that inits established form of King, Lords, and Commons,it was well calculated to advance and tosecure the welfare and happiness of man : butthey strenuously urged the removal of all disabilitiesor causes of dissatisfaction or discontent, inScotland, Ireland, or elsewhere : and above allthey pressed the necessity of a reform in therepresentation of the country. It is possible thatthe state and circumstances of the times mighthave rendered these measures questionable. Theyhave since been effected, and we may now actmost wisely by looking to our own welfare, andthat of our various dependencies, rather than embarkin the quarrels of other countries, much aswe may deplore the effects of bigotry and superstition,or commiserate the sufferings inflicted onsome most interesting portions of Europe by theunequal scales of political partition.Conduct of the Amidst the universal turmoil in which EuropeKa8t- India ,Company. was involved, the East-india Company held ontheirCuAv. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 135their course ; steering clear of party, they endear i79.:i.poured to secure the advantages anticipated fromthe joint operation of their political and commercialcharacter.The period had again arrived when a new agree charter ofment was to be entered into between them and the agreement withpublic. Various plans had been thought of, and arequisition had been made to parties abroad foropinions and suggestions. But each differed fromthe other : no two views were alike, and it wastherefore deemed most prudent to rest upon thepast, rather than launch into theoretical experimentsfor the future.With regard to the political branch of the question.The Board of Commissioners was continued,but the appointment of its members, as hitherto,was not to be confined to privy councillors. Thefirst named member was henceforth declared to bepresident. Three commissioners were to form aboard ; they were to appoint their own officers.Salaries were now, for the first time, granted tothe commissioners, but the aggregate of theirallowances was not to exceed £5,000 a year.Those to the officers of the Board were limited to£11,000, making in the whole a charge for theestablishment of £ 1 6,000 per annum . No grant ofsalary by the Directors exceeding £200 a-year wasvalid in future, unless approved by the Board.The first step was thus taken to effect, by moregradual and less extensive means, a portion of thescheme1 36 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai. IV.1793. scheme which had occasioned such an outcry in1783, so far as regarded patronage.The Government of Bengal continued supreme,and certain appropriations were made of the territorialrevenues.Interests of Jt is only necessary to allude to so much of theIndia subserve "^vient to views commercial part of the question as was connectedat home.with the products and manufactures of India. Thesame opposition to the reception of those productsand manufactures into this country was then urgedas has since been frequently advanced. The objectionrested on the ground that it would interfere• either with the national or with particular intereststhat had peculiar claims to the protection of Parliament.The manufacturers of Manchester andGlasgow, engaged in the cotton trade, had madestrong representations, in 1788, against the importationof piece goods from India. Those representationswere again put forward in 1793. But itwas shown that the distress then experienced bythe manufacturers was not owing to vast importationsby the Company, but to their own improvidentspeculations, or by their raising fictitiouscredits and circulations to an extent unprecedented.It was suggested to the Minister to prohibit,by a clause in the new Act, the export to or use ofcotton machinery in India. The Minister justlydeclared that, in his opinion, both the Companyand the manufacturers overrated the matter ; theformer in the value they attached to the exclusivetradeICuAF. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 137trade with India ; the latter, in the advantages they unexpectedto be derived from a free participation init. With regard to the China trade, he felt atotally different mode of reasoning was applicable.The matter terminated in the renewal of the charterfor twenty years, and the reservation of threethousand tons in the Company's ships for the useof private merchants, with a provision for anyfurther quantity that might be called for.The nomination of Mr. Shore as successor to objectionLord Cornwallis in the office of governor-general, shore's ap *has been noticed. Mr. Burke, then residing atBath, addressed a letter to the Chairman andDeputy,* urging the propriety of postponing theappointment, — a communication, supposed to havebeen connected with the long pending impeachmentof Mr. Hastings. The Chairs replied thatSir John Shore had been selected for his highhonour and probity, and his peculiar fitness ; theCourt had appointed him, on these grounds, to thearduous and responsible office, and to that appointmentthey adhered.Sir John Shore entered upon the duties of go sir John shoregovernment on the 28th October 1793, on which office ©"c^IUr.ay Major-general Sir Robert Abercrombie as "^^■^^"^*''^-used the office of commander-in-chief, underthe Court's appointment of September 1792.Lord Hobart, who had been brought to the Lord HobartCourt's notice by Mr. Dundas, was appointed to Governor of, Madras.theSirs Francis Baring and J. S. Burgess, baronets.138 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1793 the government of Madras, on the 23d of October1793, as successor to Sir Charles Oakley,who having been requested to remain by theCourt, was to be at liberty to retain the officefor one month after the arrival of Lord Hobartat Fort St. George. His lordship was also appointedto succeed as governor-general on thedeath, resignation, or coming away of Sir JohnShore.Pacific appear Notwithstanding the disturbed state of affairsonce of India. ,in Europe, there was every appearance of peacein India, where the sovereignty was exercised bythe Mahrattass, Tippoo Sultaun, the Nizam, andthe English.The Mahratta powers comprehended the Peish-wa, Scindiah, Holkar, and the Rajah of Berar.The latter chief had less interest and concern intheir general politics ; he carried on his administrationindependently, although he had receivedthe confirmation of his succession, with the insigniaof his investiture, from the Peishwa. But theMahrattass, to whom a French force of two brigades,under General de Boigne, was attached, weredeemed sufficiently formidable without the Rajahof Berar. The nature of the Mahratta governmentwas avaricious, grasping, and ambitious, never• neglecting any opportunity of extending its poweror aggrandizing its wealth, indifferent as to themeans by which it attained those objects.It was justly felt with regard to all the powersinChap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 139in India, that our great security was in our i''^^-strength.The Nizam (a weak unstable power,) and theMahrattass, were attached to us by treaty. Theleading principle of Tippoo was described to beambition. He had no friendships, his abilitieswere well known ; without any minister, he inspectedand regulated all the details of his government,and maintained dignity without ostentation.His peasantry were protected, and theirlabours encouraged and rewarded. Since thetermination of hostilities, he was said to havefaithfully discharged all the obligations of thetreaty of peace, and that his attention had beenmore immediately directed to the improvement ofhis finances by economy. He was supposed toentertain a particular resentment to the Nizam, but,whatever might be the result of events in India,little aid could be looked for from England.The country trade in India had suffered so se ^'^^*-merely from the French cruisers, that an armament the countrywas fitted out for its protection, until the arrivalof his Majesty's ships, under Commodore Cornwallis,in the spring of 1794 ; at the commencementof which year the Supreme Government wasengaged in carrying into effect the several proving justices of thesons of the Act regarding the appointment of jus provement at "times of the peace. Conferences were held with ^^^''""^•the judges of the Supreme Court, in conjunctionwith whom the necessary regulations were framed .The140 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai-iv.1791. The justices were empowered to take measuresfor improving the police of Calcutta, and its internalmanagement, also for cleansing the streets,controlling the sale of spirituous liquors, and othermatters, which contributed to the welfare of thecommunity. {Restoration of A question of some delicacy arose, regarding■^^jthe restoration of Tippoo's sons, who had beengiven as hostages, under the second article of the?treaty of 1792. They were to be restored on cer-^tain conditions and on the completion of thestipulated payments. The consent of the Nizaniwas necessary, between whom and Tippoo somepoints w^|e in a state of litigation. His highness!consented upon condition that the British Go-ivernment^|uld ensure a speedy settlement of theidifference relating to some claims made by Tippoaon the Rajah of Kernel, who was the Nizam'sjdependant.JK^ princes were accordingly restored to Tippooa|tt)evanally, on the 28th of March. The Government,in announcing this event, expressed theirbelief that Tippoo would embrace the first oppor-junity to recover his dominions, and thereby re-^grieve his reputation in the eyes of the native states, jDcathofMada- Madajcc Sciudiah, the celebrated Mahratta;jcc un<\^ . ^j^jgf^g^jj^^ jj^(j ^^ Poonahh in the early part of this:year. He Vv-^s succeeded by his adopted son and'grand-nephew, Dov/lut Rao Scindiah, then only!fourteen years of age. About tile same time theibenchIIChap. Iv] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 141 * ,bench at Calcutta sustained an irreparable loss, in i79i.the death of that upright judge and most accomplishedscholar, Sir William Jones.The existence of an uneasy feeling had been Probability of a;^%apparent between the Court of Poonahh and the the Nizam and ^Nizam. It was also surmised that Tippoo had ^^|**t^l4istt^^^'been assembling a force for the purpose of joining %\& vthe Mahrattass. .A question arose out of this state of things ash conduct of^ . . ^ >^ British Gotowhat course the British Government should vehement.pursue in the event of hostilities. The Governor-generalrecorded his views in a full and ableminute in February 1795. Adverting to the triplealliance of 1790 between the Company, the Nizam,and the Mahrattass, he felt that if he agreed tosupport the Nizam against Tippoo, and thus becameinvolved in a war with the Mahrattass, a state ofaffairs never contemplated by the treaty of 1790would be produced. The stipulation of thealliance which bound the* English Governmentnot to aid the enemies of either state, seemed toimpose a strict neutrality on the Company, in theevent of these powers being at war with eachother, as such war would in fact bring a temporarysubversion of the principles of the alliance.Sir John Shore therefore determined to remainneuter. The British minister with the Nizam was ^accordingly instructed to warn his highness ofthe probable effects of his involving himself withthe Poonahh durbar. This decision was declaredto142 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.IV.17M. to have been adopted by the Governor general onstrong grounds of expediency ; " when he contemplatedthe difficulties which presented themselveson a review of the Nizam's administration,the impossibility of directing his course of policywithout usurping his government, the difficultyof making any impression on the Mahrattass, thecomparative facility with which they could injurethe British Government, the magnitude of theresources of the Mahrattass and Tippoo, the numberof troops that would be necessary to opposethem, and the inevitable ruin of a long-protractedwar, it was considered that the inducement tosupport the Nizam at the hazard of such impendingconsequences, ought to be much strongerthan the future evils from the subversion of hispower"*Notwithstanding the caution on the part of theBritish resident at Hyderabad, no measures weretaken by the Nizam to avert the hostilities thatfollowed. They were not of long duration ; Tippoowas too fully occupied in his own country to takepart in the quarrel. Both the Mahrattass and theNizam had the aid of French officers and troops.The force of the Peishwa was estimated at 73,000cavalry, 38,000 infantry, and 192 guns. One of^ the brigades in Scindiah's service, under Generalde Boigne, joined the Peishwa, commanded byM. Perron. M. Raymond was with the Nizam.HostilitiesMinute of Governor-general, 20th July 1795.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 143Hostilities took place on the Uti of March, near .^'^^•^ Hostilities be-beer.The Nizam expressed a wish that the tweentheNi-^ ^ sam and thebattalions which he subsidised under the treaty Mahrattasswith the Company, should join him : this call wasevaded by Government, to avoid giving umbrageto the Mahrattass. The battalions were, however,employed in preserving peace in the Nizam'sdominions during his engagement with his opponents.When his highness returned to Hyderabad,he intimated his desire to be relieved from theCompany's troops. They were accordingly withdrawn.His disposition towards the French wasnaturally strengthened : they, in their turn, did ^not lose the opportunity of impressing upon hishighness the value of their aid, by referring to thesuccess which was represented to have attended ^their arms in Europe. The result of these mea isures, which terminated in the treaty of Kurdlah, 1gave an accession of wealth, territory, and repu ination to the Mahrattass, with an influence andcontrol over the Nizam, from which at that \moment there was little prospect of his emanci- jnation. \The Nizam had been led to station towards French troops j11/^ , ^ . under Nizam.Kurpah, situated on the Company s frontiers, the IFrench corps under M. Raymond. The Governor-generalcontemplated this measure with seriousapprehension, as it appeared by a communication \from Lord Hobart, at Madras, that M. Raymond \had opened a correspondence with several Frenchofficers, i144 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.J7d4. officers, then prisoners of war, at Pondicherry.Owing to the vigilance of Lord Hobart, a junctionwas prevented between a party of those officersand the detachment of M. Raymond. At themoment when the British influence seemed to bebanished from the councils of Hyderabad, therebellion of the Nizam's eldest son, Ali Jah,encouraged a hope of its revival. The revolt wassuppressed by aid of the French force, and thedeath of Ali Jah. These occurrences induced theNizam to recall the Company's battalions thathad been withdrawn, but which under treatythey were bound on his requisition to supply. Thisproceeding in some measure restored confidencetowards the British Government, although theFrench interest continued to preponderate overevery other at Hyderabad. Their force was enlarged,and its efficiency improved by a strongpark of artillery, well found and disciplined.Jn 1794 Fibula Cawn, the Rohilla chief, withwhom a treaty was made by the Vizier of Oudein 1774, under which the country of Temporeand other districts dependant thereon, valued altogetherat Rs. 14,75,000, were granted to him as amilitary tenure, died. Mahomed Ali succeeded,but a younger brother, Gholaum Mahomed Khan,usurped the government, and murdered MahomedAli. This event led to the Rohilla war, in supportof the Vizier's rights and authority. GholaumMahomed's forces were totally defeated, but hehimselfChap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 145himself was subsequently allowed to visit the 1795-British camp, under a promise from General SirRobert Abercrombie that he would endeavour toprocure a provision for him and his followers.An agreement was also entered into with theRohillas under the Company's guarantee, bywhich the Vizier granted to the Nabob AimedAli Khan, the son of the before-named MahomedAli, a jaghire in Lampoon of ten lacs of rupeesper annum,* and the Nabob agreed to pay to the |Company, for the support of Gholaum Mahomed,1,500 rupees per month out of the produce of thejaghire. Gholaum Mahomed was allowed to retainhis private property, and to reside at Benares.The Nabob Mobarec-ul-Dowlah died at the Death of theearly part of the year 1795, and was succeeded gai.by his son Nasir-ul-Moolk. The same allowanceswere continued to him as his father had enjoyed,with which it appeared the family were fullysatisfied.Madhoo Rao, the young Peishwa, died in the Peishwadies.autumn of 1795, an event that caused considerabledifferences among the Mahratta chiefs. Bajee Ranason of Ragobah, was the rightful heir : but NanaFurnaces, who had so long directed the affairs atPoonahh, desirous of retaining his power, attemptedto place an infant upon the musnud over whom hecould exercise entire influence. He likewise soughttoPolitical Consultations from Bengal, 1790-95VOL. II. L -RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[CiTAP. IV.Capt. Sykesreturns fromNepauK1795. to strengthen himself with the Nizam, for whichpurpose he liberated his uncle Ameer-ul-omrah,who had been confined since the former differences,and negotiated with him for the surrender of thecessions made at the termination of the previoushostilities. The arrival of Scindiah defeated thoseintentions. A new treaty was entered into with theNizam, Bajee Rao being placed on the Mahrattathrone.Capt. Sykes returned at this time from Ummera-poor, having effected the object for which he wasdeputed to the King of Ava, and established atreaty by which it was anticipated that much advantagewould be derived in our commercial intercoursewith the Burmese empire. We were to havefree access, and the privilege of a Resident at Rangoon,for the purpose of superintending the commerce,and securing communications with thecapital.Mr. Duncan, under an appointment by the Court,assumed the government of Bombay in 1795.A document was received from the Governor-general'sagent at Benares, from which it appearedthat the empire of China exercised a decided authorcity over the Rajah of Nepaul, who was requiredby the court of Pekin to re-establish his uncle,Behauder Shah, in the management of the affairsof the country, and to restore the dispossessedRaja of Jumlah, threatening at the same time tomarch an army of 80,000 men into Nepaul, shouldtheMr. DuncanGovernor ofBombay.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 147the Rajah hesitate to comply with such injunc- noe.tons.In February 1796, the settlement at the Anda- Andamanmans formed in 1793 was withdrawn, in consequenceof the extreme unhealthiness of the station.The Court of Directors communicated their views Revision of theon the military arrangements for India, which were "^' ' ^^'wholly revised. At this period the furlough regulationswere introduced, as well as those for theretirement of officers after a given period of service.Batt and other extra allowances were fixed. Arecruiting system was laid down, and a depotestablished for recruits in England. The totalincrease was a charge of £308,000 per annum.The political relations of the Company with theMahrattass and the Nizam, led the Supreme Governmentto remark, "that in reasoning upon politicalevents in India, all conclusions, from obviouscauses, must be liable to great uncertainty."Tippoo's conduct kept alive the suspicions of Tippoo.Government. Whatever were his real views, orwhatever might arise to promote or discourage theexecution of them, various circumstances had occurredsince the date of the last advices from India,to suggest a belief that the Sultan was inimical tothe company. Thisimpression, added to reappearsthe French squadron in India, and the probabilityof the arrival of the Dutch fleet whichwas last seen at St. Ago, led the Government toadopt precautionary measures for offensive or defend2 sive148 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1796 sive Operations ; as they felt that nothing wouldmore conduce to the maintenance of tranquillitythan a perseverance in measures of reasonableprecaution. Such were the sentiments of theSupreme Government in the month of October1796.The surrender of the Dutch fleet at the Cape ofGood Hope to Sir George Keith Elphinstone,*dissipated the fear that aid would be derived byour enemies from that quarter : but the apprehensionsregarding Tippoo were so much increased,that the Government suggested to their allies thepolicy of uniting in a representation to that chiefregarding his military preparations. A letter wasaccordingly written by the Governor-general in thename of the allied powers, requesting some explanationof the Sultan's views and intentions.The Madras Government were instructed to havetheir army ready to take the field at the shortestnotice. It was also determined that a considerablebody of troops should be stationed on the westernfrontier, in sufficient preparation to commence theirmarch from Midnapore to the Carnatic, if required,by the end of November. The Government ofBombay were likewise to adopt all practicablemeasures of defence on the Malabar coast, and nottoLieut-general Sir Alured Clarke, who had been appointedsecond in council and commander-in-chief at Madras, proceededin command of the troops. Lieutenant Malcolm, then in Europeon account of his health, returned to India with Sir Alured, andwas appointee! his aide-de-camp.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 149to consider the territories of Tippoo as any protectionto the enemy if he should land, but to attackhim without hesitation, if their force were adequateto the attempt. To provide for the extraordinaryexpenses occasioned by these preparations, and tosupply the requisite demands of the presidenciesof Madras and Bombay, the Supreme Governmentopened the treasury for a loan at twelve percent.Tippoo having replied to the letter from theGovernor-general, the Supreme Government remarked,** if we had expected an elucidation fromTippoo on the subject of his military preparations,we should have reason to acknowledge our disappointment,as the terms of his letter, howeverfriendly, are rather evasive than explanatory."After some further observations on the principleswhich had dictated their course of policy, theyadded, ** the conduct of this Government throughoutthese transactions has been uniformly guidedby a principle of neutrality with respect to the contendingparties, and we have every reason to congratulateourselves upon our steady adherence toa principle, no less virtually inculcated by theprescriptions of the Legislature, than most conformableto sound policy"* Tippoo persevered inhis determination to enforce his demands on Kur-soul for arrears of tribute due from that district,and manifested a disposition to take possession ofitPolitical Letter from Bengal, 31st December 1796.150 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IV.1796, it if they were not discharged. The Supreme Governmentstated that it had long been decided theCompany were not bound to defend the Nizam'sclaim to Kurnoul.At the close of this year Zemaun Shah, unexpectedlycrossed the Attack, and advancing byrapid marches, took possession of Lahore, withoutany opposition from the Seiks.1797. The affairs of Oude had engaged much of LordCornwallis's attention, but the death of HyderrBeg, the minister, put a stop to carrying forwardthe measures of reform contemplated by his lordship.In the early part of 1797, Sir John Shore leftCalcutta for the Upper Provinces, to communicatewith the Vizier AzofF-ul-Dowlah on the state ofhis kingdom, and to urge his excellency to introducea thorough reform in his government, and toensure the application of his resources for themutual defence of his own and the Company'sterritories in the event of Zemaun Shah advancinginto Hindostan. His excellency, ** fully relying onthe readiness of the Company at all times todefend his dominions from the attacks of hisenemies," agreed to defray the bond Side expensesof a regiment of European and one of nativecavalry, the charge not to exceed five lacs anda-half of rupees per annum.Zemaun Shah, after committing great excessesin Lahore, retreated towards Caubul, in consequenceChap IV Butts rOW£K IN INDIA. I J) Iqueue or the reported revolt of his brother the i79t^viceroy of Herat.Asoff-al-Dowlah, the Vizier, having died sud AftursofOude.deny. Vizier Ally succeeded to the musnud.Appeals against the succession, on the ground of'T^- intimacy, were pressed on the attention of the^ feme Government : but they were rejected bythe Gofemor-general, in the full persuasion thatVizier Ally was the rightful heir.The pecuniary pressure upon the finances of theGovernment was now so severe, that a reductionin the investments became indispensable, bothfrom Boigaland Madras.In the autumn of 1797 Sir John Shore advised 1797.the Cont of his intention to relinquish the government,and to embark for England in the ships oftke mpfKOMiamg season,* and in a subsequent^fpf^h the BriUmua was named as the vesselon nAidk lie dhoold proceed ; but at this juncturethe ztbia of Mode ^;ain rendered it necessarytint lie Anne repair to Lucknow. The principalpoiflt arose ont of circumstances resultingbam die imrrraian of Vizier Ally, through thesmppmt of the C4 — any . When Sir John ShoreqiAted ralrafta tar lie Upper Provinces, he didnot ai: aB t trntemfA^ ie any alteration in the succession;lie eome&wed it possible that the repugnance152 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chaf.IV1797. dance of the inhabitants of Oude to the title ofVizier Ali might be such as to force upon him thefurther recognition of the subject. ** By an extraordinaryconcurrence of circumstances, the Companywere compelled to become the arbiters of thedisposal of a kingdom." *It appeared from incontestable evidence that hismother was the wife of a Fraush, then living, thelowest occupation of a menial servant; that hisearly determination, after succeeding to the vizier,was to establish his own power and subvertthat of the Company in the province of Oude ;that his conduct from his accession had exhibited*' scenes of action mean, profligate, and vicious;"and that he desired to degrade the minister whowas considered as the representative of the Englishinfluence under the resident. Sir John Shore, afew days after reaching Lucknow, received repeatedcautions through various channels, not to placehimself in the power of the Nabob, in the prevailingidea that assassination was intended. Troopswere secretly admitted into the town in largenumbers, and orders had been issued for severalbattalions to advance to the city. These circumstancesled the Governor-general to quit his residencein Lucknow, and to proceed to a garden-houseof the Nabob at the distance of about fivemiles. The age of Vizier Ali was only seventeen,but• Goveriior-gencrars Minutes. Bengal Secret Consultations,January 1798.Chap. IV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 153but he was fearless, debauched, of a sanguinarydisposition, and uncontrollable except by theimpression of political fear. The Governor-general,after enumerating the various circumstanceswhich he proposed to investigate in order to arriveat the true state of affairs, confessed, withoutreserve, that he had never been involved in a sceneof more perplexity and profligacy ; but his determinationwas taken to remove Vizier Ali, and toplace Saadat Ali, a descendant of Sujah Dowlah,on the musnud. The government of Oude wasconsidered, in the opinion of the natives, a dependencyon the English, whatever its relation undertreaties might be. Scindiah was said to refer theinvestiture of Vizier Ali by the Mogul to the ,and many respectable familiesresided at Lucknow under British influence.The resolution of the Governor general to deposeVizier Ali, and to place Saadat Ali on the mus-nut,was not adopted without great hesitationand deliberation. Of its justice Sir John Shoreentertained no doubt, or that it would be everimpeached by any native of India : and if thejustice of it were dubious, as the public voicedenied all right in Vizier Ali, a decision in conformitywith it carries its own evidence. ** If,"observed Sir John Shore, '' I had consulted onlymy own personal ease or personal responsibility,I should have adopted a different decision, andupon that principle an arrangement might havebeen154 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [ChafvIV.1W7. been made, which would have enabled me by thistime to prosecute the intentions with which Ileft Calcutta, of returning to Europe ; but the lineI have taken, although that of hazard and difficulty,is, in my conscientious opinion, that ofhonour and justice, combining political responsibilityand political security."A treaty was concluded with Saadat Ali on thethe 21st February 1798, by which the subsidypaid by Asoph-ul-Dowlah of 56 lacs 70,000 rupeeswas increased to 76 lacs, to commence from January1798, The arrears of former subsidies wereto be immediately discharged. The English forcesto be maintained for the defence of Oude werenever to be less than 10,000 men ; if above 13,000or below 8,000, an increase or reduction to be madein the payment. The fortress of Allahabad wasmade over to the Company, and the Ghauts immediatelydependant on the fort, the revenue thereofto be accounted for to the Nabob. Eight lacs wereto be advanced for the repairs of the fort by theNabob, and three lacs for the repair of Futtyghur.The Company were to be paid twelve lacs for theexpenses incurred on seating Saadat Ali on themusnud ; and a revision of the Nabob's establishmentsin communication with the Company'sgovernment was to be effected ; and, without thesanction of the latter, no Europeans were to settlein Oude. Vizier Ali was removed to Benares,where he was in future to reside. The Directorscom-Chap. IV.] BRITISH P0WP:R IN INDIA. 155commended the vigilance which induced Sir JohnShore, in his zeal for the Company's interests, toproceed a second time to Lucknow, though on theeve of departure for Europe. After attentivelyperusing the whole of the voluminous documents,together with the able and elaborate detail of theGovernor-general, the Court declared that theyhad not the least hesitation in pronouncing thathis decision supported the just right of inheritance,and that the honour, reputation, and justice of theCompany had been fully maintained. They alsoexpressed their decided opinion that Lord Teign-mouth,*in a most arduous situation, and undercircumstances of much delicacy and embarrassment,conducted himself with great temper, impartiality,ability, and firmness; and that hefinished a long course of faithful services by planningand carrying into execution an arrangementwhich not only redounded highly to his honour,but which would also operate to the reciprocal advantageof the Company, the Nabob, and theVizier.Lord Teignmouth quitted the government inMarch 1798.Sir John Shore had been raised to the Irish peerage by thetitle of Baron Teignmouth, 24th October 1797.156 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.V.ICHAPTER V.iBengal. The Court of Directors had been apprized, iiiReasons for the month of March, that the precarious state ofthe re-appoints . . . imentofMar- Sir Johii Shore's health would, in all probability,quis Cornwallis ,tt /-«• iiias Governor lead him to quit India. Circumstances had alsooccurred tending to create an uncertainty whetherLord Hobart might not be on his way home. ThqCourt felt that these events were likely to arisat a time when arrangements of the first consequenceto the public interests required to becarried into effect. Amongst them was the introductionof courts of adawlut on the coasts o£Coromandel and Malabar, on principles similar tathose which had produced such beneficial effectin Bengal ; also the change in the general com-jmere of India, by the capture of the Dutch settlementsin the Eastern seas ; and the differences,that had arisen between the Supreme Government!and the presidency of Madras, on the questions ofArcot and Tanjore ; but most especially the mor-^tibi cation experienced by the Court of Directors, ^in learning that the army arrangements, whichhad been adopted after much deliberation, and at,the sacrifice of a most enormous expense, had notbeen received in Bengal with that unreservedsatisfactionChap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 157satisfaction which had been anticipated. How 1797.ever vexatious the reflection, and well-groundedthe dissatisfaction, which was created in the mindsof the Home authorities by the conduct of theleading instruments, in propagating what wastermed '' an unwarrantable spirit," the Court declaredit should not discourage them from continuingto consult and promote the real interestsof a body of men whose meritorious services theycould never forget, and to whose substantial comfortsthey should never cease to attend. They thenadverted to the affairs of Oude. The interests ofthe Vizier were felt to be so inseparably connectedwith those of the Company, that it was impossibleto be indifferent to what passed within his territory.The Court were fully alive to the delicacyand difficulty which attended the subject, butindulged a hope that some such melioration mighttake place in the interior government of theVizier's country, as would ensure that prosperityto his provinces, and security to his subjects,without which there could be no rational prospectof permanent advantage. In order to effect thesevarious measures, the Court directed their viewsto the Marquis Cornwallis, who had alreadyrendered such valuable and brilliant services tohis country and to the Company, both in a civiland military capacity. At the request of theCourt, his lordship consented to undertakeanother voyage to India, for the purpose of arranging158 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chapel.1797. ranging these weighty matters. Lord Hobart,Lord Hobart who had been appointed to succeed Sir Johnvemmentof Shore as governor-general, was therefore directed,"^' in the event of his having assumed that office, toresume the government of Fort St. George untilthe departure of Lord Cornwallis for Europe.This notification was accompanied by an assurancethat the Court highly estimated the ability,zeal, and promptitude that had distinguished hislordship's conduct in the expeditions from Madras,and to which they ascribed, in a great degree, thevery advantageous situation in which the Company'saffairs were placed by the recent conquestsin that part of the world.*Lord Cornwall. The public interests led to a change in the irS nation of Marquis Cornwallis : his lordship proceeding,in the month of June, as viceroy toIreland. The Directors, in notifying this change toIndia, reiterated the sense which they entertainedof the merits and services of Lord Hobart. GeneralSir Alured Clarke, who had proceeded from Madrasto assume the office of commander-in-chief, underthe Court's appointment of April 1796, was nominatedprovisional governor-general, in the event ofa successor not arriving in Bengal before Sir JohnShore should have embarked for Europe.Earl of Mom The nobleman ultimately fixed upon to fill the^GovTnor"* high and arduous post, thus vacated, was the^*"' Marquis Wellesley, then Earl of Mornington.HisLetter to Madras, 22d March 1797.Chap. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 159His lordship's education at Eton was superior 1797.tended by Archbishop Cornwallis, with whom he educrtbn!'andconstantly passed the holidays at Lambeth Palace, England'"from 1771 to 1779, and there he became intimatelyacquainted with Earl Cornwallis, and the severalmembers of his lordship's family.When Lord Cornwallis proceeded to India asGovernor-general, in 1786, Lord Wellesley evinceda decided taste for the study of Indian history,and zealously applied himself to the acquisition ofan intimate knowledge of its early government,and of the various matters that had of late occupiedso much of the attention of Parliament andof the country. It was a subject in which hislordship took great delight, although he couldthen have little contemplated that he was destined,at a future period, to follow his illustrious friendin the same field of foreign rule, and to be theinstrument of extending, by the wisdom of hiscouncils, that empire, in the government of whichso high an impression had been created in theminds of the natives by the benign and honourableadministration of Lord Cornwallis. Lord Welles Lord of theley was appointed a lord of the treasury in 1786, india commanda commissioner for the affairs of India, without ^'®"^^*salary, in 1795; and held these offices, togetherwith a seat in the Privy Council, until the monthof October 1797, when he was nominated, by theCourt of Directors, governor-general of India.These facts repudiate the idea that his lordshiphadIGO RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chapel.n?>7. had possessed but little time for acquainting himselfwith the complicated affairs of India, beforehis arrival in that country.Lord Wellesley had been requested to make ashort stay in Madras, for the purpose of effectinga modification of the treaty with his highnessthe Nabob of Arcot, in 1792. But as great importancewas attached to an exact observance oftreaties with the native powers, a principle sohonourably established under the administrationof Lord Cornwallis, no exertion of any otherpower than that of persuasion was to be used forthe purpose of inducing the Nabob to adopt anyEmbarks for alteration of the treaty. Lord Wellesley embarkedIndia. " . . . .at Portsmouth on La Virgin frigate, the 9th November,and on the 29th arrived at Madeira, wherehe was received with every mark of attention bythe Portuguese authorities. On the following daythe Niger frigate, with the Surat Castle, having onboardSir John Anstruther, who was proceedingto Bengal as chief justice, accompanied by thewhole of the convoy, arrived off the island. In thenight the ships of the fleet were obliged to sliptheir cables and put to sea, to avoid the effects ofInterview with a sudden and tremendous storm. Lord WellesleyPatrick atthe arrived at the Cape of Good Hope in FebruaryCape. 1798, where he met with Major Kirkpatrick, thelate resident at the court of Hyderabad, whichpost that officer had been constrained to quit, andto repair to the Cape for the benefit of his health.LordChap. V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 161Lord Wellesley was in some measure aware nor.that the increase of the French influence hadoccasioned considerable apprehension in the mindof Lord Teignmouth before he left India. Hislordship, therefore, embraced the opportunitywhich the meeting with Major Kirkpatrick presented,to frame and submit a series of questionsto that officer, whose replies enabled hislordship to form a more correct estimate of theimportance to be attached to the subject. Theresult of his deliberations was communicated in aletter to Mr. Dundas, accompanied by his lordship'sopinion on the value of the Cape, and moreespecially that of the island of Ceylon, to theinterests of Great Britain.Ceylon had been placed under the Madras misgovernmentsince its capture in 1796. Accountshaving reached Fort George in January 1798, thatthe chief of the insurgents was in communicationwith the court at Kandy, and that apprehensionswere entertained that the rebellious chiefs and theking might unite with the French and Dutchagainst the British interests, Lord Hobart pro Lord Hobartneeded to Colombo, in company with Admiral ceyio^n,\ndRainier, on the 7th of July, for the purpose of Europe!"'^"^ °securing those interests. Having effected theobjection his visit he returned to Madras, and onthe 18th announced his intention to relinquish thegovernment, and to proceed to Europe.General Harris, the commander-in-chief at FortVOL. II. M St.162 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.179a St. George, succeeded provisionally to the government.In reparation for the disappointment andloss occasioned to Lord Hobart, who it could notbe supposed would remain after two successorshad been nominated to the office of Governor-generalsince his lordship's appointment as successorto Sir John Shore in 1793, an unanimousresolution was passed by the Directors on the 8thGranted an August granting him a pension of £1,500 peri:1,500. annum, to commence from the time of his quittingMadras : which resolution was confirmed by theGeneral Court on the 6th December, when thethanks of the Company were also unanimouslyvoted to his lordship for his able and meritoriousconduct in the government of Fort St. George.Lord Olive ap In the same month the Court of Directorspointed Govern i t i /^t / x^ i t^ •nor ot Madras, appointed Lord Clive, (now Earl Powys,) his successor.The question regarding the government of Ceylonwas yet undecided ; but there were reasons tobelieve that it would be assumed by the Crown.Mr. North, The Hou. Frederick North, in anticipation of thisGovernor of ^ ^ ^Ceylon. decision, having arrived at Bombay, addressed aprivate letter to Lord Wellesley, as he consideredhis lordship might be called to account *for thearrival in India of a person unhoused, unappointed,unanimated," who, with seven or eight more ofhis Majesty's servants, in embryo, like himself,had no security for their employment but the wordof Ministers : —MvChap. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 163My appointment is to be <^10,000 a-year. Lord Clive 1798.was expected to leave England in March or April ; I amglad to find that India has so many charms besides the beauxyeuoo de la Cassetta ; that men with £1 6,000 a-year in possession,and two-and-twenty thousand in expectation, areenamoured of her, and I am very glad that these charmswere not discovered sooner, lest my poor little island ofcinnamon should have been carried off by some more powerfulsuitor than an indigent younger brother. But whatreally gives me great pleasure is, that Lord Clive is a verygood-natured, right-headed, sensible man, and exactly theperson we could wish for — you as a tributary prince, I as aneighbouring potentate.The island being declared a King's possession,Mr. North was confirmed in the government of it.Lord Wellesley landed at Madras in April 1798. LordWeiiesieyTx • 11 1 TVT 1 1 r» ^ reaches Madras.Having presented letters to the Nabob from theKing and their Royal Highnesses the Prince ofWales and Duke of York, his lordship enteredupon the question of a successor to the musnud atTanjore, and ultimately determined in favour ofSerfogee, but postponed the final instructions forthat purpose until arriving in Bengal. On the 18thMay, Lord Wellesley reached Calcutta, and assumedcharge of the government-general.Considerable light has been thrown upon various ^^^^^-f^e^fpoints connected with the period of Indian his ^^'^^y-tory now under review, by the publication of thedespatches of the Marquis Wellesley, and thoseof his Grace the Duke of Wellington.A great portion of the Marquis Wellesley's des2 patches164 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1798. patches have been already laid before Parliamentand the public ; but the present work is valuable,not only as presenting the whole in a chronologicaland connected form, but because it is also interspersedwith some confidential and private lettersfrom the Minister of the Crown and the President ofthe Board of Control, which supply the exact descriptionof information required to elucidate pointsthat would otherwise have remained obscure or unexplained.Those despatches exhibit the mind ofan accomplished statesman, whose views were notto be defeated by infirmity of purpose nor thwartedby the opposing councils of subordinate functionaries— a mind which evinced its capacity for rulein the selection of instruments well fitted to giveeffect to the wisdom of its measures.^es^tc}ie6of The despatches of the Duke of Wellington, asWellington. Colonel Gurwood happily observes, ** make hisGrace his own historian." The events which connectthe early services of the Duke with India,exhibit the dawn of his Grace's unrivalled career.They pourtray that buoyancy of spirit and unconquerableenergy which surmounted difficultiesthat would have baffled and subdued minds of aninferior caste. A marked characteristic was thefacility with which General Wellesley acquiredinformation, on all points connected with the dutiesof the prominent position he so long and so ablyfilled in Mysore. Whether relating to the strength,condition, and character of the army — the modeandChap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 165 1iand means of its supply — the face and bearing of 1798. \the country in which he more immediately acted, \or of that attached to his extensive control — the \plans of operation best calculated to defend those 1countries, or to check and defeat the enemy — the iregulation of his commissariat — the knowledge he jobtained of the character of the several native \chiefs — the important correspondence which he jmaintained with their respective courts and dur 1bars, and the confidence with which his own characterand conduct inspired both those chiefs and jtheir subjects, throughout his whole course of \service — exhibited that rare combination of talent iand qualifications which were destined to be again ]called forth with such unrivalled effect, not only \for the benefit of his own country but of Europe \at large. IGeneral Wellesley appears to have been exempt \from many of the petty infirmities which assail our \common nature : not that he was insensible to the |effects of disappointed emulation, but even this \called forth the display of qualities which tended |to raise his Grace to his present eminence. It may \truly be said, that not only is the Duke of Wei \langton his own historian, but, under a protecting \Providence, he was the founder of his own fame iiand fortune. \The position in which the Marquis Wellesley state of India^ on Marquis \found himself placed, on entering upon the office weiiesiey's iof Governor-general, will be best understood by areference i1(5G RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.1798. reference to the general state of affairs in India,and to those points which demanded his lordship'simmediate attention. The Governor-general's firstact was to record a minute on the result of hisinvestigation into the claims of Serfogee, whichclaims his lordship considered to be well founded,but he at the same time felt it right to accompanythe deposition of Ameer Sing with the grounds uponwhich so important a measure was adopted. Hisperson was to be protected, his private property tobe respected, and a suitable provision made for him,so long as he should conduct himself with propriety.Financial diffi- With a view to relieve the state of the finances bycities. *'a reduction of the expenses of the Government,his lordship proposed a general revision of thepublic establishments of the three presidencies.Revision of ** as it was impossible to believe, that establish-establishments.. . .ments of such magnitude and intricacy as those ofIndia, should not in the course of time require frequentrevision." A committee for the purpose wasaccordingly formed at Calcutta, upon the principleprescribed by Lord Cornwallis in 1788.Money marker. When hostilities commenced against Tippoo in1792, the rate of interest was low; large subscriptionswere then made to a twelve per cent, loan,and large supplies of dollars were detained at Madrasfor the public service when intended for China.In 1798, the period in question, the funded debtwas fifty-one lacs, the Court's credit so low that theeight per cent, paper was at eighteen and twentyperChare.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 167per cent, discount, and the scarcity of money so i798.great, that their twelve per cent, bonds were downat four discount : a strong proof of a want of confidencein the state of public affairs.The French interests had been greatly extended Power of thein India. The Secret Committee, in writing to theGovernor-general for his warning and guidance inJune 1798, stated : —Our empire in the East has ever been an object of jealousyto the French ; we have no doubt that the present governmentof France would even adopt measures of a most enterprisingand uncommon nature for the chance of reducing theBritish power and consequence in India. We recommendenergy, promptness, and decision. Do not wait for actual hostilitieson the part of Tippoo, should he have entered into aleague with the French.The authenticity of the proclamation by M. alaricat the Isle of France in January 1798, declaratoryof Tippoo's desire to form an offensive anddefensive alliance with France, was clearly established— its genuine character was not doubted —the events subsequent to the fall of Tippoo corroboratedthe fact, and proved the foresight andjudgment evinced by the Governor-general, whohad by no means attached undue importance to themeans exerted by the French to advance their influence,and to crush the power of the English. Ithad been alleged that the Governor-general formedboth a hasty and an erroneous estimate of the Frenchinfluence and of Tippoo's power, as well as that ofthe168 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1796. the native chiefs. It has been contended that theBritish power had increased in a greater ratio, andthat the determination to engage in hostilities forexpelling the French and humbling Tippoo wasconsequently impolitic, if not unjust.But Lord Teignmouth did not think lightly eitherof the French influence, or of Tippoo's power andintentions. In a letter written on the eve of hisdeparture from Calcutta, in the month of March1798, alluding to Tippoo, his lordship remarked,he will certainly avail himself of any fair opportunityto re-establish the power and reputationwhich he lost in his former contest with us." MajorKirkpatrick, who had been at Hyderabad, hadformed no mean estimate of the French force andinfluence at the court of the Nizam. The Governor-generalfound that there were fourteen thousandFrench troops in the pay of the Nizam, as well assome with Scindiah, whose ambition Lord Teign-mouthalso declared to be unbounded. The Frenchcorps in the service of Scindiah had been the principalinstrument in the establishment of his powerat Poonahh ; commanded and officered as it was byFrenchmen, it proved the cause of the enormouspower which was established by the Mahratta onthe western side of India. It was also clearly shownthat at the moment Tippoo was addressing an apparentlyfriendly communication to the Governor-generalon the 7th February 1709, he was sendingoff M. Dubac from Tranquebar on an embassy toFrance !army.Chap. V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 169France ! The enmity of Tippoo was not unnatural, 1798.and it was too well established to admit of its beingdoubted. His reception of a French detachment atMangalore for service at Seringapatam, his declareddesign to expel the British power from India, thereport of Capt. Malcolm, describing the extent,efficiency, and discipline of Tippoo's army in July1798, his recent negotiations with Zemaun Shah,(corroborated by documents from amongst his papersat Seringapatam after his death,) placed thematter at this time beyond all question.The state of the Company's forces proved intestate of thequite to meet the pressing exigency of affairs.Lieutenant-colonel Close, the adjutant-general,declared that the forces of Madras were notcapable of defending the Company's territories,much less of carrying on offensive operations,particularly in a country like Mysore : and thateven for the purpose of defence it could not movebefore the spring of 1799. This opinion of inadequacyof the army, even for defence, was fullycorroborated by the opinion of General Harris, thecommander-in-chief. Such was the state of theCompany's military resources more immediatelycontiguous to the kingdom of Mysore, and tooppose the power of Tippoo. On turning toBengal, it appeared that the upper and westernprovinces were threatened with invasion by ZeeShah, regarding whom Mr. Dundas, thenpresident of the Board of Control, wrote to theGovernorsRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chapel.1798. Governor-general : ** It was some time ago thefashion, in my opinion too much, to undervaluethe menaces of Zemaun Shah respecting India,but I think that opinion is wearing away." GeneralSir James Craig, of the King's service, ** trembledto think of what might be the effect of an attempton the part of the Shah against Delhi." Advertingto the means which he possessed of presenting anythingof a check, and of securing the Vizier'scountry :As to the Nabob's troops, I would be content that theyshould be useless, but I dread their being dangerous. Iwould be almost as unwilling to leave them behind me as Ishould to leave a fortress of the enemy. The Nabob is highlyunpopular, and, of all his subjects, I believe he would leastexpect attachment from his army ; we ourselves have toomany recruits, indeed a number that wil very much weakenthe dependance to be placed in our battalions. On thissubject I feel that I touch upon tender ground, but I writeto your lordship in the confidence of a private communication.Neither the discipline of the army, or the knowledgeof the officers, are such as to admit of our being insensible toother disadvantages. My view is, that your lordship maybeaware of the state of the army, which it is at least possibleyou may not be through any other channel. Three-fourthswith whom your lordship may converse do notthemselves know it, and the other fourth will not confess it.It is a fact, however, past controversy, that within thesefour years, and owing to these very circumstances, of wantof discipline and knowledge, the fate of our empire in Indiaprobably hung by a thread of the slightest texture.Such was the testimony of the commandingofficer,Chai V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 171officer, who declared, '* that a defensive war must neverbe ruinous to us in India," but there were no o/olensiTe^means for conducting an offensive one. The Govern ^p^^^^'^"^*nor-general accordingly intimated to Sir JamesCraig, that the " progress of the French arms inEgypt, our actual situation with Tippoo, and thedoubtful posture of affairs at Poonahh, must contractour means of reinforcing the army under yourcommand. We must therefore be satisfied, in theevent of Zemaun Shah's approach, with a systemstrictly defensive." We have thus briefly placedbefore us the crippled condition of the finances —the inefficient state of the army — the influence andintrigues of the French — the enmity of Tippoo, —and the threatening of an enemy on the mostvulnerable point of the Company's frontiers. Inaddition to these facts, Gholam Mahomed, theRohilla chief, and leader of the rebellion in 1794,had returned into Rohilcund, with a mission fromAhmed Shah. A constant intercourse was heldbetween the chief of the Seik nation and the Mahratta.The affairs of Poonahh, and the expediency ofmodifying the triple alliance of 1792, includingthe Nizam and the Mahratta feudatories, Scindiahand Holkar, also engaged the attention of theGovernor-general .In the midst of these varied and complicated Spirit of opposesiphon at Ma-matters,all demanding immediate attention, Lord cras.Wellesley had to contend with a spirit that manifested172 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1798. rested itself on the part of some of the function ;aries at Madras, to counteract or thwart the views ;of his lordship. Having resolved to postpone 'active operations against Mysore until the follow Iing season, the Governor-general determined upon ^the immediate reduction of the French force at \Hyderabad. Instructions were accordingly sentdown in July 1798 to the Government of Madras, ^of so confidential a nature that for a time theywere not entered even upon the secret records of \the Government. A force of four thousand men jwas ordered to be provided for service with the •!Nizam. A spirit of opposition was manifested to |this measure, which called forth the severe repro |nation of the Governor-general. His lordship felt ]that immense responsibility devolved upon him, !and justly considered every support was essential \Marquis wei to advance the public interests. He at once re- \I^Sto^ert solved to assert and to exercise the high power and jhis powers. authority with which he was invested, and thereby \to set at rest all future attempts to baffle or cramp ;those measures and exertions which might be sub ■sequently determined upon. Writing to General iHarris, his lordship observed, '' My letter will ;have informed you how essential a plan to the very jexistence of the British empire in India would 1have been defeated, if your honourable firmness \had not overcome the suggestions of an opposition Iwhich would have persuaded you to violate the law, \under the specious pretext of executing the spirit |by;Chap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 173by disobeying the letter of the orders of the Governessnor-general in Council. This opposition I amresolved to crush ; I have sufficient powers to doso, and I will exert those powers to the extremepoint of their extent, rather than suffer the smallestparticle of my plans for the public service tobe frustrated by such unworthy means"*In a public letter to the Government of Madras, AnimadvertsA on conduct ofthe Supreme Council wrote : '* If we thought Madras goegovernment.proper to enter with you into any discussion of thepolicies of our late orders (for the purpose of meetingTippoo Sultaun) we might refer you to therecords of your own Government, which furnishmore than one example of the fatal consequencesof neglecting to keep pace with the forwardnessof the enemy's equipments, and of resting thedefence of the Carnatic, in such a crisis as thepresent, upon any other security than a state ofearly and active preparation for war."'}'La Virginia, frigate, was sent down to Madras, Hon. Colonel^ . Wellesley pro-withtreasure, amounting to between ten and fife needs to Ma-teenlacs; the Government were, at the same time,advised that a part of his Majesty's 33d Regiment,with the Hon. Colonel Wellesley, had embarkedfor Fort St. George on the 15th of August, andthat the remainder would follow on the 17th.Adverting to the effect which some persons imaginedthe preparations of the Government mighthavePrivate letter to Gen. Harris, 19th August 1798.t r«Wepage 107-110.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Clap. V.179aMarquis Wellesley'snominationadvantageousforIndia.have on the mind of Tippoo, the Governor-generalremarked : ** I should be ashamed to hold for onehour the post which I now fill, if I had been soweak as to suffer any vague apprehensions of thepossible effect of our preparations on the capriciousmind of the Sultaun."In looking back on the state of India at theperiod of Lord Wellesley's arrival, it scarcelyseems possible that a happier selection, or one soadmirably fitted to meet the exigencies of thetimes could have been made of a nobleman to fillthe office of governor-general. His lordship possesseda self-confidence, not the result of an overweeningpresumption, but arising from the exerciseof a mind gifted with peculiar foresight, power,and precaution, and possessing, at the same time,a degree of moral courage which nothing couldovercome.Men read books, and because they find all warlike nationshave had their downfall, they declaim against conquestas not only dangerous but unprofitable ; but there are timesand situations where conquest not only brings a revenuegreatly beyond its expenses, but brings also additionalsecurity. Let us advance to the Kistna, we shall triple ourrevenue, our barrier will then be both stronger and shorter.The dissensions and revolutions of the native governmentswill point out the time when it is proper for us to becomeactors. While Tippoo's power exists we shall be perpetuallyin danger of losing what we have. Nothing can be moreabsurd than our regarding any of the native governmentsas powers which are to last for ages. It would not be surprisingChap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 175prising if all of them were to cease to exist in the course of 1798.thirty years.In addition to these just remarks by the lateSir Thomas, then Colonel Munro, may be addeda private letter, written to Marquis Wellesley bythe Chairman of the Court of Directors, at theperiod when his lordship's mind had been madeup on the very point to which so much importancewas justly attached by the Chairman, but whichwas properly left open to his lordship's judgment:East-india House, 22d June 1798.I am able only to add a few words to the present des Letter frompatch, but they relate to a point of considerable delicacy '^,^et!'^sq!^to'and importance. If the object of the French expedition be Marquis Wel-nottimely defeated, but it should only succeed in such adegree as to encourage the hopes of our enemies in India,and, at the same time, its success not be considerable enoughto hold out the prospect of an efficacious co-operation withthem ; the most delicate and difficult of all questions willoccur. Ought we, in such an event, to push Tippoo toa premature declaration of his intentions, and precipitatehim into a war with us ? — or would it be more prudent totemporise, for the chance of avoiding hostilities altogether''The greatest difficulty in this business is, justly to appreciatethe chances of real efficacious French assistance.The Governor-general had formed a correctestimate of the enemies he had to contend with,and determined his measures accordingly.Lord Clive reached Madras on the 21st of Lordciive,, , arrives at Ma-august.It must have been with no common heels cras.kings that his lordship landed on the shores of thesettlement, and assumed charge of a governmentunderRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. V.179aLetter to hislordship fromthe Governor-general.under which his noble father first displayed thosequalities and talents that have given his name soproud a place in the history of British India.The Governor-general, in the expectation of LordClive's daily arrival, had addressed to his lordshipa most private and confidential letter, on the termsof an intimate friend (although he had not, as heobserved, the honour of his lordship's personalacquaintance). The Governor-general enteredfrankly and fully into a review of the state ofaffairs, and of his intended line of proceeding,accompanying his letter with an outline of his opinionas to some of the public servants, and of thecondition of the civil service at Madras. After statingwhat he considered to be its defects, he pointedout that a servant might reach the most arduoustrusts, and discharge them with as much credit ashis predecessor had ever enjoyed, without theapplication necessary for acquiring any of the previousbranches of knowledge in the languages, thecustoms, and laws of the country. The Governor-generalexpressed his wish to introduce into thosecountries under Madras, that were in a fit state toreceive such an improvement, a permanent settlementof revenue, connected with a speedy andregular administration of justice : from which itwas considered such essential benefits had beenderived in Bengal. Alluding to the military establishment,he did not believe that there existed inany portion of the world an army more distinguishedChap. V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 1 77gushed for its high state of discipline, or for the noaactivity, gallantry, and skill of its officers, butthe defects were those which impeded the puttingany considerable portion of that army into action.This point was pressed on the serious attention ofLord Clive, with a request that his lordship wouldallow Colonel Wellesley, whose regiment wasunder the government of Fort St. George, to havethe honor of stating at large the Governor-generalsviews for its defence. The Governor-general borethe strongest testimony to the merits and servicesof Lord Hobart, whom he had known with theutmost decree of intimacy for many years. He Marquis weir/ lesley on thethen adverted to the relative position in which the powers of thegovernments of Madras and Bombay stood towards vehement.the Supreme Government, and pointed out thelaw as bearing upon the power of the Governor-general,who —Being in possession of the whole superintendence and control,as well as of the means of comprehending in one viewthe entire state of the Company's empire and trade, and ofall the various considerations and circumstances which mayaffect either, must frequently issue instructions, the fundamentalprinciples and final scope of which cannot at firstsight be fully understood by the other presidencies : in suchcases (as well indeed as in any of those already described),I am persuaded that your lordship will concur with me inthinking, that the duty of the other presidencies can neverbe to mix direct or indirect censures with their formalobedience to the legal authority of the Governor-generalin Council : still less can it be their duty, to anticipate hisVOL, II. N decisionsRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. V.179aLord Clive onthe finances ofMadras.Expulsion ofFrench forcefrom Hyderabad.decisions by the premature inter-position of their opinionsand advice in any quarter, where such interference maycounteract the success of his general plans, and may introduceall the mischiefs and confusion of divided councils,and of conflicting authority. On my part you will alwaysfind a sincere disposition in every transaction, both publicand private, to consider your lordship's authority as a partof my own, and to repel every attempt to disunite the twogovernments.The financial difficulties experienced at Madras,which have been already noticed, and had formedmatter of discussion between the President of theBoard and Lord Clive before the latter quittedEngland, were now fully corroborated by hislordship, who stated in a letter to Mr. Dundasthat they were in a far more distressing situationthan they had any conception of. That the mainarmy of that presidency consisted of not morethan 8,000 fighting men, without means of relief,there being no prospect of marching against Seringapatambefore January 1800.The expulsion of the French force from Hyderabadnow demanded the Governor-general's attention.The office of resident was filled by CaptainKirkpatrick : that of assistant by Captain Malcolm.The latter appointment having been madeby the Governor-general in consequence of acommunication through Colonel Wellesley, thatCaptain Malcolm was qualified not only as alinguist, but as an active, intelligent, and diligentofficer,Chap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 179 ]\officer, and well acquainted with the political I798. Istate of India. The late Sir Thomas Munro, in lexpressing his opinion, and certainly no person |was better qualified to form a correct one on the 1best course of policy, observed, '' we have forseveral years had a small detachment of two battalionswith the Nizam. This is too trifling aforce to give us any control over his measures, ^but it serves as a model for him to discipline his Iown army, and it compels us either to abandon ^him disgracefully, as we did last year, or to 'follow him headlong into any way he may rashly 1enter." This opinion was given in September i1796, two years before Lord Wellesley reached iIndia, and to a quarter in Scotland from whence iit was not likely to reach the ears of his lordship. \On the 1st September the treaty with the Treaty with ;"' Nizam. ]Nizam was concluded. The subsidiary force to 1be supplied by the Company was to consist of i6,000 men, with artillery. This treaty facilitated 1ulterior measures for effecting the entire reduction ]of the French with his highness, and the com- Iplate subversion of their dangerous influence at lhis court. It was felt that the measure wouldlikewise enable the Nizam, in the event of a war ^with Tippoo, to co-operate in its vigorous prose ]caution with great effect.The detachment under Colonel Roberts reachedHyderabad on the 10th of October. On the 22d \the British troops under the orders of the Nizam, iN 2 in 1180 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1798. in co-operation with a body of 2,000 of his cavalry,surrounded the camp of the French army, disarmedall the sepoy, and secured the persons ofall the French officers then in the camp. Ameasure happily effected without bloodshed orcontest.It had been planned and prosecuted by theGovernor-general with the strictest secrecy, towhich precaution the sudden and instantaneouseffects where, in a great degree, if not wholly,attributable.Intended ope The Govcmor-general, amidst his various otherMysore!^^'"^ engagements, never lost sight of the importanceof carrying on effectual operations, with a viewto future measures against Mysore. The vigilanceexercised by his lordship, and the energy heinfused into the public functionaries, in takingmeasures to secure the necessary supplies, and inproviding for the efficient conduct of the commissariat,was of incalculable advantage, andpresented a striking contrast to former operations.A dispute having arisen with Tippoo respectinghis right to Wynaad, a small district on theGhauts, on the borders of Malabar, the Governor-general,after satisfying himself that the Sultan'sclaim was well founded, issued immediate ordersfor its relinquishment ; an intimation to that effectbeing made to Tippoo on the 1st of August.The whole bearing of the Governor-general'sviews regarding that chieftain, and the verymoderateChap. V-l BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 181moderate terms of satisfaction that were to be i798.demanded as explained by Colonel Wellesley, atthe instance of the Governor-general to LordClive, led the latter to declare, '' that it hadrelieved his mind from much solicitude."To circumvent Tippoo and cut off all communicationby sea with the French emissaries, thewhole of the Malabar coast was occupied by theCompany's troops. A force was to be stationedat Poonahh, another at Hyderabad, and a third onthe frontiers of the Carnatic.A proposition on the part of the Governor gene rippoo declines^ • • ■ 1 m- .1 11 all overtures.oral to open a negotiation with 1 ippoo, through theintervention of Col. Doveton, whom his lordship proposedthree several times to depute, was studiouslyevaded by Tippoo. Hostile measures appearing tobe unavoidable, the Governor-general determinedto proceed in person to Madras, and thereby savethe delay that would be otherwise occasioned bydistant communications and references, which couldalso be far better and more advantageously decidedon the spot.Previously to his lordship's quitting Calcutta,his attention was diverted to a very delicate andimportant point connected with the army, whichformed one of the subjects referred to when thenomination of Lord Cornwallis was announced toIndia in 1797.The regulations respecting regimental rank hadbeen carried into effect, but the Governor-generaldetermined182 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1798. determined to suspend the execution of those re-i^i^y^judu' hating to the allowances granted by the Governmentr^'r^Tng in 17^^- ^af," observed his lordship/nhe temper ofhc^rasTthe ^^^ army afforded any ground to suspect, that thearmy. execution of the reduction ordered by the Courtwould produce either disrespectful remonstranceor intemperate opposition oil the part of the officers,no crisis, however extreme, would have induced meto modify the orders of the Court. In such a case,the power and authority of the Government, andthe discipline of the army would have been at stake;and every other consideration must have beensuperseded by the indispensable necessity of subduingevery remnant of the spirit of insubordination,and of preserving the main spring of our militarystrength. But I am happy to declare my conviction,that the army is in a temper to receive, withdutiful submission, whatever regulations the Governmentenforce."Adverting to the probable call upon the armyfor its full exertions against *' the most formidablecombination by which the British empire in Indiawas ever visited ;" he added, that although submissionto a mutinous army is a weak policy in anyconjuncture of affairs, a crisis which demands everymilitary exertion, it is not the season in which anyincentive to zeal and alacrity could be withdrawnfrom the army without a considerable aggravationof the existing danger ; and the various heads ofintended reduction being specified, his lordshipplacedChap. V.J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 183placed the whole of his sentiments on record in a i798.secret minute, for the deliberate consideration ofthe Court of Directors. The prudence of MarquisWellesley's determination was strongly marked bythis j judicious postponement. Difference of opinionhas never existed as to the purity of intention andhigh honour and integrity of Marquis Cornwallis'sadministration, but on some occasions a blind sortof reverence is paid to his lordship's opinions andpolicy, from which it seems little short of sacrilegeto differ; but still experience is the best instructor,and we find that on this very point of the militaryarrangements of 1796, some opinions were advancedwhich may justify these remarks.We are now looking out a little impatiently for the armyarrangements. Some copies have arrived in this country ofthose said to have passed the Board of Control and the Courtof Directors, but they follow too closely the plan of LordCornwallis to give general satisfaction. Eighteen thousandsepoy will never be found sufficient for the services of thecoast, and eighteen hundred men is too great a number foraregiment. Corps of this strength might answer well enoughin an open country, where the troops are kept together in largecantonments, but they are ill calculated for a country withan extensive frontier covered with forts like the Carnatic ; inorder to garrison, every battalion is broken. After all thereductions, we shall be five thousand above the proposed number,and in the event of a war, it would be more economicalto have eight thousand extra than to limit ourselves to LordCornwallis'*s number. The loss of a single campaign wouldbe attended with more expense than would counterbalanceall the savings. Had Lord Cornwallis been called upon tocombat184 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1798. combat Tippoo without ^ny assistance from the Mahrattass,I suspect he would have given a very different plan from thatwhich has now been brought forward.*An opinion had been entertained, both at homeand in India, that it was good policy to maintainTippoo as a barrier between the Company's provincesand the Mahrattass, but at the same timenot to allow him to extend his dominions. The consequenceof this *' whimsical" project was to renderthe native powers so warlike, that the necessary-augmentationof our own armies would absorb ourrevenues. It was asserted with much truth, that acomparison of the military establishment, King'sand Company's, as it stood in 1797, with what itwas twenty years before, would prove that affairswere fast advancing to that point : '* the Companyflattered themselves that their late arrangementshave set limits to this increase, but they must goonincreasing while the cause which produces themexists, viz., a prince who meets us with regulararmies in the field."Negotiations Colonel Palmer, the resident at Poonahh, hadwith Poona.been authorized to communicate to the Peishwathe authentic copy of the proclamation by GeneralAlaric at the Mauritius, during the residencethere of the ambassador from Tippoo, with theview of inducing the Peishwa to modify the thirteentharticle of the treaty of Poonahh, whichprovided, that if Tippoo should molest or attackeitherColonel Munro.Chap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 185 1ieither of the contracting parties (i, e, the Nizam, 1798. ]the Peishwa, or the Company), the others should Ijoin to prevent him : the modes and conditions of ^which were to be settled by the three contracting jparties. The declaration of the durbar at Poonahh 1of 3d July 1793, explanatory of the article, stated ithat, ** if a breach of engagement occurred on the ^part of Tippoo with respect to either of the allies, ]let that ally advise the other allies thereof and 1act agreeably to treaty." jThe Governor-generals object was to engage, Peishwa de jlines subsidedunder that treaty, the reception at Poonahh oi a my advance. ]subsidiary force from the Company, and co-open !ration in the intended measures against Tippoo, iwith whom every attempt was first to be made Ithrough negotiation. The restoration of the Nizamto his proper influence, and the annihilation of the .French force at Hyderabad, had been pointed out \as important objects. But his highness could notbe induced to accede to the Governor general's jpropositions, and his lordship accordingly directed ]the resident to abstain from all further solicitation. ]The Government of Bombay had promptly met jthe views of the Governor-general in preparing for ieventual operations. The army at that presidency ibeing put in an efficient state under General Stuart. jMr. Duncan's measures, through his agent in Bu ]shire, Melody Ali, at the court of Saber Khan, in ]Persia, had completely succeeded in drawing off Persia. *Zemaun Shah, The Governor-general expressed his \entire j186 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chapel.1798. entire satisfaction at the able manner in which theretreat of that chief had been effected, and desiredthat a present should be made to Melody Ali notexceeding three lacs of rupees. His lordship'sviews were directed to extending and improvingthe British relations with Persia to the utmostpracticable degree, and Mr. Duncan's opinionswere desired as to the commercial and politicalobjects to be sought in any treaty that might beformed with that kingdom.Commissioners A commission, Consisting of the Hon. Colonelfor Mysore.Wellesley, Lieut-colonel Close, Lieut-colonelAgnew, with Captain Malcolm, assistant at Hyderabad,and Captain Macaulay, to act as secretaries,was appointed for the purpose of carrying onnegotiations with all tributaries and principal officerswho, as subjects of Tippoo might be disposedto throw off allegiance to him and place themselvesunder the Company or their allies.Declaration of A declaration of hostilities against Tippoo wasagainst Mysore, made at the Same time, the Sultan being apprizedthat General Harris, who commanded thearmy against Mysore, would receive any communicationfrom him for treating with Government.General Harris acknowledged the final instructionsfrom the Governor-general in the followingterms : —General Harris Their very satisfactory contents are perfectly understood.£u«iontT* ^ ^^^^^ "^^ attempt an elaborate letter of thanks for them,or for all the noble and liberal confidence and encouragementChap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 187ment they contain, but I trust to that Providence on whom 1793.I depend : and allow me here to relieve your lordship'smind from the fear that I shall permit myself to become adesponding in the business, by the assurance that never in mylife was I known to have the smallest tendency or turn thatway ; on the contrary, in some severe trials I have been mostcheerful in the support of others, and, thank God, havealways found my spirits to rise in the hour of danger. Asyou have taken care to secure me by every tie dear to man —by gratitude, by my own honour and conscience beingpledged, and by the Eastern policy of having my wife andchildren in your hands, I think you will not be deceived.The Governor general formed the idea of a con Nagpoor.nexion with the court of Nagpoor. An embassywas accordingly despatched to the Rajah of Berar,for the purpose of effecting a treaty of defensivealliance between himself, the Nizam, and the Company,against the discovered projects of Scindiah,reserving at the same time a right to the Peishwato accede to it whenever he might see fit. Thefundamental principle of the treaty was to be areciprocal guarantee of the respective possessionsof the contracting powers, including the rights oftheir allies.The army under General Harris marched from , ^''^^:•^ Army underCaukeniena on the morning of the 27th of March; General Harris•^ . advances.they advanced towards Malavilly, thirty-six mileseastward of Seringapatam, where they encountereda considerable body of the enemy. ColonelWellesley's division turned the right flank of theenemy, and gave occasion to General Floyd, withthree188 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. V.1799. three regiments of cavalry, to disperse a body ofinfantry, cutting many of them in pieces.Sir John An Sir John Anstruthcf, the chief justice at Cal-stretcherto Go .governor-general. cotta, in Writing to the Govcmor-general, 27thof March, remarked, " Men concerned in thegovernment of India before your arrival appearnot only totally to have overlooked the nature ofthe war we were engaged in, and the enemy wehad to contend with, but to have contracted anarrow limited view of the political interests ofEngland in India ; every difficulty was a reasonfor inaction, and temporary pecuniary embarrassmentafforded a satisfactory ground for neglectingthe essential permanent and political interests ofthe country. You have taught them a larger wayof viewing the question, and have shown themthat difficulties vanish before activity, courage, andperseverance. We all wish your presence here ;there seems much to do to regulate the submissionof the Provinces, as well as the dominions ofOude."Court of Directly Governor-general had the satisfaction totors approve , , , ,0 /-1 •Marquis Wei Cam by a despatch fj-om the Secret Committee,dated in June 1799, that his measures regardingTanjore the Wi/tiaad district, the subsidiary treatywith the Nizam, and the intended mission ofColonel Doveton to Tippoo were fully approved.A hope was expressed that hostilities with Mysoremight be avoided; but in the event of their takingplace, the Committee observed, '' the respectivecountrieswesley's meaCures.v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA.189 ^countries of the Nabob of Arcot and the Rajah of i79£f.Tanjore, will of course come under the Company'smanagement, and we direct that they be notrelinquished without special orders from us orfrom the Court of Directors for that purpose, inorder to afford sufficient time for the formation ofarrangements for relieving those princes from allincumbrances upon their revenues."The measure of the Governor general proceedingto Madras was fully approved, as well as hislordship's intention of not interfering in the detailsof the government. Entire satisfaction was expressedat the zealous co-operation of Lord Cliveand his council in the measures of the Governor-general.It is unnecessary in this place to enter into adetail of the operations against Tippoo.General Harris adopted the expedient of attack successful openingthe capital in the heat of the day, it being SiTnga^um,considered the time best calculated to ensuresuccess, as the enemy's troops would then be theleast prepared to oppose the assailants. Seringapatamwas in possession of the British army onthe 4th of May, and Tippoo fell amongst the slain.The account did not reach Fort St. George untilthe 11th, the despatch announcing this eventbeing enclosed in a sealed quill, and conveyedthrough Mysore by a secret messenger, the countrybeing filled with Tippoo's troops and adherents.During190 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1799. During the operations, some days before thesiege, a similar misfortune to that experienced byLord Cornwallis in his night-attack, attendedColonel Wellesley, who missed the road ; whichled General Harris to remark, *' no wonder night-attacksso often fail." At the earnest recommendationof Colonel Wellesley, a permanent garrisonwas appointed for Seringapatam, and he wasnominated to the command by General Harris,who felt that he could not confide the complicatedand delicate duties of a civil and political as wellas of a military nature, required from the officerin charge of the capital, to any other better qualifiedto conduct them with advantage.The Governor-general contemplated proceedingfrom Madras to Seringapatam, for the purpose ofpersonally superintending the subsidiary measuresconnected with the settlement of the new acquisitions,and their partition amongst the Company,the Nizam, and the Peishwa. The conduct ofthe Peishwa had been such as to preclude himfrom any participation in the territories takenSettlement of from Tippoo. The cession was nevertheless made,in Mysore! ^ dependant upon his agreeing to the reception of asubsidiary force at Poonahh, and to an adjustmentby arbitration, of all points in dispute betweenhis state and that of Hyderabad. It having beenclearly proved by papers found after Tippoo 'sdeath that it was his intention to have employedthe arms of France for the purpose of recoveringfromChap. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 191from the Mahrattass and the Nizam, as well as i799.from the Company, the territories ceded to eachunder the treaty of Seringapatam, the Governor-generalproposed a defensive alliance against anyFrench invasion of India, and likewise the exclusionof the French from his dominions. TheGovernor-general instructed the Resident to ascertainthe portion of territory the Nizam v^oulddesire, at the same time cautioning him to becareful to correct any symptom of a disposition,on the part of his highness, to enter into hostilitieswith the Peishwah or Scindiah : it being his lordship's** most earnest desire to avoid hostilitieswith the Mahrattass."The effect of a great political measure in thepublic mind is best gathered from the free andunblessed expression of opinion formed by parties,who from their situation are most competent tojudge of the immediate as well as prospectivebenefit. Such was the position of the publicservant,* an extract from whose letter to SirGeorge Colebrooke, dated at Madras in May1799, on the fall of Seringapatam, is now given :French treachery, alike exerted against friend and foe,has been Tippoo's ruin. The French in his service madehim believe he might rely on powerful aid to enable himto accomplish his favourite purpose, the expulsion of theEnglish from Hindostan ; and we may thank God we have,by the vigilance and ability of our ruler, reversed thepicture.^ AtThomas Cockburn, Esq.192 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1799, At the period of Lord Mornington's arrival, their planswere completed, and measures actually taken by Tippoofor the provision of a large body of Europeans. This wasnot all ; the French party in the Nizam'^s service were incorrespondence with that in Tippoo's, the Nizam's deathwas daily expected, and to consolidate their strength, theyhad projected placing the second son on the musnud, tothe exclusion of the British interests.Lord Mornington saw the growing power with anxiety,and early anticipated the evils that would inevitably resultfrom a peace with France, if in possession of an influenceso commanding in the heart of the Deccan. Whether hehad taken any measures for rooting out the serpent, prior tothe discovery of the plots carrying on by our inveterate foes,I do not know, but the moment these were proved beyonda possibility of doubt, he pursued his object with equalsecrecy and ability, and such the celerity of his measures,that the first intimation the public received was the intelligenceof the extinction of an army without the loss of adrop of blood !The success which had attended our arms against Tippoowill, as usual, be attributed to our good fortune ; butnothing was left to fortune that wisdom and energy couldprovide against, and no plans were ever followed up withmore concert than his lordship's, by those to whom theexecution was entrusted. It has often been a question howfar it is consistent with good policy, more nearly to connectourselves with the country politics, as tending more easilyto involve us in war. That must no longer be a question.The empire of the East is at our feet. We have gainedand must hold it by the sword : we must either supportthe commanding ground our conquests and treaties havegiven us in the East, or we must relinquish the hope ofmaintaining it to advantage. The consequence of ourinactivityChaiv.]BRITISH POWER IN INDIA.inactivity in Mr. Shore's government, in the warfare whichtook place between the Mahrattass and the Nizam, was alesson which ought to teach us how fatal it may be to allowourselves to sink in opinion. We have the power to balancethe scale ; the spirit must not be wanting to exert it ; notahectoring rash spirit, but a determined rule, tempered byjustice, judgment to discern what is right and necessaryto our safety, with firmness to dictate, and resolution tosupport what may once be advanced. Nothing so certainof bringing our power into contempt, as a threat nevermeant to be enforced. It is needless to add after this, thatour dominion hinges on the one man whom ministry deputeas chief ruler. Their appointment of Lord Mornington doesthem honour ; his country will, I hope, honour him equalto his deserts. He entered not on war till every effort topreserve peace and honour with safety was exhausted, andProvidence blessed his undertaking. It fell to the lot ofGeneral Baird, who was four years a prisoner in Serin -galata, to overturn the tyrant in whose prisons he hadseverely suffered ; but it must be confessed, the tyrant wasmore exhibited to his enemies than his own subjects, whohave given instances of strong attachment; though in generalhe kept in his possession the families of all whom he employedin situations of trust, his jealousy made our conquestcomplete. The capture of the families of the commandersof the army compelled their submission. I shalloffer no apology for my prolixity on a subject which mustinterest you so deeply. It will be a deadly blow to thehopes raised in France of our ruin in India, publicly announced.May it operate to the destruction of that many-headedmonster, the Directory, though I fear nothing butthe combined force of Europe will ever prevail; and thataided by internal feuds, in pulling down a government whichcould only have been framed in the infernal regions.VOL. II. O As1799.194 BRITISH POWER IN INDIA [Chap. V.I7W. As the Governor-general did not proceed toMysore, Colonel Wellesley, Mr. Henry Wellesley,and Lieut-colonels Kirkpatrick and Barry Close,were nominated commissioners for settling theaffairs in that country.Tippoo's sons The members of the family of the late Tippooremoved tovenire, under Sultaun wcrc to bc removed to Vellore. This painfulord of Hon. , . i >-, i iColonel Wei but indispensable measure was entrusted to Colonelleslev-Wellesley, as an officer most likely to combine inhis own person every office of humanity, with thenecessary prudential precautions.Colonel Doveton was nominated to the commandof the fortress of Vellore, and Colonel Close residentwith the Rajah of Mysore.™*^ of My. In settling a successor to the musnud, it appearedthat the cruelties and jealous policy of Tippoo,with the brilliant and rapid success of the war,had left no Mahometan influence to afford anyserious apprehension. It was therefore determinedthat the Rajah of the ancient house of Mysoreshould be restored; Seringapatam was to be retainedin full sovereignty for the Company " as a towerof strength, from which we might at any time,shake Hindostan to its centre." The Nizam, from aweak, decaying, and despised state, recovered substantialstrength, and resumed a respectable postureamong the provinces of India, with the aid of asubsidiary force. The strength he required wouldnot render him formidable to the British powerwhile our positions at Chittledroog, Seringapatam,andsore.Chas. v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 195and along the heads of the passes, together with 1799.the establishment of about seven thousand of ourtroops in the heart of his dominions, would renderhim almost absolutely dependant on our power ;a power which, used in moderation, would, it waspredicted, be permanent, *' abstaining religiouslyfrom all interference with the Nizam's internal government."The French influence was greatly reduced, but French force1 • 1 1 Tier 1 with Mahrattass.some adventurers still remained with the Mahrattass.The necessity of attending to the artillery in India,and the deficiency of European officers, were pointsstrongly urged on the home authorities; '* if oncethe army was allowed to decline in efficiency, theterritory, revenue, and trade, could not long survive.We must be either content to suffer the fateof those whose minds are unequal to their fortunes,and who are afraid of their own strength." Theportions of territory allotted to the Company andthe Nizam were equal; that to the Mahrattassbetween two thirds and one-half of each of theabove-mentioned shares. The Peishwa broke offthe treaty and thereby lost the portion of territoryintended for him, which, under the second articleof the treaty of Mysore, was divided between theCompany and the Nizam. The Brahmin Poorness,who had been the chief financial minister underTippoo, was appointed dewan to the young Rajahof Mysore, Krishna Rajah Oodiaver.The command of Seringapatam, which was a trusto 2 of19GRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[C.V.1799. of great delicacy and importance, requiring to beweUe.^ry°?pl reposed in a person of approved military talents andpointed to My. jj^tcgrity, and to be superintended with peculiarvigilance and care, was continued to Colonel Weilesley,who was likewise confirmed in the commandof Mysore, which, after the settlement by the commissioners,became a distinct appointment. Theorders being received from the Supreme Government,to whom the commandant immediately directedhis communications and report.The only impediment to a quiet settlement of thatcountry arose from some disturbance in the provincesof Bednore, occasioned by a partisan of the nameDwih^^"^ of Doondiah Waugh. He was originally in the ser-waugh.yi(>g Qf ^i^Q Patan state of Savanore, but havingcommitted various depredations on the territoriesof Tippoo, he incurred the resentment of that chief,who contrived to secure his person, and compelledhim to conform to the Mahometan faith. He afterwardsemployed him in his service, but suspectinghis fidelity, confined him in irons some time previouslyto the late war. Doondiah escaped from Seringapatamin the confusion of the assault on the4th of May, and, after collecting a considerableforce of horse and foot from the fugitives of Tipperaryand other men of desperate fortune, he unitedhimself with some polygamy and the commandantof some forts in the district of Bellum. Doondiahlaid the rich country of Bednore under severe contributions,which he exacted with the most unrelentingIChap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 197letting cruelty, perpetrating throughout the provincesthe most atrocious acts of rapine, hinder, andmurder. A light corps of cavalry and some infantryunder Lieut-colonel James Dalrymple of the Madrasestablishment, overtook a party, to whom, asan example, it was resolved to show no quarter.Doondiah crossed the Toombuddra; Hurryhur,a fort on the eastern bank of the river, was takenby Colonel Dalrymple, whilst Colonel Stevensonadvanced on the other side towards Bednore, andtook Simoga by assault on the 8th August ; thefort of Hoornallay was taken in the same mannerby Colonel Dalrymple. Both detachments havingcrossed the river, re-united to make a combinedattack on Doondiah's camp at Shirkapoor. The fortwas carried by assault, his troops dispersed, but heescaped by means of a boat in readiness for him.He was ultimately obliged to take refuge in theMahratta territory, where, on the 20th of August,Colonel Stevenson saw him encamp with the remnantof his banditti, which he could easily havedestroyed, but shortly after the fall of Seringapatam,the Governor-general had apprized GeneralHarris that it was his most earnest desire to avoidhostilities with the Mahrattass, and that even shouldthey have entered the state of Mysore, he did notwish measures of force to be taken to repel them,unless the safety of the British army on their aggressionshould absolutely demand the use of force.The proceedings regarding Doondiah proved theapplesRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1799. apprehensions entertained by General Harris regardinghis power too well founded, and they atthe same time evinced the respect paid by theGovernor-general to the state of an ally who hadmanifested no favourable disposition towards theBritish Government. From the subsequent measureswhich called for the personal exertions ofColonel Wellesley, it will be seen what may bedone by an adventurous and rebellious chief.Nothing short of the strong arm of power, vigilantlyand promptly applied, can secure the countryagainst the rising of discontented and enterprisingnatives, but with whom we have no rightto quarrel for attempting to throw off a foreign yoketo which they have been constrained to submit bythe sword alone. Doondiah met with no very favourablereception at the hands of the Mahrattass;Ghoklah, a native chief, commanding a division ofthe Peishwa's forces, plundered his camp a fewhours after it had been pitched, and carried awayall his elephants, camels, bullocks and guns, andas it was imagined, entirely deprived him of themeans of future depredations. The province andfortress of Bednore being delivered up to the Britishtroops.The Governor-general having ordered the preliminarysteps, in communication with LordClive, towards the introduction of a system ofjudicature and settlement of revenue into theCompany's possessions on the coast, and into thecededChap, v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 199ceded and conquered districts, embarked fromFort St. George for Bengal on the 5th of September,and arrived at Calcutta on the 14th of thatmonth, having, in the course of less than sixteenmonths, eradicated the French influence in theDeccan, effected a subsidiary treaty with theNizam, and annihilated the most inveterate enemyto the continuation of the British power in India.Addresses were presented from the inhabitantsof Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, to the Governexpressive of the reverential feelingof admiration that had been created by the wisdomand policy of his lordship's measures, and at thecomplete success with which they had beencrowned.Votes of thanks were passed by both houses ofParliament to his lordship, and to the governorsof Madras and Bombay, and to Generals Harrisand Stuart, and the respective armies.The East-india Company likewise passed unanimousvotes of thanks to the same distinguishedparties, and to the armies. In connexion with theprize-money derived to the army by the fall ofSeringapatam, there is a circumstance whichdeserves to be specially noticed, as marking thedelicacy as well as the high and honourable feelingwhich actuated the Governor-general. It appearsby a letter from Mr. Dundas, then President ofthe Board of Control, to his lordship, dated the4th of November 1799, that, in the belief that theprize200 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai-.V.1799. prize was so large as to render it improper to giveit to the army, he intended to have suggested tothe King, that it should be burthened with a largesum, to be at Lord Wellesley's disposal. It didnot, however, appear that the prize was excessive,or that his lordship had done wrong in giving it tothe army. Instructions were accordingly sent outbythe Secret Committee which accompanied Mr.Dundas's letter, to ascertain the value of the militarystores captured at Seringapatam, and toreport the same to the Court. It had not beencustomary for the Court to pay for stores of thatkind, taken by their arms, and it was stated thatthey would not, even in the instance in question,be very willing to commence the practice; butthey would, however, be induced to do it withthe reservation that £100,000 was to be at theirown disposal. ** Your lordship," observed Mr.Dundas, '* will easily guess why that reserveshould be made. I have spoken to the Chairmanand Deputy Chairman, and they enter warmly intomy suggestions. In some shape or other the ideamust be carried into execution ; I certainly muchprefer the ways I have hinted at, because in thoseways it will come in one sum, whereas in anyother mode, it must be by instalments, and lessvaluable." The Governor-general, after statingreasons which, in a personal point of view, wouldbe too humiliating to admit of his accepting sucha grant, added, ** But, independent of any questionChap. V.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 201tion of my character, or of the dignity and vigourof my government, I should be miserable if I couldever feel that t had been enriched at the expenseof those v^ho must ever be the objects of my affection,admiration, and gratitude, and who arejustly entitled to the exclusive enjoyment of allthat a munificent King or an admiring country canbestow."On the 10th December 1800, the Court ofDirectors having taken into consideration the importantservices rendered to the East-india Companyby their present Governor-general, the mostnoble the Marquis Wellesley ; the political wisdomand foresight which distinguished his conduct innegotiating and concluding a treaty with the sou-bahof the Deccan, whereby a body of 14,000 men,commanded by 124 French officers, was completelydisbanded, and the officers made prisoners, therebyremoving the cause of great political apprehension,and leaving the army of his highness at fullliberty to act in conjunction with his British alliesin the subsequent conquest of Mysore ; the zealandalacrity shown by his lordship in proceedingto the coast of Coromandel, to forward the equipmentof the army which afterwards effected thatglorious achievement which not only terminatedin the destruction of a most implacable enemy, butby which the Company also acquired a very largeaddition of territorial revenue ; the great ability,energy, firmness, and decision displayed by himduring202 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. V.1800. during the whole of the negotiation with the lateTippoo Sultaun, and the able manner in which thesubsidiary treaty with the Rajah of Mysore wasconcluded,Resolved unanimously, That in reward for sucheminent services his lordship be requested toaccept an annuity of £5,000. The same was unanimouslyapproved by the General Court on the15th of January 1801.Chap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 203CHAPTER VI. ]IThe Governor general on resuming his seat in 1799. ]the Supreme Council, recorded the high sense lwhich he entertained of the zealous co-operation Iafforded by his Excellency, the Vice President in \Council,* in the prosecution of the late war, par \circularly in the prompt dispatch of extensive and Jimportant supplies of grain and money, and other Iarticles. The military having occasionally joined inexpediency ]of opinions of jm addresses, and the army at Cawnpore beg an army on ^n t ■ • public affairs.desirous 01 becoming parties to the general expressionof thanks, Major-general Sir James Craig, \commanding at that station, discouraged the idea. jThe reasons which he gave for such a decision, ^describe the true relation in which an army standstowards the Government. The constitutional jeanlousy entertained by Parliament of a standing Jarmy in this country, presents a barrier to the ]unlimited increase of so great power, but in Indiathe case is widely different. Our supremacy has \been established by the sword, and by the sword :it must, for some time at least, be maintained. ]The strength of the army is consequently rathergoverned ;Lieut-general Alured Clarke.204 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.governed by the means possessed to defray thecost, than by other considerations. Sir JamesCraig, writing to the Governor-general, apprizedhis lordship that if the station he commanded wasbackward in offering an address of congratulation,it was not from any want of joining most cordiallyin the general sentiments.My idea is, that military addresses are highly improperin every point of view. If we assume the right of expressingour approbation of the conduct of our superiors, we have atall times equally the power of marking our disapprobation,at least, by withholding any testimony of the former sentiment; and from thus passing our judgment on the actionsof those with whom the direction of the affairs of Governmentrests, I should think it not improbable, at last, that wemight be brought to think that we could manage thembetter ourselves.But, exclusive of the impropriety and indecency of thisassumption towards our superiors, and not adverting to thedanger to which I have alluded, and which must, at least,be looked upon as possible, I confess my lord, that, beingentirely a soldier of the old school, I cannot but considerall deliberation in any public assembly of an army, as subversiveof every idea of discipline and subordination. If Icall together the officers under my command, and submit aproposition to their consideration, it is inconsistent withevery notion of justice, that they should not enjoy fullliberty of discussion; and I should feel extremely mortified,and should consider myself as having voluntarily steppedinto a situation highly unbecoming my station, and equallymilitating against my duty to the service, were I to findmyself involved in a political opposition with some of theunthinking, hot-headed boys which abound in every army.HisChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 205His lordship observed in reply, * ' Your sentiments I'J'ss-with regard to our late happy successes, your justview of the principles of military discipline, and thecorrect boundary which you have drawn betweenthe individual feelings of the officers, and the collectiveduties of the army on the present occasion,afford me the most sincere satisfaction."The Governor-general determined that a mission Mission toshould proceed from the Supreme Government toSaber Khan in Persia, to ascertain the intentionsand power of that prince, and more particularlyof Zemaun Sha, who had threatened the northernpart of Hindostan, as well as to endeavour tointerest the Court of Persia against either him orthe French, should they attempt to penetrate intoIndia through any of the Persian territory. CaptainMalcolm was selected for this service, andproceeded from Bengal in October 1799, viaBombay for Bushire, where he arrived in February1800, having concluded an engagement with theImam of Muscat, for the residence there of anagent of the British Government. In February Treaties with1 80 1 he transmitted to Bengal copies of two treatieswith Persia, the one political and the other commercial.He returned to Calcutta in September1801, having accomplished every object of hismission. It was productive of a good understanding,with the Pasha of Bagdad, a circum Pasha of Bag-stancewhich it was anticipated would prove, at afuture period, of much advantage. The operationsof206 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [ChAp. .of the French in Egypt induced the Governorsgeneral to open a negotiation with the Portuguesepower at Goa, which led to a British force of 1 100rank and file, furnished by his Majesty's 75th,nth, and seth regiments, under the command ofSir William Clarke, being admitted into that placeon the 6th September.Affairs at The affairs under the Madras presidency wereMadras. i * 11proceeding most prosperously. A new treaty hadbeen effected with the Rajah of Tanjore, by whichthe entire administration of his government andrevenues was vested in the Company, and measureshad also been taken to disarm the southernpolygamy, who had begun to revolt during the warin Mysore. A code for the introduction of thepermanent revenue settlement, and a system ofjudicature was in a state of preparation, — benefitsthat were in a short time, to be extended over thewhole of the northern circles, the Jaghire, thecountries under the Company's dominion ceded inthe late war, and in those conquered in the presentwar, with the exception of Malabar and Canara,and the countries of the southern, eastern, andwestern polygamy, with the kingdom of Tanjore.Surat. The affairs of Surat, one of the largest and mostpopulous cities on the western side of India, carryingon an extensive commercial traffic, had in agreat measure depended upon the Company. Theactual government was retained in the hands ofthe Nabob, but the system was very defective,andChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 207and found to be utterly inadequate to secure 1799.the interests of the people. The death of theNabob in 1800, afforded an opportunity for introducinga reform, for which purpose Mr. Duncan,under instructions from the Governor-general, proceededto Surat in person, to negotiate a treatywith Nusser-ud-Deen, previous to his being confirmedin the station of Nabob. It was concludedon the 13th May ; and transferred themanagement and collection of the revenues of thecity of Surat, its territories and dependencies,with the administration of civil and criminal justice,and the whole government of the country tothe Company.The deputation of Mr. Duncan gave rise to a Mr. Duncan^ . " deputed toquestion regarding the powers which a governor Surat.could legally exercise when absent from the presidencywhere he presided. The Governor-generalinferred that as no special provision had beenmade by law for such a case, it was the intentionof the legislature that whenever the governor ofMadras or of Bombay might be absent at placeswithin the limits, but remote from the establishedseat of government, they should exercise all thepowers vested in them by law, when in councilat the presidency, as far as circumstances mightpermit such powers being considered essential tothe welfare of the public.The affairs at Poonahh, and the distracted state Affairs ofof the Mahratta empire, were other matters thatcameRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chj p. VI. i1799.Revenue andjustice.Malabar andCanara.came under Marquis Wellesley's review. The Ionly means in his lordship's judgment of restoring]order was through the establishment of a subsist \diary force with the Peishwa. For the betteradministration of the revenues of Bengal, theiGovernor-general passed a resolution to prevent ithe accumulation of balances in the hands of;collectors, and at the same time recorded hishigh opinion of the revenue system of Lord Corn !wallis, *' which had still to encounter some avowed \and many secret enemies ; he had also formed a^plan for the better administration of justice, and Iin establishing a court of sudden denny and]nizam adawlut distinct from the Council, as alsupreme court of appeal from all the Company's jpossessions, exercising a general superintendenceover the administration of justice, and the regula-^tons for the police throughout the British possessions.The districts of Malabar and Canara were so!altered by the late changes, as to require, in the]judgment of the Governor-general, the introducestion of a systematic and durable plan of rulesflowing from the generosity, justice, and power iof the British Government, and not from a timid Jsubmission to the refractory spirit of any rebellious jtributary. The Governor-general was alive toithe necessity of establishing a monthly overland Icommunication with England; and although itsimportance would more especially be felt during!theChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 209 ^ithe continuance of war with Buonaparte, he con 1799. iordered that, under any circumstances, a speedy ]and certain communication between India and J■iGreat Britain, deeply involved the interests of 1both countries. ^Some documents and papers having been found Deceit of the •i ^ ° Nabob of the 'in the palace of Seringapatam after its fall, which carnatic.appeared to implicate the Nabob of the Carnatic Iin having carried on an intercourse with Tippooduring hostilities with that chief, an investigation iwas instituted in order to ascertain whether any jfoundation existed for suspecting the conduct ofOmdut-ul-Omrah.A deliberate consideration of the evidence esta \blushed the fact that a secret correspondence had \been carried on, both by the Nabob Wallajah and ^by his son the Nabob Omdut-ul-Omrah. On ]a further examination it became manifest, that \while Mahomed Ali employed his son and sue ;cesser to negotiate the treaty of 1792 with theBritish Government, his highness was delegating tat the same moment, to the same prince, authorcity to establish an intimate connexion between this highness's family and the hereditary and im ;placable enemy of the British empire in India. 1Lord Clive was therefore directed to assume the icivil and military government of the Carnatic, Jprovision being made for the proper maintenance iof the Nabob and the several members of his \household. IVOL. II. p Omdut- 1210 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.VI.1901. Omdut-ul-Omrah was apprized of this .mention by the Governor-general, and that LordClive would communicate thereon with his highness.He died in the month of July. Everyendeavour on the part of the Governor-general toeffect a satisfactory arrangement with Hussein Ali,his reputed son, proving ineffectual, a negotiationwas opened with Azim-ul-Dowlah, the undoubtedand only son of Ameer-ul-omrah.Administration With this priucc a treaty was concluded on theof the Carnaticvested the list of July 1801, by the Government of Madras,Company. . i • • • n - ^^when the sole executive administration of civiland military affairs was for ever vested in theCompany. It removed the evils of a dividedgovernment ; the inhabitants of the extensive districtswere admitted to the same advantages asthe other subjects of the British rule, and theNabob secured in a portion of the revenues, fullyadequate to the maintenance and support of hissplendour and dignity. Notwithstanding therecent conquests, the general state of affairs worea peaceful aspect. Some thieves had been infestingthe province of Noonday, where Major Munrowas engaged in the settlement of the revenue collections.Colonel Wellesley, commanding in Mysore,advised Major Munro not to let the Mahrattaterritory stop him in the pursuit of the gamewhen once started, as some cavalry promised byPurneah, supported by a few infantry, wouldafford a proper ** shear."TheChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 211The Governor general had received instructions indirectlyfrom the King, empowering his lordship, Jempiaied ^in his individual capacity, to take measures for ^^^^'^''^persuading the Dutch authorities at Batavia toplace themselves under British protection, as theyhad done at their colonies of Surinam, Demerara,and Berbice. A plan was accordingly devised tosend vessels of war, with a sufficient complement,as an ostensible justification to the Dutch, to surrenderthe colony into the hands of the Britishforce. The principal conduct of the equipmentand negotiation was committed to Admiral Rainier,with a military officer joined in the commission.This appointment Lord Wellesley offered to ColonelWellesley, as the most fit person to beselected, if he could be spared from Mysore,leaving the acceptance of the service to the optionof Colonel Wellesley, after considering the pointsrelating to the probable operations.Lord Clive made a most earnest request to the Presence of theGovernor general that Colonel Wellesley might weiiesiey de-remainin Mysore, as he knew not how to sup sore.ply his place. The insurgent Dhoondiah Waughhaving again made his appearance, Colonel Wellesleywas instructed by the Madras Government"to pursue him wherever he could be found, andto hang him on the first tree," for which purposeauthority would be given him to enter the Mahrattafrontier.Lord Clive, in a letter to Colonel Wellesley,p 2 repressedat RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap \^I.ifloo. represented that if he vacated the command inMysore, he could not fill it by an appointmentto his satisfaction. Colonel Close, then at Seringapatam,also adverted to the contemplatedchange with feelings of alarm, and asked whetherMysore was not a most important charge, whilstthe service at Batavia could not be equally so.It was upon this communication that ColonelWellesley addressed Mr. Wellesley from camp atHurrah : ** I have left it to Lord Clive to acceptfor me Lord Mornington's offer, or not, as he mayfind it most convenient for the public service.The probable advantages and credit are great, butI am determined that nothing shall induce meto quit this country until its tranquillity is restored."Colonel Wei Colonel Wellesley wrote to the ^ oral, '' I do not deny that I should like much to go,public service, but you will have learned before you receive this,that my troops are in the field." To Lord Clive heremarked, **Dhoondiah is certainly a despicableenemy, but, from circumstances, he is one againstwhom we have been obliged to make a formidablepreparation. If we do not get him, we mustexpect a general insurrection of all the discontentedand disaffected in these countries."Again, addressing Lord Clive, he stated, *' Icannot think of relinquishing the command withwhich your lordship has entrusted me, at this interestingperiod, for any object of advantage or creditChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 213dit to be gained in another place. Dhoondiah has isoo.beat Gocklah ;* there is not a single paddy fieldin this whole country, but plenty of cotton groundswamps, which in this wet weather are delightful.When in camp, on the right of the Malpoorba,on the 31st of July, Colonel Wellesley wrote toMajor Munro :I have struck a blow against Dhoondiah which he will Colonel Wel-feelseverely. I surprised his camp at three o'clock in the tionTagainsr'evening with the cavalry, and we drove into the river or I^oondiah, and° . . correspondencedestroyed everybody that was in it. vvith MajorMunro.And on the 1st August :I must halt here tomorrow to refresh a little, havingmarched every day since the 22d July, and on the 30th,the day I took his baggage, I marched twenty-six miles,which, let me tell you, is no small affair in this country.My troops are in high health and spirits, and their pocketsfull of money, the produce of plunder.Major Munro, in a letter of the 9th August toColonel Wellesley, observed :Your dashing way of carrying on the war is better calculatedthan any other to bring it to a speedy conclusion.Dhoondiah and his assophs, and founders, and nabobs, certainlydid not expect that their reign was so short : youprobably, yourself, did not, a month ago, expect that itwould have been terminated so soon : I must own I did not*Your short campaign has added so much to the reputationof our arms, that it will, I think, make our vagabondneighbours respect our frontier more in future. I have notbeen able to discover from your letter whether DhoondiahhasCommanding the Peishwa's troops.214 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.has gone towards Kittoor, or crossed the Malpurba. I see,however, that five thousand of his people have gone to thebottom, which is some satisfaction in the mean time. I havelost the only map I had, and can, therefore, make nothingof your present route, nor of the country between the Mal-turbaand the Kistna; but I make no doubt that you mark,as you go along, what part lies convenient for us as a newfrontier, and what posts might, by a little strengthening,be used as depots in carrying on war hereafter to the northward.Darwar would be a good station, but you may haveseen others more to the eastward. A war with an enemythat could bring fourteen or fifteen thousand horse into thefield, as the Mahrattass have sometimes done, would be avery serious matter, were we obliged to draw our rice fromsuch a distance as we now do. We must not let all yourconquests go for nothing, otherwise we shall have Noondayjust as much exposed as ever. I trust that, besides subduingDhoondiah, you will extend the limits of our empire, asfar, at least, as the Malpurba : if to the Kistna, so muchthe better. Your opinion on this head would, most likely,determine the conduct of Government.Again, in a letter on the 14th of August, toColonel Wellesley, from Cundapore.Your success has been so much more rapid and completethan I could have expected, that the great object of seizingon any posts belonging to the Mahrattass, in order to keepthe enemy at a distance from our own frontier, is now removed.To keep your allies in good-humour is now what isprincipally required, and this you can easily effect by orderingmy people to stay at home. Your present expedition willanswer many useful purposes; we shall, as you say, havegained a knowledge, conciliated the principal people, andraised our reputation ; but I much doubt our being able toestablishChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 215establish a government capable of preserving the relations ofamity and peace: indeed I am convinced that we cannot ;all will be well while your army is present, but withdraw it,and you will soon see what will happen. It is the characterof all Indian governments, that whenever the energy of theruling power is gone, every subordinate agent under thetitle of Nabob, Rajah, &c. pushes for independence. Lookat the numberless revolutions Delhi has undergone, whilethe title of emperor still remains. It has always been, andalways will be the same under all Indian governments. Hadwe to do with distinct independent nations, as in Europe,it might be wise to withdraw again into our limits, for thesake of preserving an useful ally, but here things are entirelydifferent. Vavasor makes no part of the Mahrattanation, and is less connected with it than the natives ofMysore. T'q throw it hack again upon a power which cannotkeep it, would only he keeping in reserve for ourselvesa second rrdlita^^y expedition to restore order.I confess, for my own part, that, as we have thought itnecessary to appear in India as sovereigns, I think weought to avail ourselves, not of the distresses of our neighbours,hut of their aggressions, to strengthen ourselves, andto place ourselves in such a situation as may he likely toprevent such attacks hereafter, Scindiah has been allowedto increase his power by the subjugation of the Jeypoor andOdapoor rajahs, and also, in a great measure, of the Peishwa.I am for making ourselves as strong as possible before theFrench return to India, and set Scindiah to war with us,after completing his demi-brigades with pretended deserters.If you reduce Dhondiah completely, the Mahrattass oughtto think themselves well off in giving up to us, for our helpand expenses, all on this side of the Malpurba.Colonel Wellesley acknowledged Major Munro'sletter in camp at Hoobly on the 20th of August.My216 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.My ideas of the nature of the Indian governments, oftheir decline and fall, agree fully with yours ; and I thinkit probable that we shall not be able to establish a stronggovernment on this frontier. Scindiah's influence at Poonahhis too great for us, and I see plainly, that, if Colonel Palmerremains there, we shall not be able to curb him withoutgoing to war. There never was such an opportunity for it asthe present moment : and, probably, by bringing forward,and by establishing in their ancient possessions the Bhow'sfamily under our protection, we should counterbalance Scin-dial, and secure our own tranquillity for a great length oftime. But I despair of it : and I am afraid that we shallbe reduced to the alternative of allowing Scindiah to beour neighbour, upon our old frontier, or of taking thiscountry ourselves.In my opinion, the extension of our territory and influencehas been greater than our means. Besides, we have addedto the number and the description of our enemies, by deprivingof employment those who heretofore found it in theservice of Tippoo and the Nizam. Wherever we spreadourselves, particularly if we aggrandize ourselves at theexpense of the Mahrattass, we increase this evil. We throwout of employment, and of means of subsistence, allwho have hitherto managed the revenue, commanded orserved in the armies, or have plundered the country. Thesepeople become additional enemies : at the same time that, bythe extension of our territory, our means of supporting ourgovernment, and of defending ourselves, are proportionablydecreased.As for the wishes of the people, particularly in this country,I put them out of the question. They are the onlyphilosophers about their governors that ever I met with —if indifference constitutes that character.These extracts from the early correspondenceofChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 217of two such distinguished parties in the acquisitionof the British possessions in India, not only putus in possession of their views on the affairs asthey were in progress, but present those affairs inafar more interesting light than could be impartedby mere dry official despatches.After further active operations in pursuit of thefugitives, Colonel Wellesley, leaving his infantry,pushed on with his cavalry only. On the 9th ofSeptember, in the evening, Dhoondiah, who wasdesignated *' the King of the two worlds," waswithin nine miles of the British force, but ColonelWellesley's horses were so much fatigued, and thenight was so bad, he could not move. In announcinghis further proceedings, he wrote fromcamp at Yepulpurry, 11th September.After a most anxious night, I marched in the morningand met the King of the World with his army, about fivethousand horse, at a village called Conahgull, about sixmiles from hence. He had not known of my being so nearhim in the night, and had thought that I was at Chinnoor.He was marching to the westward, with the intention ofpassing between the Mahratta and Mogul cavalry and me.He drew up, however, in a very strong position, as soon asheperceived me ; and the " victorious army" stood for sometimewith apparent firmness. I charged them with the 19thand 25th Dragoons, and the 1st and 2d Regiments of Cavalry,and drove them before me till they dispersed, and were scatteredover the face of the country. I then returned andattacked the royal camp, and got possession of elephants,camels, baggage, &c. &c., which were still upon the ground.The Mogul and Mahratta cavalry came up about eleveno'clock ;218 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.1800. o'clock ; and they have been employed ever since in thepursuit and destruction of the scattered fragments of therebellious army.Thus has ended this warfare ; and I shall commence mymarch in a day or two towards my own country. An honestkilladar of Chinnoor had written to the King of the Worldby a regular appal, established for the purpose of givinghim intelligence, that I was to be at Newly on the 8th, andat Chinnoor on the 9th. His Majesty was misled by thisinformation, and was nearer to me than he expected. Thehonest killadar did all he could to detain me at Chinnoor,but I was not to be prevailed upon to stop ; and even wentso far as to threaten to hang a great man sent to show me theroad, who manifested an inclination to show me a good roadto a different place.one Wei General orders were issued at Madras on thety proceeds'rincoinaiee. 24th of December, expressing the thanks of theGovernor-general in Council and the Governor ofMadras for the services against Dhoondiah, andannouncing that Colonel Wellesley, having receivedinstructions from the Governor-general in Councilto proceed toTrincomalee to take the command ofa force destined to attack the Mauritius, ColonelStevenson would succeed to the command in Mysore,Malabar, and Canara. Colonel Wellesleyaccordingly proceeded to Trincomalee. AdmiralRainier not having made his appearance at that portby the28thJanuaryl801, Colonel Wellesley wroteto the Bengal Government, and expressed his opinionthat the season would be too far advanced toadmit of the attack. A letter which he receivedfromChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 219 1from the Governor-general, two days afterwards, ^^^in ,, , 1 • . 11 Changes iiconned him in this view, and intimated the commandw->i i> 1 • • intended e:(governor-general s determination to resume the dion.expedition to Batavia ; on which occasion General iBaird was appointed to command the military,and Colonel Wellesley to act as second in com- ^and. At the completion of that service, the ;intended measure as-ain't the Mauritius was to be iprosecuted, when Colonel Wellesley was to take jthe command and act under his former orders. IBy a subsequent letter from the Governor-generalof the 5th of February, Colonel Wellesley was iapprized of instructions having been addressed to iAdmiral Rainier, General Baird, and himself, 1assuming the possibility that the admiral might inot attack Batavia, but determine on the expeditetion to the Mauritius ; in which event General \Baird was to take the command and Colonel Wei iwesley to act as second. Before this letter was Measure'received by Colonel Wellesley, a despatch reached ^""^'"^ ^him from Madras, with the copy of a letter from jhis Majesty's Secretary of State, dated the 6th of iOctober, to the Governor-general, desiring that aforce from India might be in readiness to act inEgypt. In order to give effect to these instructions vIc^Icv's lOitons, he determined to proceed to Bombay with sight in pithe troops intended to act under orders from Ben Bombay.'gal, as the rendezvous at the former presidency |presented, in his judgment, the greatest facility )for promoting the expedition to Egypt. Having jmade ^220 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.1801 made his intentions known to Mr. North, theediffers with governor of Ceylon, that gentleman not only difffeared in opinion, but placed his sentiments onceylon. .record. This act imposed upon Colonel Wellesleythe necessity of justifying his intended course,which he did in a clear exposition of his reasons,accompanying his formal address to Mr. Northwith a private letter, in which he expressed hisregret that General M'Dowall, then commandingin the island, should also have thought it necessaryto write a public letter upon the subject, ashefelt that it considerably increased his responsibility.*but," he added, *' I conceive the groundsupon which I have determined to go to Bombay areso strong, and the urgency of the measure so great,and will appear so much so to all those who willhave to judge of my conduct, that I persist, and Istill hope that it will meet with your approbationand that of General M'Dowall." Colonel Wellesleythus early displayed that judgment, foresight,and determination, which proved of suchinfinite advantage in his subsequent career: hiszeal for the public service was equally apparent.Aware that General Baird was destined to commandthe force to Egypt, and concluding that theGovernor-general would not send both expeditions,he wrote to the general — dated the 21st ofFebruary, on board his Majesty's ship Suffolk,commanded by Capt. Pulteney Malcolm, — recommendinghim to come to Bombay immediately orheIChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 221 ]ihe might be too late. Colonel Wellesley's proceed iso.kings were approved by the Governor general, mem'auh!Having reached Bombay, he wrote from thence to commands'his brother, the Hon. Henry Wellesley, on the 23d thispemc^of February. Alluding to further explanations, he =observed : II shall always consider these expeditions as the most Iunfortunate circumstances for me, in every point of view, jthat could have occurred ; and as such shall always lament ]them. jI was at the top of the tree in this country : the govern Iment of Fort St. George and Bombay, which I had served, iplaced unlimited confidence in me, and I have received from Iboth strong and repeated marks of their approbation. Before ^I quitted the Mysore country, I arranged the plan for takeing possession of the ceded districts, which was done withoutstriking a blow ; and another plan for conquering Wynaad, iand re- conquering Malabar, which I am informed has sue jneeded without loss on our side. But this suppression hasruined all my prospects, founded upon any service that I \may have rendered. Upon this point I must refer you to ithe letters written to me and to the Governor of Fort St. •George, in May last, when an expedition to Batavia was in \contemplation ; and to those written to the governments of ;Fort St. George, Bombay, and Ceylon, and to the Admiral, :Colonel Champagne, and myself, when the troops were ']assembled in Ceylon. I then ask you, has there been any jchange whatever of circumstances that was not expected "■when I was appointed to the command ? If there has not, j(and no one can say there has, without doing injustice to ]the Go governor-general foresight,) my suppression must have jbeen occasioned, either by my own misconduct, or by an Ialteration of the sentiments of the Governor-general. I have :not222 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.1801. not been guilty of robbery or murder, and he has certainlychanged his mind. But the world, which is always good-naturedtowards those whose affairs do not exactly prosper,will not, or rather does not, fail to suspect that both, orworse, have been the occasion of my being banished, likeGeneral Pray, to my estate in Hungary. I did not look,and did not wish, for the appointment which was given tome;and I say that it would probably have been moreproper to give it to somebody else ; but when it was givento me, and a circular written to the governments upon thesubject, it would have been fair to allow me to hold it till Idid something to deserve to lose it.I put private considerations out of the question, as theyought, and have had no weight in causing either my originalappointment or my suppression. I am not quite satisfiedwith the manner in which I have been treated by Governmentupon the occasion. However, I have lost neithermy health, spirits, nor temper in consequence thereof.But it is useless to write any more upon a subject of whichI wish to retain no remembrance whatever.General Baird arrived at Bombay on the 30thof March, when Colonel Wellesley delivered overto him the command of the troops. They sailed onthe following morning. Colonel Wellesley wishedto have proceeded as second in command. Hisintention was, however, frustrated by illness. Hetherefore wrote to General Baird, and transmitteda memorandum which he had prepared for theoperations in the Red Sea ; and stated that heshould remain at Bombay as long as the seasonwould permit, and then proceed to Madras, as thecommand in Mysore was to be open to him, undertheChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 223the orders of the Governor-general. He accord i80i.iingle resumed that station on the 28th of April, and jappears to have been fully occupied in organizing |the civil and military administration of Mysore. |Colonel Stevenson was nominated to the com- Iand in Malabar and Canara, under the authority \of Colonel Wellesley. \Lieut. ~ general Gerard, afterwards Lord Lake, Iwas appointed commander-in-chief by the Court ^of Directors, on the 1st of August 1800, in successsion to Sir Alured Clarke, who retired in February \1801. IjIAt this time letters-patent were issued by Marquis \\i1 /-i • •-n/r • "ixr 11 1 /^ lesleyappoithe Crown, appomtmg Marquis Wellesley Cap bytheKinftain-general in India. The measure was adopted rale ^'" ^to prevent the possibility of difficulties arising iin the direction and employment of the King's ^forces, who were under the immediate direction 1of officers commissioned by the King, and not by 3the Company ; and also to invest the Governor jgeneral with full command over the military forces ^employed within the limits of the Company's ]exclusive trade. The letters-patent required his \lordship's obedience to all instructions, orders,and directions from the First Commissioners for \the affairs of India, or from any of his Majesty's |principal Secretaries of State.The \224 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.The settlement of the Company's future relationswith the state of Oude, which had been particularlypointed out by the Directors as a matterdemanding the earnest attention of the Government,was now brought to a conclusion.The Governor-general, in obedience to theCourt's views, contemplated, at the close of theyear 1798, entering upon a revision of the Vizier'sestablishments. The state of his troops was apressing evil : they consisted of an armed rabbleunworthy the designation of a military force. Thecivil establishment was in entire disorder, and thesystems under which the revenue was extortedwere in violation of every principle of justice.Lieut-colonel Scott succeeded Mr. Ramsden asresident, in May 1799. He was possessed of theGovernor-general's views for effecting a reductionof the Vizier's forces, for which those of the Companywere to be substituted. The Vizier hadexpressed his intention to consult Colonel Scott,on the reform of his military establishment, butno steps had been taken for the purpose. TheGovernor-general accordingly addressed his Excellency,pointing out to him that the Companywere bound, by treaty, to defend his territoriesagainst all enemies ; but that the number of Britishtroops stationed in Oude was not adequate to theobject, in the event of an invasion of his dominions.The demonstrations by Zemaun Shah, and the impossibilityof the Company's increasing their meansonChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 225on a sudden call, rendered some decisive measuresrequisite, to place the Vizier's country in a conditionof safety.The Secret Committee were apprized by theGovernor-general of his intended measures inNovember 1799, and likewise that the Vizier hadcommunicated to Colonel Scott his fixed determinationto abdicate. The Governor-general observed,'* Whatever may be his motive, it is myintention to profit by the event to the utmostpracticable extent." His lordship entertained aconfident hope of either establishing the exclusiveauthority of the Company in Oude, with the consentof the Vizier, or placing affairs there on amore satisfactory footing. His lordship caused apaper to be transmitted to Colonel Scott, in theshape of an answer to the Vizier's intimation, madethrough the resident, of his intention to retire fromthe government of Oude. It contained the objectionswhich occurred to the Governor general tosuch a step, and pointed out the proceedings thatwould become necessary in appointing a successor,which would likewise involve a question regardingthe disposition of his accumulated wealth, andother matters. The Vizier had declared his intentionto take this treasure with him ; but it waspointed out to him it was the property of the state,and therefore liable to its engagements. It is mostprobable that a knowledge of this fact induced hishighness, who was extremely parsimonious andVOL. II. Q fond226 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.fond of wealth, to alter his determination, and toabandon all idea of relinquishing the government.The Secret Committee were apprized of this circumstancein June 1800. The Governor-generalstated his concern at the determination, and expressedhis belief that the proposition of the Vizierhad been from the first illusory, and designed, byartificial delays, to frustrate a reform in his militaryforces; but that he had no doubt of accomplishingthe original intention of reducing the Nabob'sforces and substituting those of the Company. Tothis measure the Governor-general had been urgedby communication fromMr.Dundas. Lord Wellesley,writing to Mr. Duijdas, stated, **I trust that itis nearly accomplished, but not without greatreluctance on the part of the Vizier, whose characterhas been displayed on this occasion in thegenuine colours of Asiatic treachery and falsehood."Sir John Anstruther having made a tour to Allahabad,communicated the result of his observationson the country through which he had passed. 'benaresis a garden : I can compare the country fromBuxar to Mirzapore to nothing but a fine Englishpark which has been ploughed up, and the owner,not to spoil the view from his house, has bestowedcontinual pains on the cultivation. From Mirzaporeto Allahabad I went by dark, nearly thirty milesof the road lay through the Vizier's dominions : thedifference is not to be described ; the country is adesert.Chap. VI. ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 227desert, but the remains of cultivation visible. Villagesonly to be distinguished by the rising groundscovered with broken bricks formed of their ruins.Desolation cannot be more strongly painted, butI am told that the effect of disbanding the troopsin many places is already felt : people having asoldiery to protect and not to plunder them, beginto return to their fields. What would not thatcountry be, under British government?"In January 1801, the prospect of a failure onthe part of the Vizier with the necessary payments,determined the Governor general to take decidedsteps to remedy evils which were to be tracedfrom an early period to bad government. TheVizier remonstrated against the cession of territoryrequired to meet the charge of the troops, andthen stated that he found his original idea ofabandoning the government to be altogether impracticable.He urged that the payment of hiskiss was a sufficient proof of improvement in hissystem. The truth was, that he found the regularpayment of the kiss to afford the only hope ofhis retaining the management of the internaladministration of his affairs. He did not reflectfor an instant on the objectionable means employedto raise the funds, which inflicted intolerable evilson the people, whilst the force which he pretendedto maintain for the defence of his dominions, inwhich the Company were as much, if not moredeeply concerned than himself, was really a use2 less228 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VLless armed rabble, unfit for any service but pillaginghis subjects. In the month of July, the general accredited the Honourable Henry Wellesley,his lordship's private secretary, to theVizier, with authority to conclude, in concertwith Lieutenant Colonel Scott, one or more ofthe treaties that officer had received. The Governhimself intending to proceed to theUpper Provinces as soon as the situation of publicaffairs would admit, his lordship announced hisintention to the Secret Committee in a letter fromMonghyr, of the 28th September, in which hestated, that it appeared to be a primary article ofhis duty to ascertain at the earliest opportunity,by the best evidence which could be collected,the real operation of the existing system of theCompany's government, upon the prosperity ofthe country, and upon the wealth, industry, morals,and happiness of the people. An advantage wouldalso arise to the stability of the government, fromthe inhabitants being convinced that the officerexecuting the supreme power, was enabled occasionallyto superintend and control in person theconduct of the subordinate administration, aswell as to investigate and watch the condition ofthe civil service in remote parts, and to satisfy itsmembers that their respective characters and conductwere under the observation of the Governor-general,and to encourage and reward honourableexertion.AnChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 229An interview took place between the Vizier andMr. Henry Wellesley on the 6th of September,when the former begged it might not be understoodthat he pledged himself to the acceptanceof any specific proposition, but that he was sensibleany resistance to an arrangement proposedby the Governor-general would not be for hisadvantage. Lieutenant-colonel Scott was presentduring the whole of the conference. The treatyultimately agreed upon was signed on the morningof the 10th of September, by which the Vizierceded districts to the Company yielding a jumnaof 1,35,23,474 Lucknow rupees. Mr. Henry Wellesleywas appointed to preside over the cededcountry, and sundry other gentlemen were nominatedto assist him in the administration of affairs,and to take charge of the districts from the Company'sofficers. A copy of the treaty was transmittedby the Governor-general to the Court ofDirectors whilst on the Ganges, near Benares.His lordship described it as providing for the substitutionof a regular force, in lieu of the irregularand precarious military power of the Vizier. Thepayment of the subsidy was no longer to rest onthe faith of the native government of Oude, norsubject to be affected by the corruption, imbecility,and abuse of a vicious and incorrigible systemof misrule and vexation, in the support of whichthe influence of the British name, and the powerof the British sword, had been frequently applied,thereby230 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI.thereby upholding a system disgraceful in itsprinciples and ruinous in its effects. A positiveright of interference on the part of the Companywas reserved in the internal management of thecountry remaining with the Vizier. The Governor-generalanticipated, that in the course of a yearthe settlement of the ceded districts would be sofaradvanced as to enable him to withdraw Mr.Henry Wellesley, who would superintend it untilthat time.The Vizier met the Governor-general at Cawnporeon the 19th of January. All discussion onthe treaty was purposely deferred by his lordshipuntil reaching Lucknow, when six points wereproposed, and, under modification, agreed to.The arrear of augmented subsidy of twenty-onelacs was to be paid.The immediate reduction of the militaryestablishment.The exchange of the district of Handed, andany other districts south of Allahabad, whichinterfered with the Company's frontier.The regular payment of the pensions.The introduction of an improved system ofadministration, with the advice and assistanceof the British Government.The concentration of the British militaryforce to be employed in his excellency's dominions,at a cantonment in the vicinity ofLucknow.OnChap. VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 231On the 15th February, the Nabob Vizier deliveredto the Governor general a paper of propositions,calculated to preserve his power andauthority, which appeared to be drawn up withgreat judgment and discretion; at the same timethat the modified assent of the Governor-general,with certain stipulations in favour of the authorityto be exercised by the Resident, showed the extentof power which the individual filling the postwould possess. It called for the exercise of thegreatest caution in the selection of an officer ofhigh honour and character, for so responsible apost.By the treaty, concluded in November 1801, theVizier's power was to be completely establishedwithin his reserved dominions, and to be exercisedthrough his own officers and servants, the BritishGovernment agreeing to guarantee the establishmentof his excellency's authority within thosedominions. The British Government was never todepart from this engagement.232 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai. VIICHAPTER VII.In the autumn of 1801, both the Marquis Wellesleyand Lord Clive contemplated retiring fromtheir respective governments. The measures of theGovernor-general in effecting the expulsion of theFrench from Hydrabad, — in the conquest of Mysore,and in the arrangements respecting the Carnatic,had received the entire approbation of the homeauthorities. High commendations had likewise beenpassed upon the conduct of Lord Clive, in supportingthe measures of the Supreme Council, and inadministering the government of Fort St. George.The causes which operated upon the minds of thosenoble functionaries, and made them desirous ofrelinquishing their charge, arose out of the peculiarconstitution of the Company.The Proprietary was divided into three classes,each possessing a relative degree of power, whichthey could exert on given occasions.The Shipping interest;The City interest ; andThe interest of the Agency-houses.The two first were at that time by far the mostpowerful,ten.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 233 1powerful, and of these the shipping interest pre I801-2.'1 . t East Indiapondered. shipping sysFrom the causes which bound the members ofthis interest together, and more frequently calledit into operation, it presented a very formidablebody. The question regarding the Company'sshipping affairs had for a long period agitatedthe home councils. The Company felt that thedistance which separated them from the sourceof their commerce, rendered it necessary for themto pay great attention to the links which unitedthem. This led to the Company equipping and navigatingtheir ships in a manner very different fromthat which prevailed in other branches of commercialdealing. When territory came also to be combinedwith their commerce, the attention to theirshipping was found to be still more needed, as theirvessels were fitted both for defence and the transportof troops for service in their territorial possessions.Their shipping was gradually brought to such astandard of perfection, both in point of equipmentand navigation, as far to surpass all other shippingof a commercial character, and even to rival thenavy of every other country, that of Great Britainexcepted; but even here, the scientific knowledgeand skill in navigation possessed by the officers inthe maritime service of the East India Company,was not secondary to that possessed by the officersof the Royal Navy.The best proof of the efficiency of the Company'smaritime234 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.maritime establishment was the very trifling losswhich attached to it, either in men or merchandise,through the long and perilous navigation of an Indianvoyage. Evils, however, of a very various andcomplicated nature, soon began to engraft themselvesupon a system, thus excellent and successfulin many of its objects. Some captains who hadraised themselves to affluence in the service, obtainedseats and considerable power in the Direction.The outfit and equipment of the Company's shipsemployed a very large capital, and the personsinterested in those concerns qualified themselvesas voters.The consequence of these measures, and a combinationof other secondary causes, which it is notnecessary here to enumerate, were, that in processof time the managers and owners of those ships, bycombining together, obtained such an influence,both in the Courts of Directors and Proprietors, asalmost to be able to direct the measures of the Company,not only in matters relating to the shippingconcerns, but also upon great political subjectswhich frequently formed matter of public discussionin the General Court. Hence various abusesprevailed. The rate of freight was exorbitant;every thing of its kind was excellent, but scarcelyany attention was paid by the owners to the stowage; their expenditure was profuse ; their indulgenceto the captains great, so that little came intothe pockets of those who held shares of ships, saveandIChai'.VII.J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 235and except to the managing owner. The high rateof freight and other outgoings became at last soglaring, that a revision took place in the system.Still sufficient of the old leaven remained to entailupon the finances a heavy and unnecessary burthen.It will astonish owners at the present day to knowthat a ship was originally engaged for four voyagesonly; with some difficulty it was afterwards extendedto six. The keel of a new ship was permitted tobe laid down upon the bottom of the ship worn outor lost. It was to be built under the Company'simmediate inspection, and to be commanded bythe captain of the old ship lost or worn out, and thenew ship came in her turn to be employed. Thenumber of ships required by the Company soonbecame known as a matter of certainty, and thusthe shipping system of the Company, althoughrevised and improved, still formed a separate andpowerful interest, very jealous of interference, extendingeven to the casual admission of other thanriver-built shipping, but the idea of foreign builtvessels was never for a moment thought of.It has been seen in the Charter Act of 1793,three thousand tons were set apart for the use ofthe private trade in the India commerce.* Themode and cost of this supply were objected to bythe merchants engaged in the India trade, andthey unceasingly endeavoured to impress uponthe Minister the injustice of excluding India-builtshipping from bringing home the empty tonnage*ra. page 137. which236 Rise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1801-2. which found its way to Europe through foreigncapital : a fact alluded to by Lord Cornwallis,who had pointed out the obligation on the Companyto facilitate the means of remittance.*In the summer of 1797, Mr. Dundas, then presidentof the Board of Control, addressed the shipbuildersin the river Thames, through Mr. Perry,an eminent builder, and urged the injustice, aswell as folly, of depriving a large description ofthe subjects of Great Britain of a right whichundoubtedly belonged to them. The British dominionsin India being under the sovereignty ofGreat Britain, the ships built there were equallyentitled to all the privileges of British-built shipping.Those privileges had not been withheld fromships built in the West-indies, or Canada, or anyother foreign dependency of the empire. Thebuilders had never set up a claim to prohibit anyof the shipping, in those quarters, from bringinghome the produce of their own territories in shipsof their own building. The sound policy was tomake the whole trade of India to centre in GreatBritain, either for consumption or exportation.The large shipping built for the Company had, itwas admitted, a greater claim to consideration, aswell as the workmen connected with it for employ ;but those who contended for the exclusion of allother shipping, forgot that the commerce of theCompany was to be regulated by their means, andthatVide page 48.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 237that it was impolitic to admit of foreigners enjoyingthat which the British merchant ought aloneto possess. The principle of exclusion was alsourged by the ship-builders, in the belief that itwould materially interfere with their interests,whereas it was quite clear that the India producewould find its way to Europe, and if through otherchannels than the shipping belonging to England,or her possessions in India, the repairs and outfitwould be derived in a foreign port, and the produceof India, in the room of being alone purchasedat the Company's sales, would be procured on theContinent or elsewhere.Notwithstanding these sound principles, theopposition promoted by the shipping interest ledto a conspiracy far from creditable to the shipbuilders,by which the interests of the ship-carpentersin the river Thames were inflamed, at themoment when the feelings of the country wereexcited and alarmed by the state of the navy,and the mutiny at the More.On the arrival of Lord Wellesley at Calcutta,in May 1798, the mercantile community at thatpresidency presented an address of congratulation,and expressed the satisfaction which they felt athis lordship having been a member of the Boardof Control, as in that station he must have acquireda full knowledge of every point beneficialto the territories over which he was placed, as wellas to the commerce of the mother country ; andurged238 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIT.1901.2. urged on his consideration all the arguments thathad been advanced in favour of a general permissionfor India-built ships to carry cargoes toLondon, under certain regulations, so as to securea permanent benefit to the East-india Company,the British nation, and the nations and countriesin Asia under the sovereignty of Great Britain.They contended that such a measure would annihilatethe illicit trade of Europe, and secure greatadvantages to London, as the depot for Asiaticindia-built commerce. The Supreme Government, in Bengal, bcr following, accordingly sanctioned a noticefrom the Board of Trade, proposing to hire, onaccount of the Company, ships, qualified accordingto lav, to proceed from Bengal to Englandwith cargoes, such tenders to be made by the 31stof January 1799.Mr. Dundas, In March of that year, the President of theas to shipping T-k , ^ ,r-< -i i i /^interest. Board of Control announced to the Governor-general,that the financial state of India affairsv^ould form the subject of an early communicationfrom home; but he thought it right to put hislordship in possession of his sentiments on somepoints, regarding which a difference would arisebetween the Board and the Directors, that must ultimatelybe settled by the authority of the former.He pointed out the expediency, under certaincircumstances, of opening loans in India, for thepurpose of raising funds for the investment, andstated that it was necessary he should give a particularIIChap. VIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 239 ititular consideration to these matters, '* because it I801-2. :was very natural that the Court of Directors should jturn their eyes chiefly to the state of their affairsin Leadenhall Street, as both the Directors andthe Proprietors were flattered by the view of salesuncommonly large, and a swelling balance in theirhome coffers ;" it being, at the same time, obvious ^to every person, who took a comprehensive view |of their affairs, that this flattering delusion, if per- imitted to go on for a very few years, would bring Iirretrievable ruin upon the affairs and finances ofIndia. He, at the same time, admitted the importtance of keeping up a large investment from India. \Alluding to a report having reached him, that the 1Governor-general had issued an advertisement for |a supply of tonnage for Europe, Mr. Dundas iobserved, '' I hope the information is true, both ibecause it is a measure of much wisdom, and '^because it will bring the point directly to issue. 1You need not be under any apprehension as to the iresult of it*'Lord Wellesley, before he received the above Oovemor-^e- ]neral's views.communication, wrote to Mr. Dundas on the 29th IJanuary 1800: '* that the matter of the private Itonnage had given him much trouble : he found it ^difficult to decide such a question permanently, on Iprinciples supposed contradictory to the orders ofthe Court of Directors ; and that he should endeavourto proceed at least as far as to prevent the ]trade from taking a bent towards foreign European ■'markets ]RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1801.2.Opposed bythe Court.Wisdom of hislordship's mea-marketsthis year: but he remarked, '* You ought, injusticeto my situation to decide the question at home.'Thus the Governor-general's adoption of a measurewhich was so strongly opposed by the shippinginterest, as a separate body, and then by theCompany, in conjunction with that interest, whourged their own views by bringing to their aid theargument, that the measure entrenched upon theexclusive privileges of the Company, created afeeling strongly adverse to the Governor-general,which impression gathered additional strength fromthe question having involved the Court of Directorsin extreme difference with the Board of Control,as it was expected to have led to an openrupture, and an appeal to Parliament.The measure advocated by Mr. Dundas, andcarried into effect by Lord Wellesley, was calculatedto promote the permanent interests of India.The principles upon which the measure wasfounded are equally applicable in the present dayto the state of our relations with that country.** It is to the increased exports from India toEurope that we are to look for the increase ofIndian prosperity, industry, population, and revenue.The increase in the export of our manufacturesfrom this country is the most desirable sourcefor supplying means for returns from thence, andthe export of such manufactures ought to have nolimits, except what are prescribed by the powerof selling them in India or China."AnotherChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 241Another measure which created an unfavourable I801-2feeling towards the Governor-general, was the spelled ad-modeadopted by his lordship for extending the Siy."^^''means of education to the civil service.Lord Wellesley's administration was distinguishedby the encouragement extended to theCompany's servants, whether civil or military,where their qualifications fitted them for prominentemploy. The penetrating eye of the Governdiscovered and drew forth merit, andthe parties selected experienced the most liberalsupport in giving effect to the enlightened measuresof his lordship's councils.The great and rapid changes which the course Calcutta coifevents produced, convinced the Governor-generalthat more enlarged means were required forqualifying the junior servants to enter upon a fieldof duty, which embraced the dispensing justice tomillions of people, of various languages, usages,and religions. The administering a vast and complicatedsystem of revenue throughout districtsequal in extent to some of the most considerablekingdoms in Europe, the maintaining civil orderin one of the most populous and litigious regionsof the world, — acting occasionally in the capacityof governors of the respective districts in whichthey held the offices of collectors, or magistrates,taking part in arduous and distant political missionsand embassies, and in aiding the councils ofGovernment on momentous matters of great .R cay,RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. VII.1801-2.Removal ofMr. Webbed,and other appointmentsfrom home.cay, both politically and financially. These considerationsled his lordship to record a minute,which contained a proposition for establishing theCollege at Fort William, on the 4th of May, beingthe anniversary of the fall of Seringapatam and theconquest of Mysore.The Directors did justice to the motives whichactuated the Governor general. The plan evincedthe enlightened views of his lordship : but it wasthought to involve an indefinite expense, — to embracefar too wide a field, and to contemplate theacquirement of various branches of knowledge,the study of which it was considered might beprosecuted with more success at home. It wasalso felt that the embarrassed state of the Indianfinances, the amount of the public debt, the unparalleledscarcity of money and depression ofpublic credit, with the suspension of a considerableportion of the investment, — combined to renderthe plan inexpedient. In January 1802, theCourt resolved on its immediate abolition.The third cause for dissatisfaction was to befound in the interference of the Court of Directorswith certain appointments made by the Governmentsabroad.One of the parties at Madras, supposed to beadverse to the Governor-general's views in 179B,was stated to be Mr. Josiah Webbe, then secretaryto the Madras Government. He was an officer ofacknowledged talent, and possessed of very generalinformationon expense.Chap. VII ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 243information regarding the state of India and the 1801.2.Company's affairs. After the arrival of Lord Clive,he evinced as great zeal in aiding the views of theGovernor-general as it vias conjectured he had]before exerted to oppose them.In the month of June 1801, the Directors,writing to the Madras Government, adverted withgreat satisfaction to the success of Colonel Wellesleyagainst Dhoondiah, and conveyed the expressionof their special thanks to him as well asto the officers and troops who served under him.They then animadverted upon the great expending Animadversionture that had been incurred, and observed, '' ifbounds were not set to it, but, on the contrary,every occasion was eagerly embraced for the erectionof new offices (alluding to the town-major ofVellore and others), there would be no end to theexpense. Instead of retrenchments, a great additionalcharge had been incurred." They, nevertheless,expressed a very high sense of the servicesrendered by the Commissioners in Mysore, andpresented the Hon. Colonel Wellesley, the Hon.Henry Wellesley, and Lieutenant-colonel Kirkpatrick,who composed the commission, with tenthousand pagodas each. In addition to thesestrictures on expenditure was the Court's interferencein appointments under the presidency ofMadras. They stated that they had seldom exercisedthe power; but when, in their judgment,ineligible parties had been selected in preferencer2 to244 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [ChavVIT.180U2. to others possessing pretensions, they felt it theirduty to interpose. They, therefore, desired theappointment, made by the Governor of Madras, ofMr. Falconer to the Board of Revenue, to be annulled,and nominated Mr. Place, then in England,to the vacant seat at the Board. This gentlemanhad incurred the displeasure of the Madras Government.In the event of any other arrangementhaving taken effect, the Court still desiredtheir orders regarding Mr. Place should be carriedinto execution. They also directed that Mr.Webbe, who had so long filled the office of chiefsecretary, should be appointed to some otherstation.It could not be matter of surprise that theseorders should create strong feelings in the mindsof the Governor-general and Lord Clive. Theformer, when at Moonghyr, on the 28th of September,wrote to the Court, expressing a wish toretain charge of the government, while the exigencyof affairs might require his presence, andwhile the Court were pleased to extend to him theaid and encouragement of their confidence andsupport ; and stating that he had experienced greatanxiety since the departure of Sir Alured Clarke, asno provisional successor had been appointed especiallyin his room. His lordship urged the necessityof that measure, and pointed out Mr. Barlow,his experience of whose character, and his implicitconfidence in his talents and virtues, would leavehimCiiAi'. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 245him without doubt in reposing the government inhis hands : but still he felt the impropriety of theGovernment devolving on any one not possessingthe advantage of the Court's previous approbationand of their declared confidence : without which*' the most splendid abilities combined with themost exalted virtues, might be found unequal tothe burthen of this great empire."The letter from the Court to the Madras Govern ^ ^,^J:^-Lord Clive toment was acknowledged by Lord Clive on the JJ^ court of^ '' ^ Directors.15th of October. His lordship entered into an explanationof the measures he had carried forwardunder the direction and in communication withthe Governor-general. He remarked, that thesystem wisely introduced by Lord Cornwallis hadbeen carefully fostered by the Marquis Wellesley.In order to establish a spirit of public virtue, honour,and emulation among the servants, it wasnecessary to degrade some and advance others.His lordship eulogised the conduct of Mr. Webbe,whom having found secretary, he continued assuch, from his great merits, and when the Governcontemplated sending him to Poonahh,he had requested he might remain at Madras.He had since gone to Bengal, to receive the 'sviews regarding the Carnatic.His lordship added, that if the internal merit ofhis measures, the success of his administration,and the force of personal character, should not besufficient to maintain the confidence of the Courtof246 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1801.2. of Directors against the calumny of an internalcabal, it was his earnest desire that a communicationof their sentiments might be accompaniedwith a provision for relieving him from the chargeof his government.Lord Clive at the same time addressed a privateletter to the Governor general, then in the UpperProvinces, in which he referred to the despatchfrom the Directors, and requested that this presentcommunication should be considered an officialintimation of his desire to embark immediatelyfor England, and that the Governor-general wouldmake provision, as he might see fit, for the contingencyof his departure.Governor. The Govcmor-general was, the same moment,Mr.webbe. Writing to the Secret Committee from Patna, onthe 18th of October, '* I acknowledge with gratitudethe assistance which I received from theknowledge and abilities of Mr. Webbe, whom Idirected to attend me at Fort William, for thepurpose of aiding me in forming the system ofmeasures to be adopted for the future administrationof affairs in the Carnatic, in consequence ofthe treachery of the Nabob. The obligations ofpublic duty, and the most indispensable rules ofjustice, concur to demand from me a recordedtestimony in favour of the indefatigable talents,powerful abilities, and personal integrity of Mr.Webbe, who adds to these qualities a most accurateknowledge of the oriental languages, and anintimateChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 247intimate acquaintance with every branch of your IS02.affairs in the Peninsula." The Governor-general,when near Cawnpore, on the 1st January 1802,reiterated to the Court of Directors his wish torelinquish the government in the December orJanuary following.The orders of the Court of Directors respectingthe removal of Mr.Webbe, and the appointmentof Mr. Chamier as chief secretary in his room, wereissued in the belief that they would produce LordOlive's resignation, and thereby break the powerfullink that supported the whole course of the 'spolicy and proceedings, opposedas they were to the views entertained by the Court,although strongly supported by the Board of Control.But the orders from home produced a totallyopposite result.Lord Wellesley had laid considerable stress uponthe necessity of the Directors extending their confidenceto the party filling the post of governor-general.There was still nothing in his lordship'spublic communication to induce a belief that hisretention of that office was incompatible with hisfeelings. But an extract from a private letter addressedby Lord Wellesley, on the 10th of June, atCawnpore, to Mr. Addington, then prime minister,now for the first time published, contains the reasonswhich weighed with his lordship in desiring tobe relieved from the charge of the government.*** Distrust,Vide Marquis Wellesley 's Despatches, vol. iii.248 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr.VII.1802. ** Distrust, and a. want of confidence manifestedon the part of the Directors, as well as their interferencein the appointments abroad, and theircurtailment or rejection of allowances made bythe Governor-general ; their recent orders for theremoval of Mr. Webbe, and the appointment ofMr. Chamier to that office, thereby driving amost honest and valuable public servant from themost confidential executive office in the state,directly in the face of Lord Olive's most decidedcountenance, and of his own most marked respectand regard." The direct appointment of Mr.Chamier from home, was considered to compriseevery degree of personal indignity which could beoffered to Lord Clive or to the Governor-general,together with every practicable injury to the publictrust committed to their joint charge. Lord Wellesleydeclared that he would not separate hischaracter from that of Lord Clive.In addition to the causes already detailed,the fourth and last arose out of the deputationof the Hon. Henry Wellesley to Oude; it wasfelt by the Court to be an interference with theclaims of their own servants for employment, anda consequent interference with the principle uponwhich the patronage had been reserved to theCompany. The subject regarding Oude being alsoreported in the secret department, was necessarilyunknown to the Directors. It was like most othersecrets, little worth knowing, but the mode ofdealingChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 249dealing with it, whilst in conformity with the Act IB02.of Parliament as to treaties and negotiations, only-increasedthe rumours which tended still furtherto awaken the suspicions of the Directors, as tohis lordship's views and intentions.Lord Clive having been apprized, through CaptainMalcolm, of the Governor-general's sentiments,in reply to the communication he hadaddressed to him at Cawnpore, intimated to theCourt of Directors, in February 1802, that he hadpostponed his departure from Madras. In a letterhis lordship received from the Governor-generalin August following, he learned that the Swallowwas placed at his service, in the event of a successorhaving been sent out by the Court. Inthis letter, the Governor general referred to themultiplied, complex, and vexatious affairs thathad required his personal attention for some timepast. Among them was the decease of Hajih Kul-heel Khan, the Persian ambassador to the BritishGovernment, who was accidentally shot at Bombay,whither Major Malcolm had been deputedfrom Calcutta to conduct the explanation fortransmission to the Persian court. The reductionsin the military expenditure, and the amount offorce in consequence of peace with France, hadoccupied his lordship's attention ; whilst he was,at the same time, apprized of the feelings whichexisted in the Court of Director r'^'Tfarding someof his measures.i250 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1802. The Earl of Dartmouth had succeeded Mr. duncanat the head of the Board of Control. He expressed,in a letter to the Governor-general, themost serious regret that any transactions shouldhave taken place at home of a nature to induce himto quit India ; and his desire that the same councilswhich had brought the war to so glorious a conclusion,should continue to preside over the work ofpeace. His lordship also stated that the Court ofDirectors had appointed Mr. Barlow provisionalsuccessor, in case the Governor-general should, atany time, think proper to quit India ; and that aplan in preparation by the Board of Control, forthe distribution of the Indian army, would be sentout, leaving, as far as possible, all discretionarypower with the Governor-general. Lord Dartmouthadded, the Board were engaged in warm dispute,with the Directors, upon the private trade.Remarks on A Combination of circumstances frequently giveferenw.^ ' rise to feelings that would never have existed, hadthe causes which produced them been disposed ofas they arose.The measures producing such differences betweenthe Board and the Court, affected particularinterests, all combining to render questionable,in the opinion of the Directors, the acts ofthe Governor-general. His lordship, however, feltthat his best course was to act as his judgment anddiscretion pointed out, leaving the decision uponhis measures to the authorities to whom the lawhad rendered him amenable. rp.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 251The course of policy pursued by the Governor 1802.general was viewed with admiration by the public,but the powers of unrestricted disbursementcontended for by his lordship were incompatiblewith the existing system. The principle, iffollowed out, would have placed the public purseunder the sole control of the Governor-general, whowould have been at liberty to incur any cost, pleadingthe good of the service as a sufficient reason.All public expenditure in this country is jealouslywatched by Parliament, but that of India is notguarded by any such check ; it became thereforestill more necessary that the orders from homerestricting unauthorized expenditure should beimplicitly obeyed, unless the safety of the statedemanded the outlay, a circumstance in itself presentinga sufficient justification. On the other hand,the orders of the Court of Directors regarding Mr.Webbe were viewed as an attempt to reach oneof the highest functionaries in India, through asubordinate officer, whose merits formed his greatestfault. This measure, taken in connexion withthe other instructions from home regarding Mr.Place, Mr. Chamier, and Mr. Falconer, producedstrong feelings in the mind of the Governor-generaland Lord Clive, as more or less implicating theirpersonal character. The former declared that asense of the propriety of observing a submissiveand respectful deportment in all his officialcommunications to the Court, induced him toabstain252 RISE AND PROGRESS OF Tie [Chap. VII.1802. abstain from officially recording the real and efficientcauses of his resignation.Change in the Whilst Lord Dartmouth was addressing MarquisJacob Bosan- Wellesley, the annual change inthe India DirectionDep^uty^chair. took place at home. Jacob Bosanquet, Esq., whohad filled the chairs in 1797 and 1798, was againchosen Deputy Chairman. He was a man possessedof the most upright and honourable feelings, ofirreproachable integrity, and was independent bothin mind and fortune. Disengaged from business,and intimately acquainted with the affairs of theCompany and of India, he took a warm interestin maintaining a system he believed to be welladapted to answer the purposes for which it hadbeen framed. He was a strong advocate for supportingthe Company's privileges, but at the sametime desired to preserve a good understanding withhis Majesty's Government, where he could do sowithout the sacrifice of principle.Letter to Lord In writhe* to Lord Dartmouth shortly after hisDartmouth. . , .lordship's accession to the office of President of theBoard, he observed :For more than a year we have been disputing about ourtrade, the Board disclaiming the most distant intention ofinterfering with it. But somehow or other, during this period,our rights and powers of acting have been completely suspended. From day to day we have patiently submitted tocontumely and attack. Prepared at last to vindicate our rights,and seeing no choice but the most determined resistance, wedeemed it not of essential importance to be very choice in ourwords. The resolution is certainly strong when referred onlytoChakVIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 253to the paragraphs in question, not strong enough if it has a ]802.view to the whole conduct of the Board.Be this, however, as it may, I hope you will believe that, asfar as respects ourselves, we are both infinitely above standingout, or making any difficulty whatever upon a mere punctilio;we deem such things of very trifling importance, indeed, whencompared to what we have in hand.With the same frankness, Mr. Bosanquet wroteto the Governor-general, in a private letter in May1802.I think it my duty to tell you that the Court are not well Mr. Bosanquet. . to Marquispleased that they hear so little from you, and also view with Weilesley.some jealousy the choice you have made of your brother toregulate the government of Oude, so many of the old servantsbeing upon the spot, who must have been at least as wellqualified as your brother to take this situation. Upon thelatter point they have expressed themselves so strongly, thatit will, I think, be unavoidable to take some notice of it inour next public dispatch.I fear you will experience some difficulties from the pretensionsof the French, but they will all yield to firmness,joined with moderation. The late changes which have takenplace throughout the world, make a reference to the old entrenchmentsof treaties and obsolete rights perfectly ridiculous.The only and best ground to take is that of fact. Weareand must remain the sovereigns of India, and if our adversariesare not content to meet us upon this footing, theymay as well quarrel with us upon this point, as upon anyother. We owe our safety to the sword and not to parchments,and we ought to take to that which has carried us throughour difficulties. It is clear, I think, that if the French wishfor peace they will content themselves with what they possessedprevious to the war ; if they wish to quarrel, no concession,however large, will satisfy them.I doubt254 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1802. I doubt whether the peace will be lasting,* but I am sureit is as well to wait for change in the French Governmentin peace as in war, and I consider all cessation from hostilitiesas " tant de gagne."Lord Castle Lord Castlereagh succeeded as President of thereach succeeds ^as President. Board in July following. Mr. Bosanquet beingrequested to state his private opinion to his lordship,on the leading points that demanded attention,he submitted a paper, from which thefollowing is an extract. The matters were ofconsiderable interest, some having relation toquestions either now pending, or only very latelysettled.Mr. Botanist A complete revision of the military establishmenttons. i^ ^11 its parts, with a determination to curtail all needlessexpense, both of a permanent and contingent nature, forthe purpose of aiding the finances of India ; this beingthe only apparent source from which they can be effectuallyrelieved.Second. A new modification of the Governments abroad,if, after full examination, it shall be thought that any beneficialalteration can be made.Third. A careful selection of persons to take charge ofthe Government.Fourth. An investigation of the accounts dependingbetween the Company and the Government, that the resourcesof the Company may be fully ascertained.Fifth. A system formed either for bringing home part ofthe debts in India, or for the progressive application of thedormantThis doubt was well-founded, vide page 260.GttAP. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 255dormant resources in this country, for the purpose of re- 1802.during the interest in India to six per cent.Sixth. An arrangement of the Carnatic for the purposeof gradually liquidating the debts due by the late Nabob ofArcot and his father, without disturbing, but rather increasingthe Company's receipts, for its defence. — I drop allmatters of an inferior consideration.With respect to money currency, much has been latelywritten upon this subject, and a minute of Lord Teign-mouthdeserves particularly to be read. Great inconveniencesexist, both in Bengal and upon the coast, from the variationsof batt upon the existing coins. It is clear that nopalliatives can succeed for any length of time, and the onlyradical cure for the evils which have been felt, will be thatpointed out by his lordship, to reduce the currency to onemetal, and to suffer the others to fluctuate as articles ofexchange.During the war, the Company have been well served bytheir agents at Constantinople, at Aleppo, at Bagdad, andBussora; but at the time of the French irruption into Egypt,a revision was intended by Government, and may now beeffected, of the whole of these establishments.No doubt an agent of some kind should be continued inEgypt, which, in cases of extreme urgency, may often betheshortest channel of communication with India. It is singular,though true, that the former agent should have beenremoved, as unnecessary, a few months preceding Buonaparte'sarrival there.These suggestions evinced both sound reflectionand good judgment, and no apprehension oftouching on any point in the system, where heconceived it might be amended.Lord Castlereagh announced his appointmentas256 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.VII.1802. as President of the Board to the Marquis Wellesleyon the 10th of August, and expressed hisdesire to give stability to the Governor-general'sadministration. After having had some communicationsv^ith the India-house, he hoped to writefully as to the settlement of the Carnatic, the militaryestablishment, and the India debt.On the 10th September, in another letter, hislordship trusted that the Court of Directors wouldcontribute fairly and honestly to render his continuancefor another year, in the charge of theirdominions, satisfactory.The Deputy Chairman* of the Court of Directorswrote the Governor-general on the sameday; after touching upon some private matters,he stated :I shall content myself in the present moment with observing,that I see with pleasure an opening offer itself, whichholds out some prospect of inducing your lordship to prolongyour stay in India for another season, and which will enableyou, I hope, to put a finishing hand to the important measureswhich have been commenced, under your lordship'simmediate direction ; and to seal, by a proper and judiciouscurtailment of the Company's late immense expenditure inIndia, the character, which will then be indelibly stampedupon your lordship's administration. Your lordship must,I am sure, recollect that upon this subject I have invariablyheld the same opinion, since the first communication whichtook place between your lordship and me relative to ourIndian interests.WithJacob Bosanquet, Esq.Chap.VIL] British power in INDIA. 257With the official despatch, which will, I make no doubt, j^^gshortly follow the present one, a clear and decisive opinionwill, I hope, be conveyed to your lordship, upon the subjectof the late measures which have taken place in the Carnatic.To me it has been a matter of much concern thatthis decision has been so long delayed, as I think bothgeneral policy and justice to yourself and Lord Clive calledfor this relief from that kind of anxiety, which the delaymust naturally have occasioned. The delay, however, hasarisen from causes, that it was utterly out of the power ofthe Chairs to control — changes in the political direction ofthe Company's affairs, which has, for a considerable lengthof time, created a chasm, which it was not in their power tofill.I laboured, and I may say most ardently, upon a formeroccasion, to give relief to the wants of India, and shall do so,I hope with no less success, upon the present occasion. I feelthat India has suffered, and all your lordship's measureshave been thwarted, by the want of that assistance which certainlyyou had a right to expect, and upon which it was naturalthat you should have placed some dependance. But Imust, in justice to those who have gone before me, add, that inno event, or under any exertions, could the supply of silverhave been very considerable in amount, owing to the realdeficiency of it in Europe.I have much pleasure in congratulating your lordshipupon the appointment of Lord Castlereagh to the Presidencyof the Board of Commissioners for the affairs of India. Heappears to me, both from reputation and from what I havehitherto seen of his talents, so perfectly well qualified to takea lead in the situation he fills, and so indefatigable in hispursuit of information, that I feel a confident reliance hewill give complete satisfaction in India, and to the public athome.VOL. ir. s His258 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1802, His lordship is extremely anxious that some plan shouldbe immediately suggested for the gradual liquidation ofthe Indian debt, and that the outlines of this plan shouldbe forwarded to India, to enable our Governments abroadto act in concert with the Court at home. So much, however,depends upon events which cannot be foreseen, that Ireally think too much of a determined plan will tend moreto embarrass than to assist our endeavours.The official approval of the arrangements andtreaty of the Carnatic, by the Court, were sent toMadras in September, and at the same time anofficial despatch from the Directors of the 29th ofthat month was forwarded to the Governor-general,requesting that his lordship would postponehis departure until the month of January 1804,under the persuasion that in another seasonhe would be enabled to perfect the retrenchments,as well those resulting from peace, asothers of which the Company's affairs might besusceptible.^^'; Although preliminaries of peace with FrancePeace withFrance. wcrc hastened by the success of the British armsin Egypt, and had been signed on the 1st of October1801, it was not until the month of Novemberthat Marquis Cornwallis, as the representative ofthe British nation, proceeded to France, for thepurpose of concluding the definitive treaty. Hislordship displayed on the occasion a magnificencetotally at variance with his habits and taste. Hesailed from Dover on the 3d of November, in astorm : the passage to Calais occupying eighteenhoursChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 259hours, during which great apprehensions were iso.entertained for his safety. Having paid hisrespects to the First Consul at Paris, he returnedto Amiens at the close of the month to pursue theobject of his mission. The definitive treaty wasnqt signed until 27th March 1802. On the 2d of Buonaparte.August, Napoleon was chosen Consul for life ;in his reply to the address of the citizens, announcingtheir choice, was the following remarkablepassage :Content with having been called by the order of Himfrom whom every thing emanates, to bring back upon theearth justice, order, and equality, I shall hear my last hoursound without regret and without uneasiness about the opinionof future generations.When this extraordinary man gave utterance tothese sentiments, he little contemplated that sucha work, had he been permitted to accomplish it,would have terminated in his being transportedfrom England in the same month, thirteen yearsafterwards, to an island belonging to the East-indiaCompany, in the midst of the Atlantic,where he expired on the 5th of May 1821 !The delay in signing the definitive treaty causedsome suspicion as to the sincerity of the Frenchruler. In October, an address of Buonaparte tothe Helvetic republic, in which he attempted tocontrol the Swiss nation in the exercise of theirindependent rights, led to a representation onthe part of the British Government, through Lords2 HawksRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Ceiai>. VII.ift02. Hawkesbury, to M. Otto, the French ambassador,and to an intimation to the Governor-general,through the President of the Board, not to surrendersuch conquests as might not have passed toFrance or Holland under the treaty of peace.The Governor-general watched with his usualvigilance, and with great anxiety, the proceedingsof France towards Switzerland ; in acknowledgingthe instructions from home, he anticipateda renewal of hostilities from the state of affairs asrelated in the French papers. War with Holland1803. was declared on the 17th of June 1803, and hostilitiesfollowed with France. Fortunately none ofthe possessions cf the governments of France orHolland, in India, had been evacuated by theBritish troops.The assurance given to Lord Wellesley by theChairman, in his private letter of the 10th of September,confirmed as it was by the official despatchfrom the Court of Directors of the 29th ofthat month, led to an expectation that the differenceswhich had occurred might pass away.This hope was strongly expressed by Lord Castlereaghon the 15th of November, when he advisedthe Governor-general that Mr. Yorke had beenthought of for the government of Madras, witheventual succession to the government-general ;but family reasons having prevented the arrangement,the King's government had recommendedMr. Barlow whenever they might be deprived ofhisChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 261his lordship's services. Lord Castlereagh felt I803.that there vias the strongest objection on generalprinciples to the government abroad beingfilled by the Company's servants, but observed,** there is no rule which is universal." The hightestimonies borne to the character of Mr. Barlowjustified the exception. It had been thoughtexpedient to fill up the appointment of successionto the government of Bengal, before steps weretaken to supply the appointment for Madras. Hislordship, after alluding to his not having yet beenable to bring the Court to a decision for regulatingthe debt, stated : *' I cannot yet acquaint you thatI have altogether conquered their repugnance toadopt any plan which may oblige them to haverecourse to extraordinary resources," and added,'* Your lordship is aware how difficult and delicatea task it is for the person who fills my situation(particularly when strong feelings have once beenexcited) to manage such a body as the Court ofDirectors, so as to shield the person in yours fromany unpleasant interference on their part. I amsanguine in hoping that those impressions, whichnever should have led them for a moment to forgetyour substantial services, will pass away, and theremainder of your government be rendered perfectlysatisfactory both to your lordship and tothem."The line of conduct marked out by the framers Remarks as toof the Acts of 1784 and 1793, certainly indicated '^'^ ^"""i'^"^'that262 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI L1803. that the Directors were to watch over the politicalevents in India, and thus form a check upon thealmost absolute power conferred upon the Boardof Control. The Court were likewise the depositaryof the patronage connected with thatcountry, and the Company's combined resourceswere applied to the political disbursements ofIndia. The President of the Board was wellaware that the territorial possessions had notyielded and could not be immediately expected toyield the means of meeting the additional chargescaused by new and unsettled conquests. Had thewhole of the receipts from the territorial possessionsbeen placed on the one side, and the charges on theother, it would have been found that not one shillinghad in point of fact been realized from therevenues ; and, but for the out-turn of the Company'scommercial concerns, India would havebeen a burthen upon Great Britain. The Directorsstood also in the character of trustees for the Proprietors,whose interests and privileges they werebound to maintain. The country having given tothe Company the exclusive privilege of tradewith India and China, was not prepared to bearthe least pecuniary charge on account of India.The aspect of affairs in relation to the Mahrattahad induced the Governor-general to intimateto the Directors, in December, his intention to remainuntil there was a greater prospect of permanenttranquillity ; his lordship received about thesameChas. VII ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 263same time the expression of the Court's wishes con 1803.gained in their letter of the 29th of September.*He referred to his foregoing communication, andstated that the Court's former sentiments of disapprobationon various points of his administration,had been received with a degree of concern andregret, proportioned to the satisfaction with whichhe acknowledged the recent expression of theirapprobation of his conduct ; the expectations ofpublic advantage from his continuance in theirservice, being sufficient to determine him on thesacrifice of every private consideration to the importantduty of obeying their commands.Lord Wellesley nevertheless felt that the motives impression ofof his actions had been misconstrued by the Com- ley's mind.any, and that the request for his continuance hadbeen reluctantly made at the instigation of theMinister. He still invariably observed towards theCourt a studied respect in all his official communicationsto them ; but the bearing of his lordship'smind is shown by his private and confidentialcorrespondence with the President, and that hefrequently endured a state of painful anxiety anddoubt, which must have been enhanced by the distractedstate of the Mahratta powers, and the openingthat would present itself for the intrigue offoreign emissaries, should the peace of Europenot be permanent, an event which his usual foresightled him to apprehend. The question oftheFide page 258.264 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1802. the Private Trade, his lordship remarked, hadnever appeared to him to be of the magnitudeor importance described by either of the contendingparties. His conduct had been regulatedby a calm and deliberate view of the comparativepolitical and commercial advantages to theCompany and the nation, of promoting or destroyingthat branch of trade. He complained of the longsilence that had been observed for the three yearsduring which he had been expecting definite commandson the subject, which he had sought withan anxiety " equally assiduous and fruitless." Hislordship observed with regard to the appointmentof the Hon. Henry Wellesley to Oude, no considerationinferior to the most urgent demand of thepublic service could have induced him to havewithdrawn his brother from the management of hispersonal and domestic arrangements, the loss havingbeen irreparable to his private interests. Sofarfrom its having been injurious to the civilservants, the transaction offered the most considerableadvantages that could be conferred uponthat service since the acquirement of the dennyin Bengal.The Directors had been censured by Mr. duncanfor desiring to keep a good balance in theirhome coffers,* but they knew full well by experiencethat their ships, stores, and funds, might bedevoted to the public service at the bidding ofthe*Firfcpagc 239.Chap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 265the Secret Committee, or under direct orders from 1802.the Crown, without other intervention. But whenthe state of the Company's finances led the Court todesire reimbursement of the political outlay, theiraccounts were disputed ; and if, after lengtheneddiscussions, they had been partially admitted, thepressure on the national Exchequer rendered asettlement very inconvenient. Such were the facts.It is not now necessary to stand forward in defenceof the past system, but so long as that systemlasted, and the interests of the proprietors were leftto the mercy of the Minister and of Parliament,every one connected with the Company was boundto uphold and maintain the rights and privileges,upon which their claims could alone be successfullysupported. These circumstances explain whythe Directors watched so jealously, and opposed sostrongly, every attempt at the least inroad on theCompany's exclusive privileges. This feeling willbe better apprehended by the following extractfrom a private letter of the Deputy Chairman to DifferencesViscount Castlereagh, then president of the Board,who held out something of a threat of appealing toParliament for additional powers to enable theBoard to appropriate certain funds for the benefitof India. The measure had immediate referenceto the expense of the Calcutta College.*One part of your lordship's letter appears to me to be ofso questionable a nature, and likely to lead to such unpleasantLetter from Jacob Banquet, Esq. to Viscount Castlereagh.266 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1803. sant remarks, should it ever become necessary to lay itbefore the Court of Directors, that I think I should notdischarge the duty I owe to your lordship, and to my ownsituation, if I did not hasten, at least to point out the apprehensionsI entertain, and give your lordship an opportunityof making any alteration which a subsequent view of thesubject may suggest.The passage to which I at present allude, is that in whichyour lordship seems to me to hold out the interference ofParliament as a kind of threat likely to influence the decisionof the Court of Directors upon a point, which, if it isnearly connected with the future prosperity of the Indianempire, attaches itself also as closely to the honour, the credit,and the good faith of the Company at home.But even if the case should be otherwise, which I cannotallow myself for a moment to think, I should still chooserather to risk your lordship's displeasure by the freedom ofmy communications, than be thought wanting in any respectin my attention to the rights of those whom I serve, or inany point of what I may conceive to be a necessary part ofmy duty.No doubt the omnipotence of Parliament may (if itsjustice will permit), interfere to abridge the powers, uponwhich the public faith has been solemnly pledged to theEast-india Company.It may take into its own direction, or place under that ofother persons, the control over the commercial and otherfunds of the Company, which the law has authorized thisbody to exercise by the statute to which I allude, and by itsother acts. But I am sure your lordship will agree with meinthinking, that whilst these powers exist unaltered, itwould be meanness in the extreme in the Court of Directorsto abandon these rights, or that discretion which they havesworn to maintain and to exercise ; nor, I believe, can .aninstanceChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 267instance of more importance be supposed, than one in which 1803.the Company, by the nature of the engagements she may becalled upon to take, may, it is true, under one course ofevents, contribute to the prosperity of the Indian empire ;but, under another, if those engagements should exceedthe means by which they are to be met, may become herselfa mendicant at the bar of that public from whom she hasreceived her rights, and a bankrupt in the fulfilment of hercommercial undertakings.Neither can I, my lord, believe that any benefit would beultimately derived to the state, from such a wanton exerciseof authority. The check, or the supposed unnecessary impedimentsof a Court of Directors might be removed ; butso little submissive is credit (the vital principle of the Company'sgreatness) to the hand of power, — as the experience ofages has proved in every country where the experiment hasbeen made — that the very resources which would be amplefor all the Company's wants under her present constitution,would become paralyzed and of no effect, if force and powershould be applied where discretion alone ought to govern.Your lordship will do me the justice to believe that, ifupon this subject I express myself with freedom, it is atleast with a good intent that 1 do so, and that it is far, veryfar, from my design to arrogate to myself, or to the bodyof which I am a member, any right or privilege which is notunquestionably theirs. I hope I may also add, that even inthe exercise of these, my disposition and theirs will alwaysbe the same to meet your lordship's wishes by every reasonableaccommodation in our power, for the support of thatharmony between the Boards which is so necessary for asuccessful administration of the Company's concerns.Lord Castlereagh, writing to the Governor LordCastie-reach to Governadverted to the probability of a rupture nor-general.with268 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1803. with France, and stated that he could only furnishLord Wellesley with what was passing. He thendirected his lordship's particular attention to theplan for reducing the India debt, doing justice atthe same time to the honourable exertions of hislordship in effecting retrenchments.Policy of The Governor-several anticipated that even aMarquis Wei . , ^ . ^lesiey. renewal of hostilities with France, unaccompaniedby the danger of military operations with theFrench in India, or by a rupture between theCompany and the Mahratta power, could notoccasion any material delay in the liquidation ofthe debt, provided remittance was made fromEngland for the investment from India. But heconsidered the instructions from the Secret Committee,which directed the principal attention ofthe Governor to the reduction of the debt evenshould hostilities arise, inculcated principles ofpolicy which might prove injurious to the safetyof the Indian empire in time of war. Just economyhe felt to be a bulwark of strength against theenemy, but he considered that no desire of temporaryadvantage ought to be allowed to contractacomprehensive scale of military preparations,or to repress the activity of military enterprisein India, in the event of a renewal of hostilities.They ought to be maintained upon a scale tofrustrate surprise from the French, and to meetthe attempts of the Mahratta powers.Reports had reached the Governor-general ofsomeChap. VII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 269some secret engagements between France and the 1803.Batavia Republic, by which the latter power had as'^to inditeceded Cochin and other possessions to France.His lordship felt these circumstances called forgreat caution and vigilance. The views of theFrench government, in preparing to resume thesepossessions under the treaty of Amiens, were fullydeveloped in a Memoir prepared by M. Lefebvre,an officer of the French army, and attached tothe staff at Pondicherry. It pointed out '* theimportance of India to Great Britain, the extentof her possessions there, the treatment of theMogul, and the possibility of a French armyreaching India via Egypt. The object whichshould first engage its attention on arriving inHindostan, was the restoration of the throne ofTimor; and whilst the British Government wouldbe directing all their attention to defeat theadvance from the West, a secret expeditionshould be prepared to proceed from Spain viaMexico to Manilla, and another, to be providedby the Dutch Republic, to proceed by the Capeof Good Hope, to the Spanish Islands, and fromthence to Trincomalee, a port so important to theKentish navy. The author of the Memoir wasfully master of his subject; and expressed hisconviction that if his own country did not enterinto his views, that Russia, rapidly advancing incivilisation, would direct her attention to theEast."270 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII.1803. East' Under other circumstances, and with aless vigilant and comprehensive mind than thatpossessed by the Governor general, the machinationsof the enemy might have inflicted an irreparableblow on the interests of Great Britainin India.Chai'. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 271CHAPTER VIII.1803.The apprehensions entertained by Lord Well"^ Hostilities inleslev of a rupture between France and Great Europe and in. . . . India.Britain, and that hostilities would also arisewith the Mahrattass, were unfortunately realized,and disappointed the expectations of the homeauthorities, that a continuation of peace wouldadmit of further reductions in the Indian establishments.The Company possessed at this time on the Con Company's terrT T T» T» -i f-\ editorial assessment01 India, Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa, sionsattimin full sovereignty, to which might be added theprovince of Benares, with the territories to thewestward of the Ganges, lately belonging toOude, but now ceded to the Company. Theseterritories formed an almost uninterrupted line ofcountry from the sea-coast to Delhi, extendingfrom south to north-west more than one thousandmiles. The remaining part of the Vizier's possessionswere circumvented by those belongingto the British Government.The coast of Coromandel had long been thechief military station. The Company's territoriesin272 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1803. in that quarter of India consisted of the NorthernCiRCARS, their ancient Jaghire round Fort St.George, the Carnatic under the late assumption,the Cessions made by Tippoo in 1792 inthe Tanjore and the Tinnevelly country dependantupon the Carnatic. These dominions, withthe others, in entire subjugation to the Company,stretched in a continuous line through the Peninsulaof India, from the sea to the coast of Malabar.Contiguous to this line was the country givento OoDiAVAR, the restored Rajah of Mysore ; butas the Company retained Seringapatam, the rajahbeing entirely dependant upon them for his defence,the boundary of their rule might be consideredthe Mahratta state, with the country ofthe Nizam.On the upper coast of Malabar, the Companypossessed the islands of Bombay and Palette,with their trifling dependencies, and the cessionsmade by the Nabob of Broach.Quarters of Tic quarters from whence hostilities might ber£'''^ '*^'^^'' expected to arise, were those of the Mahrattassand the Rajah of Berar ; the latter, althoughconnected with the Peishwa as supreme head ofthe Mahratta power, did not stand so immediatelyin the relation of a feudatory as Scinde ahand HoLKAR.The states of Ava and Nepaul were notranked as powers of sufficient importance tooccasion any apprehension, their character andstrengthCHAp.VIir.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 273strength being little known, and much under I802.rated.The dominions of the Rajah of Ber a r commencedfrom the sea on the western coast of theBay of Bengal, being bounded by those of theNizam on the south-west. His capital was Nag-pore.His power was not very formidable, andhis territories were generally in an uncultivatedstate.The Nizam had been secured as an ally of theCompany, under the subsidiary treaty of 1798.The most vulnerable part of the Company'sfrontier was contiguous to the country possessedby Scindiah. In the event, therefore, of a combinationof the Mahratta forces, the Peishwa as thehead, with Scindiah and Holkar as feudatories,joined to the Rajah of Berar, and directed bythe skill and science of French officers, — Scindiahpossessing Delhi and the person of the Mogul, — aunited force would be collected to act against theBritish interests of fearful strength, which woulddemand the utmost exertion of the Governmentto contend against with success.Since the conclusion of the treaty of Salbeywith the Mahrattass in 1782,* and the aid whichthey gave under their leader Purser Bhow,on the occasion of Lord Cornwallis's operationsagainst Seringapatam in 1792, the British GovernmentF?V/f vol. i. page C21.VOL ir. T274 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CuAr.VIII.1802. ment had maintained little immediate connexionwith them. But both Scindiah and Holkar hadsince become powerful chiefs, with immense andwell-trained forces.RiseofScin- The rise of the Mahratta power has beendial and Holkar.adverted to, but the origin of both Scindiah andHoLKAR, each of whom now engaged in hostilitieswith the British Government, presents tooremarkable a feature in the history of the Company,and of India, to be passed over unnoticed .The family of Scindiah were of a tribe of cultivators.Ranojee Scindiah was the first whobecame a soldier ; when taken into the serviceof the Peishwa, his chief employment was thecharge of his master's slippers. His advancementis attributed to the Peishwa discovering, oncomingout from a long audience with the Yahoorajah, Ranojee Scindiah asleep on his back, withhis slippers clasped with fixed hands to his breast.This extreme care of so trifling a charge struckthe Peishwa, who immediately appointed him tohis body guard. He became a very enterprising,active soldier ; his exertions went far beyond hismeans, and he was indebted to Mulhar Row Holkar,with whom he formed an intimate connexion,for considerable pecuniary aid. Ranojee died inMalwa, leaving two natural sons, Tukajee andMadhajee Scindiah. The latter became thehead of the family ; and the death of MulharRow, in 1764, who was their founder, left Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 275hajee Scindiah the first in power of the Mahratta 1802military chiefs. At this juncture Ragobah, ofwhom so much has been already written, desiredto coerce Ahalya Baee, the widow of Mulhar RowHolkar's son, and the representative of the family,into an arrangement that would have destroyedits power. Madhajee Scindiah, though he offeredhis personal service, as belonging to the householdtroops of Ragobah, in the character of Peishwa,refused to command the army which he himselfpossessed against Holkar's family. The Rajahof Nagpoor adopted a similar determination, andthus frustrated Ragobah's designs. MadhajeeScindiah greatly increased his power, and becamethe principal opposer of the English in the celebratedMahratta war carried on in favour of ,during the government of Mr. Hastings.He was the nominal slave, but the rigid master of the unfortunateEmperor Shah Alum ; the pretended friend, butdesigning rival of the house of Holkar ; the professed inferiorin all matters of form, but the real superior and oppressor ofthe Rajpoot provinces of Central India ; and the proclaimedsoldier, but the actual plunderer of the Peishwa.In the part he took at the treaty of Salbey, heappeared as an independent prince, though manifestingdeference to the Peishwa, for whom he madethe emperor sign the commission of vice-regent ofthe empire;* at the same time receiving from thePeishwa a commission as his deputy in that highoffice.Fide vol. i. page 687.T 2276 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1802. office. But after he came to Poonahh he was actualsovereign of Hindostan, from the Sutlej to Agra ;the conqueror of the princes of Rajpootana; thecommander of an army composed of sixteen battalionsof regular infantry, five hundred pieces ofcannon, and 100,000 horse ; the possessor of two-thirdsof Malwa, and some of the finest provincesof the Deccan. When he went to pay obeisance toa youth who then filled the office of Peishwa, hedismounted from his elephant at the gates of Poona,placed himself in the great hall of audiencebelow all the hereditary nobles of the state, andwhen the Peishwa came into the room and desiredhim to be seated with others, he objected, on theground of being unworthy of the honour ; and untyinga bundle he carried under his arm, produceda pair of slippers, saying, *' this is my occupation,it was my father's."He is stated to have been consistent throughouthis life in the part he acted, which appeared morenatural, from a manly simplicity of character leadinghim equally to despise the trappings of state andallurements of luxury. To check the incursions ofthe Bheels, and to take an effectual part in thewars north of theNerbudda, in which he was mostlyengrossed, he determined to raise a corps of infantry.General De Boigne, when he entered his service,was brought to his notice as the author of aplan to frustrate his operations against Gohud.His forces, thus aided by Dc Boigne, not only subduedCifAp.VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 277duet the several petty states in Central India, but 1802.broke the proud spirits of the higher Rajpoots, andacquired possessions computed at seventy-five lacsof rupees. He proceeded to Poonahh in 1794, wherehe died.His object had been to give greater permanencyto his government than had hitherto belonged to aMahratta chief; generally residing in Hindostan,but coming sometimes to Malwa, and remaining ashort time at Oojeen. The countries under his ovenobservation are stated to have been well managed,as were also those where the people observed peaceand manifested obedience ; but, in his endeavour tosubdue the chiefs of Hindostan, the provinces ofRajpootana, and the petty rajahs of Central India,to the state of subjects, great cruelties were inflictedby his army, full liberty being given to their irregularviolence.Madhajee Scindiah had no sons. His brotherTukajee had three; the eldest of them died withoutissue ; the second had two, of whom the youngest,Anund Row, became the favourite of his uncle.He had but one son, Dowlut Row Scindiah, whowas adopted by his great-uncle as his heir. He wasonly thirteen years of age at the death of Madhajee,when he succeeded to his great uncle's vast possessions,and to the command of an army that renderedhim the arbiter of the Mahratta empire*Born and educated at a distance from the Deccan,surrounded by Europeans, Mahomedans, and Raj-poets,278 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai.VIII.1802. poets, and despising the irregular and predatoryhordes, whose activity and enterprise had establishedthe fame of his ancestors, Dowlut RowScindiah was more the principal sovereign of India,than a member of the Mahratta confederacy. Thewar undertaken by these chiefs against the Nizamin 1795, formed a temporary bond of union, butthe campaign was shortly terminated by great sacrificeof territory and treasure, under the treaty ofKurdlah, secured by scenes of art, treachery, andintrigue, which led to the subsequent commotionsin the Mahratta states.The family of Holkar were of the shepherdtribe. The first who rose above the class of peasantswas Mulhar Row, born in 1693. Appointed originallyto watch the sheep of the family, he was subsequentlytaken into the service of the Peishwa,Bajee Row, and detached into the Conan withthe Peishwa's brother Chinamen. By 1732, hehad acquired considerable possessions, and hadIndore assigned to him for the support of his troops.He was engaged with the other chiefs in endeavouringto fix the power of his nation permanentlyover hindostan, by operations which extended fromthe provinces of Oude to the Indus, and from thehills of Rajpootana to the mountains of Kumaon.He obtained from the Emperor Ahmed Shah, in1757, the sirdaismookhee, a due of twelve anda-half per cent, on the revenue of Chandore. Heestablished a considerable influence in the countryofChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 279ofJeypoor, and large domains in the Deccan, with J802.a portion of Candeish. He died at the age ofseventy-six. Inferior to Madhajee Scindiah as astatesman, he is represented to have been his superioras a soldier. His administration is said to havebeen firm but considerate, as well as his conducttowards the Rajpoot princes of Malwa, whose respect,if not regard, he conciliated by good faith,and moderation in the exercise of power. He wasgenerous, and had no personal regard for money ;in his several relations of life he is stated to havedone that from his heart, which Madhajee Scindiahdid from his head. The one was a plain, sinceresoldier ; the other added to great qualities all theart of a crafty politician. Mulhar Row had onlyone son, Kundee Row, who was killed in 1752 atthe siege of Kumbheer, four coss from Deig, lyingequi-distant between that place and Bhurtpore.Kundee Row had married Ahalya Baee, of a familyof the name of Scindiah, by whom he had one sonand one daughter. The Peishwa immediately sentthe son a khelaut, or honorary dress, recognisinghim as successor to the power and possessions of hisgrandfather. He was of weak intellect, and diedinsane. His mother, Ahalya Baee, defeated the Ahaiya Baee.intrigues of the Brahmin minister of the late MullerRow, who was in concert with Ragobah, thePeishwa, and determined to exercise the right shepossessed of electing a successor, which claim sheresolved to maintain at all hazards. Hearing thatRau'obahI280 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai-.V!!!.isis?. Hagobah was making preparations to attack her,she advised him not to make war on a woman, fromwhich he might incur disgrace, but could not derivehonour ; she made preparations for hostilities,in which the troops of Holkar evinced the greatestenthusiasm. Ragohah was accordingly induced toabandon his intentions.Ahalya Baee selected for the command of herarmies Tukajee Holkar, a chief of the same tribe,but no way related to Mulhar Row. Tukajee obtainedan honorary dress from the Peishwa, confirminghim in his high station. The authority ofthe Holkar state, although thus divided, remainedundisturbed by jealousy or ambition. Tukajee, bydesire of Ahalya Baee, was styled on his seal ** theson of Mulhar Row Holkar." Although he was inthe Deccan lor nearly twelve years together, all thedistricts south of the Satpoora range were managedby him : but he always consulted Ahalya Baee, whowas in fact the head of the government. Tukajeeacted a conspicuous part in the war which thePoonahh government, united with theNizam, carriedun against Tippoo in 1784. The administration ofAhalya Baee is described as having been singularlysuccessful.Prinriplofiof The first principle of her government appears to have.^.'v^nmu'lir ^ been moderate assessment, and an almost sacred respect forthe native rights of the village officers and proprietors ofland. She heard every complaint in person, and althonolishe continually referred causes to courts of ecpiity and arbitration,CiiAF. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 281oration, and to her ministers, for settlement, she was always 18C2.accessible: and so strong was her sense of duty, on allpoints connected with the distribution of justice, that she isrepresented as being not only patient, but unwearied, in theinvestigation of the most insignificant causes, when appealswere made to her decision. Although enquiries have beenmade among all ranks and classes, nothing has been discoveredto diminish the eulogium, or rather blessings, whichare poured forth whenever her name is mentioned. Themore, indeed, enquiry is pursued, the more admiration isexcited : but it appears above all extraordinary, how shehad mental and bodily powers to go through with thelabours she imposed upon herself, and which, from the ageof thirty to sixty, when she died, were unremitted. Thehours gained from the affairs of the state, were all given toacts of devotion and charity : and a deep sense of religionappears to have strengthened her mind in the performanceof her worldly duties. She used to say that she " deemedherself answerable to God for every exercise of power," and,in the full spirit of a pious and benevolent mind was wontto exclaim, when urged by her ministers to acts of extremeseverity, " Let us, mortals, beware how we destroy theworks of the Almighty."'"' From a very minute narrativewhich has been obtained of Ahalya Baee's daily occupations,it appears that she rose one hour before day-break,to say her morning prayers and perform the customary ceremonies.She then heard the sacred volumes of her faithread for a fixed period, distributed alms, and gave food inperson to a number of Brahmins. Her own breakfast wasthen brought, which was always of vegetable diet : for,although the rules of her tribe did not require it, she hadforsworn animal food. After breakfast she again went toprayers, and then took a short repose : after rising fromwhich, and dressing herself, she went, about two oVlock,to282 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1802. to her durbar, or court, where she usually remained tillsix in the evening : and when two or three hours had beendevoted to religious exercises and a frugal repast, businessrecommenced about nine o'clock, and continued till eleven,at which hour she retired to rest. This course of life,marked by prayer, abstinence, and labour, knew little variation,except what was occasioned by religious fasts andfestivals (of which she was very observant), and the occurrenceof public emergencies.The territories of the Holkar family continuedprosperous until the death of Tukajee, in 1797.He left two sons, Caseee Row and Mulhar Row,by his wife, and two natural sons, Jeswunt Rowand Etojee Row. The pretensions of Caseee Rowwere prior from birth, but he was of weak intellect,deformed in body, and quite unequal to theactive duties of government. Mulhar Row, abrave aspiring youth, commanded the armies,and, in consequence of his father not havingfavoured his pretensions, he threw himself forsupport on Nana Furnaces, the celebrated ministerof the Peishwa, who promised him his influence.Caseee Row, then at Mhysir, sought supportfrom Dowlut Row Scindiah, or rather fromhis profligate minister Sirjee Row Gratia, whosedaughter was married to Scindiah. The aid waspromised, and on his arrival at Poonahh his causewas openly espoused. To prevent the escape of hisbrother, a reconciliation took place : but, on thenight of the day on which it was elected under asacred oath, the camp of Mulhar Row was surroundedChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 283rounded by Scindiah's forces. Mulhar Row at 1802.daybreak, learning his situation, endeavoured toescape, and mounted his horse : but was killed bya ball, which pierced him in the forehead. Thewhole of Holkar's troops, about three or fourthousand, were dispersed, except a few followersof Caseee Row, and their camp plundered. JesuitRow, the eldest of the two natural sons,was among the fugitives ; he sought protection atNagpoor : but a belief that he possessed property,or a desire to conciliate the government of Poonahhand Scindiah, led Ragojee Bhoonslah, the rajahof Nagpoor, to seize and confine Jeswunt Row.After six months' imprisonment he escaped, butwas retaken. He again managed to elude hisguard, and escaped to Candeish, accompaniedby a Mahometan soldier, an active and intelligentHindu of the name of Bhuwanee Shunkur. Hewas aided by Anund Row, chief of Dhurmpooree,on the Nerbudda, of the family of Pear. Whilstwith Anund Row, the latter was attacked by abody of Paeans and Pindarries. Jeswunt wroteto the leaders of the Pindarries, desiring them, asadherents of the Holkar family, to withdraw.They fell back ; upon which Jeswunt Row sprungfrom his horse, seized a sponge start', and a gun thatwas recovered, turned it upon the assailants, andconstrained them to retreat. After extraordinaryexertions he effected a junction with Ameer Khan,the Patau leader, in 1798, and plundered sometowns284 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.VIII.1802. towns of Dowlut Row Scindiah on the Nerewhere he had a sharp contest with a campos,or brigade of the Chevalier Dudernaic, thenin the service of Caseee Row, which had been sentfrom Indore to attack him. Jeswunt Row beingvictorious, was ultimately joined by the troops ofCaseee Row, the Chevalier Dudernaic, and NujeebKhan. Thus at the close of the year in which hehad escaped from Poonahh as a fugitive, he becamethe acknowledged guardian of Kundee Row, theinfant and posthumous son of Mulhar Row. Hereformed his army : he bestowed the title ofnabob on Ameer Khan, who was detached in aneastern direction with a strong corps, to plunder andcollect contributions. Saugor, belonging to thePeishwa, after being defended by Venice Row, wastaken by storm : a scene of the most promiscuousand unrestrained pillage followed, and continuedalmost a month. The city was set fire to on the dayof the storm, and the flames raged throughout thewhole period. All were ruined ; no property wasspared ; andthelastfewdayswerepassed in draggingthe tanks for supposed treasure. The excesses committedby Ameer Khan's troops were dreadful.During these extraordinary vicissitudes, JeswuntRow committed ravages on the territories of Scin-dial, which led to contests between those twochiefs, in the course of which Scindiah sent awayCaseee Row to Mhysir, and offered to give up DundeeRow, the infant son of Mulhar Row, and withhimChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 285bim all the Holkar possessions, if Jeswunt Row I802.would cease from farther devastation of his provinces.The latter, however, required the restorationof some of the Holkar provinces which hadnot been in possession of the family since the timeof the first Mulhar Row. This being refused, hecarried on his operations on a more extended Hostilities bestween Holkarscale. He sent two Patau chiefs to plunder the and scinuiaii.territories of Scindiah and the Peishwa in the Deccan,while he marched northward, levying heavyfines as he went. He obliged Salem Sing, ofKotah, to pay him seven lacs to save his countryfrom desolation. He induced the troops underthe Chevalier Dudernaic to abandon that officerand join him; he then moved westward froniTonkto meet a force sent against him by Scindiah.Having learned of the riches at Nati Dora, inM6war, he made rapid marches, in hopes of relievingthe wants of his army, by plundering thetreasures and jewels with which the liberal pietyof the Hindus had ornamented its shrines. Themost dreadful scenes of cruelty and pillage arestated to have marked his advance towards Poonahh,in defence of which city Scindiah had sent a forceto support the Peishwa. The battle between thecombined troops of the Peishwa and Scindiah,opposed to those of Holkar, was fought on the 25thOctober 1802. Jeswunt Row, after drawing outhis army opposite to his enemies, with his cavalryin the rear, dismounted and stood upon an eminence,286 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1802. hence, to have a clear view of the whole action.His enemies commenced the engagement, andcaused some of his cavalry to retreat ; whereuponhe immediately sprang upon his horse, andaddressing a small party of his men, advised allwho did not intend to conquer or die, to savethemselves, and return to their wives and children,exclaiming, ** As for me, I have no intention ofsurviving this day ; if I do not gain the victory,where can I fly ?"His victory was complete, a considerable numberof the enemy being killed and wounded. ThePaeans of Ameer Khan returned to plunder, andhad reached the skirts of the city of Poonahh, whenJeswunt Row Holkar ordered some guns to playupon them ; but as it did not wholly stop them,he galloped, wounded as he was, to the spot,and slew two or three of them with his spear. Hedisplayed great bravery throughout the action.When Ameer Khan, who had not been so distinguished,came to congratulate Jeswunt Row onthe happy result of the day, the latter chieftainsmilingly remarked, '' You have been lucky toescape, brother." **I have, indeed," was thereply, '' for see here, the top of my bridle is brokenwith a cannon ball." ** Well, you are a mostfortunate fellow, for I observe the shot has touchedneither of your horse's ears, though the woundedornament was betwixt them."Holkar formed an alliance with Amrut Row,theCHAF.Viri.] BRITISH POWER IN IM)IA. 287the adopted son of the late Peishwa's father, and I802.therefore called his brother. The Peishwa fled,and was considered by that act to have virtuallyabdicated. Holkar staid some days, to await thearrival of Amrut Row. He treated the British resident,Colonel Close, with great distinction, butevery endeavour to reconcile him to the newgovernment proving unavailing, his passports forBombay were unwillingly granted.The Governor several had ineffectually sought Peishwa at last•-' ./ o makes over-theformation of a subsidiary treaty with the ties for a subdiary treaty.Peishwa. In a letter to the resident, dated inJune, his lordship stated that, however desirablesuch a measure might be, he was of opinion thathis highness would never consent until compelledby the exigency of his affairs. That exigencyhad now arisen ; for on the same day that Holkarobtained the victory just alluded to, the Peishwasubmitted preliminary propositions for subsidisingsix native battalions with their proportion of artillerymen,intending, should circumstances renderit necessary, to proceed himself for safety to Bassein.Had the proposition of the Governor-general,so repeatedly urged, for forming such analliance, been accepted by his highness, he wouldhave been spared his humiliating flight, and hiscapital would not have suffered the miseries inflictedfrom the inroads of his ungovernable feudatories.It was supposed (a supposition that had considerable288 RISK AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.VITI.1802. miserable weight with the Court of Directors, inreviewing the proceedings at Oude), that thePeishwa withheld his assent to a subsidiary treaty,from having witnessed the Governor-generalsarrangements with the Vizier, which had terminatedin the alienation of so large a portion ofhis territorial possessions. But the Peishwa hadrejected the proposal more than a year and a-halfantecedent to the treaty formed by the Hon.Henry Wellesley, and long before he could bypossibility have learned the tenor of the negotiationwith the Vizier. If he knew of it previouslyto its final settlement, it must have been bytreachery. These are important facts, as bearingupon the policy adopted by the Governor-generalin the midst of events and circumstances connectedwith interests so widely extended.Jeswunt Row Holkar desired to obtain possessionof the Peishwa's person, and to establish anadministration that would secure his own ascendancy,to the exclusion of Scindiah. This planfailing, his next project was to invite Amrut Rowto Poonahh, Jeswunt Row assuming the generalcommand of the troops. The engagement contraryof Bas eluded between the Peishwa and the Residenton the 31st of December 1802, was confirmedby the Governor-general on the 11th of February1803.By the 17tK article, '' the union of the twostates was so firmly connected that they were tobeseinChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 289be considered as one, and the Peishwa was not I802.to commence, nor to pursue in future, any negotiationswith any other power whatever." Itwas termed the treaty of Bassein. A subsidiaryforce of not less than six thousand regular nativeinfantry, with the usual appointment of field-piecesand European artillery, were attached. The desired to comprehend the principalbranches of the Mahratta empire in the generalsystem of defensive alliance and guarantee, onthe basis of the engagements concluded with theNizam in 1800.His lordship also felt that the British Governmentmust either persevere in restoring the Peish-wa's authority, or abandon all hope of concluding-arrangementswith the Mahratta states, whichwere essential to complete the consolidation ofthe British empire in India, and to secure thefuture tranquillity of Hindostan.Communications had passed between a vakeelof Gocklah, the Peishwa's commandant, and ColonelWellesley. At the same time the Governor-generalwrote to General Lake, the commander-in-chief,apprising him that the Madras governmenthad, partly from its own view of circumstances,and partly from the Governor-general'sorders, collected a force to aid in the generalmeasures. His lordship exerted every effort toavoid hostilities, and believed that he should notbe disappointed in preserving peace ; but in theVOL. II. u possibleRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI 1 1.1802.Preparationsagainst hostilitieswith thePeishwa.Command ofthe forces inthe Deccanconfided toGeneral Wellesley.possible event of hostilities, Scindiah's possessions,and the destruction of his power in Hindostan,were the first points to be effected. It was deemedadvisable that General Lake should remain withthe army in Oude, rather than proceed to thecommand in Hurryhur, but the option was stillleft to his excellency. In order to ensure a fulland accurate report of events in Nagpore, in connexionwith the affairs of the Mahratta empire,Mr.Webbe, then resident at Seringapatam, wasremoved to Nagpore, Major Malcolm being appointedto Mysore.The force provided by the Madras Governmenthad assembled at Hurryhur. The command of thedetachment, which consisted of about eleven thousandmen, was confided to General Wellesley, atthe particular desire of Lord Olive, who felt thathis local knowledge, and the influence he hadestablished, by personal intercourse, with theMahratta chieftains, peculiarly qualified him todischarge its complicated duties. General Wellesleycommenced his movements on the 9th ofMarch, crossing the Tumboodra river on the 12th.The admirable conduct observed by the forceunder his command during the operations againstDoondiah Waugh, had produced so favorable animpression, that it greatly facilitated the presentprogress of his troops. Holkar moved off towardsAhmednuggur and Chandore. Certain Mahrattagirders and jaghiredars, including Appal Sahib,theC.rAi'. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 291the head of the Putwurdan family, and son of ^^2.Purser Bhow, with Gocklah the commander inthe service of the Peishwa, joined General Wellesley.Intelligence reaching the General thatAmrut Row intended to burn Poonahh when theBritish force should approach the city, he made aforced march between the morning and the nightof the 19th of April, of sixty miles, having beendetained, out of that time, six hours in the ShoreGhaut. The unexampled celerity of this movementsaved the city, which Amrut Row quittedwith great precipitation. The state of the Deccanhad been so impoverished by the incursion of Holkar,that his army could not have longer subsistedin that quarter ; he had not *' left a stick standing "within one hundred and fifty miles. The Peishwamet General Wellesley on the 6th May, and on the13th entered Poonahh, where he was reseated onthe musnud. The first object of the general wasto effect a good understanding between the Peish-wa and Amrut Row, who having been induced topromise a separation from the Peishwa's enemies,was presented with the *surrey putka,' or goldenpennon. Differences had arisen between the family and the Rajah of Kolapoor, whohad deprived them of a considerable part of theirpossessions. The feelings of the southern jaghire-tars were likewise to be consulted ; althoughevery exertion was made by General Wellesley,to induce the Peishwa to act in a manner callus2 lated292 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.VIIT.1808. lated to reconcile these discordant interests, andto come forward and manifest a disposition to supporthis own power, all proved ineffectual. Thejaghiredars were separating, and there was everyprospect that the Peishwa s army would shortlybe disbanded. His highness saw his own safetyin the treaty with the Company, but was incapableof transacting the business with his government; he was jealous of the influence which theCompany's authorities had gained over his chiefs,although he knew that he owed to that influencehis restoration to power. His disposition was likewiseso vindictive, that he could not be broughtto pardon those who had injured him, or to whomhe had done an injury.Conduct of Scindiah and Holkar having evinced an intentionto form a confederacy for the purpose of inducingthe Peishwa to cede the lands he had acquiredin Guzzerat, under the treaty of Bassein, the Governdetermined to bring Scindiah to a definitivedeclaration. The chiefs of the Mahrattaempire had been accustomed to look at a confederacyof the greater powers among them, as a forcewhich nothing could withstand. They recollectedits success against the British Government informertimes, and anticipated the same success inthe expected contest. Several ineffectual attemptswere made on the part of Colonel Collins, theresident at Scindiah's durbar, to learn the intentionsof that chief : who replied, that after seeingtheChap. VI 1 1] BRITISH POAVER IN INDIA. 293the Rajah of Berar, he would inform the Resident I802.** whether it should be peace or war." The interviewhaving taken place, Colonel Collins pressedfor a decision, but without success. In this stateof vacillation and uncertainty, the Governor-generalresolved to entrust General Wellesley withthe conduct of the whole of the affairs, civil andmilitary, in Hindostan and the Deccan, connectedwith the countries of the Nizam, the Peishwa,and the Mahratta states and chiefs, and withpower to decide any question which might arise,or to negotiate and conclude any engagementswith Scindiah, Holkar, or the Rajah of Berar.The approved abilities, zeal, temper, and judgmentof General Wellesley, combined with hisextensive local experience, his established influence,and high reputation amongst the Mahrattachiefs and states, and his knowledge of the 'sviews, pointed him out as peculiarlyfitted to undertake the important andresponsible trust. In reply to a letter whichScindiah had written to the Governor-general, hewas informed by General Wellesley that ColonelCollins, the resident, had been directed to demandan explanation forthwith ; and, at the same time,to apprize him, that arrangements had been madefor the most active operations against him and theRajah of Berar; but on his troops being withdrawnto their usual stations beyond the Nerbud-dal, the British force would likewise retire. Acommunication294 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1802. communication was at the same time addressed toHolkar, expressing a conviction that he wouldconduct himself in a manner consonant to his owninterests, by continuing in peace with the Company.The Peishwa, although bound by treaty to bringforward a contingent of sixteen thousand men,sent only three thousand, and these without themeans of defraying their pay. Both Scindiah andthe Rajah of Berar, professed to have no intentionof disturbing the provisions of the treaty of Bassein,but at the same time advanced to the Adjunteepass, situated immediately upon the Nizam'sActive mea frontier. There they carried on protracted commissureof Gene . . • i i • i i • i • irai Weiiesiey. vicarious With the resident, which were permitted,in the vain hope of avoiding extremities. Incessantactivity and great ability were evinced by GeneralWellesley, in the promptitude with which he dealtwith the several important matters as they arose,keeping up a daily correspondence, which includedcommunications with General Lake in Hindostan,with the governments of Madras and Bombay,with the Mahratta chiefs, and with the residentsat the respective courts; and, lastly, making areport of his measures and proceedings to theGovernor-general, besides directing all the militaryarrangements, embracing the disposition ofthe troops, the supply of the commissariat, anddevising plans for meeting the failure of aid whichhe had been led to expect from other quarters.GeneralChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 295General Wellesley, in the exercise of his pie ^^^•nary powers, issued directions to Colonel Collins,to call upon Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar toretire without delay to Nagpoor ; but as Scindiahmight plead his inability, on account of the rains,to pass the Taptee and Nerbuddah, he was to proceedto Burhampoor. General Wellesley throughouthis correspondence observed an urbanity ofstyle, which had great effect in securing thehearty co-operation of all whose services he calledforth. It was of essential advantage in communicatingwith the natives. His companion inarms. Colonel Stevenson, towards whom the generalentertained more than common regard, hadwritten a letter to a chief of some considerationin Scindiah's service, desiring him to withdrawfrom the Nizam's territories, in which he hadmade use of an expression not commonly employedin communications to natives of that description.General Wellesley stated, that althoughthe native ought not to have entered the Nizam'scountry, he could not approve of the expressioninadvertently used, and desired Colonel Stevensonto take an opportunity of writing to the nativeofficer to explain it.As General Wellesley 's extensive commandincluded the troops acting in Guzerat, with whichcountry and its localities he was entirely unacquainted,he requested the governor of Bombaywould be so kind as to furnish him with returnsof296 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [ChapVIII.1802. of the strength and equipment of those forces,their distribution, an account of the state ofdefence of the forts they occupied, and the namesof the officers who commanded them ; a sketchof the territories of the Guicowar, which it wasintended the troops should defend, and any generaltopographical account of the country fromwhich he might be able to form a judgment, re-petting its great communication, as well withthe sea-coast as with the countries of the Holkarfamily and of Scindiah, and with those latelyceded to the Company by the Peishwa. Withsuch documents, he hoped to form a system forthe defence of those territories that would tendto their security ; and he urged a request, beforemade by the resident at Poonahh, that ColonelReynolds might be ordered to send him a map ofthe countries which were or might be the sceneof his operations. The advantages derived to theBombay Government from General Wellesley'sadvice, on the measures to be adopted for thedefence of Guzerat, is apparent from the admirablesuggestions he made to the Governor of Bombayon the 2d August 1803. Although he had nevervisited those countries, the reader will discoverthe clear and correct perception he formed, fromthe documents furnished, of the objects to be providedfor, including the security of Surat, Kara, thegarrisons for Baroda, Cambay, Hurrah, and eventuallyBaroach. After considering the dispositionChap. VIII J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 297tion and distribution of the troops, he adverted to I802their means of subsistence, discriminating betweenthose required for defensive and those for offensivemeasures ; the latter being quite different, and ofa more extensive nature. He then entered uponthe more immediate duties of the officer whowould command the force, both in a militarypoint of view, and in his political communicationswith the resident at Poonahh and Baroda, andsuggested the importance of keeping on goodterms with the Bheels.In a subsequent letter of the 13th of August,he animadverts upon the inexcusable delay inrelieving the wants of the troops at Songhur,which fort presented the only check to an enemyadvancing on Surat. His pecuniary arrangementsfor carrying on the public service were equallymarked by a knowledge of the subject, in devisingthe best means for meeting the pressure ofthe times.To bring matters to a final issue with the Mah- British resindent with Scin-rattan chiefs, Colonel Collins was instructed to ^iah demands. ' n ^ ^"^ passports.quit bcmdiah s camp, upon being satisfied thatthey determined to retain their positions. Heaccordingly demanded his passport on the 30thJuly, and sent off his iptsh-kanah* The rainprotracted his departure until the 3d of August,when he quitted the camp for Tondapoor. GeneralWellesley had apprized General Lake on the 22dJulyThe chief manager or agent to a resident.298 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VJ IT.1802. July of his intended measures, and the dispositionof his forces. The communication from ColonelCollins of the 3d of August reaching GeneralWellesley on the 6th, he issued immediate ordersto the officers in Guzerat to attack Baroach, andnot to suffer any attempt at negotiation to interruptthe measure. Colonel Stevenson was at thesame time directed to move forward from Aurun-gabad, and a suggestion was made to the governmentof Madras, for operations from Ganjamagainst Cuttack,General Stuart General Stuart, the commander-in-chief atrelinquishes the ■ - , i i i i • p r^command to Madras, not only detached reinforcements to .ural Wellesley, but most honourably and disinterestedlyrelinquished the personal gratificationof commanding an army, probably destined toundertake very distinguished services : but he didso in order to continue that important charge inthe hands of General Wellesley, who, in hisjudgment, was the officer best qualified to exerciseit with advantage to the public.General We] - The 8th being the first day the weather per-Ahmednuggur. mitted. General Wellesley broke ground, havingin the morning despatched a messenger to thekilledar of the fort of Ahmednuggur, requiring itssurrender. On his arrival in the neighbourhoodof the petal,* he offered cole f to the inhabitants.The petal being held by a body ofArabs, supported by a battalion of Scindiah'sregularSuburb, or outworks. + Quarter, protection.Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 299regular infantry and some horse, who were en 1802camped in an open space between the petal andthe fort, the killed refused. It was immediately-attacked: but being peculiarly well adapted fordefence, the resistance was obstinate. After agallant contest, the British force obtained possession,the Arabs who survived retiring in thenight to the northward. On the following dayGeneral Wellesley reconnoitred the ground inthe neighbourhood of the fort ; a battery waserected which opened at daylight on the 10th;its effect induced the killed to offer to capitulate,but he protracted the negotiation until theevening, during which interval the general refusedto cease operations, as they had declinedto send hostages to the camp. On the morning Ahmednuggof the 12th the enemy, consisting of 1,400 menmarched out, and the fort of Ahmednuggur wastaken possession of by the British troops. GeneralWellesley proposed to cross the Godaveryriver, having framed measures for following uphis operations against the enemy, by getting possessionof all Scindiah's territories south of thatriver, depending upon Ahmednuggur, and securingresources for his army. Captain Graham, whowas appointed collector of the districts aroundAhmednuggur, was cautioned by General Wellesleyto bear in mind, that to preserve the countryin a state of tranquillity, and to secure for theuse of the troops under his command resourcesandsurrenders300 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1802. and a free communication through it to Poonahhand Bombay, were objects of far greater importancethan to collect a large revenue from it.I wish you therefore to refrain from pressing the countrywith a view to raising the collections as high as they cango. You will correspond with me, in the performance ofthe duties now entrusted to you.Having inspected the fort, the quantity of storesthat were found was astonishing, and the powderso good, that as much was replaced from themagazines as had been consumed in the siege.A treaty was agreed to with Amrut Row, whowas to join General Wellesley within nineteendays from the 16th of August.Operations in General Lake, under the tenour of the communfictions made to him in January, remained inBengal, where his presence was deemed of greaterimportance than in Mysore. The Governor-generalhad expressed an opinion, that the force atHurryhur would not be called upon to act defensivelyor offensively, but should hostilities arise,they would, in all probability, take place againstScindiah, when an attack on his possessions inHindostan would follow ; but it was his lordship'searnest desire and belief that Scindiah wouldbe brought to terms, although he had felt it rightto take measures for assembling a force to act incaseof necessity. His lordship suggested Cawnporeand Futtyghur as the stations at which thetroops should be collected, and in furtherance oftheseChap. Visit ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 301these objects observed, that the collectors and ma I802.magistrates must be taught to co-operate in the systemessential for the maintenance of a distinctionbetween the civil and military power, in the administrationof the ceded districts, and to abstainfrom the uncontrolled use of the regular troops.Circular orders were accordingly issued, callingupon the servants to co-operate on these reasonableterms. In the event of hostilities, the chiefobjects were :1 . To seize all Scindiah's possessions between objects of^u i-. J ^u T campaign.the Ganges and the Jumna.2. To take the person of the Mogul, Shah Alum,under British protection.3. To form alliances with the Rajpoots and otherinferior states beyond the Jumna, for the purposeof excluding Scindiah from the northern districtsof Hindostan.4. To occupy Bundlecund, and thus to strengthenthe portion of the provinces of Benares againstScindiah or the Rajah of Berar.The Governor-general then prescribed the courseof operations, in which he evinced a thorough andcomprehensive knowledge of the several states, andthe influence to be established in connexion withthem. General Lake was apprized by the Governof the communication from ColonelCollins of the 12th June, regarding Scindiah'sdeclaration whether it should be peace or war, andof his lordship's opinion that Scindiah's object wasto302 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. VIII.1802. to gain time, he added, "ours must be to actbetween this time and the month of October. The^ seizure of Agra would be a great and masterlyMr. Barlow's blow." A paper was at this time submitted to thecourse of policy Govcmor-general by Mr. Barlow, in support of hislordship's measures towards the Peishwa and theMahrattass ; he observed, ** it was impossible toconjecture to what length their presumptuous charactersmight lead them, if permitted to usurp thePoonahh government, and expressed an entire convictionof the justice, wisdom, and policy whichhis excellency had pursued with regard to the Mahrattaempire ; its justice and wisdom being morestrongly impressed upon his mind, in proportionas he considered it in all its relations,"1802-3. The Governor-general received, on the 17thMarch 1803, a communication from the SecretCommittee, which caused him much apprehension.Notwithstanding the belligerent state of Europe,and the unsettled condition of India, France alsobeing in possession of the Mauritius, a confidentexpectation was expressed that measures for thereduction of the India debt would be followed up.His lordship was led to make the following remarks,in a letter to Lord Castlereagh :The actual condition of the Mahratta powers connectedwith the views of France, and the constitution of some brandiesof Scindiairs military establishment, will require the mostvigilant and extensive state of military preparation. Myapprehensions of the approaching crisis would be much moreserious.Chap, villi BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 303serious, if I were not confident that your lordship will oppose 1802-3.the generosity, vigour, and firmness of your mind, to theprogress of any system of compromise between the conflictingcharacters of merchant and sovereign, which compose theconstitution of the East-india Company. While that Companyshall represent the sovereign executive authority of therealm in so great, populous, and flourishing a portion of theBritish empire, its duties of sovereignty must be deemedparamount to its mercantile interests, prejudices, and profitsThe most indispensable duty of the sovereign executive governmentin India is therefore the maintenance of the mili- .try power, without which no security can exist for the mercantileor financial interests of the Company, or even for thetranquillity and welfare of our Indian subjects.The north-western frontier of Hindostan pre Affairs in Hircosta.seated the most vulnerable point of the Company sextensive empire. The condition of the Seiks wasat this time trifling, Unmeet Sing not being ableto assemble four thousand troops, whilst that of theRajpoots and other petty states offered considerableadvantage to an invading army, from the morenorthern countries of India. The enterprising spiritof France, or the ambition of Russia, might haveproduced effects little contemplated. Scindiah hada considerable force of regular infantry, commandedby European officers, supported by funds derivedfrom his possessions between the Jumna, theGanges, and the mountains of Kemaoon, most ofwhich territory had been assigned to M. Perron.The Governor-general was convinced that no timeshould be lost in endeavouring to reduce the Frenchpower304 KISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VI 1 1.1802-3. power and influence in Hindostan. General LakeJive'ru)^Grn" was accordingly invested with full power and authorLake. ^.j^^ ^^ conclude agreements with the Mahrattass,with M. Perron, or any of Scindiah's Europeanor native officers, and with the Rajpoot princes,with the view of promoting the alliance that hadbeen concluded with the Peishwa by the treaty ofBassein. Mr. Mercer was appointed the governor-general'sagent to negotiate with the Bundelahchiefs Gunner Behauder, Himhut Behauder, andShumshere Behauder, or any others in Bundle-fund; also with the Rajah of Gohud and the BegumSumroo. The latter power presented a mostextraordinary instance of the erection of a nativepetty state on the ruins of the Mogul empire. Thesum^^"™ Begum was the widow of Sumroo, a renegadeFrench soldier, and the instrument of Cossim inmurdering the English at Patna in 1763.* He purchasedhis wife, then a dancing girl. He successivelyserved the Vizier and the Rajahs of Hurtsand Jeypoor, and ultimately became chief ofSirdhuna. He died in 1776. His widow, the Begum,entertained in her employ an Irish adventurer,George Thomas, who had absconded from someship, and was first employed atHydrabad, and thenin her service, which he quitted, and became himselfa considerable chief at Hanse. The Rajah of and the Rajah Unmeet Sing, were then describedas petty Seik chieftains, but possessing considerableFide vol. i. page 89.Chap. Vii] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 305miserable influence were to be secured to the I802.British interests. Instructions were likewise sentto Lieut colonel Campbell for operations againstCuttack, a measure which General Wellesley had operationsrecommended to the Madras government. He tack.was to proceed directly to Juggernaut, and toobserve every respect for the religious prejudicesof the Brahmins and pilgrims ; treating them with juggernaut.consideration and kindness. If necessary, an assurancewas to be given to the Brahmins that itwas not intended to disturb the actual system ofcollections at the pagoda. In this instance MarquisWellesley evinced his usual judgment and caution,by directing Colonel Campbell carefully to abstainfrom contracting any engagement with the Brahmins,for limiting the power of the British Governmentto make such arrangements with respect tothe pagoda, or to introduce such a reform of existingabuses and vexations as might be deemed advisable,at a future period.General Lake commenced operations by attackingM. Perron's force before the fort of Allyghur,on the 29th August, and after a brief encounter compelledhim to retire towards Agra, leaving behindColonel Pedro in command of the fort. The townof Cool was taken possession of by the troops, whohad undergone great fatigue, and suffered intenselyfrom the heat, the thermometer being upwards of100° in the tents. To avoid a needless effusion ofblood, General Lake desired to obtain possessionVOL. 11. X of306 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1802. of Allyghur through negotiation, as the place wasvery strong, and he had reason to believe theenemy would come to terms. This expectationproving fruitless, he determined to carry it byassault. The attack was led by the Hon. Lieut. -colonel Monson, Colonel Hereford, of the Company'sArtillery, covering the advance. Thedefence was most obstinate, Colonel Monson andColonel Brown, of the Native Infantry, beingseverely wounded, the former dangerously : butcomplete success crowned the operations, whichhad been much promoted through the aid of aMr. Lucan, an Englishman, who quitted Scin-dial's service to avoid fighting against hisown countrymen. He very gallantly led ColonelMonson to the gate, and pointed out the roadthrough the fort, for which that officer expressedhimself infinitely indebted.Capture of General Wellesley considered the capture ofGenere Lake. Allyghur ouc of the most extraordinary feats hehad heard of in India. He had never attacked afort that he did not attempt the same thing, viz,blowing open the gates, but never succeeded : hehad, therefore, always taken them by escalade,which in the present instance appeared to be impossible.The little fort of Kainga was evacuatedby the enemy on the 8th. General Lake thenadvanced on Delhi, where he arrived on the 11thof September, after a march of eighteen miles,and learned with satisfaction that the enemy ingreatChap.VIIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 307great force had crossed the Jumna, under the com- Islandof M. Louis, with the intention of offeringhim battle. The general had scarcely encampedwhen his outposts were attacked by M. Louis,whose army was drawn up in fighting order.General Lake immediately brought out his wholeline, and attacked the enemy in front, whoopened a tremendous fire from a numerous andwell-served artillery; but the British army ad Battle of Demi.danced under a heavy cannonade, and chargedthem within a distance of a hundred yards,which caused a precipitate retreat. The armyhad been under arms from three in the morninguntil half-past seven in the evening, whenthe engagement closed. The city and fort of Delhiwere evacuated by the enemy : M. Louis fled withsome of the Seiks who were with him, and a strongdesire was expressed by the Mogul for the marchof the British troops to Delhi. General Lake anticipatedthe surrender of the fort of Hanse, latelyin the possession of George Thomas.* Ferozabadwas taken possession of by Colonel Macon on the9th. Six French officers delivered themselves up interview bearprisoners of war on the 15th; on the 17th gufandGefe^'General Lake was received by the Mogul at his ^^^ ^^^^•palace in the fort, to which he was conducted byAber Shah, his majesty's eldest son. The Moguland the whole court were unanimous in testifyingtheFide page 304.X 2308 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChaf.VIII.1802. the joy which they experienced at the change thathad taken place.The immense tract of country conquered bythese operations led General Lake to engage somegirders, lately in the service of M. Perron, two ofwhom were of high character and to be dependedupon. The rapidity of the marches, and loss inaction,had considerably reduced the force with thegeneral, who urged the Governor-general to proceedto the upper provinces, in order to satisfy hismind as to the force required ; at the same timepointing out the necessity of an increase in Europeancavalry and in King's troops, as but littledependence was to be placed on the Secundicorps.* The army was in high spirits : their good-humour,patience, and readiness to obey orders*was delightful, and caused the greatest confidence."Of Lieut-colonel Ochterlonyf the generalspoke in the highest terms, and expressed a deepsense of the loss he should experience, on beingobliged to leave him in the confidential situationof resident with the King at Delhi.The Governor-general had been apprized byLord Castlereagh, on the 14th of November, thatno time would be lost in nominating a successor toLord Clive in the government of Madras. On theBe[ftiiJ^ic"L7 1 7th of that month the Court of Directors appointed,Cof Madras'" tic Right Hon. Lord William Cavendish BentinckgovernorAn irregular native soldier employed in the service of therevenue and police.t The late Major-general Sir David Ochterlony.Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 309governor of Fort St. George. His lordship em '^^■^•barked in the March following.Lord Clive deemed it necessary, in vindication Lord clive addressestheof his administration, to address the Court, enter court of Direing into a full review of the various measures thathad been effected during his government, and contendedthat the stability of the Company had beengreatly promoted, their possessions largely andbeneficially extended, and the welfare of thenatives advanced by the introduction of soundprinciples of government. His lordship then deprecated,in the strongest manner, the course whichhad been adopted towards him by the Court ofDirectors, who by their orders had supersededmeasures, calculated for the purity and integrity ofthe British administration. Emulation had beensuppressed, and the energy of meritorious men,who, in the consciousness of their virtue, lookedfor reward, was damped by the attention of the idleand the dissolute being directed to an authoritysuperior to that of the government. His lordshipdwelt particularly upon the valuable revenue servicesrendered by Colonel Read in Salem and theBaramahal, and by Mr. Washington in the districtof Rained. Lord Clive appeared to havegiven a most zealous support to those measures hebelieved essential to the best interests of the Companyand to their government abroad, and to haveevincedThe present Right Hon. S. R. Lushington, Map., lategovernor of Madras.310 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.VIII.1802. evinced on all occasions a high and honourablefeeling in the discharge of his public duties. Itwas not, therefore, unnatural, that he should experiencemortification at acts, which affected theexercise of his authority, and the interests of thosewhose services formed the only claim to his lordship'ssupport. If, in giving expression to thesefeelings, his lordship exceeded the bounds which,upon a calm consideration of the position in whichhe stood towards the authority from whom hereceived his appointment would have prescribed,an apology was to be found in the anomalous andfluctuating composition of such authority, whichwas subject to impressions from various causes, towhich no other body exercising sovereign powerwas liable.1 803.Lord William The Govcmor- general deputed Colonel ,tou, au officer belonging to his lordship's family,?epiy't"^^^^^^^ ' to Madras on the 1st August, for the purpose offroTthe'co-''" assuring Lord William Bentinck of his desire tocensor-general, render the most cordial assistance, in the dischargeof the duties of the difficult and important trustcommitted to him ; and expressed the satisfactionwhich he should derive from a personal interview.Lord William Bentinck did not reach Madrasuntil the 30th August. His lordship acknowledgedthe Governor-general's communication onthe 9th September, and observed :The divided state of the Madras Government, and theopposition and counteraction which my noble predecessorsreceivedChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 311received, are circumstances much to be lamented; they tend 1803.to destroy all the vigour and efficiency so imperiously requisitein the management of this great, unsettled territory.The only system of conduct which can oppose itself withsuccess to such attacks, must be founded upon a steady anddetermined resolution to do what is right, uninfluenced byparty or prejudice, careless and fearless of the event. Fromthe moment I cannot retain my situation consistently withmy own honour, character, and comfort, I will resign it.At this time the Governor-general received fromLord Castlereagh the announcement of hostilitieswith France. The principles of finance determinedupon by Ministers (who were strongly supported),were to declare at once the burthen astate of war would call upon the people to sustain ;viz. ten millions a year additional taxes, for aterm of eight years' duration.It must at first be felt by the country as a severe blister,and they will smart under it ; but when they have experiencedand known the worst, they may then look theirdifficulties in the face with confidence, and are likely to exhibita more resolute temper than could be hoped for underthe annual irritation of new taxes.Lord Castlereagh wrote, that —In looking to the state of India, he felt full confidence,under the care of the Governor-general ; every day affordinghim fresh proofs of the vigour and wisdom of his councils ;and, in proportion as he acquired information on the policy, the more deeply he was impressedwith the value and extent of his lordship's services.The Governor-general was to take the necessary Operationssteps for capturing the French ships and forts, Srests.^^"^andRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chi. VIII.1803.Juggernauttaken.Operations inthe Deccan.Battle of Assayee,underGeneral .and for preserving and completely protecting thetrade and dominions of the Company.The change in the political state of Europe,France having taken possession of Holland, wasnecessarily felt in India, by the unavoidable expensesit entailed, as well as the stop it put tothe measures of reduction which had been contemplatedby the Governor-general.The operations in Cuttack were proceedingmost satisfactorily. Juggernaut was taken possessionof on the 18th September. The forces inthe Deccan, under General Wellesley, were acquiringfresh distinction. The enemy had beenjoined, between the 8th and 18th of September,by the infantry under Colonel Portman, by thatbelonging to the Begum Sumroo,* and by anotherbrigade of infantry under M. Dupont. Their armywas collected between Bokerdun and JafFeerbadOn the 20th General Wellesley moved towardsthem. On the 23d he arrived at Naulniah, wherehe learned that Scindiah and the Rajah of Berarhad moved off, and were in camp about six milesdistant : he accordingly determined at once toproceed against them. The whole of the combinedarmy was discovered on the bank of the Kaitnariver. Their right consisted entirely of cavalry,and extended from Bokerdun to their corps ofinfantry near Assayee. Although General Wellesleycame, first, in front of their right, he determinedtoVide page 304.Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 313to attack their left, as the defeat of their infantry isowas most likely to be effectual. He accordinglymarched round to their left flank, covering themovement of the column of infantry by the Britishcavalry in the rear, and by the Mahratta andMysore cavalry on the right flank. Having passedthe Kaitna, and the enemy having changed theposition of their infantry, General Wellesley immediatelyattacked them, *' advancing under avery hot fire from the cannon, the execution ofwhich was terrible." Lieut-colonel Maxwellcharged a large body of the enemy's infantry, andfell in the operation. ** The victory was complete,but had cost dear."I cannot, (observed the general,) write in too strong termsof the conduct of the troops ; they advanced in the bestorder, and with the greatest steadiness, under a most destructivefire, against a body of infantry far superior in number,who appeared determined to contend with them to the last,and who were driven from their guns only by the bayonet ;and, notwithstanding the number of the enemy's cavalry,and the repeated demonstrations they made of an intentionto charge, they were kept at a distance by our infantry.General Wellesley, and every officer of thestaff, had horses shot under them. The enemymoved off to the Adjuntee pass, and from thencetowards Burhampoor, to the north of the riverTapty. As the enemy had several brigades undefeated,General Wellesley doubted the proprietyof the expedition into Berar by one of the divisionsonly.314 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1803. only. The enemy's infantry was the best he hadever seen in India, excepting our own, and theyand their equipment far surpassed Tippoo's.I assure you that their fire was so heavy, I much doubtedat the time whether I should be able to prevail upon ourtroops to advance, and all agree that the battle was thefiercest that has ever been seen in India ; our troops behavedadmirably, the Sepoy astonished me.*General Wei In the beginning of October, General WellesleymentU™^^^" ** made a dash down " towards Phoolmurry, sixteenmiles north of Arungabad, upon a defensiveprinciple, the enemy, with all their horse and someinfantry and guns, drawn out of Burhampore,having threatened to pass to the southward, bythe Canterbury Ghaut. *' But it is only a threat,and I believe I have stopped them already." Inthe midst of these calls for exertion. GeneralWellesley evinced his interest for a young writer,the son of Admiral Pakenham, who had reachedCalcutta ; writing to a friend who was to takecharge of him, "do not let him be idle, urge himto learn the country languages, and do not let himrun in debt." More sound advice could not wellbe comprised in fewer words. When in camp atthe Adjuntee pass, he remarked :If our allies were in any degree of strength, a movementof our whole force upon Asseerghur, and then upon Gawil-ghur and Nagpoor, would put an end to the war; but, underpresent circumstances, I must be satisfied with somethingless brilliant.Notwith-♦ Letter to Major Malcolm.Chap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN India 315Notwithstanding these exertions were made to i^oa1 • p 1 TVT- • ^ ^1 Imbecilitymaintain the authority oi the Nizam against the the Nizam.Mahrattass, his highness seemed wholly insensibleto the support he received. Since the battle ofAssayee, the general stated that he had been like aman who fights with one hand and defends himselfwith another. With Colonel Stevenson's forcehe had acted offensively, and taken Asseerghur ;and with his own he had covered the territories ofthe Nizam and the Peishwa, in the course ofwhich service he had made " some terrible "marches. Celerity of movement was everything ;and, acting upon the defensive or offensive, witheither corps, according to their situation and theposition of the enemy. When a force was up to itswork, it was in other words described, *sin style."Alluding to the measures pursued by the Bombaygovernment, the general observed, what a pityit is we have not Guzerat *' in style." To MajorMalcolm he remarked :The Rajah, the Minister, and the Resident at Baroda,have guards so exceedingly strong as to run away with thewhole garrison ; and each have more than half their guardsrunning after them on foot when they go out, whether inpalanquin or on horseback. All respect for the troops usedin this manner must be at an end, and the troops lose allrespect for themselves. " Purneah* never has a Sepoy, exceptingperhaps an orderly from the commandant ; and asfor the Rajah of Mysore, he has one company of nativeinfantry, who do the duty of Seringapatam and the Rajah'spalace.The celebrated and efficient Dewan to the Rajah of Mysore.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1803. ]palace. To remedy this is a more difficult negotiation titianyou have ever had in your diplomatic career."General vvei- It having been customary to send in bills upon(hictVofficbi honour for payments on account of the commandingofficer, General Wellesley suggested, in aletter to the secretary at Bombay, that the bills onhonour ought not to be multiplied ; but that theexpenses of the military should be brought underproper heads of account, and a distinct modedevised for supplying every thing for which therewas a regular demand. A bill upon honour oughtnever to bq admitted, except for extraordinary orunforeseen service, for which no previous provisioncould have been made. Alluding to therevenue arrangements of Colonel Murray in Guze-rat, he remarked they were quite ridiculous, andought never to have been made, or have occupiedhis attention for a moment. That officer havinginvolved himself in a dispute with the paymasterand military auditor at Bombay, General Wellesleyremarked :There were two parties at Bombay, the civil and military;and of the latter, two parties, King's and Company's ; thedisputes of the two being the sole business of every manunder the government at Bombay. If this goes to Mr.Duncan, I shall be burned in effigy at that presidency. .Asseerghur had been reconnoitred by ColonelStevenson on the 18th of October, when he sentin a flag of truce : but receiving no decided answer,the operations were not relaxed, as the indecisionwas only to gain time to admit of Scindiah comingupChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 317Up to its relief. Before the batteries were opened isoColonel Stevenson informed the killed of theterms that would be granted : after an hour's firing, Asseerghur° ^ surrenders.a white flag was shown on the walls of the fort,which was delivered up the following morning.On the 11th of November a Mahratta of somerank, from Scindiah, waited upon General Welles Armistice withr ' • Scindiah.ley, for the purpose of entering upon a pacificnegotiation. It appeared that he had not powersto conclude any agreement ; but, in anticipationthat he might subsequently be accredited by Scin-dial, General "Wellesley communicated to theGovernor-general the terms on which he shouldtreat for peace. An armistice was concluded withthe natives Jeswunt Row Goorparrah and NarooPunt Nana, as accredited vakeels from Scindiah,for a cessation of hostilities in the Deccan andGuzerat ; it being agreed that Scindiah was tomarch with his army and take up a position twentycoss* eastward of Ellichpoor, and to forage stillfurther eastward : the distance of twenty coss tobe always preserved between his forces and thoseof the British and allied armies. The vakeelwished the cessation to extend to Hindostan, butto this General Wellesley would not assent. Hethen stated his reasons for effecting this armistice.Some suggestions made by Major Malcolm on theterms were in part adopted, the whole beingreferredA corrupt term used by Europeans to denote a road measureof about two miles.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII1803.Conferenceswith Scindiali.Battle of Ar-gaul,underGeneral wellesley.referred to the Governor-general, accompanied byfull explanations.Conferences vv^ere carried on : Scindiah's troopshad not complied with the terms of the armistice,but the vakeel trusted that the general would notattack them ; the latter, however, stated that heshould attack the enemies of the Company whereverhe met them. A junction having been fortunatelyeffected with Colonel Stevenson on the 28th,the army had advanced, after a march of greatlength on a very hot day, to Waverley, when theenemy were descried encamped at Argaum.Although late in the day. General Wellesley determinedto march against them. At the first movementthe Native Infantry got into confusion ; threebattalions, who behaved so admirably in the battleof Assayee, being broke and running off when thecannonade commenced at Argaum, which was notto be compared to that of Assayee. General Wellesleywas fortunately at no great distance, and wasable to rally and re-establish them. The jointforces of the enemy were completely routed ;thirty-eight pieces of cannon and all their ammunitiontaken ; they were pursued by the cavalry,who destroyed great numbers : there was not sufficientlight to enable the general to do all that hewished, but the cavalry continued the pursuit bymoonlight, all the troops being under armstill a late hour in the night. General Wellesleyhad himself been on horseback from six in themorningChap. Vii] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. J319morning till twelve at night. Notwithstanding isothese great exertions on the part of General Wellesleyand his troops, the army advanced on thefollowing day towards Gawilghur. A vakeel camein from the Rajah of Berar to the British camp atArose on the 2d of December.The powers possessed by the vakeel from Scin-dial proving insufficient, the general determinedto send them away unless they could produce credentialsin a more perfect form. '' Every Mahratta is 'so haughty, and so prone to delay, that I suspectboth Scindiah and Ragojee Bhoonslah will beruined, rather than submit to the conditions I mustrequire from them."The operations in Guzerat, from want of judg Affairs in argumentand discretion on the part of the leading-authoritiesin that quarter, were carried on in avery unsatisfactory way. Frequent appeals weremade to General Wellesley, involving personalconsiderations, in addition to the annoyance itoccasioned by interfering with the general measuresframed to produce one common result.A complaint was made of want of power tocheck misconduct ; the general replied, ** If myMahratta allies did not know that I should hang-anyone that might be found plundering, not onlyI should have starved long ago, but most probablymy own coat would have been taken off my back."To a representation of misconduct on the partof some of the military at Surat, he observed,'' Measuresherat.'toRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VII F.]8oaGeneral Wellesleyto BombayGovernmentMeasures might and ought to have been taken,by the commanding officer, to put an end to thesedisgraceful proceedings, which it appears he hasentirely neglected." Colonel Murray having addresseda letter couched in disrespectful terms toMajor-general Nicolls at Bombay, General Wellesleywrote to the secretary :It must rest with Government to take such measures asmay be thought necessary to vindicate its own dignity andauthority, I cannot presume to suggest any thing to such acase ; and I have only to add, that I will submit with cheerfulness,and carry into execution, as far as lies in my power,whatever may be ordered upon this unfortunate occurrence.In conducting the extensive duties with which I amcharged, it has been my constant wish to conform to existingrules and establishments and to introduce no innovations,so that at the conclusion of the war, when my duties wouldcease, every thing might go on in its accustomed channel.Whenever the hon. Governor in Council may think properto call for my opinion upon any subject, I will give it himto the best of my judgment and abilities; but I hope thathe will not desire me to enter into the detail of Guzerataffairs, which I cannot be supposed to comprehend, and withwhich I am convinced it was never intended I should becharged.At the same moment that General Wellesley'smind was thus pressed upon with the feuds anddifferences under the government of Bombay, hehad to decide as to dealing with rebellious butless powerful feudatories of the Peishwa. Anative Baba Phurkiah came in on cole withfour thousand horse, to entreat the general's interferenceChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 321terence with the Peishwa in his favour. He was isis.desired to remove from the Nizam's territories intothose of the Rajah of Berar, beyond the Wiirdah.The general refused to receive Cashier Rao inhis camp, because he was not only useless, buthis reception might create uneasiness in Holkar'smind, and thereby increase the number of enemiesto the British Government. The same objectionswere felt to his reception by the Peishwa. Inthe midst of a few moments' leisure, in forminghis arrangements for storming the fort of Gawil-ghur, he transmitted to the Resident at Poonahh along paper from Amrut Rao, detailing the historyof the —Rascally intrigues of himself and the Peishwa, ratherthan any real ground of dispute.There were two modes of dealing with him— -one by raising a force to attack and subdue him,the other to pardon him ; and if he would notaccept pardon, to draw off his adherents by conciliation; and, at all events, to avoid every act ofoppression on their families and servants : —But the principle of the Poonahh government was re- General revenge;the gratification of that detestable passion, and p^iain^ o^ wantnothing else, has been listened to. The day I hope is not of information ,far distant when I shall be able to resign my charge inthis country, and when the Peishwa will have to settle hiscountries ; but there is not a soul in his government capableof giving a line of information, upon any one point concerningthe administration of the extensive territories, thegovernment of which is in his hands ! Not less than fiftyVOL. II. y timesghur,322 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.180ai times I have pressed the fellow he has here by way ofvakeel, to urge the government to send into Candeishproper persons to take possession of his highness's richdistricts in that province, which, the Nizam's officers havetold me, are going to ruin for want of a person to managethem.This is but an outline of the numerous pointswhich engaged General Wellesley in the midst ofSiege of Gawii- his preparations for storming Gawilghur, a strongfort situated in the range of mountains betweenthe sources of the rivers Poona and Tapty. Itstood on a lofty mountain in that range, andconsisted of one complete inner fort, fronting thesouth, where the rock was most steep, and anouter fort, which covered the inner to the westand north. This fort had a third wall, whichcovered the approach to it from the north by thevillage of Labada : all the walls being stronglybuilt, and fortified by ramparts and towers. Fromthe day on which Colonel Stevenson broke ground,near Labada, the troops in his division wentthrough a series of laborious services, ** such," observedthe general, " as I never before witnessed,with the utmost cheerfulness and perseverance."The heavy ordnance and stores were dragged byhand over mountains and through ravines fornearly the whole distance, by roads which ithad been previously necessary to make for themselves.We have been accustomed to read with wondertheChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 323the surprising efforts made by Napoleon and his isis^ • . 1 • • 1 1 • J. J Exertions oftroops in their campaigns when advancing towards troops.Italy ; but, whilst the astonishment caused bycontemplating such persevering exertions is byno means lessened, feelings of equal, if not ofincreased surprise are created, when we reflectthat the efforts of which we are now speakingwere made by Europeans in an eastern climate,and by natives whose bodily strength and moralcourage were far inferior ; in the face, too, of anenemy sometimes strongly entrenched, and duringheat so excessive, as to render the fatigue of suchlabour almost insupportable. These are some ofthe unheeded toils and exertions by which ourempire has been acquired, and from whence suchwealth has been derived.The defence of the fort of Gawilghur was mostresolute, the garrison being numerous, and consistingof Rajpoots commanded by Bent Singhimself, who had escaped from Argaum. Theywere all well armed, with the Company's newmuskets and bayonets. Vast numbers were killed,particularly at the different gates. Bent Singwas found amidst the slain, having determined todefend his trust to the last extremity. They hadresolved to put their families to death, in orderto save their wives and daughters from disgrace.Twelve or fourteen women were found, someof whom having been ineffectually stabbed, werestill bleeding, whilst three were actually dead.Y 2 OnRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [C.rAP. VIII.1803.Peace with13erar.General WellesleyappointsHon. M. toBerar.On the 17th December a treaty of peace wasconcluded with Ragojee Bhoonslah, the rajah ofBerar. He ceded to the Company and theirallies the province of Cuttack, including the fortand district of Balasore ; also all the territoriesof which he had collected the revenues in participationwith the soubahdar of the Deccan, andthose he possessed to the westward of the Wur-dal. The frontier of the Rajah of Berar was tobe formed to the west by the Wurdah, from itsissue from the Injury hills to its junction withthe Godavery, and he was to have the hills onwhich the forts of Nernullah and Gawilghur weresituated. Every thing south of those hills, andto the west of the Wurdah, was to belong to theBritish Government and their allies.General Wellesley proposed sending the HonourableMountstuart Elphinstone to act withthe Rajah until the arrival of Mr.Webbe at Nag-poor.Mr. Elphinstone had rendered the greatestassistance to the general ; he was well versed inthe languages, and had experience and knowledgeof the interest of the Mahratta powers and theirrelations with each other, and with the BritishGovernment and its allies. He had been presentin all the actions fought in that quarter duringthe war, and at all the sieges ; he was acquaintedwith every transaction that had taken place, andwith General Wellesley's sentiments upon allsubjects : the general therefore recommended himtoChap. VIII. ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 325to the Governor-general. Such was the testimony isis.borne by so competent a judge to the merits ofthat distinguished servant of the East-india Company.A communication being made by the general Curious intentRajah Mohiput Ram, the vakeel or resident in the vakeeiofc ii TVT- c A\ ' '. the Nizam andcamp iron the Nizam, oi the measures requisite General Wei-fortaking possession of certain territory to be ^^^^*ceded to his master, Mohiput Ram was anxiousto ascertain what particular countries and districtsthey were likely to be. General Wellesley declinedgiving the information, whereupon MohiputRam offered him seven lacs of rupees for it : thegeneral replied, by asking him, *' Can you keepa secret ?" — ** Yes," said Mohiput Ram ; *' And socan I," answered the general. The appal, ormessenger, who was sent with the intelligence toHydrabad, was stated to have been way-laid andmurdered, at the instance, it was assumed, of thevakeel, to effect his object of obtaining the information.The ratification of the treaty by the Rajah ofBerar was received by General Wellesley on the23d. Notice had been given to the vakeel of Scin-dial, that the agreement of the 23d November forthe suspension of hostilities, would cease on the27th December. On the 30th, a treaty of peace peace ofwas concluded with Scindiah's vakeel at Surjee lalim.^ ^"^^"'Anjengaum, by which that chief ceded to theCompany and their allies in perpetual sovereignty,all326 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.^^^' all his forts, territories, and rights in the Dooab, orcountry situated between the Jumna and the Ganges,and all his forts, territories, rights, and interests,in the countries to the northward of those ofthe Rajahs of Jeypoor and Joudpoor, and of theRan ah of Gohud ; the forts of Baroach and Aimedand the territory depending upon eachexcepting certain lands and villages held in enim.*He also ceded all the territories which belonged tohim previously to the breaking out of the war,situated to the southward of theAdjuntee hills, includingthe fort and district of Julnahpoor ; thefort of Asseerghur, the town of Burhampoor, theforts of Powangur and Dohud. The territories inCandeish and Guzerat depending on those forts,were to be restored to Scindiah. He was to holdin enim the lands of Dhoolpoor Bare and RajahKernel. The sum of seventeen lacs of rupees, orlands equal, were to be set apart by the Companyto pay pensions or grants, &c. The treaties madeby the British Government with those Rajahs whohad been his feudatories were to be confirmed, butthe revenues collected from lands southward ofthose of the Rajahs of Jeypoor, Joudpoor, and theRajah of Gohud, were granted away. The Companywere to arbitrate as to the claims of the Peishwaand Scindiah regarding lands in Malwa. Scindiahrelinquished all claims on the king. Shah Alum, andagreed never to take or retain in his service anyFrenchman,Grants of land free of rent.Chap.VIII] BRITISH power in INDIA. 327Frenchman, or the subject of any other European I803or American power, the government of which mightbe at war with the British Government, or any-britishsubject, whether European or native ofIndia, without the consent of the British Government; and accredited ministers were to reside ateach court.Such was the conclusion of the operations and chose of affairsnegotiations by General Wellesley in the Deccan, '" *^ *^^""*at the close of the year 1803.In Bengal, General Lake, on the 10th October, Bengal.was before the fort of Agra : but a force of seven ^^^^ ^''^^"'battalions of the enemy being in possession of thetown, he felt it necessary to dislodge them, and tooccupy the ravines which would answer as trenches,and afford a complete covering for carrying on theworks. The town was taken possession of after asevere conflict, in which a number of officers andmen were killed and wounded. Having ascertainedthat seventeen battalions had come from the Deccanto the relief of Scindiah's forces in Hindostan,General Lake determined to drive the enemy fromtheir strongholds in the garrison, which was noteffected without much loss, the enemy having contendedmost desperately, the troops being supposedthe best that M. Perron had with him ; a circumstancewhich led General Lake to lay considerablestress on the necessity of having always a dueproportionRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.VIII.Encouragementgiven bytile Governor-general1803. proportion of European troops in India. Theexposure of the European officers of the nativecorps, which was so essential to render those troopsefficient in battle, had caused great loss; but, withouttheir spirited and gallant exertions, ** we hadnot been where we are."The Governor general, who watched with anxioussolicitude the progress of these events in the Deccan,in Guzerat, and in Hindostan, did ample justiceto the zeal, gallantry, and devotion, exhibitedby the respective generals and their armies ; everyencouragement was held out, and every mode ofapplause was extended, that could possibly be bestowedby the supreme authorities. The fullest confidencewas reposed by the Governor-general in thedistinguished officers whom he had entrusted withsuch extensive powers ; their unexampled efforts,in overcoming all obstacles, and establishing onevery occasion the superiority and energy of theBritish arms, amply repaid the confidence theyenjoyed. General Lake, under the authority givenhim by the Governor-general, raised two regiments,observing.You cannot conceive what a tract of country at this momentlies exposed to the invasion of any enterprising freebooter.ijiindiecund. Licut.-coloncl Powell had entered Bundlecund,crossing the Jumna in September, and establishedthe British authority between that and the riverKane. Shumshur Chaucer's troops, at the instigationChap. VIII.l BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 329nation of his girders, advanced to the opposite ^^^•banks of the Kane. Colonel Powell crossed withthe troops of Himmut Bahadur a few days afterwards.Shumshur Behauder appearing determinedto risk an action, Colonel Powell advanced, whena cannonade was commenced by mistake at tooearly a period in the action, which prevented theeffect intended by the commanding officer. Theprovince was evacuated by Shumshur Behauder,who, having crossed the river Betwah, afterwardssurrendered, on terms of a provision for his support.Bundlecund was subsequently brought underBritish rule, after lengthened military operations.Baroach, under Colonel Dodington, was capturedon the 29th of August ; on the 14th of October,the fort of Barabutty, in Cuttack, was takenby assault, under Lieut-colonel Clayton.Agra, termed by the natives *' the key of Hindostan,"capitulated on the 17th October; thegarrison, consisting of six thousand men, marchedout at noon on the 18th, Brigadier-general Mcdonaldoccupying the fort. Its early surrender wasattributed to the impression made by the breachingbatteries, which opened within three hundredand fifty yards under Colonel Hereford. GeneralLake considered its early acquisition most important,in saving many lives that must have beensacrificed, as the garrison was composed of a mostdesperate caste of men, and the passages of thefort were very intricate.The330 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1803. The Governor-general, in acknowledging thissuccess in a letter to General Lake, observed.You must excuse this delay of my official despatches,when you reflect I am compelled to look all around India.General Lake marched romagna on the 27th ofOctober in pursuit of the Mahratta force, and onthe 31st encamped at Laswarree, a short distancefrom the ground the enemy had quitted the samemorning. On being apprized of this circumstance,he determined to make an effort with his army toovertake the enemy, with the intention of detaininghim until the infantry should come up. Themarch of the cavalry was made at twelve at night.They performed a distance of forty-four miles intwelve hours, and came up with the enemy atday-break. This sudden approach induced thegeneral to venture on an attack with his cavalryalone, supported by mounted artillery ; the enemyavailed himself of a most advantageous post beforeGeneral Lake had discovered the alterationof his position, owing to the quantities of dustwhich wholly obscured him from sight. The advancedguard of the front brigade, commandedby Colonel Vandeleur, made a charge with muchgallantry : but they were exposed to a most gallingfire, in which Colonel Vandeleur fell. The gunsthat had fallen into the hands of the British troops,could not be brought away for want of bullocks.The infantry, which had marched at three in themorning, arrived at eleven a.m. Some refreshmentChap. VIII] British POWER IN INDIA, 33 1ment was absolutely requisite. The enemy having isis.sent to offer terms, an hour was allowed them todecide on the proposals offered by the general ; inthe interim preparations were made for operations.The right wing was commanded by Major-generalWare, and the left by Major-general St.John. At the expiration of the time allowed tothe enemy to decide, the infantry were orderedto advance ; they were met by the most determinedgallantry on the part of the enemy, supportedby cannister-shot, served with most dreadfuleffect. The enemy assumed altogether somenacing a position, that the cavalry was orderedto attack. His Majesty's 29th Regiment was commandedby Captain Wade, Major Griffith havingbeen killed. They charged with great gallantry,in which Major-general Ware fell, his head beingcarried off by a cannon shot. Colonel McDonaldsucceeded; though wounded, he continued tocommand. After further vigorous efforts, the enemywas ultimately defeated. The 15th regularbattalion, sent from the Deccan under MonsieurDudenaic, and two battalions of the same descriptionfrom Delhi, were annihilated, and the Frenchforce in Scindiah's service, commanded by Frenchofficers, destroyed. Gen. Lake's son was woundedseverely in the knee ; the general spoke in admirationof the enemy's sepoy, observing, ** if theyhad been commanded by French officers, the resultwould have been doubtful."The332 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1803. The Governor-general, in acknowledging GeneralLake's account of the engagement, remarked,** Your safety in the midst of such perils, remindsme of Lord Duncan's private account of the battleof Camperdown, in which, describing his ownsituation in the midst of the general slaughter,he said, ' God covered my head in the day ofbattle.' "cuttack. The successful operations in Cuttack enabledthe Governor-general to send up the Europeanregiment to Allahabad, to await the commander-in-chief'sorders. His lordship wrote GeneralLake : ** The principle of all my plans of war isexactly the same with that which appears to meto be your leading principle in action ; to commencethe attack, and to compel the enemy toa defensive system." He then took a view of themode by which the war could be most advantageouslyprosecuted. The movement towardsthe northward was not to be lost sight of, and ifHolkar should mix in the war, the destruction ofhis force was to be a primary object. His presentviews were supposed to be neutral, but it wasbelieved he would rush into war if any object ofavarice or ambition appeared attainable.General Lake, in thanking the Governor-generalfor this communication, stated, ** 1 must ever regretthe loss of so many brave men and worthyofficers, and have only to look up to that Providencewith adoration and thanksgiving, whom, intheChap. Vii] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 333the midst of our most perilous situations, saved isis.so many of us to tell the tale, and offer up ourprayers for His mercies vouchsafed'*The Governor-general had to direct his attend vigilant superintendenceoftion to every quarter of his immense charge, the Governor-alludingto the state of affairs in Europe, in aletter to Lord Hobart of the 25th September, andthe necessity of guarding against the French atCochin, ** I entertain a confident expectation, thatthe vigilance of Lord William Bentinck will haveinduced his lordship to anticipate my opinionwith regard to that important position." Writingto Lord William Bentinck, who had anticipatedmeasures as to Cochin, the Governor-general expressedhis sense of his steadfast support and activeco-operation, and his entire approval of his lordship'sconduct respecting the French, who wereintriguing through M. Colin, a secret agent atPondicherry, as well as of his lordship's severalmilitary arrangements, and other proceedings.*The responsibility of the Governor-general wasnot confined to the territories and possessionsunder the government of the Company, but aforcible appeal was made from the government ofCeylon, for aid to assist in quelling the lamentablestate of insurrection caused by the Indian violationof the truce which had been concludedwith them. Aid was extended, but not withoutgreatLetter to Lord Wm. Bentinck, November 1803.334 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.iso great inconvenience to the Government, as it lessenedthe military means of India at a juncturewhen additional troops were required by the IndianGovernments. Lord Wellesley, in a letter toLord Hobart, dwelt at considerable length uponthe importance of Ceylon being placed under thecontrol and superintendence of the Governor-general.General Lake, then in camp at Coorka, awarethat no one more earnestly desired that the blessingsof peace and tranquillity might be restored toIndia than the Governor-general, whenever theycould be secured with safety, expressed a hope thatthe negotiations pending with the Rajpoot princeswould be satisfactorily concluded. He thoughtlittle was to be apprehended from Holkar, uponwhose views and motions he should still keep avigilant watch.1804. The Governor-general, in order to avoid, if possible,hostilities with Holkar, expressed his wish toGeneral Lake that he should open negotiationswith that chief ; reserving, at the same time, anyacknowledgment or confirmation of the legitimacyof his dominion. The commandant of the fort ofGwalior had refused to surrender that fortress, inpursuance of the treaty with Rajah Umbajee ofthe 16th of December 1803. There was reason tobelieve that the Rajah was in communication withHolkar against the Company, as he had manifesteda decided indifference towards the requisitionsmadeHolkar.Chap. Vii] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 335made by General Lake. The Governor general iso.therefore determined not to hold any intercoursewith him ; that his authority as the representativeof Scindiah should not be admitted, by deliveringup the districts of Dholepore, Barren, and RajahKerrah, situated on the north of the Chumbul, andcommanding the line of communication betweenAgra, Gwalior, and the territory of Gohud.The Governor-general received, on the 29th of Letter fromFebruary, a letter from Lord Castlereagh, express re^h.ing, on behalf of his Majesty's Ministers and himself,their unanimous opinion that the governmentof India could not be placed in any hands soadvantageously as his lordship's, and that theyhad the most anxious disposition to give a cordialand honourable support to his lordship's government,but regretted that there was not a correspondingdisposition in the Court of Directors ; andthat, although he had hoped the feelings whichexisted had been buried in oblivion, subsequentobservations had satisfied him that it would havebeen exposing the Governor-general's name to unmeritedcoldness, to have sought the Court's concurrencein urging him to continue in the government.He added, that the legal authority of theBoard enabled them to disarm much of the dispositionmanifested with reference to his lordship'sadministration ; but it was difficult, if not impossible,to give a totally different complexion to allthe details which originate with others, and whichmust336 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1804. must necessarily receive and disclose the stampand character of the mind which prevails in theDirection.This communication was certainly not calculatedto propitiate the feelings of the Governor-generaltowards the executive body of the Company,whilst the drain on their home coffers for the supplyof specie to India increased their indispositiontowards his lordship's policy.The following: extract of a letter from the chairmanof the Court of Directors, will convey someidea of the state of feelings at home ; it shows, likewise,the difficulty which the Court experienced,in providing pecuniary supplies.This letter will accompany a dispatch, communicating loyour lordship the rupture of this country with the late unitedprovinces, whom the French Republic have not permitted topreserve a neutrality, which would have been (I persuade myself)as congenial to their wishes, as it would have been advan -gaseous to their interests.What projects the Corsican adventurer may form to injurethis country and its dependencies (except that of an attemptof a descent upon Great Britain or Ireland), no person is wellenough informed to know ; but doubtless, disappointed as hehas been in the objects of his ambition, and boiling as hisbreast is with revenge, nothing within the reach of his capability(and, in the present state of Europe, this capability isgreat,) will be omitted to be tried. I am unable, however,in turning my eyes round to our different and dispersed possessionsin the different quarters of the world, to anticipateany great mischief except what may have arisen to us, ifFrance, deciding upon the knowledge which she obtained ofourChap. Will.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 337our having suspended the evacuation of the Cape, had made isoup her mind to give orders for acting hostilely against us,intending, if an actual rupture did not afterwards occur, toshelter himself under this temporary suspension of the treaty.In this case, it is impossible to calculate what mischief maynot have been effected by Linois''s squadron. I persuade myself,from the circumstances to which I have myself been aparty, that this has not been the case, but my mind will notbe relieved from its doubts till I hear the final destinationof that squadron.You will not, I hope, have any reason to complain of myexertions, when you find our supply of silver to India andChina this season will amount to c^^l, 700,000 ; it is a vastsum to have collected, in the present situation of Europe, andexceeds in amount my most sanguine expectations. My apprehensionsare, that a great part of it will be wanted for ourmilitary expenses upon the coast, and that it will thus bediverted from the purposes for which it was intended. If thePeishwa's government is re-established without a very heavydisburse from the Company's funds, I shall find my self agreeablydisappointed. It is impossible, in the present moment, toform any opinion upon the amount of bullion that may besent out next year ; every exertion will be made to renderit as large as possible, but I strongly recommend you to formyour estimates upon the expectation of a very limited supplyof this article. In the first place, our funds have been crippledcompletely by the unexpected occurrence of the war, and bythe enormous duties which have been imposed upon everyarticle ; in the second place, the assistance of Government, inthe return of a further part of the debt which it owes to theCompany, is made, by the same circumstance of the war, amatter of much greater uncertainty than it would otherwisehave been ; and lastly, we cannot depend upon or exert ourcredit in war as in peace. But should the resources of theVOL. ir. z Company338 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1903. Company not fail, it is still not possible at all to guess at theamount of the supply which the markets of Europe mayafford. I would, therefore, by all means recommend you notto depend upon a receipt of silver larger in amount than fromthree to seven or eight hundred thousand pounds. I thinkthe supply may be nearer the first, viz. three hundred, thanthe latter, seven ; but at the same time I beg you always tobear in mind, that though you should not depend upon thereceipt of a large sum, every exertion will be made to extendthe supply to the largest possible amount.Of our great men I say nothing, except that the generalimpression of the public seems to be, that things cannot continuefor any length of time exactly in their present state.I have long had it in contemplation in my mind that itwould be a wise thing in the East-india Company to abandonentirely their settlement of Bencoolen. Reduced even as it is(I hope) in expense, I still think it a useless drain upon ourfinances, and that its commercial advantages are not equivalentto its expense. In a military point of view, or as a station,I am not aware that it possesses any.In addition to the pressure on the Company'sfinances was the feeling occasioned by the affairsof Oude, which had necessarily been confined tothe Secret Committee.Many of the Directors have applied to see the secret papersrelating to the Oude negotiation: but they have not yet beenmade public, and before they are it will be necessary to determinewhether or not they are to be answered in the publiccorrespondence. The Nabob I make no doubt is now moreat his ease than ever, but I fear we must not try the measuresthat have made him so in foro conscience,*InLetter from Jacob Bosanquet, Esq., October 1803.Chap. VIII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 339In addition to £1,700,000 in silver, already sent, I803.a further sum of £200,000 was to be forwarded.The Company's stock had fallen, since the recommencementof hostilities with the Mahrattass, from215 to 160 ; but his lordship was assured by thePresident of the Board, that the utmost aid wouldbe given to enable him to overcome all the pecuniarydifficulties.The condition of the finances was in fact the Pecuniaryaffairs.test by which all acts were tried. There couldnot be a position of greater embarrassment thanthat in which the Governor-general stood at thisperiod. Europe in a state of war, the BritishGovernment in India involved in unavoidablehostilities, specie scarcely to be obtained forremittance to India, whilst self-interest annihilatedevery other feeling that ought to have operatedat such a juncture. The merchants at Madrasacted most handsomely to the Government : thefifteen lacs of treasury notes in circulation hadcaused them to fall to six per cent, discount. Themerchants nevertheless always consented to receivethem at par ; but the loss suffered by Governmentarose from the want of co-operation on the part ofthe Company's servants, who, having funds in thehouses of agency, insisted upon the payment ofthem in specie for the purpose of speculating intreasury paper. Several of the houses of agencyresisted this demand, but the claimants actuallyresorted to the Supreme Court to enforce payment.z2 The340 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1803. The exportation of specie from Madras during thethree preceding years had been very great. Suchwere the variety of causes that combined to renderthe situation of the Governor-general one of greatresponsibility and of arduous and anxious labour ;but in the midst of these conflicting interests, andfar from insensible to the ill feeling which existedtowards him in the Home authorities, his lordshipwas not to be diverted from his purpose of establishingthe supremacy of the British power inIndia, and of subduing its enemies, leaving hismeasures to be judged by the results that wouldbe seen to have flowed from them at a futureperiod.Marquis wei The Governor-general addressed the Court ofDirectors in March. His lordship referred to hisletter of the 20th of December, which intimatedhis intention of remaining in India to await theissue of the transactions in the Mahratta empire,which originated in 1802. As the treaties of peacewith Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar had beenconcluded on principles of exemplary faith andequity towards the Company's allies, of moderationand lenity towards their enemies, and of a justregard for the general prosperity of India, henotified his intention of embarking for Europe atthe close of 1804. In the interim it was his lordship'sintention to proceed to Agra, returning toCalcutta by December. Should, however, anyevent arise to demand his remaining in India alongerChap. VIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 341longer period, his lordship stated that the Court ibo.might rely on his zeal for the interests and honourof the Company and of that country.On the same day that the Governor-general wasannouncing these intentions to the Court, hereceived a letter from Lord Castlereagh, upon thesubject of the discussions that had been carried onbetween the Court and the Board regarding theCollege; the despatch advised the adoption of avery modified scheme for the instruction of Writers,and, if expedient, ultimately at each of the presidencies.On the 14th of February, a squadron of French china fleeces-^ 7 , - feat Frenchships of war in the Straits of Malacca, commanded ships of war.by Admiral Illinois, in the Marengo of eighty guns,of two large frigates, a corvette of thirty guns, anda Dutch brig of eighteen guns, was defeated by theChina fleet homeward-bound. Captain Dance, ofthe Earl Camden, being Commodore. He was gallantlysupported by Captain J. F. Timid of theRoyal George, who led his ship into action in admirablestyle. The whole of the officers and menof the fleet afforded the most cordial and determinedsupport to the commodore. The value ofthe cargo and fleet was little short of eight millionssterling. The Company handsomely acknowledgedthe services of the commodore, officers,and men.*TheThe sum of £50,000 was presented by the Company:Commodore Dance was knighted and granted an annuity of £500,besides342 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. VIII.1804. The military operations in India had, in formerOperations in .Bengal. wars, been in a great measure governed by theweather : the rainy season having generally put atotal stop to them. The drought had been so excessivein the last year, as to admit of the movementsof the army when all parties had calculatedon a cessation of hostilities. The enemy, who wereextremely superstitious, declared that the Almightyhad ordered the dry season for the English conqueringHindostan, and that nothing could standagainst them as God fought for them. ** I do,"observed General Lake, ** most sincerely agreewith them, as our successes have been beyond allparallel, and must have had the assistance of aninvisible hand. I cannot help offering my thanks toProvidence whenever I reflect upon the operationsof this campaign, which nothing but his guidancecould have carried into effect."besides the sum of £2,000 and a piece of plate of the value of£200 ; Captain Timing £1,000 and a piece of plate of the valueof £100; Captain Moffatt £500 and a piece of plate £100 ;each of the other captains received £500, and £50 each for apiece of plate, viz. Captains Wilson, Farquharson, Torn, Clarke,Martin, Wordsworth, Kirkpatrick, Hamilton, Farrar, RendersLacking, Locker.Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 343CHAPTER IX.1804.General Wellesley had been engaged, since General wei. . wesley engagedthe termination of the military operations in the in forming the-r^ . , . , . , . treaties withDeccan, in settling several points relating to the sundial, &c.transactions and treaties with Scindiah and theRajah of Berar. The latter chieftain having laidclaim to certain districts previously possessed bythe Nizam, situated on the left bank of the Wurdah,reference was made by Mr. Elphinstone, thenresident at Nagpore, to General Wellesley. TheGeneral replied that it was impossible to frame atreaty of peace to provide for a decision of all questions,but that certain principles supply the defectsof such instruments; one of those principles being,that the meaning of an article of a treaty shall notbe construed in a sense directly the reverse of theprinciples and basis on which such treaty of peaceis founded. As upon the face of the treaty no intentionappeared that the districts in question wereto be ceded to the Rajah, the decision was thereforeadverse to his claim.Major Malcolm was deputed to the camp ofScindiah, to effect a definitive alliance under instructionsthin344 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.180k instructions from General Wellesley. The terms onwhich he completed the object called forth thewarmest approbation of the general, who remarked,*' that all the qualifications which had so repeatedlygained the applause of the Governor-general hadbeen again displayed, and established on the partof Major Malcolm fresh claims upon the East-indiaCompany and his country." Scindiah was to receivea subsidiary force, to be stationed near hisfrontiers, and to be available in promoting the jointinterests of the contracting parties.* The treatywas signed on the 27th February, and ratified bythe Governor-general on the 23d March.subsidiary sys The Subsidiary system, which has been erroneouslyattributed to Marquis Wellesley, was introducedlong before his lordship proceeded to India. Inorder to render it effectual. General Wellesley consideredthat the treaties ought to provide the meansof giving support to the native governments in theadministration of their local affairs, and therebyenable them to maintain their own authority. If,observed the general, the Nizam and the Peishwawere not to entertain armies for these objects, thenumber of troops to be supplied to each by way ofsubsidy would require to be largely increased, andin that case, could those chiefs pay for the additionalcharge ? If not, the expense would fall uponthe British Government, to whom cessions wouldbe made to defray, in part only, the additional cost.Another♦ This stipulation was never fulfilled.Chap IX.J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 345Another evil, he considered, was occasioned by the I804. 1disbanding considerable portions of the armies ofour allies. It let loose formidable bodies of armedmen, who, in the character of freebooters, wereready for any measure of plunder, or, by joiningthe enemies of the state and acting with the Pin-carries,could inflict upon the rich and undefendedpoints of the Company's provinces the most seriouscalamities. We had not cavalry to withstand theinroads of such bodies of undisciplined horsemen,who spread devastation and ruin wherever theycame.In contemplation of hostilities with Holkar,General Wellesley submitted his opinion on themeasures best calculated to reduce his power.He pointed out the essential aid which Colonel Colonel Mur.Murray in Guzerat might afford by a judiciousapplication of his force. Writing to that officer, heobserved :You have now a great game in your hands ; but all willdepend upon your management of the natives with whom youwill have to co-operate. I have only to recommend you toconciliate them as much as possible — to treat them with thegreatest kindness and attention ; you must not lose sight thatthey are Mahrattass, but do not let them perceive that youdistrust them.Colonel Murray had made frequent communicationsto General Wellesley on the small numberof his European force. The general, when he brokeup in the Deccan, under orders from the Governor-generalin the month of June, intimated to ColonelMurrayray in Guzerat.346 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.I1801. Murray that he would henceforth be placed underthe orders of the Bombay Government.You have a larger body of Europeans than the commander-in-chiefor I ever had. From your frequent allusions to thissubject, I should be induced to believe that you do not deemyour force sufficient to perform the service on which you areemployed, if I was not aware of the circumstances to whichI have above referred, and it is therefore necessary that Ishould request you to explain yourself fully to Mr. Duncan,the governor of Bombay, upon it.The commander-in-chief at Cawnpore, whenalluding to Colonel Monson's retreat, wrote to theGovernor-general : "If Colonel Murray could advance,the several consequences attending a forwardmovement from that quarter would have amost wonderful effect. He complains of a want ofprovision and cattle." Again, on the 22d, "A reportprevails that Murray is at Kotah, which I cannotbelieve, he might be of greater use there, but I fearI shall derive no advantage from his movements."And on the 19th October, '' If Colonel Murray, orany one else who may be in command, would butcome forward at all, this monster* would not escape. "Colonel Murray had difficulties to contend with inprocuring provisions and money. General Wellesley,alluding to the pressure, pays a just tribute tothe aid afforded to Government in seasons of difficultyby the present Sir Charles Forbes, Bart.,then at Bombay.Never being at a loss for resources in the mostpressing♦ Holkar.Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 347pressing emergencies. General Wellesley had turned 1804<.his troops into a body of tailors : his army being wesley's methodtoo much in want of clothing to delay for the obser- a^y.'^"'^^''vance of forms, he sent up cloth, which was dividedinto quantities necessary for a sepoy's jacket,to each of whom they were given, and they managedto clothe themselves; otherwise five thousand wouldhave passed the monsoon in rags. Whilst no onepaid more attention to the clear wording of papersof moment, he had a dislike to captious objections,and deprecated the obstruction given to publicbusiness by attempting to draw nice logical distinctionsupon words, or to give them a meaningthey were never intended to convey.Having received instructions to repair to Cal General Weiwesley proceedscotta, he submitted to the commander-in-chief to Calcutta.at Madras a memorandum on the relief of thetroops in Malabar, and the settlement of affairsat Wynaad, receiving a gratuity of one month'spay to the persons belonging to the bullock department,who served under him during thelate war. The latter representation was supportedby the fact, that in the former war againstSeringapatam, it was thought sufficient to dragthe train of artillery to the attack, but neverexpected that the guns and carriages should bebrought away again ; such, however, had beenthe state of efficiency throughout the late severeservice, that the general was able, with but littleassistance, to draw away the guns which thetroops348 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap. IX.1804. troops had with them ; and that, alter all the dutyin which so great a space of country had beeninarched over, the number of cattle that had diedwas scarcely greater than it would have been at thegrazing ground. It would not have been difficultto prove that the new mode was the cheapest ;but the consideration respecting a public establishmentof the description, was not referable entirelyto cheapness in such a war as the last, charity ofmovement being every thing.The disasters in Bundlecund, under ColonelFacets, called forth strong expressions of indignationon the part of the Governor-general, havingbeen caused by either inefficiency or incapacity.Captain Baillie being appointed superintendantof that province, his conduct in the command oftwo hundred cavalry and one thousand sepoy, byfirmness, manly prudence, and fortitude, restoredconfidence.Colonel Mon A Still more serious check was experienced bya detachment under the Hon. Colonel Monson,who in the month of May had been directedto watch the movements of Holkar, in order toprevent his entrance into Hindostan.The Governor-general, from the notes he hadperused of that officer's position, and of the positionof Colonel Murray in Guzerat, who it wasintended should advance in support of ColonelMonson, suggested that a reinforcement of Europeantroops, and two or three regiments of nativecavalry,Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 349cavalry, should be sent to Colonel Murray. At i804^.the time that the Governor-general was communicatingthese views, the commander-in-chief waswriting to the Governor-general of Colonel Mon-son'sretreat from Malwa, near Rampoora, situatedto the westward of the Banks river, and the southwardof Tone.Had Colonel Murray fortunately come on, Holkar wouldhave been completely destroyed.His want of cavalry was supposed to be thecause of his not advancing. Zalim Sing of Kotah,on the borders of the Chumbul, behaved admirably,and proved himself a staunch friend to the BritishGovernment; it was apprehended that, shouldColonel Monson quit his country, he would sufferseverely for it. General Lake was at Cawnpore,and intimated that he should soon be at Agra, ifColonel Monson needed support, adding.Despondency is of no avail : we must therefore set to work,and retrieve our misfortune as quick as possible.The worst apprehensions were unfortunatelyrealized. Colonel Monson had encamped on theBanks river on the 22d August, expecting to beenabled to cross the following day. It had not,however, fallen sufficiently : he therefore orderedCaptain Nichols, with six companies of the secondbattalion of the 21st regiment, to pass over inboats, and proceed immediately to KhooshuUGhur in charge of the treasure. On the eveningof the 23d, Holkar's cavalry came up. Aftersevere350 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1904. severe conflicts, the enemy continually harassingthe troops, they reached an old ruined fort atHindoo on the evening of the 27th, greatly exhausted.On the 28th they arrived at the Dianapass about sunset, and at the city of Dianaabout nine. There the baggage and troops gotmixed, and in great confusion, but being at lengthseparated, the troops made the best of their wayto Agra in detachments, where the whole hadarrived on the 31st. Captain Nichols's party,with the treasure, was attacked at KhooshullGhur, but very gallantly repulsed the enemy.Throughout this disastrous retreat the utmostbravery was exhibited by Colonel Monson, hisofficers and men. It afforded another instancewhere, from the want of a combination of thosepeculiar qualities which alone constitute a skilfulcommander, such reverses have happened, thedevotion of both officers and men being sacrificedto incompetency in the chief. General Lakewrote to the Governor-general, '* I am certain theaccount will be the cause of as much misery toyourself as to me." The sentiments of the Governcannot fail to draw forth admiration :Grievous and disastrous as the events are, the extent ofthe calamity does not exceed my expectation. From thefirst hour of Colonel Monson's retreat, I have always auguredthe ruin of that detachment. I fear my poor friendMonson is gone. Whatever may have been his fate, orwhatever the result of his misfortune to my own fame, IwillChap.IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 351will endeavour to shield his character from obloquy, nor 1804.will I attempt the mean purpose of sacrificing his reputationto save mine. His former services, and his zeal, entitlehim to indulgence ; and, however I may lament, or sufferfrom his errors, I will not reproach his memory if he belost, or his character if he survive. I admit no doubt inmy mind of your complete and early "triumph ; but it isnecessary on all great occasions to look to the utmost possible,or rather imaginable, degree of misfortune, distinctlyin front.This defeat of Colonel Monson led the Governto postpone his visit to the UpperProvinces. The commander-in-chief advanced toAgra, and on the 22d August assured the Governthat he had raised as few men aspossible. The sepoy, with the exception of a veryfew, '* behaved most gloriously, and had in generalevinced a strong attachment to the Government."He apprehended that he should deriveno advantage from Colonel Murray's movements.General Lake was at Muttra on the 7th of October;Holkar having collected the whole of his cavalryat the village of Anonkee, about two coss in frontof his position, General Lake marched out beforeday-light on the morning of the 7th of October,and drove the enemy from their ground, Holkarbeing the first to fly; their direction appearing tobe Bhurtpore. A disappointment in the supply ofgrain prevented the army marching on the 19th.Upon the point of supplies, one of the last importanceto an Indian army which has to traverseso352 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.i804w SO great an extent of country, General Wellesley,whilst at Calcutta, endeavoured to gain some particulars.In communicating the result of hisenquiries, he accompanied it by a statement ofthe mode which he had himself adopted in detail,and observed, *' In truth, no person here knowshow General Lake is supplied, any more than ifhis army was in Japan." General Lake, then atDelhi, had seen the king the preceding day, whoexpressed himself sensible of the advantages derivedfrom the protection of the British Government.The conduct of Colonel Ochterlony washighly applauded.General Wei General Wellesley prepared various other me-wesley'smemorandaon ya miranda on important subjects of merest m subjects . . , /. i miof government, ncxion With measures of the government. IeScindiah. first paper related to the possible conduct of Scin-dial, whose affairs were in so desperate a state,as to hold out but little promise of aid from himin operations against Holkar.Holkar. The second, on the extent and danger of thefreebooter system in India, with the chance ofthe evil arising from bodies of numerous militaryclasses, from whom it was in vain to expect thehabits of industry required for their subsistencein a civil capacity, and suggested remedies tocheck the evil.Miiiraryesta. Tic third related to the military establishmentof India, pointed out the inefficiency of thatadopted in 170G, and also of the measures of 1799andChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 353and 1801, when alterations and additions were 1804*.made in the military government. It did not appearthat the Home authorities had any detailedstatements before them when they issued theorders, or that they knew the circumstances ofthe country to which they were intended to beapplied.The fourth, on the rank of colonel, as connected Rank of colonels.with the four new regiments to be raised atMadras.The fifth, as to colonels of artillery, when major coroners of artillery.generals, being competent to be placed on thestaff of the army.The saith, relative to the army of the com- operationsmander-in-chief in his operations against Holkar. ^^^'"^In this paper General Wellesley exhibited thatpeculiar judgment which formed so marked afeature in his military operations. The view hetook of Holkar's force if acting separately, andthe formidable accession he would derive if, asit was reported, the Rajah of Bhurtpore shouldjoin him. This chief was considered by GeneralWellesley the most dangerous enemy the Companycould have. To defeat Holkar in the field,to establish a firm authority in Malwa, and todestroy the Rajah of Bhurtpore, were the objectsto be kept in view ; but all depended upon thepower of attacking Bhurtpore with vigour.A seventh, on the system of regulating the intelligencedepartment ; a point of great momentVOL. II. 2 A during:RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IX.General returnsto theDeccan.ISO*. during war, in such a country as that of India,where to obtain intelligence of the enemy's movementsand intentions sufficiently early to takeadvantage of them, was a matter of the greatestdifficulty.General Wellesley having fulfilled the objectsof the Governor general in repairing to Calcutta,prepared in the middle of November to return to hisduties in the Deccan. The civil and military powersvested in him under the orders of June 1803,were renewed. He was, accordingly, to resumethe chief command of all the British troops, andof the forces of their allies serving in the territoriesof the Peishwa, the Soubahdar of the Deccan, orany of the Mahratta states or chiefs, subject onlyto the orders of the commander-in-chief at Madras,or his Excellency General Lake. He also possessedthe direction and control of all the politicaland military affairs of the British Government inthose countries. He embarked from Calcutta onthe 1 4th November, in the Boynhay frigate, and atGanjam took en board Major Malcolm, where heIllness of Mr. also rcccivcd intelligence of the illness of Mr.Webbe, then at Scindiah's durbar, and urged thenecessity of Mr. Sydenham's joining it withoutdelay, as, should Mr. Webbe * retire from it, theaffairs of the residency would be left in the handsof Mr. Jenkins, a very promising, but still tooyoung a servant. General Wellesley landed atMadras• Mr. Webbe died on the 9th November, in Scindiah's camp.Webbe.Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 355Madras on the 21st, and proceeded to Seringapatam iso.tarn by Arcot, where he took an opportunity oflooking at his 'told friends," the 19th Dragoonsand the 4th Cavalry. Both looked remarkably well.'the horses of the 4th were lean, but then theircoats were smooth and clean." He desired to haveallowed them six months' rest and refreshment atArcot, having purposely sent them into the Carnatic,because the men had not seen their familiessince the corps marched with the grand army inFebruary 1799, nearly five years!These details are interesting, in showing theminute attention which was paid by the generalto the state of his troops and their appointments,and his concern for the comforts of his men.Major Wilks, then acting resident in Mysore, whenreporting to Lord William Bentinck, governor ofMadras, on the state of that country, observed,** I am far from intending an unbecoming com- Testimony toaliment to General Wellesley at the expense of leTiey!^^others, in stating a doubt whether the same extentof support may always be afforded by his successors,because the actual duties of that commandcan never be made to prescribe the parentaldescription of care with which the Hon. GeneralWellesley has guarded the government ofMysore."The intended measures of the Governor-general views of theHome autliori-against the Mahrattass, as alluded to m the summer ties as to Mal.of 1803, had created strong feelings of apprehendA 2 sion356 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.i804u sion at home. The Secret Committee suggested tohis lordship, in March 1804, some relaxation in thetreaty of Bassein, for the purpose of relieving thePeishwa from the subsidiary force in his territory.The deceitful and disingenuous conduct of Scindiahand of the Rajah of Berar, was admitted; but theearly termination of the wait*' was neverthelesspressed at almost any sacrifice. Lord Castlereaghcommunicated to Marquis Wellesley, in May,these apprehensions to have particular referenceto the possible extension of the Company's influence,bringing them in contact with the Seiksand other northern tribes with whom it was proposedto establish connexions through the Punjab,as far as the Indus. After remarking upon the prospectof affairs. Lord Castlereagh acknowledged*the error into which the result proved he hadfallen, in his former observations and reasonings onMahratta affairs." Others, as well as himself, hadformed a mistaken estimate of Scindiah's powerand force. It had proved much more formidablethan even Mr. Henry Wellesley had conceived itto be, from whom his lordship had received, on allsubjects regarding India, the most satisfactory andaccurate intelligence. The dissolution of this forcewas considered to be amongst the most valuableservices the Governor-general could render, andthe war was contemplated by Lord Castlereagh ascarrying with it this collateral effect, the most solidadvantage to the British empire in the East. ThetenorChap. IX] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 357tenoroflhiscommunicationfromthePresidentofthe 1804.Board of Control, marks the different views entertainedby that authority and by the Court of Directorson the great political measures then in progress.It likewise proved how impossible it was forparties at home to lay down any prescribed courseof policy for the Indian governments, calculatedto meet events, which a day might bring forth in anempire so peculiarly constituted, and at twelvethousand miles distance from the mother country.Had the views of the Secret Committee beenobeyed, the reduction of the Mahratta chieftainswould have been abandoned, and the supremacyof the British power, which was inevitable — postponedto a more distant period, with all the attendantcharge of an armed pacification.The next important operation under General Battle of Deig.Lake was the battle of Deig. Holkar had alteredhis plans, and crossed the river Jumna with hiscavalry, leaving his guns on the other side. Thecommander-in-chief determined himself to followHolkar with six regiments of cavalry, and thereserve, leaving Major-general Fraser with sixbattalions of native infantry, and his Majesty'sseventy-sixth regiment, with the European regiment,and two regiments of native cavalry, to takehis guns. General Lake quitted Delhi on the 31stOctober. In November, General Fraser attackedthe infantry and the whole of the guns commandedby Holkar's chief, Sirdar Kernaut Dada. GeneralFraser358 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1804. Fraser being severely wounded, by which he lostSrkiui/'^" his leg, was obliged to quit the field, and afterwardsdied of the wound. The command devolved uponColonel Monson, who, after carrying the village ofDeig, attacked and charged the enemy's advanced-guard,under a most tremendous fire of round,grape, and chain shot ; they abandoned their gunson the approach of the British force. Theenemy were ultimately defeated, and fled in everydirection. Their force had consisted of twenty-fourbattalions, a considerable body of horse,and one hundred and sixty pieces of cannon.Their loss was great, and that of the British considerable.General Lake's The commander-in-chief had descended intooperations. ^|^^ Dooab, whcrc his presence was demanded bythe disposition of the Begum, who had been joinedby some of the Seiks, whilst the zemindar wereactuated by plunder, with the certainty of theRohillas joining them. The people in all partsassisted Holkar, and the town of Furruckabad behavedexceedingly ill towards the British force.General Lake reached that city in the morningbefore daybreak, after a march of more than thirty-fourmiles. The enemy were surprised under thewalls ; vast numbers of their men and horses weretaken, with all their baggage and cattle. Holkarescaped by an early flight. The troops sustainedGreat exertion the most scvcrc privations, and endured excessivefatigue. They marched for eighteen days successivelyChap. IX] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 359lively nearly twenty-four miles a day, and on the '^^*'day and night preceding the rencontre at Furruck-bad, fifty-eight miles! Throughout, they werestated to have behaved admirably. On the 19th,General Lake was at Delhi, in pursuit of Holkar.The rapidity of this general's march astonishedthe natives beyond measure. At this moment hereceived an intimation from Colonel Monson of his Colonel Mon-intentionto fall back to Muttra for supplies, wherethere were more than sufficient for two months' consumption.Without this retrograde movement, hemight have drawn stores from thence, and avoidedthe encouragement it was calculated to give to thepeople to join the Bhurtpore rajah, and thus protracta war which might otherwise have beenbrought to a conclusion. *' But," added GeneralLake, referring to Colonel Monson, **itis somewhatextraordinary that a man, brave as a lion, shouldhave no judgment or reflection."Amidst these untoward events, and with a know spirit of perseveranceof theledge of the sentiments entertained at home so Governor-adverseto hostilities, the Governor-general expressedhis fullest confidence in the result of his measures,and in the energetic operations of the com-mander-in-chief, who proceeded to Muttra on the30th November. Holkar having quitted the Dooab,and crossed the Jumna at a ford in the vicinity ofMohabun, the Rajah of Bhurtpore determined tosupport him. The reduction of that fortress, therefore,became a matter of importance. It was knowntogeneral.3G0 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.180*. to be very strong, but General Lake calculated onits early surrender.Lord Castle At this pcrlod instructions reached the .general from Lord Castlereagh and the SecretCommittee for increasing the naval force of thecountry. The country shipping was pointed out byMr. Dundas, v^ho had been in the Company'smarine at Bombay : six ships were fixed upon ; theofficers and men to be sent out from Englandby the Admiralty. These measures were taken toguard against the apprehension entertained of theFrench power in the Mauritius.Siege of Hurts General Lake was at Deig on the 8th Decem-pore.ber, whither instructions were forwarded to hisexcellency from the Governor-general, directinghim to prosecute hostilities against the Rajah ofBhurtpore, the subjugation of whose territory wasessential to the reduction of Holkar's hostile force.The pursuit of Holkar's person and army being theprincipal objects of the war, the Governor-generaldesired that circular communications might bemade from the commander-in-chief to the allies onthe north-west frontier, and to the several Rajpootstates, including Kotah ; also to Begum Sumroo,and the Seik chieftains, for the purpose of explainingthe principles of his conduct in attackingBhurtpore. Bapojee Scindiah, an officer in Dow-hutRow Scindiah's service, and one who receiveda jaghire or pension from the Company, had atthis time joined Holkar. The Governor generalcommandedChap.IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 361commanded a proclamation to be issued, ordering i804.Bapojee and his followers to-attend at GeneralLake's camp on a given day, on pain of forfeitinghis pension. In the event of his not obeying thecall, and his being taken prisoner, he was to betried by court-martial, and the sentence forthwithexecuted. General Lake having received inform iso.nation that a practicable breach had been madein the wall of Bhurtpore on the 9th January,determined upon storming the place the sameevening, in order to prevent the enemy fromstocking it during the night. Insurmountableobstacles presented themselves. The water in theditch was very deep ; this the party overcame, andreached the bottom of the breach : but every effortto ascend proved fruitless. After suffering greatloss in repeated attempts, they were obliged toretire. Lieut-colonel Maitland, of his Majesty's75th, commanding the party, was among the killed;he had continued to fight, after having receivedseveral wounds, until a ball pierced his forehead,which proved instantaneously mortal. MajorFawkes gained possession of the enemy's battery.A second attempt was made on the 21st, but theditch was found to be so broad and deep, that theparty was obliged to return to the trenches, afterbeing exposed to a heavy fire for some time, whichoccasioned severe loss. On the 23d the com-mander-in-chief detached the 1st native cavalry,and the 1st battalion 15th regiment, under CaptainWelsh,RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. IX.1805.General Wellesley'sviewsof proceedingto Europe.Welsh, to meet a convoy of provisions from Muttra.It was attacked furiously on its march bya considerable body of Holkar's infantry, underAmeer Khan and Bapojee Scindiah. GeneralLake, on hearing the firing, immediately detachedLieut-colonel Need with his H.M. 27th Dragoonsto the relief of the party under CaptainWelsh, which had made a most gallant defence :on the approach of Colonel Need they movedforward, and charged the enemy, who were totallyrouted. Ameer Khan, who commanded the infantry,appears to have been so closely pursued,that to prevent his being known he stripped offhis clothes and arms ; his palanquin, with a completesuit of armour, was brought into the camp,as was also the palanquin of Bapojee Scindiah.One of the objects entrusted to General Wellesley,when he left Calcutta in November, wasto prevent Scindiah and the Rajah of Berar frombecoming parties in the war against the Company,and, if possible, to march a corps of cavalry tojoin Colonel Murray in Malwa. In the event ofHolkar being defeated, his proceeding to theDeccan would be rendered unnecessary, but hewas to stay in that quarter if he should hear ofit after his arrival there. Accounts of Holkar'sdefeat determined General Wellesley not to moveto the northward from Seringapatam ; he thereforeturned his thoughts towards Europe. He intimatedthrough the Governor-general's private secretary,Chap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 363secretary, on the 4th January, that after considerable 1805.doubt he had come to the resolution of not goinginto the Deccan. Aware of the favourable feelingof the people towards him, he felt that wheneverhis departure took place, the same inconvenienceswould be experienced, and that the same causeswhich called for his presence there, at the momentwould exist for the following seven years ; ashedid not intend to pass his life in the Deccan,nor to stay one moment longer than the Governor-generalremained in India, he fixed Februaryas the time of his departure. With regard to prolonginghis stay, the question was, whether theCourt of Directors, or the King's Ministers, hadany claim sufficiently strong to induce him to doany thing so disagreeable to his feelings — leavinghealth out of the question.I have served the Company in important situations formany years, and have never received any thing but injuryfrom the Court of Directors, although I am a singular instanceof an officer who has served under all the governments,and in common with all the political residents, andmany civil authorities ; and there is not an instance onrecord, or in any private correspondence, of disapprobationof any one of my acts, or a single complaint, or even asymptom of ill-temper from any one of the civil or politicalauthorities, in communication with whom I have acted.The King's Ministers have as little claim upon me as theCourt of Directors. I am not very ambitious, and I acknowledgethat I have never been very sanguine that ' militaryservices in India would be considered in the scale inwhich364 His AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chain.1S05. which similar services are considered in other parts of theworld. But I might have expected to be placed on thestair in India, and yet, if it had not been for the lamenteddeath of General Fraser, General Smith's arrival wouldhave made me supernumerary. This is perfectly wellknown to the army, and is the subject of a good deal ofconversation. If my services were absolutely necessary forthe security of the British empire, or to ensure its peace, Ishould not hesitate a moment about staying, even for years;but these men, or the public, have no right to ask me tostay in India, merely because my presence in a particularquarter may be attended by convenience.General Wellesley also felt that his presencemight be useful in England, to afford informationon some of the affairs of India, to explain thecauses of the late increase of the military establishments,and to endeavour to explode someerroneous notions which had been entertainedand circulated upon this subject.I am prepared for every thing, and in five days I canbe at Madras ; and on the other hand, if I should see anysolid necessity for going into the Deccan, I shall not beremiss in my duty ; but I shall not be drawn there by meresuspicions and unfounded surmises.These sentiments, whilst not unmixed with feelingsarising from causes not now necessary to bemore particularly adverted to, were in accordancewith that high and honourable bearing which GeneralWellesley displayed during the long courseof seven years' zealous, indefatigable, and distinguishedservice. He had by his example infusedan energy and vigour into the army, and exhibitedthoseChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 365those military principles and qualities from which I805.the most beneficial effects were anticipated. GeneralWellesley's position threw him much amongstthe natives, and he appears to have won their confidenceand esteem in a peculiar degree.Whatever is the cause, and it may be discoveredin reviewing the existing system, the Indian armydoes not stand in the relation which it ought, tothe British dominions. Nor are the high functionaries,who form the connecting link in thatsystem, between the authorities in this countryand in India, placed towards their colleagues inthat position which the responsibility of theiroffice demands.General Wellesley having been apprized from General wei.Bengal, that his longer residence at Seringapatam mLTs to quitwas not essential to the public service, felt most ^"^'^anxious to proceed to England. Mistrusting, however,the judgment of every man, in a case inwhich his own wishes were concerned, he did notcome to the resolution without consulting MajorMalcolm, who agreed with him in every point.Sir Arthur Wellesley,* accordingly, took the necessarysteps for carrying into effect instructionsfrom the Governor-general, for the relief and dispositionof the troops in the Deccan, and wroteto his lordship announcing his intention to proceedto England by the ships under despatch. On the2d MarchThe notification of Sir Arthur Wellesley's nomination as aKnight of the Bath reached India at this period.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805.General Wellesley'sletterto Purneah.Addresses toIii on hisdeparture.2d March he advised Purneah, the dewan of theRajah of Mysore, of his intended departure forEurope, and that he parted with him with thegreatest regret, adding : —I shall ever feel the most lively interest for the honourand the prosperity of the government of Mysore, overwhich you preside. Upon the occasion of taking leave ofyou, I must take the liberty to recommend to you to perseverein the laudable path which you have hitherto followed;let the prosperity of the country be your greatobject ; protect the riots and traders, and let no man,whether vested with authority or otherwise, oppress themwith impunity. Do justice to every man, and attend to thewholesome advice which will be given you by the Britishresident, and you may depend upon it your government willbe as prosperous and permanent as I wish it to be.Addresses were presented to Sir Arthur Wellesleyfrom the field and other officers of his ownregiment, the 33d Foot, then at Vellore ; from thenative inhabitants at Seringapatam, composed ofindependent soars (bankers), and others, expressiveof their strong feelings of attachment, and theirhope that he would return and uphold his protectionover them; also from the officers of the garrison ofSeringapatam, who participated with the army atlarge in admiration of those exalted talents andsplendid achievements, which had been so recentlydistinguished by their most gracious Sovereign.They stated :—We are desirous of offering you the tribute of our particularrespect and" gratitude, for that consideration andjusticeChai IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 3G7justice in command, which has made obedience a pleasure, 1805.and for that frank condescension in the private intercourseof life, which it is our pride individually to acknowledge.The European inhabitants and military officersof the presidency of Madras offered the first tributeof their applause and admiration, and requestedto be allowed to possess his picture, to be placedin the Exchange-room.In the general orders issued to the troops under sir Arthurhis command, Sir Arthur Wellesley — miUtarVdis"Earnestly recommended to the officers of the army neverto lose sight of the great principle of the military service,to preserve the discipline of the troops, and to encourage intheir respective corps the spirit and sentiments of gentlemenand of soldiers, as the most certain road to the achievementof every thing that is great in their profession.Sir Arthur Wellesley embarked on board hisMajesty's ship Trident, and reached England inSeptember 1805.There appears to have been but one universalfeeling — of regret, at his departure, as well as ofpersonal attachment towards him in all quarters,both native and European.Lord William Bentinck, then governor of Ma Lord vviiiiamcras, whose services in that station will be tSioil'y'tonoticed, felt called upon to address the Chairman ^leif/sil!"''of the Court of Directors on the occasion. Hislordship stated it to be impossible to describe thesensations of universal concern expressed at thedeparture of Sir Arthur Wellesley. After advertingto the official despatch in the military department,368 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. ment, which announced the event, his lordshipexpressed himself as follows :—I am satisfied that the high degree of reputation whichhas been acquired by Sir Arthur Wellesley during theperiod of his services in India, will render it unnecessaryfor me to recommend to your particular notice this distinguishedofficer.In justice, however, to my own feelings, I cannot foregothe occasion of expressing my sense of Sir Arthur wellesley'seminent merits and services, and of conveying a publictestimony of my sincere regard for those talents and virtueswhich have so powerfully contributed to strengthen thefoundation of the British empire in India, and to raise ourmilitary character in the country to the highest pitch.The attention of the Court of Directors has been frequentlydrawn to the high degree of prosperity which the territoriesof Mysore have obtained under the British influence, andthe important benefits which have been derived from theexisting state of affairs. In viewing these happy consequences,I feel it to be an act of justice due to Sir Arthur Wellesley,to state my entire belief that there is no cause to which theycan be so immediately traced as to the judgment and talentsof that officer, which have been invariably directed to everymeans connected with the public interest. He has left hiscommand, amongst the regret of all individuals, civil andmilitary, European and native.In tracing such parts of this officer's conduct which maynot have appeared upon the public records, it is my duty tostate the order and economy with which every departmentof the service, during the late war, has been carried on. Theregularity with which the disbursements of each month havel)een transmitted, could not have been greater in profoundpeace. I can assert, that the general arrangement, the correctnessChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 369ness and minuteness of every detail of supply and of account, 1805.has been admired by every public and civil officer at thepresidency.Impressed with sentiments of the strongest regard for thepublic merits of Sir Arthur Wellesley, and actuated withthe warmest feelings of private respect, I have been inducedto give the brief recital of his services, not less eminent in theconduct of the war, than in the negotiation of a most honourableand advantageous peace ; and I feel an entire convictionthat the Honourable Court of Directors will be disposed toextend to Sir Arthur Wellesley a reception correspondentwith his merits and reputation.I have, &c.W. Bentinck.Fort St. George, 9th March 1805.A few weeks only elapsed between the arrival sir Arthur•^ ^ . Wellesley'sof Sir Arthur Wellesley in England, and his further return to Eng-. land, and em-employmentin the service oi his country. payment.It was a just remark of Major-general Salmon,before the Military Committee in 1832, that hadthe Duke of Wellington been a Company's insteadof a King's officer, his talents, which first becameknown by his services in India, would have beenutterly useless with reference to the safety of England,and the general liberties of Europe. In immediateconnexion with this remark, the exclusionof general officers of the Indian army from employmentin Europe is naturally felt to operatewith peculiar severity, in point both of honourand character. It is one of the anomalies of thatarmy, that soldiers of distinguished talent and servicesare shut out from all such employ. WhenVOL. II. 2 b an370 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. an officer shall have attained the rank of a generalofficer, he should be eligible to serve her Majestyin any part of the world.Siege of Hurtle Operations against Bhurtpore continuedto engage the commander-in-chief, whose thirdattempt to carry it by assault, on the 20th February,was equally unsuccessful. No better result followeda fourth attempt, under Brigadier-general Monson,who displayed '* uncommon gallantry" on the occasion.Major Menzies, aide-de-camp to the commandbeing among the killed. The steepnessof the bastion which was the point of attack, withthe vigorous resistance on the part of the enemy,prevented the advance of our troops, except in smallparties, whilst discharges of grape, logs of wood,and pots filled with combustible materials, knockeddown those who were in the act of ascending. Aftera tremendous conflict for more than two hours, thetroops were constrained to relinquish the attempt,and to retire again to the trenches.The loss, in the attempts to reduce the fortress,on the part of the British army was, 1 lieut-colonel,2 majors, 20 captains, 1 capt-lieutenant, 45 lieutenants,I adjutant, 1 cornet, 2 ensigns, and 2,205non-commissioned officers and privates.Opinion of Sir Licut.-colonel Munro, writing to his brother,acknowledges his account of the last assault :I admireChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 371I admire the gallantry and perseverance with which both 1805.the Europeans and the Bengal army have so often returnedto the assault of Bhurtpore : even if the report of the Europeansbeing dispirited is well-founded, it is not to be wonderedat, for I do not believe that any troops in Europe would havepreserved their spirit under so many discouraging repulsesas they have sustained. Their despondency will soon vanish.I hope that the general will persevere in the siege, and if heis deficient in military stores, convert it into a blockade tillhe gets a supply. I see nothing gloomy in your situation, but,on the contrary, every thing that ought to inspire hope andconfidence. The repulses at Bhurtpore give me a higheropinion of the Bengal army than all their victories. We cannotexpect that we are to carry on war without meeting anydisaster, and that it should be quite a holiday work, inwhich every thing is to go on as we wish.During these operations, General Lake receivedfrom the Marquis Wellesley the notification ofhis being raised to the peerage. Lord Lake declaredthat the late disasters at Bhurtpore hadtaken off much of the pleasure he should havereceived from the honours granted to him, buthoped, ere long, to be in possession of the town.The Governor-general, although deeply anxious for ^^JJ^^^J^j^f^"the success of the measure, pressed upon the com- weiiesiey for*■ ^ ^ troops m themander-in-chief the importance of not renewing siege.the siege without ample means for its prosecution,nor to attempt any assault while the least doubtexisted of success. The resumption of the siegepreviously to the pursuit of Holkar was anotherpoint to be attentively weighed ; its decision was2 B 2 left372 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1803. left to the superior judgment of the commander-in-chiefby the Governor-general, who desired thatthe health of the troops should be most seriouslyand tenderly considered.In another communication to the commander-in-chief,his lordship expressed a hope that LordLake would fix his mind rather upon the certaintythan the celerity of the success against that fortress,if it should be necessary to resume the siege ; itbeing of more importance not to fail again, than thathe should soon succeed.Scindiah. The negotiations at the camp of Scindiah werein a painful state of doubt, his conduct to theResident having been most unjustifiable.In a representation to the Governor-general ofhis heads of grievance, was a revival of his claimto the districts of Gohud and Gwalior. The pointed out the inaccuracy, fallacy,and injustice of Scindiah's statements, and clearlyproved that his claims to Gohud and Gwalior wererenounced in the most formal manner by his highness,and that they had no connexion whateverwith the schedule of cessions annexed to the treatyof peace. The Rajah of Joudpore had been inserted,but as he had refused to receive the engagementratified by the British Government, thealliance became dissolved. The Governor-generalthen enumerated the several acts in which he consideredhis highness to have manifestly violatedthe treaty of the defensive alliance, as also thetreatyChap. IX] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 373treaty of peace, and expressed his desire to avoid 1805.hostilities ; but if, in despite of all efforts to maintainthe relations of amity, he should be compelledto renew the war, ** every exertion would be madeto put a due restraint upon the violence, treachery,and ambition of a state, whose perverted counselshad manifested an utter contempt of every obligationof justice, faith, gratitude, and honour."To this representation Scindiah replied, '* thatas the foundations of union and attachment weredurably and satisfactorily established between thetwo states, Mike the wall of Alexander,' it was hispositive intention to return to his capital ; buthearing of the enemy's invasion of Hindostan, andit being a point of obligation to lay the dust ofdisturbance, he turned back from the high roadand encamped with a powerful army." The personswho treated the Resident with disrespect wereto be rebuked, and harmony to be maintained.The Governor-general apprized Scindiah, thatthe British Government would never admit anyother power to step in to adjust any differenceswith another state, and assured him that the onlymode in which his force could be useful, was byemploying it in the settlement of his own country.Lord Lake succeeded in effecting terms between surrenderthe Rajah of Bhurtpore and the British Government.The Rajah was to pay twenty lacs of rupeesby instalments — if he behaved well, the last fivewere to be remitted ; the sum was to be repaid inthree374 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.IX.1805. three years. Deep and the country around was surrenderedby him, although he earnestly desired toretain it in his own possession. This arrangementenabled Lord Lake, if necessary, to proceed againstScindiah, who had written to the Rajah of Hurtsadvising him not to make peace with theEnglish. Scindiah at length retired ; a movementwhich enabled the Governor-general to communicatewith the commander-in-chief as to cantoningthe army, with a view to operations in the ensuingAugust, should circumstances call for furthermeasures. The objects to be provided for were, thesubsidiary force with the Rana of Gohud ; second,Bundlecund ; third, Agra and Muttra ; fourth,Delhi, in the northern part of the Dooab.War with At this time intelligence reached the Governor-spain.general from England of a probable rupture withSpain. Entire confidence was reposed by theMinistry in the prudence, foresight, and vigour ofMarquis Wellesley, to preserve his Majesty's dominionsin the East-indies from threat or attack.Lord Castlereagh wrote at the same time to LordWellesley, intimating that it was the desire ofMr. Pitt and himself to try whether the choice ofa successor to the office of governor general mightnot be made at home, so as to allow of his reachingCalcutta in October.Letter from This Communication reached the Governor-courtof Directors,general at the same time with the despatch of theCourt of Directors of 28th November 1804, animadvertingChap. IX ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 375adverting upon his lordship's conduct in having 1805.issued the instructions for hostilities against Holkarin the Governor-general's own name, singly —in having invested General Wellesley with suchextensive powers — in having omitted to send immediateintelligence of these circumstances to theHome authorities — in having pursued a course ofpolicy of which Caseee Row, the rightful heir tothe Holkar territory, might complain, — and ofhaving generally infringed the provisions of theAct of Parliament regulating the proceedings of theIndian Governments.Lord Wellesley acknowledged its receipt, and Marquis wei-expressedhis hope that the answer of the Governour of directors.nor-general in Council would afford sufficient proof,that the motives and objects of all his endeavoursin the service of the Company had been for thepreservation and improvement of their interests,and of the interests of the nation in India. Hislordship, at the same time, intimated that he shouldembark in a ship of war for England, so soon as theseason would admit.The Governor-general in Council addressed an Governor-officialreply to the Court of Directors on the 20th count to theof May 1805. Adverting to the authority which itwas alleged Marquis Wellesley had assumed irrespectiveof his Council, in issuing the instructionsto General Wellesley in the Deccan, they statedthat 'they were given, after full communicationwith the members of the Council, and with theirconcurrence376 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Ckaf. IX.1805. concurrence and approbation." The requisitepromptitude and vigour demanded the authority sogiven, and the same observation applied to thoseissued to General Lake as commander-in-chief inHindostan.The Governor-general in Council stated that thegovernor-general, by law, appeared to be responsiblefor the administration of government. Thathe was not only authorized, but manifestly boundby his duty to act on his separate opinion, distinctfrom his council, in all cases of deliberate differenceon subjects of importance.With regard to the delay, supposed to haveintentionally occurred, in keeping the Court informedas to the progress of affairs, the Governor-generalhad not relaxed in his earnest endeavoursto execute, with punctuality and dispatch, everypart of the duties of his arduous charge, amongstwhich was that of conveying the earliest intelligenceof affairs in India.Provision for In making a permanent arrangement for thesupport of his majesty Shah Alum, it had originallybeen proposed to assign to the king certainlands ; but, under the representations from ColonelOchterlony, the Government felt that it would bebetter to allow the territory to be assigned for thesupport of the royal family, to remain under thecharge of the Resident at Delhi ; the revenue to becollected and justice administered in the name ofhis majesty. Certain punishments, which involvedmutilationChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 377mutilation under sentences of the courts to be reestablishedin the assigned territory, were commutedfor imprisonment ; and a civil servant wasto be appointed to assist the resident in superintendingthe administering of justice.The Peishwa expressed to the resident, Captain Peishwa.Sydenham, his voluntary acknowledgment of thebenefits which he had derived from the operationof his alliance with the Company.The Company, under an agreement with the Guicowar.Nabob of Broach in 1771, were allowed to erect afactory at that place : but the Nabob having failedto fulfil the terms of the agreement, a force wasdetached by the Governor of Bombay to reduce theplace ; when, under an agreement concluded withPutty Sing Guicowar, in January 1773, the revenueswere to be divided between him and the Company,in the proportions they stood at the time ofthe conquest. In the course of the war with theMahrattass in 1778, in support of Ragobah, GeneralGoddard, who had the command of the forcesent from Bengal to Bombay,* concluded, at theinstance of the Council at the latter presidency, atreaty with Putty Sing, on the 26th January 1780.That chief ceded to the Company a portion of Gu-heratsouth of the Tapped, with the share of therevenues of Surat, and engaged to supply threethousand horse, in return for which he was to haveAhmedabad and other possessions, excluding thegovernmentVide vol; i. page 562.378 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. government of Poonahh. These were restored to theMahrattass by the treaty of Salbey in 1783. GovindRow, the Guicowar, died in 1800. His eldest legitimateson and heir, Anund Row, was opposed byMulhar Row, a cousin of the late Govind Row.The Government determined to support AnundRow: who agreed to subsidize four battalions of theCompany's troops, and to cede certain territory,which was to be the means of securing the countryaround Surat, and clearing it from the demand ofa chute, by establishing the Company's authorityin the only part of India open to Europeanrivals. Mulhar Row treacherously detained Capt.Williams, who, at his desire, was proceeding to hiscourt, and commenced an attack on Major Walker,but was repulsed with severe loss. A junction beingeffected by some troops under Sir William Clarke,the fort of Kurree was taken, and the enemy's campafterwards stormed, when Capt. Williams wasreleased ; Mulhar Row subsequently surrenderinghimself, on promise of personal safety. A treaty wasnegotiated with the Guicowar, for the purpose ofdefining the terms of the future connexion betweenhim and the Company, by Major Walker and Row-seeApparel, the Guicowar's dewan, at Cambay,on the 6th of June. Certain provision was made forMulhar Row, and the pergunna of Thickly, situatedin the district of the Surat Attaveezy, was cededto the Company, including pecuniary and otherarrangements. Both holkar and Scindiah threatenedChap, IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 379ened the Guicowar's territories, who was assured 1805.of full support from the British Government. Capt.Seton was at this time despatched for the purposeof obtaining information relative to the country ofKutch, and Lieutenant Carnac appointed assistantto the Resident, Major Walker, at Baroda. Variousagreements and stipulations had been contractedand entered into. The Governor-general had desiredto bring about a definitive alliance, for whichpurpose the Governor of Bombay consulted GeneralWellesley, when he was there in April 1804.After various modifications and discussions, a definitivetreaty of general defensive alliance wasentered into at Baroda on the 21st April 1805. Aforce of not less than three thousand regular nativeinfantry, with one company of European artilleryand ordnance, was to be subsidized; and territoryvalued at 11,70,000 rupees, was ceded to the Companyby the Guicowar, who was not to entertainany person in his service without the consent of theBritish Government : by whom certain points ofdifference between the Peishwa and Guicowarwere to be settled ; and should disturbances breakout in either state, the subsidiary force on the oneside, and the troops of the Company on the other,as circumstances might dictate, were to be supplied.The380 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. The Marquis Cornwallis, who had beenMarquis Corn appointed surveyor-general and commander in-wallis arnves as i^ A ^ oGovmior- chief, wrote to Lord Wellesley on the 25th of July,announcing his arrival at Madras, and that it washis intention to proceed to Calcutta in three or fourdays. Lord William Bentinck had quitted Madrasfor Calcutta, for the purpose of discussing somepoints of considerable moment with the Governor-general,and missed the opportunity of seeing LordCornwallis, who arrived at Fort William on the30th July.Marquis Wellesley apprized Lord Lake of thegreat satisfaction which he experienced by thearrival of his successor, and that it was his intentionto embark between the 15th and 20th August.As Lord Cornwallis held the two appointments ofgovernor-general and commander-in-chief. LordLake was nominated provincial commander-in-chief.Addresses to In an address presented to Marquis WellesleyLord .from the British inhabitants of Calcutta, they remarked,** We are impressed with the firm persuasionthat you have governed with a direct viewto the glory of your country, and to the prosperityof its possessions, and with no other personal feelingthan the honourable ambition of obtaining its applauseas your reward." We desire to mark in themost authentic manner, that you carry with you toour common country, the respect, the regard, andthe confidence of your fellow subjects; a confidencewhich is undiminished at the last hour of youradmonishIX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 381administration ; a respect and a regard which are 1805.founded on our long experience of your ability,unsullied integrity, of your impartial and honourableuse of power, and of your high and liberalspirit in the conduct of public affairs."His lordship's reply contained the followingpassage :The welfare of these extensive dominions constitutes notonly a principal object of the general policy of our country,but a solemn obligation of moral duty inseparably connectedwith the honour and reputation of the British name. It willbe my duty to assert, in every situation, the principles bywhich I have regulated my conduct in the government ofthis empire, and to inculcate the necessity of maintaining thefoundations of our ascendant power in Asia, upon the firmbasis of justice, fortitude, and clemency.Prejudice, caused by party feeling or personal Concluding, , 1 1 • 1 • 1 • remarks oninterest, must have ceased to bias the mid in Marquis wei-passingjudgment upon the Indian administration nistradon.™*'of Marquis Wellesley. His lordship's governmentmay be characterised as the most brilliant instanceof British rule in that quarter of the globe. Theperiod when he entered upon the charge was mostportentous. His comprehensive mind seized withdiscriminating promptitude, and pursued with unabatedvigour, those measures which annihilatedthe influence of our powerful European rival, subjugatedthe most implacable but not unnaturalenemy382 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. enemy amongst the native chiefs to the Britishpower, and brought under the Company's controlthe princes on the coast, whose treachery had beenso clearly established as to constrain the Governor-generalto adopt the extreme course of deprivingthem of their territory.The impotent head of the Mahratta state, by hisvacillating policy, defeated the measures whichwere calculated to maintain his supremacy, andpromoted the further aggrandizement of his powerfulfeudatories. These chiefs had exercised themost extended sway by means of their predatoryand undisciplined bands. Having incorporatedFrench officers and troops amongst their forces,they manifested designs so hostile and ambitious,as to leave but the choice between abject submissionto their rule, or a decided opposition to itscontinuance. The Governor-general was too wellaware of the strength which unopposed ambitiongathers, to expect that peace would be secured bya temporizing concession to an insatiate thirst forrule. Lord Wellesley, although vexed and harassedby a series of occurrences that acquired weight fromthe circumstances under which they arose, and themanner in which they were pressed, happily pursuedthose political views which his foresight hadprescribed. He repudiated that unhealthy course ofpolitical pusillanimity founded upon the erroneousapplication of the parliamentary declaration againstIndian conquests ; a declaration made under circumstancesChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 383substances the exact opposite to what now existed, Islandwhich put forth a truism practically inapplicableand inconsistent with the safety of our Indianempire.By the measures of Lord Wellesley, that empirewas placed upon a basis which short-sighted policyor positive imbecility could alone weaken or remove.As the measures of Lord Cornwallis in 1792 hadnot been free from censure in Parliament, it wasnot to be expected that the government of MarquisWellesley would escape condemnation. We accordinglyfind that the Earl of Moira, who, as LordRawdon, had animadverted upon the war of 1792,again stood forward to arraign the acts of LordWellesley's administration, which had, as he conceived,led to the excessive increase and extensionof the territorial possessions in opposition to theparliamentary declaration, which denounced as'unjustifiable, measures of making war for conquest."Lord Moira gave the best refutation of hisown views, and of the arguments by which he supportedthem, in his subsequent conduct as governor-general; in which position he had an opportunityof learning, how far more valuable experience isthan theory, in leading to a right judgment onmeasures, which it is easy to denounce when positiveignorance prevails regarding the circumstancesthat gave rise to them.But the most direct attack against the MarquisWellesley,384 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. Wellesley, was founded upon his lordship's measureson the affairs of Oude ; a subject which hasbeen an unceasing source of disquietude to eachsucceeding head of the British Government inIndia. Oude was the first state with which asubsidiary alliance was formed, and that almostat the commencement of the Company's politicalexistence in Bengal. The vicissitudes experiencedby the Vizier, occasioned considerable embarrassmentto his finances. The subsequent agreementshe entered into with the Company (whether rightor wrong is not now the question) were felt to bemost onerous. To discharge his obligations, hehad recourse to various means for raising funds,and amongst others, to Europeans. The Companydid not feel bound at that time to enquire fromwhence his resources were derived, or whetherthe parties had been reimbursed the advanceswhich they might have made. But when it becameapparent that the defenceless state of theVizier's country, which formed a barrier to theCompany's territories, exposed the latter to theeasy inroad of an enemy, measures were devisedto guard against so serious an event.The defence of Oude had become to the BritishGovernment a measure of self-preservation ; treatieswere formed, a subsidiary force of a stipulatedamount provided, and an agreement entered intofor its payment by the Vizier. Individual claimsfor the repayment of monies lent to that state werepreferred ;}Chai'.IX.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 385preferred ; but, whether in the belief that they i805.were founded on usurious, or other apparently-objectionablebasis, the Government declined topromote their settlement, declaring to the Vizierthat they purposely abstained from all interference;an intimation that afforded a sufficient plea,to a mind insensible to the obligations of honouror justice, for not listening to their settlement.Time rolled on, troops were supplied, and thepayments were sometimes in arrear ; whilst thecondition of the country, and the principles uponwhich it was governed, called loudly for interpositionand reform. These measures were repeatedlyurged on the Indian Government by the Homeauthorities. Lord Wellesley saw it was in vainto expect that any other than a decided coursecould effect an improvement. It may be true,that the Vizier shed tears when he found that themeans of gratifying his inordinate desires of cupidityand self-indulgence were likely to be curtailed: but to dignify the grief of so heartless aruler, as evincing a '' wounded pride and fallengreatness," was ascribing to him feelings to which,however void of merit in themselves, he still wasan entire stranger.Whatever character may have been given tothe treaty effected by Lord Wellesley, it wasopen to the Home authorities to have revised orannulled it ; but neither step was adopted. TheSecret Political Committee entirely approved ofVOL. II. 2 c its386 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.1805. its provisions ; the stipulations were consideredcalculated to improve and secure the interests ofthe Vizier as well as those of the Company, andto provide for the good government and prosperityof Oude. The ceded territory, on the part of theVizier, did not exceed the subsidy payable byhim to the Company ; the Governor-general neverthelessliberated his excellency from all extraordinarycharges that might be incurred in providingfor the internal as well as the external security ofhis kingdom — a measure entirely approved bythe Secret Committee. Such was the deliberateconfirmation and sanction given by the King'sgovernment, in November 1803, to the measures ofMarquis Wellesley in the affairs of Oude, underthe treaties and agreements of February and June1802.The Chairman of the Court of Directors, asone of the three members who formed the SecretCommittee, and who were bound to forward thedespatch as sent down by the Board of Control,declared that he did so ministerially, and recordedhis dissent in the secret department, declaratoryof his sentiments.Affairs of More than three years had elapsed since theconclusion of the treaty with Oude, when thesubject was made matter of charge against MarquisWellesley in Parliament, by an individual,who, it might be supposed, would have been thelast party to come forward as the public accuserofOude.Chap. IX ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 387of a nobleman, to whom he owed more than a 1805.common debt of gratitude.Mr. James Paulll had been for some time resin Mr. Paullli.dent at Lucknow, in the prosecution of commercialpursuits. From some cause which does notappear, he was sent out of the kingdom of Oudeby order of the Vizier. This act, if perseveredin, would have involved his affairs in utter ruin.Through the intervention of the Governor-general,the prohibition was removed, and Mr. Paulll acknowledgedhis deep obligations to Marquis Wellesleyin the following letter, addressed to MajorMalcolm, then secretary to the Governor-general:Lucknow, 9th February 1803.My dear Sir :I have not troubled you with any letter since I hadthe happiness of seeing you in Calcutta. I am fully awarehow much your time is occupied with real business, and Iam unwilling to appear obtrusive. I trust, however, thatyou will believe that I retain, and ever shall, a very sensibleimpression of your kindness to me, and of the veryimportant services you rendered me. To your zeal I attributemy being now at Lucknow ; for I feel and believethat, without your support, I must have been recalled whenthe Nabob so unexpectedly and unaccountably remonstratedagainst my being allowed to return to his dominions. Asthe most pernicious consequences must have attended acompliance with the very unjust request of his highness, Ifeel a proportionate degree of obligation to you, and a senseof gratitude that nothing can diminish. Interested as youhave shown yourself in my welfare, it will give you pleasure2 c 2 to388 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chat. IX.1905. to hear, that ever since I was restored to the good gracesof the Nabob, he always treats me, when we meet (whichby the bye is seldom) with great attention and kindness,and that I consequently carry on my extensive concernsquietly and unmolested. I live mostly with Colonel Scott,and, unless on days of state and ceremony, I have nothingto do with the Nabob or his court.After the flattering approbation of four successive residents,and conscious that I had never given the Vizier anycause of complaint, the knowledge of his application, whichI did not learn until some time after my reaching Lucknow,could not fail to excite my utmost astonishment ; however,the application was suggested by others, and I shall nottrouble you now with the plan that was laid for my undoing.I am convinced, since, the Nabob has felt both shameand sorrow for his ill-founded rancour against me, and hasoften subsequently attempted an intimacy, from which Ihave as invariably shrunk ; for he is a very dangerous, and,I believe, a very bad man. Knowing with what satisfactionhis Excellency the Governor-general, on all occasions,remedies any injuries that are made known to him, I sometimeago took the liberty (which perhaps I ought not tohave done) of addressing his lordship directly, pointingout a very serious and extensive injury that I experience,in common with others, from the conduct of the governmentcustom-masters, but which was and is most particularlyinjurious to me, from the magnitude of my exports fromOude. I presume to trouble you with a copy of my letter,and you will add to the many obligations I owe you, if ata spare moment you would give me your advice and opinion,as to the proper channel for again representing the grievancesI labour under, and which are increased in a tenfold degreelately ; indeed so vexatious, heavy, and arbitrary are theexactions at Ghauzi}X)ur, where no rate of valuation of anykindChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 389kind is defined, that they almost compel me to stop business 1805.altogether, and any direct complaint against Mr. Ryder,would only render things worse.I sincerely hope and trust, that I have not offended hisExcellency, in the mode I adopted of transmitting my addressto his lordship. Colonel Scott, to whom I submittedit, thought it out of his department, and my friend Sydenhamacquainted me, that direct communication with LordWellesley was the best. If therefore I have offended, itwas most unintentional ; for sensibly do 1 feel the obligationsI am under to his excellency, for whom I have onlysentiments of gratitude and profound respect.I have had late letters from George Johnston,* andfrom your friend Miss Sophia ; the latter particularly mentionsyour relations and my friends in Gower-street. I havenot failed on every occasion to state to the Johnston, andSir William, my obligations to you,George had a very keen contest for Heron, not for hisown seat, for he came in, in the room of Sir Lionel Darrell :\but to bring in Mr. Sandal Jackson J in the room ofMr. Seville ; the weight of the money fell on George andhis uncle, for Jackson has not a penny. Very large sumswere expended at several places, particularly at Graham,and in the contest for Herefordshire, where the old memberswere ousted. I am with great esteem and attachment,My dear Sir,Very faithfully yours,(Signed) J. Paulll,Mr.Originally opposed to Lord Wellesley, but who now dissuadedMr. Paulll from following up the course he had adopted.f A Director of the Company.\ A barrister, who spoke frequently in the Court of Proprietors,and died in 1837, leaving a large fortune.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. IX.180.5. Mr.PauU reached this county in 1 805, and shortlyMr.PaulI's ^ i i • i • -n. • ^charges against afterwards obtained a seat in Parliament. Onlesiey. the second day of his attendance in the House, heopened his design of *' prosecuting to conviction,if possible, the Marquis Wellesley, to whom heimputed all the dangers that threatened our existencein India." He accordingly moved for a massof documents, relative to the affairs of Oude.Parliament was dissolved in the early part of1807, and put a temporary stop to the proceedings;but Mr.PauU had placed upon the votesof the House an e.vparte view, contained in a Resolutioncondemnatory of Lord Wellesley. At thegeneral election, Mr. Paulll, assuming on the supposedpopularity that he had acquired, and havingobtained access to Sir Francis Burdett, who wasnot then a candidate for Parliament, but whosecountenance he knew would aid his views, cameforward as a candidate for Westminster. Theunsuspecting candour of Sir Francis Burdettappears to have been awakened, and he declinedto be dragged forward as the great Katerfelto insupport of Mr. Paulll. The latter felt heavilyaggrieved, and concluded himself authorized torepay the unmerited confidence he had alreadyexperienced at the hands of the hon. baronet byseeking his life. Sir Francis Burdett, who, throughoutan extraordinary stormy political course neverappears to have been the party to demand what istermed satisfaction, felt constrained, in deferencetoHe demandssatisfactionfrom Sir F,Burdett.IChap. IX.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 391to the tyrant custom and the laws of honour, to 1^05.hazard his life and meet his enemy. Both parties wo"utded!^ ^"^^'were wounded on the second fire.Sir Francis Burdett was chosen as one of themembers for Westminster. Mr. Paulll did notagain obtain a seat in Parliament : and in thefollowing spring terminated his own existence! Suicide of Mr.The subject of the charges was not, however,allowed to pass away with its unfortunate mover; charges contfound a supporter in Lord Folkestone, whilstother points in Lord Wellesley 's administration werebrought forward by another member. Various motions,criminatory of the noble marquis, were submitted,but rejected by large majorities. Atlength, Sir John Anstruther moved a Resolution,"That the Marquis Wellesley, in his arrange Resolution in,. /-villi 11 favour of Lordments regarding Oude, had been actuated by an Weiiesiey.ardent zeal for the service of his country, and anardent desire to promote the safety, interests, andprosperity of the British empire in India." It wascarried by 189 to 29, and closed a proceedingwhich had been kept pending for a period of threeyears, during which time the character of thatnobleman was held up to the public as stainedwith acts of the greatest atrocity, which, in adegree, gained belief, from the ignorance thatpervaded the country on all subjects connectedwith the affairs of India, and from opinionsexpressed by members of the Direction who hadseats in the House of Commons, which opinionswere392 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.IX.1905. ^rere opposed to the general principles of policy-adoptedby Lord Wellesley in administering theaffairs of the Company abroad.Remarks. Such was the rectum which Marquis Wellesleymet with on revisiting his native land, after renderingservices which had called forth the repeatedthanks of Parliament, and had added to the dominionof the British Crown vast and valuable territorialpossessions, increasing its political influence,and opening extended fields of commercial enterpriseto its subjects.Marquis Wei It would bc departing from the intention of thisq^ue7t^ee7in work to follow out the European career of thisEurope. distinguished nobleman, to whom the foreignseals were offered during the progress of the Parliamentaryproceedings ; but his lordship felt itto be incompatible with his honour to hold office,until judgment had been pronounced on the chargesbrought against him, on a subject however unjustlyopened, or by whatsoever means supported.After this lengthened exclusion from the serviceof his sovereign, and proceedings which had causedhim great personal cost. Marquis Wellesley wasdeputed, in 1809, as ambassador to the Junta inSpain. During that embassy, his lordship had aninterview of some days with his illustrious brother,then in the command of the British troops; anincident of much interest in the history of thesenoble and distinguished relatives, who were againfound, at the distance of twelve thousand milesfromChakIX] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 393from the former scenes of their eminent services, 1805.devoting the same talents and unparalleled qualificationsto uphold the honour of their country,and to secure the general welfare of Europe.Lord Wellesley received the order of the Garterfrom his Majesty King George the Third, in 1810,in which year his lordship, on the death of theDuke of Portland, was recalled from Spain, andappointed Secretary of State for foreign affairs.In 1821, he proceeded as Lord-lieutenant to Ireland,thus again following in the footsteps of hisearly and illustrious friend, the Marquis Cornwallis;and remained in Ireland until 1828. Hislordship proceeded again as Viceroy in 1833, andresigned that office on the retirement of ViscountMelbourne in November 1834.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chapel.CHAPTER X.1805.Political authorityof theCourt of Directors.The power exercised by the executive body ofthe East India Company, in the conduct of thepolitical affairs connected with the administrationof India, was at times felt irksome by the controllingauthority at home, and by the governmentabroad.The leading member in the Home councils atthis period, was a gentleman who had served longand honourably in the Bengal civil service. Hewas so peculiarly distinguished for his extensiveand intimate acquaintance with the Company'saffairs, that his competitors for a seat in the Directionretired from the contest, and yielded to himthe undisputed suffrages of the proprietors. Hehad been in India during the government of MarquisCornwallis, and entertained for his lordship'sprinciples and policy a feeling in common withmany others, little short of veneration.When the severe but temporary pressure uponthe finances of the Company was felt by the Court,they attributed the cause to a departure from therestrictive policy laid down by Parliament, andsupported by the Company. A policy which hasbeenIIChap. X] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 395been proved to be entirely at variance with the 1805.maintenance of our supremacy in India : a supremacyessential to the existence of our power there.Under these circumstances, it was natural that Lord cornwallisagain ap-theCourt of Directors should again desire to place pointed over.1 T -i r ^ . rn ' ^ nor-general andat the head or their affairs the venerable noble commander-man,who was considered to be the founder of thesystem best calculated to secure the safety of theCompany's territorial possessions, and well fitted topromote the general prosperity of their affairs, andto restore to a healthy state their financial resources.Lord Cornwallis, whose unceasing devotion to Iso.the interests of his country had fully entitledhim to pass the remainder of his days in honourableretirement, nevertheless responded to thecall of the Court, and consented once more toassume the offices of governor-general and com-mander-in-chief. His lordship entered upon his Assumes the. government.government on the 31st July 1806. After institutingenquiries into the general state of affairs,and effecting some preliminary arrangements forthe public service, he caused letters to be dispatchedto each of the native courts, in whichreference was made to the principles that hadguided his former administration ; and an assurancegiven of his desire for the restoration ofpeace and harmony between the respective statesand the British Government.His lordship then addressed the Court of Direct Financial diffi-*■ cities.tors. In detailing the steps which he had pursued,he39GRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. X.1806.Political viewsquestionable.he pointed out the embarrassed state of thefinances; he represented that there were fivemonths' arrears due to the army ; and that he hadconsequently been under the necessity of takingout of the ships, at Madras, treasure amounting to£250,000, intended for the investment in China.To effect a speedy reduction in the general charge,he intended to abolish a considerable part of theirregular troops, and to effect an accommodationwith Scindiah and the Mahrattass. He accordinglyleft Calcutta for the Upper Provinces on the 9thAugust. When at Rajhmal he again wrote to theDirectors, and expressed an opinion that the ascendancyof the British influence at the courts ofPoonahh and Hyderabad, was owing to the illeffects of the subsidiary alliances with thosepowers; and dwelt upon the large expense of theirregular force, and the pressure of the pecuniaryembarrassments. His earnest desire forpeace led him, notwithstanding Scindiah's retentionof Mr. Jenkins, to open a negotiation on thebasis of restoring to that chieftain the fortress of jGwalior and the territories of Gohud. Fortunately,Lord Lake had effected the release of theresident, before the receipt of the Governor-general'sletter : the most serious effects might otherwisehave been produced, by such apparent submissionon the part of the supreme British authority.The changes in the Bengal Government, underthese circumstances, was an event calculated toinduceChap. X] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 397induce a belief on the part of the Mahratta chiefs, Joe,that the altered course of policy was not producedby any want of means, financially or otherwise,on the part of the Government, but proceededfrom the spontaneous determination of theGovernor-general. The Rajah of Berar actuallyconstrued the communication into an intentionof his lordship to make restitution of the territorywhich he had been deprived of in 1793 !Lord Lake, having received full and minuteinstructions regarding the treaty which the desired to effect with Scindiah,despatched Colonel Malcolm, who had arrived athead-quarters under instructions from MarquisWellesley, in June, to the court of Dowlut RowScindiah, where, in conjunction with MoonshineCavil Nine, he concluded a defensive treaty ofalliance on the 22d of November.Although Scindiah's right under the treaty of cessions toSurjee Angengaum, to possess the fortress ofGwalior and the territories of Gohud, was not inthe slightest degree admitted ; yet, from considerationsof friendship, that fortress was now cededto him, with a portion of the territories of Gohud.As a compensation for this cession, Scindiah was torelinquish, after January 1806, all right and claimto the pensions of fifteen lacs of rupees, grantedto certain of his officers by the same treaty. Helikewise ceded to the Company all the territorynorth of the Chumbul, which he had acquired bythe398 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. X.1806. the seventh article of the treaty of Surjee Angels; viz. the whole of the districts of Dholepoor,Bare, and Rajah Kerrah. The Company wereto have no claim to any rule, tribute, revenue, orpossessions, on the south bank. The looks ofBlade and Sooseraparah, on the banks of theJumna, were to remain with the Company. Fromfriendship to Scindiah, the Company were tO]grant him, personally and exclusively, the annual;sum of four lacs of rupees, and to assign within)their territories in Hindostan, a jaghire of two lacsof rupees per annum to Baezah Bye, his wielandof one lac per annum to Chimmah Bye, hisdaughter. The Company engaged not to enter]into any treaty with the Rajahs of Oodeyporein Mewar, Joudpore in Marwar, or Kotah insMalwa, nor with other chieftains tributaries oiScindiah, situated in those provinces ; or to interferein any shape with the settlement he might ■make with them.In the event of the Company concluding a peace 'with Holkar, they engaged not to restore to him,or to desire to be restored to him, any of the possessionsof the Holkar family in the province ofMalwa, lying between the river Tapty and humbug,which might have been taken by Scindiah,who was to be at full liberty to make his own termswith Holkar, without the British Governmentinterfering in any way, even if war should arisebetween the two chiefs.TheIChap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 399The flagitious member of Scindiah's Govern Iso.ment, Sujree Row Ghautkia, was to be excludedfrom his councils and employ. Before this treatyhad been concluded, the state of Marquis Cornwallis'shealth caused so much anxiety, that SirGeorge Barlow appointed Mr. Udny vice-president,and quitted Calcutta in September for thepurpose of joining the Govern or general. His lordshipwas then in a most enfeebled state at Ghazee-pore. His health rapidly declined, and he sunkunder an exhausted frame, on the 5th of October, Death of LordCornwallis.closing an honourable and virtuous career of publicservice, devoting the last moment of his life to thewelfare of what his lordship believed to be the bestinterests of his country.Sir George Barlow immediately succeeded under sir George. . . - . % m n ^ Barlow amnisprovisional appointment, to the office of Go sums thevernon-general, and Lord Lake again assumed that ^^^^^"™®" *of commander-in-chief in India.Sir George Barlow had been fully apprized ofthe views and intentions of Marquis Cornwallis,and communicated the same to Lord Lake, whenhe followed up the instructions already given forthe conclusion of the treaty with Scindiah.Lord Cornwallis had explained to Lord Lake Different viewsthat it was his intention to dispose of the conquered and sir Georgecountries southward and westwards Delhi, amongst ^*^^®^-some of the chieftains who had aided the BritishGovernment during the war, including the Rajahsof Cherry and Bhurtpore, on their agreeing torelinquish400 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chapel.1806. relinquish the alliances they had formed with theCompany in September and November 1803; bywhich, in the event of hostilities, mutual aid wasto be given by each party. Lord Lake was stronglyopposed to this measure. He felt that it wouldafford a pretext to the Mahrattass for maintaininga force in Hindostan, from which he was satisfiedthey ought to be excluded ; and that it would likewisesanction them in their attacks on the pettystates immediately westward of the Jumna, andevince a want of good faith towards them. Anembarrassing question arose regarding the Rajahof Jeypore, whose territory divided Malwa fromHindostan. By a treaty formed with him on the3d December 1803, mutual aid was to be extendedin the event of the Rajah or the Company becominginvolved in hostilities. The Rajah, instead of givingthe aid which he was bound to furnish, rather gavecountenance to the enemy. Nevertheless, LordLake despatched a communication to the Rajah'sagent, in the hope of inducing his master to comeforward. After this communication had been sent.Lord Lake received an intimation that the conductof the Rajah had dissolved the treaty of alliance;he therefore determined to abstain from interferingin any attack which either Scindiah or Holkarmight make on Jeypore. Similar orders were tobe sent to the force which proceeded from Bombayunder General Jones, then on the frontiersof the Rajah's territories. These intentions werenotChap. X] BRITISH Porter IN INDIA. 401not, however, made known to the Rajah, and as he i«06.subsequently joined the force of General Jonesagainst Holkar, in October, the treaty of 1803remained undisturbed.Lord Lake pointed out to Sir George Barlow theimportance of stipulating with Scindiah in favourof the Rajah of Boondee, whose capital commandedan important pass towards the territory of the Rajahof Kotah, Zalim Sing, who had rendered muchimportant aid in the retreat of Colonel Monson ;*but Sir George Barlow declined to alter his determination,or to modify his resolutions. Lord Lakepursued Holkar to the banks of the Beyah river,one of the five which form the Punjab, where hesent to the commander-in-chief to sue for peace.Sir George Barlow announced to the Court ofDirectors the treaty with Scindiah. He stated thatperfect tranquillity existed throughout the Company'spossessions, and that he considered a permanentpeace would be best secured by contractingthe British frontier to the Jumna, and in having nopolitical engagements whatever beyond that river,excepting treaties of amity. Holkar had been drivenbeyond the Sutlej, and would not be able to maintainhimself in the Punjab without exciting Run-feetSing. In another letter from Allahabad, heannounced the intended dissolution of the defensivealliances with Jyneghur, Bhurtpore, and Cherry.Lieut. -Vide page 349.VOL. II. 2 D402 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. X.i806. Lieut-colonel Malcolm was again selected toH^ar7* negotiate peace with Holkar, on terms prescribedby the Governor general, which he concludedon the 24th December 1805. Hostilitieswere to cease, and friendship to be restored. Holkarrenounced all right and title to the districts ofTone, Rampoorah, Boone, Lakherie, Sameydee,Bhaumgaum, Case, and other places north of theBoondee hills, occupied by the British Government.The Company agreed to have no concernwith the ancient possessions of the Holkar familyin Mewar, Malwa, and Harowtee, or with any ofthe Rajahs south of the Chumbul, (including theancient possessions of the Holkar family in theDeccan, occupied by the Company, south of theTapty,) excepting the fort and pergunnah of Chancre,the pergunnahs of Amber and Egham, andthe villages of pergunnahs south of the Godavery,remaining in possession of the Company. In considerationof the respectability of the Holkar family,the Company agreed that, after the expiration ofeighteen months, should the conduct of Holkarprove the sincerity of his peaceable and amicableintentions, the fort of Chandore, &c. should berestored to him. He renounced all claim to thedistrict of Koonch, in Bundlecund, and all claimsof every description in that province ; but in twoyears, if his conduct were amicable, the district ofKoonch was to be given in jaghire to BheemahBye, the daughter of Holkar. He renounced allclaimsChapel.] BRITISH power in INDIA. 403claims on the Company or their allies ; he was not i^oc.to entertain in his service Europeans of any description,nor to admit into his counsels or serviceSurjee Row Ghautkia. He was to return to Hindostanby a route which would leave Partially,Jeypoor, and the Company's country, on the left.By declaratory articles of the 2d February 1806,the Company, desirous of gratifying the Maharaja,Holkar, to the fullest extent, relinquished all claimto Tone Rampoorah. The strongest testimony wasborne by Lord Lake to the conduct of ColonelMalcolm, who was retained by his lordship in consequenceof several political discussions with Holkar,combined with numerous unsettled pointsregarding the irregular corps. At the close of themonth of March, Colonel Malcolm returned toCalcutta. The Government acknowledged LordLake's letter regarding Colonel Malcolm, in thefollowing terms :We have great pleasure in expressing our high approbationof the activity, diligence, ability, and judgment, manifestedby Lieut-colonel Malcolm in the discharge of thearduous and important duties connected with the arrangementsfor the reduction of the irregular troops, and for theassignments of rewards and provisions for such individualsas had received promises, or had established claims uponthe Government by their conduct during the war ; and weconcur in opinion with your lordship, that Lieut-colonelMalcolm has accomplished the objects of your lordship'sorders in a manner highly honourable to the reputation,and advantageous to the interests of the British GovernsD 2 ment ;404 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CnAv. X.18Cf. ment ; and we consider that officer to have rendered importantpublic services, by his indefatigable and successfulexertions in the accomplishment of these important arrangements.We entirely approve your lordship's intention ofpermitting Lieut-colonel Malcolm to return to the Presidency,when his services shall no longer be required by yourlordship.Colonel Malcolm represented the opinions entertainedby Lord Lake on various points connectedwith the reduction of the countries westward ofthe Jumna, which led Sir George Barlow to postponeacting upon his intention, of immediatelyannouncing the dissolution of the treaties of alliancewith the states : circumstances ultimately setaside the measure altogether.BarSw'7^ The policy of Lord Cornwallis contemplatedviews. important modifications in the treaties, bothwith the Nizam and the Peishwa, almost tothe extent of abolishing the subsidiary allianceswith those states. Such views had been thrownout in a despatch from the Secret Committee of the1st of June to the Governor general in Council.But Sir George Barlow most wisely observed,that, if receding from power and influence wasconsidered to be dangerous, it was much more sowhen the motives of the British Government, forpursuing a line of moderation had been industriouslymisrepresented, to the injury of our power :he was aware that these views were opposed tonon-interference, which had of late been sostrongly urged from home ; but it was evidentthatChap. X.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 405that neither state was in a condition to support 18C6.itself under such an important change, the benefitsof which, in any point of view, were by no meansapparent.The wishes of the Peishwa had been misinterpretedby the Home authorities, who conceived,with reference to his original indisposition to thesubsidiary treaty, that he desired its abrogation,whereas the fact was directly the reverse : hesought for no modification, but was anxious forthe maintenance of its stipulations. The injuryand embarrassment that would have followed onits cessation, were fully pointed out. Sir GeorgeBarlow entertained the greatest respect for theopinions of his noble and lamented predecessor.He desired to manifest every attention to the viewsexpressed from England, but he felt that therewas a still paramount obligation imposed uponhim, viz. that of maintaining the supremacy ofthe British rule, which would have been placedat imminent hazard had he acted upon the principlesof non-interference, so strongly pressedupon his attention.The intelligence of the death of Lord Corn wal lis Proceedings ofreached the Court of Directors in the month of rectors on theFebruary 1806. It was received by them with comwaiiisf'feelings of the deepest concern. They manifestedevery mark of respect for his lordship's memory,» and.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. X.1806.Death of Mr.Pitt.Lord Lauderdaleproposedas Governor-generaland, in testimony of the sense entertained by theCompany of the great benefit derived to theiraffairs and to the interests of India from his lordship'sservices, and as a mark of their gratefulsense of the same, his lordship's son and heir.Viscount Brome, vias presented with the sum of£40,000. The Chairman gave notice to the Courtof Directors, on the 12th February, that on the19th of that month he should bring under theirconsideration the state of the government of Bengal.On the 14th Lord Minto, then president of theBoard of Control, addressed the Chairs, and suggestedthat Sir George Barlow should be immediatelyappointed governor-general ; but intimated,at the same time, that it was to be viewed only asatemporary appointment, prompted by the exigencyof a particular moment in the first days ofa new administration.Mr. Pitt died on the 23d January, when LordGrenville was nominated first lord of the Treasury,and Mr. Fox secretary of state for ForeignAffairs. Lord Minto succeeded Lord Castlereaghas president. Sir George Barlow was appointed,by the unanimous resolution of the Court of Directors,governor general on the 19th February. Atan interview which the Chairs had with LordMinto at the Board on the 7th March, the Earl ofLauderdale was named for the permanent successorof Lord Cornwall is, as governor-general. Acorrespondence ensued between the Board andtherevoked.IChapel.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 407the Court, when, in a letter from the President to goetheChairs of the 12 th May, the principle of theKing's ministers having an individual in their confidenceas governor-general, was forcibly urged.They claimed at the hands of the Court the samedegree of credit and deference which it had beenthe happy system and practice of the Court togive to the King's Government in similar cases,and again named Lord Lauderdale. The Court,however, declined to rescind their appointment ofSir George Barlow : the Kino was, therefore, Sir George° . . T Barlow'sadvised to revoke that nomination. It was, accord nominationingle, intimated to the Directors by Lord Mintoon the 29th May, that his Majesty had vacatedSir George Barlow's appointment* The Courtpresented a strong remonstrance against this proceedingon the part of his Majesty's ministers, inthe exercise of the power of recall, and pointedout how entirely it nullified the power vested inthe Court. Lord Minto stated, in reply, hisreasons for not protracting the discussion, — thathe was ready to assist in maintaining the right ofthe Court to appoint: at the same time the powerof revocation was equally clear, both in the Crown,and the Court. His lordship disclaimed the allegation,that Ministers wished to arrogate the exclusiveright of appointment, and fully subscribed tothe remark of the Court, that it had been usualfor them to have an understanding with hisMajesty's ministers, and to consult their opinionsand408 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. X.1806. and wishes, and added, that the appointment ofa successor was of urgent importance. After conferencewith a deputation from the Court, andLord Minto some further proceedings. Lord Minto himself wasvernor.generai. appointed, ou the 9th of July 1806, governor-general.Sir George Barlow returned to Calcutta, fromthe Upper Provinces, in February 1806. In July,the Supreme Government replied to the Court'sletter, animadverting upon the mode in which thegeneral course of business had been carried onduring the preceding government. They representedthat the members of Council had full cognizanceof, and entirely concurred in the measuresof Marquis Wellesley, and that the rapidity ofevents, with the multiplicity of matters whichpressed themselves upon their attention, mighthave prevented their observance of the strict letter,although the entire spirit of the system was adheredto. That it had been impossible to place thedespatches in exact order upon record, but everythinghad been transacted in full communicationwith the Council.Sir George Barlow apprized the Chairman, inMarch, that there was every fair prospect of arestoration of the Indian finances if peace continued,and that he did not entertain a doubt thatthereout be million surplus in 1807-8. Variousquestions arose, and amongst them claims of Scin-dial on the Giiicowar, which, on inquiry, appearedIChakX] BRITISH power in INDIA. 409feared to have been wholly satisfied. The Cutch isle.rajah, Tutti Mahomed, who was originally a privatehorseman, ultimately assumed the governmentin 1792. In 1806, he sought aid from the Company,in attempting to regain his authority, whichhad been usurped by some of his rebellioussubjects, in conjunction with pirates and plunderers.The Governor-general desired that anamicable answer should be returned to the Rajah,but deemed it unadvisable to take any part in theaffairs of that country.Dissensions had arisen amongst the Rajpootchieftains but as the Company's possessions werein a state of perfect tranquillity, the Governmentdeclined all interference in the settlement of theirdisputes. The Peishwa having evinced a desire torevive the offices of Vakeel-ul-mulluk, or viceroyof Hindostan, the Government deemed it prudentto dissuade his highness from such an idea. Aninsurrection broke out in Caubul, the King beinginvolved in disputes with his nephew ; he wasconstrained to pay a ransom to Unmeet Sing, whowas engaged in the siege of Mountain, whichbelonged to Caubul. The province of Berar sufferedseverely from two inroads by Scindiah's Pin-carriesin May and June 1807.410 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE IChai-.XI.CHAPTER XI.1803.Lord William The appointment of Lord William Bentinck asM^^r^^ ^^ governor of Madras, his arrival at Fort St. George,with the communication from the Governor-generalon that occasion, and his lordship's replyhave been already noticed.*Lord William Bentinck had warmly supportedthe measures for bringing the operations in theDeccan to a successful termination. The Governwrote to the Court of Directors inDecember 1803 : " From Lord William Bentinck,since his lordship's arrival in India, I have experiencedthe most cordial and invariable supportand co-operation." When the force in the Deccanwas broken up, and the operations against Holkarconfined to Hindostan, Lord William Bentinck,after forming a corps de reserve, zealously devotedhis undivided attention to the internal affairs ofjgp^ his own government.Affairs of Tan One of the first subjects which engaged hislordship's particular notice, were the evils thathad arisen in the administration of Tanjore. Thatcountry♦ Vide pages 308 and 310.jureChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 411country was placed under the entire management 1804.of the Company in 1800. Its revenues had fallenshort in the year 1803, from a violent inundation.The attention of the collector in the district hadbeen favourably noticed by the Government on hiseffecting the introduction of the Company's authoritythroughout the province : it had beenarranged, that when the existing system of leaseswas abolished, a system of money rent should beintroduced. Before measures could be adoptedfor effecting this revision, a combination had beenformed amongst the native servants of the Collectorand the Meerassidar* of the provinces, which hadcaused considerable dilapidation in the publicrevenue. A committee being ordered to investigatethe extent of the alleged frauds, it appearedthat in two years and a-half they amounted tothree lacs ten thousand pagodas. Captain (nowMajor-general) Blackburn, who was subsequentlyresident at Tanjore, formed one of the committee;his conduct was highly applauded by Lord WilliamBentinck, his zeal and perseverance havingled to the discovery. A general combination had Frauds in thetaken place between the servants of the circa and of ksTS!'"the landholders to defraud the Government of itsrevenue ; they had been carrying on a system ofone continued series of corruption, exaction, andoppression ; a sale of justice, a violation of allpublic and private rights ; and had been guilty ofeveryThe holder or possessor of a heritage.412 JIISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XI.1804. every malpractice that could by possibility disgracea government or a people. Lord WilliamOpinion of Bentinck remarked, that ** when it was consideredLord WilliamBentinck on the province had not lone since been transferredthe causes.from the rajah, whose system of government, togetherwith that of all the other rajahs, was theconstant theme of our condemnation, we couldnot but feel mortified that an administration underBritish superintendence, should not have a morejust title to the confidence and respect of thenatives."Without further enquiry (observed his lordship), Ideem it to be my duty to stand up in the defence of aprinciple upon which rests all security for the delegationof great trust and great confidence ; I mean the principleof responsibility.Acting upon this principle, his lordship proposedthat the collector, to whom it appearedthese frauds were unknown, should with all hisassistants be recalled. The collector asserted,that it arose not from a defect in government, butinthe unaltered vice of the people. ** I do notsee it made out," observed Lord William Bentinck;I am inclined to believe that there is much depravity inTanjore, and this will always be found where there hasexisted a long oppressive despotism : cunning, deceit, andfalsehood, are the only means of refuge to the weak frompowerful extortion.The collector flogged and banished the nativewhoChap-XI.] BRITISH POAVER IN INDIA. 413who would have exposed corruptions notorious to 1804.all but collectors. Timidity was inherent in thenative character, and no complaint would belodged, nor would natives dare to prefer one againsta revenue-servant, if the power of the collector, incountries not permanently settled, was completelyarbitrary : hence every thing depended upon thecollectors. It was admitted that there was not amore zealous public servant : but he entertainedan abhorrence of the native character, and hisadministration of justice was marked by severity.Lord William Bentinck stated, that it was notonly necessary to be just, but most important thatthe people should have confidence in the collector'sjustice and protection, and this the peopleof Tanjore had not.The sentiments of his lordship will be respondedto by all who justly estimate the value of a pureand upright government, alive to the prejudicesof the natives ; but at the same time prepared tocombat evasion and unfounded pleas to indulgence.The Court of Directors designated his lordship's Concurrence ofminute as both able and judicious, and as anti. inLordwmiamcheating most of the material observations con views."'^^ ^gained in the Report from the Commissioners ofInquiry : '' Concurring, therefore, in every sentimentexpressed by his lordship, we have littlemore to add than to adopt these sentiments asour own"*TheLetter to Madras, November 1805.4 1 4 wise AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. X F.18M. The state of the finances, the condition of Ma-subjectswhich ^ , . itengage Lord lahar and Canara, the conclusion of the subsidiarytinck'satten-" treaty with Travancore, the refractory spirit ofthe polygamy, and the introduction of the judicialand revenue systems, were subjects which engagedthe anxious deliberation of Lord William Bentinck,in communication with the Supreme Government.Questions as A point of some dcHcacy occasioned a differencepatronage of opiuiori between the civil members of the Governmentand General Stuart, regarding the exerciseof military patronage. In order to preventthe recurrence of any such disagreement withsucceeding commanders-in-chief, Lord WilliamBentinck requested the two civil councillors todraw a line respecting the patronage, without hisinterference. In accordance with the view whichthose gentlemen took, a resolution of Governmentwas passed and sent home, for the confirmation ofthe Court of Directors.Sir John crag Major general Sir John Cradock succeeded asdockcontem- . , • ^ ^ i /-\ iplates resigning commander-in-chiei on the 17th October 1804.mentes'" Shortly after his taking his seat as second in council,he addressed a communication to Lord WilliamBentinck. He represented the impossibilityof his remaining in India under the resolution, justadverted to, on the subject of the military patronage;and declared his intention of immediatelyresigning the command of the army. Sir ArthurWellesley, who happened to be at Madras, remonstratedChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 415demonstrated with Sir John Cradock upon the inex- iso.expediency of carrying his resolution into effect, butwithout success. Lord William Bentinck, utterly Lord williamindifferent, so far as his personal feelings were difference as toconcerned, to the exercise of patronage, more or ^^ '^°"^^^'less ; anxious to preserve harmony in the councilsof Government, as most conducive to the publicinterests, and to manifest that respect which hefelt to be due to his Majesty's choice, offered togive up the whole of the patronage to the commandconsidering it immaterial in whosehands it was placed. The sentiments of his lordship'scolleagues were, however, decidedly adverseto such a course, as they felt that the Governmentwould be lowered by such concession. It wasnot without much difficulty that Sir John Cradockwas finally prevailed upon to forego his intentionof resigning the command, and to accept hj privatearrangement the whole of the patronage. He hadurged his opinion, that the public transfer of it tohis authority was necessary to the dignity of hissituation : but the Government now felt that itbecame of little consideration what the originalquestion had been : a deliberate resolution hadbeen passed ; to revoke it at the will of any individualwould, it was felt, subject the conduct ofGovernment to the charge of weakness, and theproposition was therefore rejected.The sentiments of the Court of Directors, on Decision by thethe reference under the above Resolution, was ceptabie to sirJohn Cradock.communRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XL1804. communicated to the Madras government on the30th July 1806. It laid down rules for their futureguidance, and expressed a hope that the ruleswould be found sufficiently clear thenceforth toregulate their conduct on the subject of militarypatronage and military regulations, and to preventthe recurrence of discussions which it was of theutmost importance to avoid. To these rules SirJohn Cradock strongly objected, deeming them tobe highly detrimental to the service.In 1804, the presidency having suffered from thedearth with which they were visited. Lord WilliamBentinck, to rescue the poor natives from therapacity of the grain dealers, interposed, and bythe most liberal and charitable hand, extendedrelief to the distressed villagers, to some gratuitously,and to all at a moderate rate. Rice wasobtained from Calcutta to prevent the calamitiesand horrors of anticipated famine.On the introduction of the judicial system,various questions arose upon points which renderedthat system not exactly applicable in particularstations. In Malabar, Mr. Thomas Warden,whose services were of a most valuable character,pressed upon the attention of Government thenecessity of modifying the resolutions on thepowers of the collector, the grand principle ofLord Cornwallis having been to separate the revenueand judicial functions. Lord Wm. Bentinckreplied : *' You will find that the duties of thejudgeChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 417judge and collector are most accurately defined i804.in the judicial letter from the Supreme Govern revenue systemment : and that the collector has all the powerswhich he can honestly desire." A copy of itwas sent to Mr. Warden ; it contained admirableregulations for the happiness of the people and theprosperity of the Company's Government ; '* interestswhich I should be sorry to suppose for amoment were separate and distinct." On intimatingto Mr. Warden the re-transfer of a local corpsto his orders. Lord Wm. Bentinck informed him,that having taken occasion to converse with GeneralWellesley on the subject of this and other local General Weiss^ ^ *^ wesley's opinioncorps, his opinion was strongly in favour of such astoiocaiestablishments, where the unhealthiness of theclimate might make the employment of the regularsimpossible, or where the face of the countryfrom mountain and jungle should render the exertionsof those not acquainted with irregular fightingof little avail. He also pointed out the probabilitiesthat the peons engaged in our service wouldotherwise serve against us. ** I give here," saidLord William, *' the opinion of General Wellesleyin preference to my own, because — •I consider his authority on every point relating to theinterests of this country, and more particularly in its meansof military defence, to be undoubted and incontrovertible."1805.Mr. Warden had been appointed, by the Madras Lord williamGovernment, collector in Malabar. His standing in timonrto^thr'the service was not of sufficient length, according Thomafwar-VOL. II. 2 E to ^'"-RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap.XT,1805.His lordship'szeal for the interestsof theCompany.French influence.to the then existing law, to enable him to hold sohigh an office, with the allowances attached to it.The Court of Directors, naturally governed by thelaw, ordered the appointment to be cancelled.Lord Wm. Bentinck wrote to Mr. Warden :As bad news circulates rapidly, you may already haveheard of it. It may be satisfactory to you to know thatit is not my intention to execute these orders until I mayhave made a further appeal. It may be still more gratifyingto you to know that this determination is founded on the successof your measures in Malabar, in restoring tranquillity,and in realizing the revenues. I cannot but consider that acontinuance of these happy effects will be the result of thesame zealous and prudent conduct. Never having seen you,it cannot be supposed that I am actuated by any personalpartiality : the good of the public service is my whole andsole motive, and I feel no doubt that your future exertionswill correspond with the past, and bear me out in thearduous responsibility which I have taken upon myself.Writing to a member of the Direction, who filledthe deputy chair when Lord Wm. Bentinck wasappointed governor of Madras, his lordship advertedto various points connected with his administration,and observed :I cannot expect not to have done acts which may be disapproved,but I hope you will do me the justice to believethat I have acted with honest and hearty zeal for the interestsof the East-india Company.Owing to the state of affairs in Europe, the Frenchsettlement of Pondicherry was retained under theCompany's authority. Mr. Fallowfield had beeninstructedChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA, 419instructed by the Government to take measures 1805.for establishing a court of justice there. His proceedingsreceived the entire approbation of theGovernment. In selecting individuals, a M.was named, whose conduct had not been perfectlycorrect in a transaction which the governor.Lord Wm. Bentinck, did not immediately recollect,but it induced him to wish another gentlemanto be nominated judge; and then, alluding toM. :I understand him to be a very decided Frenchman, andto have said upon a former occasion, when the same situationwas offered, that he could only accept it upon the conditionthat he should not be obliged to take up spies oragents of his own government. I do not know whetherany such stipulation has been proposed upon the presentoccasion ; but I have no difficulty in saying, that if, whilehe is in charge of the police, he knowingly permitted theprosecution of designs hostile to the Government, he oughtto be hanged. I do not, at the same time, expect activeagency, in this respect, against his own government, butwe have a right to require his assistance in preventing suchpractices in Pondicherry at least, as we give to the inhabitantsa great boon, law and justice : we could not give agreater to our own subjects ; we only ask in return what,I think, they are bound, in honour and gratitude to give, atacit assurance that they will not by themselves, or by theirencouragement to others, engage in acts of hostility.In a subsequent letter M. had consentedto give a written declaration ; Lord WilliamBentinck wrote : " I wish you to say to M.that I place entire reliance upon his honour,2 E 2 and420 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.J805. and will require no written agreement fromhim."These communications tended to justify theimportance attached by Marquis Wellesley toguard against the attempts at French influence.Revenue and The introduction of the revenue and judicialjudicial systems,systems on the coast now became a question forthe consideration and decision of the governments.The zemindar system prevailed throughoutBengal ; the permanent settlement being fixedwith that class of landholders.Under Madras there were the northern circles,the Company's ancient jaghire, the heavenly lands,the dollars, and those which came under thedenomination of the ceded territory.The Home authorities had been desirous, in1786, to extend the permanent settlement to theterritories under Madras upon the same principlesas obtained in Bengal, but they were unable, fromwant of sufficient data and other details, to prescribeany precise course of conduct. In thenorthern circles there were the zemindar, whopresented a barrier to any effectual improvement,by opposing any detailed enquiry. It had beenthe wish of the Home authorities to reduce themilitary power of these zemindar, as a preliminarystep ; but the condition of the Company'sfinances, the face of the country, which presentedobstacles to the employment of troops, and thecontiguity of native powers, jealous of the extensionChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 421sion of the Company's authority, combined to ren i805,der the measure impracticable.A Board of Revenue was formed at Madras inJune 1786, with whom the chiefs and councilscorresponded. The servants, ignorant of the nativelanguages, were in the hands of debases, whothus became instruments of rapine and extortion,under unprincipled masters. At Bombay therewas still less ground of hope, to look with anyconfidence to manage the newly acquired cessionson the coast of Malabar. The districts of Salemand Kistnagherry, comprising the Baramahal andthe provinces of Dindigul and Malabar, wereceded by Tippoo in 1792.The civil servants at Madras, not possessingthe requisite qualifications. Lord Cornwallis appointedCaptain Read, with nine military assistants,to the revenue service, all of whom werewell acquainted with the native languages, habits,and manners of the people. Their zeal and abilitysecured success to their labours. They appliedthemselves to acquire a knowledge of the nativeusages, as the only ground upon which they couldrightly proceed in framing and settling a revenue •system for the country. Their earliest investigationrelated to the customary division of the crop, thenature of the produce, and the manner of keepingthe revenue accounts ; tracing, as they proceededin their enquiries, the origin and progress of everycivil institution of the country; and connectingtherewith.422 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1805. therewith, not only a particular examination intothe theory, practice, and operation of the revenuemanagement, which they found to exist under theMahometan rule of Hyderr and Tippoo, but evenwhile the Baramahal was under its Hindoo princes.This system became the general guide of therevenue authorities in other parts, Dindigul,Coimbatore, Canara, and in the Ceded districts.It was, in fact, the only system that enabled themto acquire the necessary information. The Heavenlylands* were, at this time, separated from theauthority of the chiefs and councils. In 1792 theywere again subjected to that authority, until thearrival of Lord Hobart, who abolished the ProvincialCouncils, and made the collectors amenableto the Board of Revenue, with whom theyimmediately corresponded. This change was, inagreat measure, produced by the representationof a very able officer at Madras, who comparedthe system with Bengal, where chiefs and councilshad been abolished with that in the northerncircles, where it prevailed. In the former was awell regulated and efficient system of revenue,and in the latter an unconnected jumble, withoutauthority, subordination, arrangement, or regulation.Although invested with so important a chargeof revenue administration, not one of the gentlemenin the provincial councils had ever acquiredproficiency in any of the country languages, or proposedLands immediately under the management of Government*Chai'. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 423posed any plan of general utility since the acquitssiphon of the circles. The system pursued byCaptain Read in the preceding year, was cited inproof of the important benefit that would accruefrom the appointment of some seven or eight collectors,who would conduct themselves upon hisprinciple.When the Bengal Government, in 1799, issuedinstructions for a general revision of their establishments,with a view to reduction of expenditure,the revenue system was pointed out as demandingreform, the introduction of the system existing inBengal being suggested. The Board of Revenueat Madras made an elaborate report in September1799, which, mainly resting upon the argumentsurged by the authorities in Bengal, suggested theadoption of a permanent settlement: sufficientattention had not been paid to the difference in timeand circumstances between the land tenures ofthe two presidencies. The authority of the SupremeGovernment for a permanent settlement includednot merely the circles, but the ancient possessionson the coast of Coromandel, as well as the territorysince acquired.The Court of Directors in consenting, so far asrespected the lands on the coast, pointed out themeasure, when once adopted, as irrevocable, bothas regarded good faith to the natives, and theinterest of the Company : still it did not appearthat sufficient information was possessed so as toauthorizemerits.424 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XL1805. authorize the general extension of the permanentsettlement. A commission had been appointed in1799, to carry into effect the recommendation ofthe Board of Revenue, in the districts composingthe northern circles, within 1802 and 1804. TheHeavenly lands were sold, subject to a zemindarjumna. The Guntoor circa was assessed withreference to the average of the preceding thirteenyears, and such other information as could beobtained. The permanent settlement was introducedin the jaghire, and in other of the Com-^ any's ancient possessions, in 1802. A considerationssettle rablc portion of those more recently acquired hadbeen held by polygamy, or military chieftains, butthe largest part had been under the control of thenative government. From the impracticability ofentering into a detailed, plan of management, thelands were, in the first instance, farmed out on theprinciple which generally prevailed in the countryto individuals who stood somewhat in the characterof polygamy. As soon as circumstances admitted,village settlements were made, a certain rentbeing agreed upon with its head inhabitants, whosub-let to the riots with whom they settled. Therenters were required to give portals to the riots,and not to take beyond the stipulated amount. Butso long as this system lasted, it presented aneffectual bar to an investigation into the defectsand abuses in the land revenues. The recordsabound with instances of abuse and fraud practisedby^Chap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 425 ,^^by the village renters, in conjunction with the i^^.curnums, in order to conceal the value. The intermediateagency of renters was ultimately setaside by the collector entering into separate engagementswith every ryot or cultivator, situatedwithin its boundaries, for the revenue he was topay on account of the land he occupied. Thismode of renting has been generally termed a ryot Ryotwar set-warsettlement. As it would inevitably lead to ^" ' A^the exposition of all the oppressive influence and ^^$!!j^power exercised to enrich the landholders at theexpense of the riots, every possible opposition wasgiven to its introduction ; and nothing but the zeal,perseverance, and talent of the able functionarieswho were the instruments of its introduction, renderedthe measure in any degree effectual. Withthe support of the Gov;p^m%nt the confederatedopposition of the details was subdued, and theirduties confined to collecting the rents from theriots on account of the Government.The late Sir Thomas Munro was one of the principalinstruments in carrying forward this importantscheme. His plan of operations was detailedwith great clearness in a report on a ryotwarsettlement in November 1806, to the Government ofMadras. A practical knowledge of the languages,pure intentions, clear understanding, and acti\%%^^'habits of body and mind, were indispensable tomake the riots sensible of the vigilance and careof a collector under such a system ; qualities whichappearm,.426 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XL1805. appear to have been eminently possessed by Col.Munro, Capt. McLeod and Graham, and by Mr.Hurts, who were appointed by Lord Hobart.Lord William Lord William Bentinck felt so strongly that aneeds to Cain permanent zemindar settlement, which had beenordered from Bengal, was unfitted for a large portionof the territories on the coast, that he determinedto proceed to Calcutta, to procure by personalrepresentation some modifications by whichthe ryotwar settlement might be continued. TheHis lordship's Supreme Government passed an immediate deci-views acceded ^ ^to by the Go jon iu accordance with Lord William Bentinck'smemor-general.suggestions. His lordship returned to Fort S georgeby the northern circles. He considered that thegreat advantage of the system was to be found inthat most sure and certain of all human actions,self-interest. Every man would exert himself toincrease his means; thence would arise the increaseof cultivation, the only true criterion to judge ofthe prosperity of the country. It was upon thisprinciple that his lordship wished to improve, bymaking that settlement permanent, which hadbeen annual, with each ryot.Lord William Lord William Bentinck, in furtherance of hisBentinck con . i i • * • • •tdmpiates visit views, recorded a muiute* expressing an optionMliabaT'^ "" that the exact plan of a permanent settlementadopted in Bengal, was not, in his judgment,applicable to Madras, but that a ryotwar annualsettlement, from which such vast advantage hadarisen,January 1806.Chap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN, INDIA. 427arisen, ought to form the basis of the permanent isle.settlement. His lordship had opened a correspondencewith the collectors, and, in order to gainpersonal information by inspection, he purposedvisiting Malabar and Canara, and the ceded districts,accompanied by Mr. William Thackeray,who prepared, by his lordship's desire, a paperdetailing the objections to a zemindar, and thereasons in favour of a rotary settlement. Thispaper his lordship laid before the Board on the29th April, and invited discussion in those quarterswhose opinions were opposed to his ownviews. In the progress of these measures. Lord is preventedWilliam Bentinck was constrained to abandon hisintention of visiting Malabar and Canara by thestate of public affairs at Madras. His lordshiprecorded a minute, in which regret was expressed Records a,^,. Tali* A Minute on thethat he felt it necessary to relinquish his tour to revenue affairs.these distant provinces, both as it prevented himfrom benefiting by personal communication withthe local instruments, and because he believedthat the occasional presence of persons in authorityis calculated to have a salutary influence overthe conduct of subordinate officers : an opinionwhich his lordship held in common with LordsCornwallis and Wellesley. The disappointmentwas more felt from the measure contemplatedbeing one of great national importance. Mr.Thackeray was, therefore, deputed, at the recommendationof his lordship, for the purpose. Thatgentleman428 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1806. gentleman submitted the result of his visitation inamost interesting report, made in August 1807.He remarked,That a rotary system is attended with some troubleand detail, and that the revenue officers must think and actalittle to carry it on well; but all governments, all humanaffairs, are attended with some trouble and difficulty, andthe more pains bestowed upon them, the better are they in ,general conducted. That mode of payment which promisesmost security to the government and to the ryot is the best,but all middle-men, farmers, contractors, and other intermediateagents, must get a profit, and generally a verygreat one, either openly or clandestinely, and the more ofthem there are the greater sum must be divided amongthem. But in India they are hardly ever content with theirlegitimate profit.This was the system which had been condemnedby Mr. Hastings.*The principle advocated by Lord William Bentinck,and so strongly supported by the ablefunctionary who had been deputed to act uponit and to investigate its results, was ultimately setaside by the introduction of the village-settlementin the year 1808. It was adopted in theconviction that the ryotwar settlement demandedtoo great a sacrifice, or remission of rent, and thatthe return to village-rents appeared to be bestadapted to secure the revenue of the state, andthe prosperity of the country. The resolutions ofthe Government went further : they declared thatwhatFide vol. i. page 419-423.Chap. XI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 429what was termed Colonel Munro's system, in- 18O6.solved a constant exercise of the domiciliary control,which it was the principal object of the permanentsettlement to exclude, and they consideredthat Colonel Munro had not sufficiently appreciatedthe advantages of a zemindar settlement,which had been attended with great benefit, andhad been free from most of the objections supposedby that officer !From some extraordinary and unexplained circuit of directorsconcurconstance, the report of Mr. Thackeray, made in in Lord wiu-.^^« r--11 1 ^ n T\' A lias Bentinck1807, was not forwarded to the Court 01 Directors views on revelFebruary 1810. The Court expressed theirdispleasure at this great irregularity ; but whatproved still more unsatisfactory to them, andcreated great suspicion, was the circumstance thatthis valuable document was not taken into particularconsideration by the Government whenthey discontinued the ryotwar mode of settlement.The Court were at a loss to imagine a reason, asthe minutes of Lord William Bentinck of Januaryand April 1806, referred in marked terms to thedocument, which established in their minds, convictionson some important points connected withthe principles of the land-revenue administrationunder Madras; and they believed, that a dispassionatereview of its contents would at least havehad the effect of restraining the Government, fromthe adoption of any immediate change of the revenuesystem in operation. The observations confirmed430 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XL1806. firmed the soundness of the views taken by LordWilliam Bentinck, upon which it was his lordship'sintention to have acted had he not beenabruptly removed from office.To enter into a disquisition of this much discussedand interesting question, at the length itdeserves, would be impossible within the limits ofthe present work.The opinions which were supported by LordWilliam Bentinck and Colonel Munro, have stoodthe test of experience ; the system founded uponthem requires considerable personal labour, energy,and perseverance, with great intelligence. Butso far from these qualifications presenting argumentsagainst the system, they appear to plead inthe strongest possible manner in its favour, asthey are the very requisites for calling forth exertionand talents, in advancing the interests ofthe state and the welfare of the people.The circumstance which interposed to precludeLord William Bentinck from following up his intentionof proceeding on the tour of inspection,Mutiny at was the mutiny which broke out at Vellore in theVellore.month of July 1806, an event that so deeply affectedhis lordship's interests and character.The fortress of Vellore had been fixed upon atthe termination of the Mysore war, in 1799, forthe residence of the family of the late TippooSultaun. The Court of Directors appear to havehad some doubts whether Bengal might not havebeenChai. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 431been, upon the whole, more eligible in point of iso,security, from all possible effects likely to createdisturbance ; but it was not an opinion pressedagainst the arrangement which had been adopted.When Sir John Cradock entered upon the office Causes of dissatisfaction.of commander-in-chief, he found that there wasno code of military regulations under the presidencyof Madras. He accordingly submitted tothe Governor, in March 1805, a proposition forthe preparation of a code ; and Major Pearce,the deputy-adjutant-general, was appointed by thecommander-in-chief to prepare it. His excellency,in his representation to the Governor in Councilstated, that he had it only in contemplation toreduce into one view the several orders that werealready ti force, and sanctioned by Government :but should any slight alteration appear obviouslynecessary, or should it be found requisite to introducea few circumstances of discipline or interioreconomy, of the later practice in England,such new matter would be distinguished in themanuscripts to be submitted for the final approbationof Government.The code was accompanied by a minute in whichthe commander-in-chief stated, that the whole ofthe regulations were comprised in twenty-sevensections, alphabetically arranged, and now submittedto Government. The additional orders towhich his excellency requested the attention ofthe Board, as requiring the sanction of Government,432 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1806. ment, were then enumerated. It was thus obvious,that the only part to which the attentionof the Government was required, was that enumeratedby the commander-in-chief. The otherpart, being the old and sanctioned regulations, comprisedin one hundred and fifty folio sheets, consistedof regimental orders respecting drill disciplineand dress already in force, and sanctionedby Government. The duty of attending to thatpart which was enumerated by the commander-in-chief,devolved upon Lord William Bentinck asgovernor, and that duty his lordship most conscientiouslydischarged.The tenth paragraph, although appearing nowfor the first time in any military code, had beeninserted among the old orders which had receivedevery necessary ratification, and of course it hadno place in the list of those additional orders towhich, as requiring the sanction of Government,the attention of the Board was requested by thecommander-in-chief. The purport of the paragraphwas as follows :Offensive regu- ** The scpoys wcrc required to appear on paradeto LorTwiu with their chins clean shaved, and the hair on thelias Bentinck. t j. ^. w .a j j.upper lip cut after the same pattern, and never towear the distinguishing mark of caste, or theirear-rings, when in uniform. A turban of anew pattern was also ordered for the sepoy."The alterations thus instituted seemed, for atime, to be received by the sepoy with submission.TheChap. XI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 433The first symptoms of a spirit of insubordination Iso.appeared in the second battalion of the fourthregiment of Native Infantry, which then composedpart of the garrison of Vellore. On the6th and 7th of May, when called upon to wearthe new turban, the battalion was most disorderly,and even mutinous, and it was only bysevere measures that it was at last reduced toobedience.The existence of the tenth paragraph was now,for the first time, discovered as part of the regulations; the Government was accused of havingsanctioned an order of which it was entirely ignorant.The commander-in-chief was immediatelyapprized of this omission in his original report toGovernment. He referred to Major Pearce, thedeputy adjutant-general, to whom the task ofarranging the new orders in a separate class hadbeen officially assigned. That officer's defence wasnot only ample as regarded himself, but his barestatement of the facts also completely exculpatedthe Governor and Council.The commander-in-chief caused a court ofinquiry to be held, to report upon the causeswhich led to these acts of insubordination. In theinterim, the non-commissioned officers who refusedto wear the turban were ordered to be reduced tothe ranks, and the immediate adoption of the turbanby the disorderly battalion was imperativelyinsisted upon. *' Disobedience was to be imme-voL. II. -2 F lately434 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XI.1806. lately followed up by dismission." Such werethe commander-in-chief's orders.Result of court The court of inquiry sentenced nineteen of theof inquiry, ^ .ring-leaders to punishment, of whom seventeenwere pardoned, two being condemned to receivenine hundred lashes each. The evidence from allquarters (and also of two native officers of thehighest caste, both Hindooss and Mussulman),was in favour of the turban : and it was declaredthat the objection to it had no warrant in the religiousprejudices of the people. Subordination atlength appeared to have been restored ; but onthe 4th July the commander-in-chief sought theadvice of Government on the expediency of revokingthe order regarding * the turban' as he hadthe strongest reasons to suppose almost universalobjection arose against it, and that he also understoodthe sepoy were impressed with a belief thatit was intended to convert them by force to Christianity.Still it was his wish, as the result of thebest judgment he could apply to the subject, topersevere, and conquer prejudice ; but he was notsatisfied in his own mind to persevere to the fullextent without the advice and sanction of Government.The Governor in Council regretted thefirst adoption of the measure, but agreed with thecommander-in-chief, that it might now compromisethe authority by whom it had been publiclyput in force in such strong terms. Had it, however,militated against the religious prejudices, itwasChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 435was felt that not a moment's consideration would Iso.be required in revoking the order ; this did not atall appear to be the case. The Governor in Councilaccordingly proposed issuing a general orderto the native troops, containing the most positiveassurances that ** no intention existed to introduceany change incompatible with the laws or usagesof their religion." Previously to circulation, acopy was sent to the commander-in-chief, thenabsent from council. Sir John Cradock warmlyapproved of its spirit ; but having been led tobelieve that the reports he had received wereexaggerated, he considered its publication wa$ nolonger required : the order was, therefore, notpublished.The government of Madras was at this timeapprised of the existence of any of the recentregulations regarding dress, excepting the order forthe turban.On the 10th July, while Sir John Cradock's Mutiny breaksout.letter, above referred to, was on the road toMadras, the mutiny at Vellore broke out at twoin the morning, by an attack on the European partof the garrison, consisting of four companies ofH.M.69th Regiment. Fourteen officers, includingColonel Rancour, ninety-nine non-commissionedofficers and privates, were massacred, and fifteenothers died of their wounds.A few days following this event. Lord WilliamBentinck stated to the Council, that he had only2 F 2 been436 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1806. been very lately informed of the recent changes inthe dress of the sepoy, distinct from the new-turban,and that the knowledge of this fact, andsome advices from Vellore, induced him to proposethe immediate suspension of the orders regardingthe turban, the marks of caste, and ornaments ofdress. The resolution, being passed, was transmittedto the commander-in-chief at Vellore. Acircular letter was, at the same time, in accordancewith the resolution, addressed by the commandto all the commanding officers of divisions,and of the subsidiary forces at Hydrabadand Travancore ; but in this letter the restorationof the old turban was only conditional, it being leftto the option of the native officers and men to wearthe new one. This clause was objected to by theGovernor in Council, and the objection wasdeferred to by Sir John Cradock.A special commission was appointed to inquireinto the origin and causes of the mutiny. It appearedthat the innovations in dress, and theresidence of the Mysore family at Vellore, werethe leading causes : that the plot was to havebroke out on the 17th June. A communication tothis effect had been made to an officer of the garrisonby Mustapha Beg, a sepoy of the 1st battalion1st regiment; but the native officers hadsucceeded in inducing a belief that MustaphaBeg was insane. He was presented, by order ofGovernment, with two thousand rupees and a goldmedal.CiiAi'.XI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 437medal . Amongst the arrangements which followed, isle.it was determined to send the Mysore princes toBengal ; they were accordingly embarked onboardthe Culloden, being sent down under anescort commanded by Colonel Gillespie, fromVellore.The impressions in different detachments of thearmy, that a design existed to destroy the Europeans,and to raise the Mysore power on the ruinof the British authority, was so strongly fixed, thatthe most exaggerated alarm was entertained. Thequestion which immediately pressed for decisionwas, how to dispose of the mutineers at Vellore.A general court-martial was appointed by thecommander-in-chief, to try those against whomthere was indisputable evidence that they weredeserving of death ; the remainder, amounting tosix hundred, were imprisoned in forts in theneighbourhood, until Government decided on themanner of disposing of them. A serious agitationoccurred in the subsidiary force at Hydrabad,regarding the turban, and marks of caste, and earrings,and whiskers : the whole force of ten thousandmen was thrown into disorder, and confidenceseemed to have departed. The commanding officer.Colonel Montresor, with the concurrence of CaptainSydenham, the Resident, took upon himselfthe responsibility of revoking those orders. Thespirit of tumult was instantly allayed.On the 2d September the commander-in-chiefsubmitted438 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1806. submitted to Government two propositions, whichwere strongly supported by the commanding officersof the southern and Mysore districts. The first,that the mutineers condemned to death by thenative general court-martial should be executedin detachments at the different divisions of thearmy. To this measure, as indicating a suspicionof every part of the native army, all the membersof the Council refused their assent. The secondwas the erasure of the guilty regiments from thearmy list. It received the approbation of themajority of the Council ; but Lord Wm. Bentincknegatived it upon his own authority, believingthat such a step would only serve to refresh foreverrecollections, which it was wisdom to endeavourto extinguish. The Bengal Government wasof a different opinion, and the erasure took place.Differences as As a preliminary to the trial of the prisoners,dealing with the commander-in-chief had directed Lieut. -e prisoners, ^^j^j^^j Forbes and Lieutenant Coombs to investigatethe comparative delinquency of the prisoners.Their report stated such a course to be impossible,as it pronounced all .to be most deeply implicated.The question as to dealing with themwas now, therefore, before the Government, as itwas not believed that any one would be convictedbefore a court-martial for want of evidence. Therewere six hundred of them. The commander-inchief pressed for general banishment; the BengalGovernment for a general amnesty ; and LordWilliamChap. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 439Wm. Bentinck recommended a temporary con isle.finance of the imprisonment, as leaving scopefor acting under such circumstances as mightarise. In addition to the six hundred, anotherclass of men, about five hundred, who had beenfugitives from Vellore, claimed the attention ofGovernment. To have let the whole loose by dismissal,in such a country, where designs of unprincipledindividuals might be prosecuted withsuch facilities, was deemed most unadvisable.The Council, therefore, excepting the commander-in-chief,acceded to the opinion of the President,for a temporary continuance of imprisonment.The apprehensions amongst the officers still AdmirableT/Y> • * 1 r-rt behaviour ofcontinued at different stations. At that oi Bangs Pmneah inlore, the brother of Purneah, the celebrated minis ^^^^^'ter, so highly applauded by Sir Arthur Wellesley,*held the principal official situation under the MysoreGovernment. He was suspected. Purneahmade no attempt to screen his near relative, butimmediately suspended him from office, and requestedthat his conduct might be submitted tothe examination of a court, composed soielj/ ofBritish officers. This request of Purneah was compliedwith. The result proved most honourable tothe accused. No method was omitted to repairthe insult which had thus been offered to thefame of the Mysore Government. The commandingofficer was removed, and the Government of MadrasFide page 366.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1806.Lord WilliamBentinck supportsmeasuresof lenity.Infatuated conductof thecommandingofficer at .cras made a request to Purneah that his brothermight be reinstated in office.The most lenient measures had been tried, atthe special recommendation of Lord Wm. Bentinck,who from circumstance felt his positionto be peculiarly embarrassing. The commandattributed to the favourite system ofconciliation, the existing state of affairs, and contendedthat an opposite course would have producedthe desired result. The Supreme Governmentabandoned their plan of amnesty, and sawno refuge but in the dreadful resource of a generalbanishment ; and even the supporters of his lordship'sviews were staggered ; but Lord Wm. Bentinckfelt it right to adhere to his former line ofconduct, believing that the existing commotionswere the effects of the late violent concussion, andthat the system which, on the maturest deliberation,he had preferred, would justify his opinion. Atthe same time his lordship took every proper precaution,by altering the distribution of the army,and bringing together native and European troops,who had been broken into insulated detachments.At this moment a most extraordinary proceedingtook place at Palamcottah. The commandingofficer adopted the resolution of disarming hiswhole corps, separating Mussulman from hindoo,putting arms into the hands of the latter,expelling the former from the fort, and takingpossession of it with the Europeans, and a fewhundredChap. XLl BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 441hundred faithful Hindooss ; at the same time dis islepatching expresses to the commanding officer ofthe subsidiary force in Travancore, and to GeneralMaitland, governor of Ceylon. In his communicationto the latter, he represented, in themost extraordinary terms, that he had detected adesperate conspiracy, which had taken deep rootalong all the coast ; and requested European aidwith all possible promptitude ! It was afforded.But with the same promptitude, and without anycommunication whatever to the Government atMadras, General Maitland dispatched intelligenceof these events from Ceylon direct to England.It was fully believed, and with good reason, thatthis precipitate step of General Maitland finallydecided the measure of recalling Lord Wm. Bentinck,which had been suggested on the first receiptof the accounts of the mutiny at Vellore, accompaniedby all the usual exaggeration of privatereports. The whole of the Palamcottah affair appearedto be a phantom of the imagination. Thearms were restored to the Mahometan troops, whoreadily resumed their duties without showing theleast disaffection. The Governor in Council causeda general order to be issued, condemning the impolicyof the measures adopted at Palamcottahand elsewhere, and calling upon all officers, bothcivil and military, cordially to co-operate in carryinginto effect principles of confidence, respect,and conciliation, towards native troops, whichprinciplesRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. XI.1806.Restoration ofconfidence.Orders fromBengal forbanishing theprisoners objectedto byLord WilliamBentinck.Proceedings ofthe Court ofDirectors onthe affair of themutiny.principles had been recognized by the Governmentof Madras and the Governor-general in Council.Other rumours were set at rest, and terminatedthe disturbances which had for nearly six monthsharassed the peninsula. The panic wore away : thesepoy forgot their fears of an attack upon theirreligion, and the officers were no longer in apprehensionof the safety of their lives, or sleptwith pistols under their pillows.The Bengal Government sent down orders forthe banishment of the prisoners. To this LordWilliam Bentinck objected, as impolitic and hostileto the Government of Madras. The com-mander-in-chief supported the views from Bengal,which he contended was the course of policy herecommended from the first : the majority of theCouncil agreed with Lord William Bentinck inoffering a representation to the Supreme Governmentagainst these views. At this critical moment.Lord Minto reached Madras on his way to Bengalas governor-general. His lordship gave his sanctionto the act of lenity, and agreed with LordWilliam Bentinck in gradually setting the prisonersat liberty.The Court of Directors received the first intelligenceof the mutiny at Vellore on the 17th February1807, in a secret dispatch from Madras.On the 24th, the interval of a week only havingelapsed, a motion was made for the recall ofLord William Bentinck : it was postponed untiltheChap. XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 443the 4th of March, and from that day until the i807.27th of April, when it was —Resolved, by the ballot, That although the zeal and inter Lord Williamgritty of the present governor. Lord William Bentinck, are called,deserving of the Court's approbation : yet, when they considerthe unhappy events which have taken place at Vellore,and also other parts of his lordship's administration whichhave come before them, the Court are of opinion, that it isexpedient, for the restoration of confidence in the Company'sgovernment, that Lord William Bentinck should be removed,and he is hereby removed accordingly.On the 15th April the Court's orders were sentto Madras, removing his lordship, and also SirJohn Cradock, which orders were received at FortSt. George on the 17th September, Mr. Petrie Mr. Petriebeing appointed to take charge of the government, governor.It was desired to continue to Lord William Bentinckthe same honours during his stay at Madrasas when his lordship was governor ; but he de Lord williamlined to receive them, in consideration of the cites conti-termsin which his removal was announced in the honoursdispatch from the Court. It had been usual toallow the superseded governor the nominal possessionof his office until the arrival of his successor,or until he could meet with an opportunityof embarking for England ; his lordship's uncorrupt modeI , . T , , . of his lordship'stons, however, ceased immediately on the receipt removal.of the orders ; no measures had been taken toenable his lordship to return home, and but forthe voluntary kindness of Sir Edward Pellet, hewouldRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chai. XI.1807.would have been obliged to remain, stripped ofall authority, till the departure of the homeward-boundfleet : circumstances which produced animpression unfavourable to his lordship's character,both in the public mind at home, and inthat of the community where he had presided asgovernor.Sir John Crackdemursresigning.Sir John Cradock hesitated to relinquish thecommand of the King's troops ; but the Governmentintimated that they should resort to thepowers vested in them by law, to enforce obedience,and they appointed Major-general HayMcdowell, of his Majesty's service, then on thestaff, to the command of the army.Court's dis. In the dispatch to Madras, communicating thepatch to Ma r-\drascondemna- resolution of recall, the Court observedtory of LordWiiHam Ben. Yf{\\i respect to Lord William Bentinck, of the uprightnessof his intentions, and his regard for our service, wehave no doubt, and we have had pleasure in expressing oursatisfaction with different measures of his government ; butothers, which we felt ourselves obliged in the course of thelast year to disapprove, impaired our confidence in him.No instances were pointed out in which hislordship had incurred disapprobation : it was ageneral censure on the conduct of the latter partof his government. It is true, his lordship's visitto Calcutta was condemned, as militating againstthe principles which, by the Act of Parliament,restricted communications, except through thecouncils ; but it is evident, that the personal representationChap. XL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 445presentation of his lordship at the moment could 807.alone have effected the object regarding the suspensionof the permanent settlement. That questionformed another ground of disapprobation; butit was a question upon which party feeling prevailed,and his lordship's views were as stronglysupported a short time afterwards, as they hadbeen previously disapproved. The employmentof military men in civil duties was another causeof dissatisfaction ; but the state of the countryabsolutely demanded it, and the most efficientinstruments, indeed, the only capable servants,with but very few exceptions, were the military,to carry through the settlement of countries sopeculiar and disorganized as those under the presidencyof Fort St. George.Another and most extraordinary circumstancehad arisen, from the conduct of Sir Henry William,one of the puisne judges at Madras. In anaddress from the bench, he used the most intemperatelanguage towards the Government, andeven personally offensive to the governor, whohad appointed Captain Grant, of his body guard,to the head of the police. A representation wasmade by petition to the King in Council, and SirHenry William came home.Lord William Bentinck having, on his return toEngland, ineffectually endeavoured to obtain fromthe Chairman a specific enumeration of the circumstanceswhich entered into the contemplationof446 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1807. of the Court, at the period of their adopting thewords of the resolution for his removal, addresseda powerful appeal to the Court of Directors. Afterentering into a full explanation of the variouspoints connected with the mutiny at Vellore, hislordship concluded in the following terms : —Lord William There are, gentlemen, occasions in which egotism is notpeafs'to the*" Vanity. I have a right to state my services, however hum-courtfor re- ably I may think of their deserts. The mutiny at Velloredress. . . . .cannot be attributed to me, directly or indirectly. I havebeen removed from my situation, and condemned as anaccomplice, in measures with which I had no further concernthan to obviate their ill consequences : my dismissalwas effected in a manner harsh and mortifying ; and theforms which custom has prescribed to soften the severity ofa misfortune, at all events sufficiently severe, were on thissingle occasion violated, as if for the express purpose ofdeepening my disgrace. Whatever have been my errors,they surely have not merited a punishment, than whicha heavier could hardly have been awarded to the mostwretched incapacity, or the most criminal negligence. Underthese circumstances, I present myself to your notice. Itake it for granted, that the Court of Directors have beenmisinformed, and that to place the question before them inits true light, is to obtain redress. I have been severelyinjured in my character and feelings. For these injuries Iask reparation, if, indeed, any reparation can atone forfeelings so deeply aggrieved, and a character so unjustlycompromised in the eyes of the world. In complying withmy demands, you will discharge, if I may venture tosay so, what is due no less to your own honour than tomine.TheChap. XT] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 447The Court, on the 25th July 1809, 1807.Resolved, — That under the impressions universally entertained,both in India and in Europe, at the breaking out ofthe Vellore mutiny, that it was occasioned by the wanton orneedless violation of the religious usages of the natives, anopinion considerably sanctioned by the Supreme Governmentof Bengal, and even countenanced by the first dispatches ofthe Fort St. George presidency ; and under the impressions,then also general, of the dangers to which the Company'sinterests were exposed, and of the necessity of a change inthe chief officers of civil and military command, as well tovindicate the national respect for the religious usages of ournative subjects, as to make a sacrifice to their violated rights,to restore public confidence, and to relieve the executivebody of the Company, with whom so much responsibilityrested, from the anxiety and apprehension occasioned by sounexampled and alarming a calamity, it became natural andexpedient for them to remove Lord William Bentinck fromthe government, and Sir John Cradock from the command ofthe army of Fort St. George. And although, from the explanationsthat have since been given by those personagesrespectively, and from the further evidences which havecome before the Court, it appears that the orders in questionwere far from being intended by the members of the MadrasGovernment to trench in the least upon the religious tenetsof the natives, and did not in reality infringe them, althoughthe uninformed sepoy were led at length to believe that theydid, yet the effects produced having been so disastrous, andassociated in the native mind with the administration of thethen governor and commander-in-chief; and those officersbesides having, in the judgment of the Court, been defectivein not examining with greater caution and care into the realsentiments and dispositions of the sepoy, before they proceeded448 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI.1807. needed to enforce the orders for the turban, the Court muststill lament, that as, in proceeding to a change in the MadrasGovernment, they yielded with regret to imperious circumstances;so, though they have the pleasure to find thecharges originally advanced against the conduct of thegovernor and commander-in-chief, respecting the violationsof caste, to have been, in the sense then attached to them,misapplied and defective, also in general vigilance and intelligence,yet that, as the misfortunes which happened in theiradministration placed their fate under the government ofpublic events and opinions, which the Court could not control,so it is not now in their power to alter the effects ofthem.Resolved, — That in considering the general character andconduct of Lord William Bentinck, in the presidency ofMadras, the Court view with peculiar regret the unfortunateevents which happened in the time of his administration,and which, from their unexampled alarming nature and vastimpression upon the general mind both in India and Europe,with the baneful consequences apprehended from them, appearedto call instantly for such measures as should bestsatisfy the then state of public opinion, and seem most likelyto restore public confidence and tranquillity ; events whichhad the principal share in dictating those changes whichremoved him from the government of Fort St. George, andsuggested also that the change should be immediate. But inthe abruptness of the order of removal the Court meant nopersonal disrespect to Lord William Bentinck, and extremelyregret that his feelings have been wounded by hisconsidering it in that light. They lament that it should havebeen his fate to have his public situation decided by a crisisof such difficulty and danger as it has been the lot of very fewpublic men to encounter ; a crisis which they have since beenhappy to find was not produced by intended or actual violationsCirAi-.XI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 449tons of caste, as they are now satisfied that Lord William 1807.Bentinck had no share in originating the orders which for atime bore that character, and, by the machinations of enemiesworking upon the ignorance and prejudices of the sepoy,were by them believed to be such violations. The Court cannotbut regret, that as the reality of this belief would havebeen a sufficient motive for rescinding the order respectingthe use of a new turban, which might have had themost beneficial effects, greater care and caution were notexercised in examining into the real sentiments and dispositionsof the sepoy, before measures of severity were adoptedto enforce that order. But in all the measures of moderation,clemency, and consideration, recommended by LordWilliamBentinck after the mutiny, the Court, though not exactlyagreeing with him in the data from which he reasoned, givehim unqualified praise ; and though the unfortunate eventswhich separated Lord William Bentinck from the service ofthe Company cannot be recalled, yet the Court are happyto bear testimony to the uprightness, disinterestedness, zeal,respect to the system of the Company, and, in many instances,success with which he acted in the government ofFort St. George, and to express their best wishes that hisvaluable qualities and honourable character maybe employed,as they deserve, for the benefit of his country.VOL. II. 2 ORISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XTT.CHAPTER XII.1807.Lord Minto atMadras :At Calcutta.His policy.British powerparamountLord Minto touched at Madras on his way toBengal in July 1807. Having sanctioned the measuresof lenity recommended by Lord WilliamBentinck towards the native soldiery who hadbeen concerned in the mutiny at Vellore, he proceededto Calcutta, and entered upon the office ofgovernor-general on the 31st of July. His lordship'ssentiments accorded generally with theprinciple of non-interference, and with the courseof policy opposed to an extension of the Britishpossessions, and to further connexion with thenative states.The British power had, by the course of events,become paramount, and was, in fact, substitutedfor that formerly exercised by the Mogul. A timidcourse of policy was, therefore, incompatible withthe obligations we had incurred by the progressof our arms. This was felt to be the case by theGovernor-general, who acknowledged that thesecurity and tranquillity of our dominions dependedupon the actual superiority of our powerupon the sense which the natives entertainedof it — and upon the comparative weaknessofCuff. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 451of those states individually. The policy of forbear 1807.once followed in the course of the changes in thesupreme councils of India, had only increased thecharge for repressing irruptions of those predatorypowers, whose means of hostility would have beeneffectually subdued by an adherence to a morevigorous and decided course of proceeding.The abandonment of the Rajpoot states to the Effects of re-'' ^ stricture policy.westward of the Jumna, which left the Mahrattachiefs to pursue their own views regarding thesestates, had created no very favourable opinion of thefaith and honour of a power, which aroused them toaction when essential to its own interests, andabandoned them, on the ground of expediency, tothe irritated feelings of their former rulers, whentheir services were no longer necessary.The administration of Lord Minto comprised an Political nego-. '^ nations.extensive field of political negotiation. The measuresof his government may be described underthe internal and external relations on the continentof India, and to the expeditions against the foreignsettlements of our European enemies beyond sea.The measures at Hydrabad arose out of the isodeath of the minister of the Nizam, Meer Allum, ^^*^^ ^ *which took place in 1808. Sooner fool Moola,the chosen minister of the Nizam, endeavoured tomaintain his authority in opposition to RajahChundoo Loll, who was more favourably disposedtowards the British Government, they having supportedhis pretensions to the countenance of the2 G 2 Nizam.452 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Car. XII.1808. Nizam. The instructions from the Home authoritieshad enjoined forbearance in all matters connectedwith the internal affairs of his highness's government,with the exception of giving assistance inreforming the army, and in authorizing the admissionof British officers to train, discipline, andcommand his troops. The necessary influencewhich attached to the British resident from thisstate of things, at Hydrabad, left the power ofthe Nizam merely nominal.The pecuniary interests of the Governmentrested with the Dewan. The Nizam, who felt thathis personal influence had little weight againstthe power of Chundoo Loll, supported as it wasby the British resident, soon ceased to take anyconcern in the conduct of public affairs. A fieldwas thus presented for the growth of those evilswhich subsequent events have so abundantly exhibited.Captain Sydenham having resigned theresidency in 1810, Mr. Russell was appointed hissuccessor ; Mr. Elphinstone was at the same timenominated to Poonahh ; Mr. Jenkins to Nagpoor;and Mr. Metcalfee* with Scindiah.|1808-9. A modification of the treaty of Bassein wasbea^tyTf bIs- ^^^^^ ^ point pressed ou the attention of the Su-sen.prime Government from home. Any relaxationin the provisions of that treaty would havebeen gratifying to the Mahrattass, so far as ittendedThe present Sir Charles Metcalfee, Bart, and G.C.B.f Political Letters from Bengal, August and October 1810.Chap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 453tended to weaken the influence of the British iscis-o.Government atPoonah. The only alternative was,to maintain the alliance on its original basis, or toabandon it altogether. The former secured thepurposes for which it had been formed : the latterwould only have served to revive the ambition ofthe Mahratta state. Whatever had been the reluctanceof the Peishwa to the treaty when first proposed,he had now no desire for any change, ashis highness felt his welfare depended upon theobservance of its stipulations.An impression was at this time entertained at weaof aba-1 1 11 n '11 1 I • 1 T \^wQ.e: of powerhome, that a balance oi power might be established in India.in India for the security of the several states, andfor the interest of the whole. But such a systemhad never existed in that country ; it seemed tobe opposed to the character and constitution ofthose states. Rapine and conquest were theirlegitimate pursuits, being sanctioned by theprinciples of the religion professed by the Mahometanpower, which was dead to all semblanceof public faith, justice, or humanity.The negotiations with the Peishwa were accordinglyconfined to remodelling his troops, and tomeasures for bringing into a better state of subjectionhis refractory tributaries, the southernjaghiredars, who held lands upon condition ofrendering military service.The possessions of the Rajah of Berar had been Ameer Khan.repeatedly menaced by the Patan chief. AmeerKhan,454 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1808-9. Khan, who was a native of Trumbull , in the provinceof Mooradabad. He had been originally retained bya Mahratta officer of the Peishwa, who had the managementof some districts in Malwa. In theseservices he, with his followers, were employed assecundi or local militia, with an average monthlypay of three or four rupees a man, and ten to fifteento him as their commander. He was afterwards,with six horsemen and sixty foot, enlisted by HiyatMahomed Khan, and became engaged with theRajpoots against the Mahrattass, in which contestshe so distinguished himself as to be raised to thecommand of five hundred men. Some differenceswith the Rajpoot chiefs led to his entering theservice of Balaam Anglia, a Mahratta chief, thenengaged in disputes at Bhopaul. In this servicehe had 1,500 men placed under him. Hesubsequently adopted the cause of Jeswunt RaoHolkar, in whose service he rose to the possessionof that power and influence which rendered himso formidable as a predatory chief.He was sole commander of Holkar's army ; buthis Patan followers were in a constant state ofmutiny, and for more than half a year they heldtheir chief under restraint, near Saugor. After thereturn of Holkar from Hindostan, he separatedfrom him and entered the service of the Rajah ofJeypoor, who engaged his aid in an approachingcontest with the Rajah of Joudpoor and BheemSing, for the disputed hand of the daughter oftheChai. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 455the Rajah of Oodeypoor, the family of the highest I8O8.9.rank amongst the Rajpoots. She had been betrothedto Bheem Sing ; but he died, and wassucceeded by Maun Sing, a distant relation. Twoyears afterwards, Sevaee Sing, who had beenminister to Bheem Sing, brought forward a realor supposed son of that prince, in support of whoseclaims he formed a strong party. After manyvicissitudes, in the course of which Maun Sing-hadbeen constrained to flee from Joudpoor, hewas ultimately restored ; but could not feel secureso long as Sevaee Sing, who had already conspiredagainst him, continued alive ; he, therefore,engaged the Patau chief. Ameer Khan, toinarch against him. He made him an advance oftwo lacs of rupees, and promised him future wealthand favour, as the reward of success in this enterprize.Sevaee Sing had been persuaded to promise a visit toAmeer Khan ; but when the hour came the Rajpoot chief,who, probably, had received some intelligence of the designsagainst his life, hesitated. Ameer Khan, when he learnedhis irresolution, mounted, and proceeded with a few followersto the shrine of a Mahometan saint, close to the walls ofNagore. He was here joined by Sevaee Sing, whom icireproached for his fears, and asked him if he thought itpossible, that a man who cherished evil designs could showsuch confidence as he had that day done, by placing himselfin the power of the person he meant to betray ; Severingconfessed his error. Presents, dresses, and even turbans(a pledge of brotherhood) were exchanged, and AmeerKhan456 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1S08-9. Khan swore, at the tomb of the saint, to be faithful to hisnew ally, who was persuaded to go next day to his camp,where splendid preparations were made for his reception,and a number of chiefs appointed to meet him. The troopswere under arms, some on pretext of doing honour to thevisitor, others apparently at exercise. The guns were loadedwith grape, and pointed at the quarters prepared for theRajah, who, with his principal adherents, to the number oftwo hundred, were seated in a large tent, when it was letfall upon them at a concerted signal ; and while the officersof Ameer Khan saved themselves, all the Rajpoots wereinhumanly massacred by showers of grape and musketryfrom every direction. Of seven hundred horse that accompaniedSevaee Sing, and continued mounted near the tent,only two hundred escaped ; the rest were slain, and a numberof Ameer Khan's people, among whom was one of his ownrelations, fell under the promiscuous fire of the cannon.Sevaee Sing had been killed by grape ; but his head was cutoff,and sent to Maun Sing, who rewarded Ameer Khan witha jaghire and a large sum of money.Such is the history given by Sir John Malcolmof one of the leading chiefs who engaged theattention of the British Government, under LordHastings, terminating in a treaty concluded withhim by Mr. Metcalfee, securing to him certainportions of Holkar's territories.Ameer Khan had availed himself of the insanityof Jeswunt Row Holkar, to lodge a claim on behalfof the Holkar state, as a colour for his incursions.He was assisted in his projects by a considerableforce of the Pindarries, with whom he advancedtowards Nagpoor. A British force, under thecommandIChap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 457command of Colonel Close,* was sent against him, I8O8-9.by which he was expelled from the Rajah's territories.He retired into Malwa, where he associatedhimself with the Pindarries. His force daily-increased,with which he threatened the frontiersof the Nizam, the Peishwa, and the Rajah ofBerar. The apprehensions of the British Governmentof the effects likely to be produced by the appearanceof so powerful a body, composed of materialsthat would spread desolation in its course, contemplatedthe establishment of a permanent forceon the Nerbuddah, in order to check the inroads thatmight be attempted, not only against other territories,but even the Company's own possessions.It is in these movements we perceive the inevitable Extension of1 n • T J • X J 1 • British powertendency 01 our power m India to advance, beg inevitable.propelled by the necessity of self-preservation.The affairs of the Baroda presidency, in con isoo.io.nexion with Guzerat and the state of Kattywar, r^^aand c^ze-next engaged the attention of the Governor-gene ^^^*oral. The country of Kattywar was possessed byvarious chieftains, tributaries of the Guicowar, butexercising independent power in the internal ruleof their own limits.Colonel Walker, the resident at Baroda, had Coi. Waiter.been engaged, at the close of the year 1806, in reducingthe expenses of the Guicowar state, and inrecovering the revenue due to it from Kattywar,as well as in exerting his influence for the preventionThe late Sir Barry Close.458 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cj£ai. XII.1809-10. tioii of infanticide, a crime prevalent amongstmany of the chieftains. In the negotiations andmeasures which followed. Colonel Walker manifestedgreat firmness and judgment. He effecteda settlement, by which a body of troops was to beKattyvvar. stationed at Palliate, the Kattywar chieftainsengaging to pay a stipulated annual tribute ofbetween four and five lacs.Operations were carried on against the mostrefractory of the chiefs. The fort of Kindador wastaken without loss, and that of Gallia was stormedon the 8th July. Colonel Walker returned to Englandin 1810, when Major Carnac,* who had actedas resident during his absence in Kattywar, wasconfirmed in that post by the Government, andrecommended to the favourable notice of the Courtof Directors, who consented to his retaining theoffice on trial. In February 1811, the Governmentof Bombay nominated him resident, whichwas confirmed by the Court. Major Carnac successfullyexerted himself in introducing measuresof reform, the benefits of which were so apparent,that the Government desired to ensure their continuanceby his intervention and superintendence.The Peishwa, Bajee Row, having preferredsome claims on the Guicowar, his minister, Gun-ganderShastry, was deputed to Poonahh at theclose of 1813, to effect a settlement.ode. That interminable subject, the affairs of Oude,againNow Sir James Rivet Carnac, Bart.Chap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 459again demanded the interposition of the Governor iso-ii.1 Xt 1 1 1 • • -1 Oudegeneral. His lordship was anxious to prevail uponthe Vizier to introduce a reform in the vicious systemof his administration — but all his efforts provedfruitless. The undue exactions and over-assessmentof the Vizier's lands, caused determinedresistance on the part of the zemindar. The BritishGovernment were called upon to interfere beforein supporting the cause of injustice. Theresident at Lucknow, * who had acted in amanner which called forth the entire approbationof the Governor-general, pointed out, in strong-terms,to the Vizier, the ruinous consequencesthat would inevitably ensue from persevering in asystem of farming his lands at exorbitant rates,and exacting payment by force of arms againsthis oppressed and suffering subjects. The residentapprised the Vizier, that the repeated and positiveinjunctions of the British Government precludedhis compliance with any future requisition fortroops, till entirely satisfied of the justice andexpediency of the measures which they might berequired to support.Every endeavour to induce the Vizier to make asettlement, under lease, upon fair and equitableterms, was ineffectual : his inordinate desire ofaccumulating wealth being opposed to any planfor advancing his own permanent interests or thehappiness of the people. fTheThe late Colonel John Baillie.t Political Letter from Bengal, October 1811.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. XII.1809-10.External politicalrelations.Mission toScinde.The external relations on the continent of Indiacomprehended negotiations with Scinde, Bushire,Persia, Caubul, Lahore, Nepaul, and Ava.The policy of effectually guarding against theinfluence of the French, whose views were directedtowards the East, led to a mission from theGovernor-general to the Ameer of Scinde, underMr. Hanker Smith, who concluded an agreementon the 9th August 1809. It was one of friendship,and excluded the tribe of the French from settlingin that country. The Ameer, Gholam Ali, wasdesirous, as a proof of cordiality on the part of theBritish Government, that they should aid him inthe conquest of Cutch. This proposition being atvariance with the principles of justice and moderationby which the Governor-general was actuated,the Ameer was apprised that the Governmenthad no desire to extend its dominions in anydirection. He was likewise informed, that theterritories which had been subdued by the Britisharms, were conquered from chiefs who employedtheir resources to subvert the British power, andeven a large portion of the conquered territorieshad been restored to the vanquished enemies, orgranted to others. The object of the British Governmentwas to maintain peace and tranquillity ; tocultivate relations of amity and concord with surroundingstates; to respect their rights, and toguard its own.Intelligence having reached the Governor-general,Chap. XII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 461neral, at the close of 1807, of a design entertained isoT-aby the French for invading India, with a prospect p^'sTaV"of co-operation on the part of the Turkish andPersian states, Lord Minto appointed Colonel Coi. Malcolm'^ *■ appointed toMalcolm his political agent, investing him with Persia.plenipotentiary powers in Persia, the PersianGulf, and Turkish Arabia, by which the authorityof the separate political agency possessed bythe residents at Bagdad, Bussorah, and Bushire,was suspended; Colonel Malcolm being authorized,whenever he should see fit for the benefitof the public service, to take upon him the powersof resident at either of those places. He wasfurnished with credentials as envoy, or ambassadorto the court of Persia, and to the Pacha ofBagdad, in the event of his finding it practicableto proceed to either of those courts. He reachedBushire in May 1808, from whence he transmittedto Bengal an able historical review of the progressof the French intrigues in Persia, and of the mili- ^^^^^^ Jnfl«-*-' once paramounttry operations of Russia on the north-west frontier i" Persia.of that kingdom. The ascendancy of the Frenchcouncils at the Persian court rendered abortiveall attempts to procure the reception of the Britishmission. Colonel Malcolm accordingly quittedBushire, leaving his secretary, Captain Parley,to act in any emergency, and returned to Calcutta.To check attempts of the French to establish „. i.^oT-a*■ Mission of Sirtheir influence in the East, aided by that of Russia, Harford jones•^ ^ to Persia fromMinisters England.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XIL1807-8.1808-9.Colonel Malcolmproceedsto Persia.Sir GoreMoseley.Embassy toCaubul.Ministers dispatched Sir Harford Jones,* as envoyextraordinary and plenipotentiary, to Tehran,where he effected a treaty, in virtue of whichthe French embassy was dismissed. Instructionshaving been sent at the same time to the Governor-generalto adopt measures of precaution. LordMinto deputed Colonel Malcolm to the Arabianand Persian courts. That officer arrived in Bushirein February 1810, and assumed, in obedienceto his instructions, the functions of envoy andplenipotentiary on the part of the Indian Governmentto the Persian court. He met with a mostgracious reception; his residence there was notof long duration, as he learned that another missionwas on the eve of departure from Europe, insuccession to that of Sir Harford Jones, with whomColonel Malcolm, so long as he remained, cooperatedin the most cordial manner in advancingthe public interests. Sir Gore Moseley proceededon his embassy in 1810.Lord Minto had taken early measures, shortlyafter his arrival in Bengal, for securing the serviceof an intelligent native to obtain correct informationof what was passing in Caubul, and in thecountries between the Indus and Persia.A revolution had taken place in Caubul, occasionedby the rebellion of the king's nephew,prince Canaan. The king, Shujah-ool-Moolk, attemptedto induce the chiefs in Molten to joinhimThe present Right Hon. Sir Harford Jones Bridges, Bart.CnAP.Xn.] BRITISH POWER IN India 463him and oppose Meyer Shah, then in possession I8O8-9.of the country, from the city of Caubul to Kandahar.The Hon. Mountstuart Elphinstone was dis Mission of m., Elphinstone.patched as ambassador extraordinary to the King ;he was graciously received : a treaty being concludedin June 1809, in which the co-operationof Caubul was secured against the designs of theFrench, which power was declared in the treatyto have entered into a confederacy against Caubul,with ulterior views on India. The king wasshortly afterwards defeated, and compelled to fly,with only thirty horsemen, by Shah Mahomed,who was in possession of the capital in September1810, the king being then at Peshawur. Hismajesty having assembled some troops with theaid of the soubahdar of Cashmere, advancedagainst Shah Mahomed, but was again defeated,and obliged to fly to Attack. Caubul wasthreatened with invasion by the Persians in 1812,who had also menaced Herat. Shah Mahomedfailed in his attempts against the hill people, andShujah-ool-Moolk recovered from him Peshawur.Any thing beyond a treaty of the least bindingand extensive character, with a state subject tosuch vicissitudes, was considered both unadvisableand impolitic.Unmeet Sing, the chief of Lahore, had at this Runjeetsing.time made advances towards the confines of theCompany's north-west frontier. CircumstancesinducedRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1808-9.Treaty withUnmeet Sing.iinduced the Governor-general to hold communicationswith him in the early part of 1808. Supportedby a force under the command of ColonelOchterlony, they terminated satisfactorily ; a mutualdesire being manifested to maintain a friendlyintercourse and correspondence.The Government, in August 1809, effected atreaty, through the instrumentality of Mr. metcalf,vv^ith Unmeet Sing, in which that chieftainagreed not to maintain on the north bank of theSutleje more troops than were necessary for theinternal duties of his territory: the British Governmentwas not to interfere, nor to have anyconcern with the territories and subjects to thenorth of that river. In the spring of 1809, a negotiationtook place between Bye Paul Sing, achief to the south of the Sutlej, and UnmeetSing, for the cession by the latter of some landssouth of the Sutlej, in favour of Bye Paul, whowished the British Government to guarantee thetransaction. This was declined ; but the Governmentmanifested a disposition to maintain him init, provided he effected the cession.Unmeet Sing's authority, north of the Sutlej,was now fully acknowledged. He manifested themost amicable conduct towards the British Government,expelling Philo Sing, who had attackedLieutenant White, an officer in the Company'sservice. The Governor-general, in order to cementthe harmony existing between the two states,presentedChap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 465presented Unmeet Sing with a carriage and a isoao.pair of horses, with which he was much pleased.After raising the siege of Mooltaun, for the sumof two lacs and a-half of rupees, that stateagreeing to deliver to him twenty war horsesand to furnish a body of horse, he returned toLahore.*The affairs of Nepaul had begun to press them Nepauuselves upon the attention of the Supreme Government.The conduct of the rajah had beenmost oppressive towards his subjects, twelve hundredhaving emigrated in the summer of 1806.At the close of 1808, the Supreme Governmentbecame involved with the rajah in boundary disputes.In writing to the Court, the Governmentremarked, that the encroachments of the rajahmight be easily repelled, without involving anyserious difficulty.* In 1810, the Government was iso-ii.constrained to demand the relinquishment of some incursions of*■ the Nepaul eselands belonging to the zemindar of Bimnus^ghur, into the com-° ^ oo ' any's districts.who was a subject of the British Government.The rajah was apprized that force would be resortedto, if he hesitated in making restitution.The Goorkhas, at the same time, evinced a dispositionto encroach upon the Seik chieftains to thesouth of the Sutlej, who were under British protection.In 1811 they advanced to the district ofKyneghur,Political Letter, 20th August 1810.f Political Letter, 21st January 1809.VOL.11. 2 H466 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XII.Kyneghur, and actually erected a fort in the Company'sterritories.*1812-ia In May 1812 the Bengal Government apprizedthe Court of Directors, that there was no prospectof an amicable settlement of the disputes with theNepaulese. Restitution was subsequently demanded,and, at the close of the year, a militaryforce was required to expel them from Bootwul.Major Bradshaw was deputed, in May 1813, tosettle the boundary disputes, by whom *' the encroachmentswhich they had made were clearlydemonstrated, "fThese proceedings were a prelude to the hostilitieswhich eventually followed : affording anotherinstance of our having fallen into the worst oferrors, viz, that of undervaluing an enemy.1809-10. From the north-eastern borders of the Britishpossessions we travel down to Arrack. The neutralityof its coast had been infringed, in an attackby a French ship on an island situated betweenHecuba and the main land : a circumstance whichled to a mission from Ava to Calcutta, for the purposeof ascertaining the cause, and to expostulateagainst the proceeding. Lieut. Canning was selectedby the Government to proceed on a mission toUmmarapoora, to explain the circumstance, as wellas the blockade resolved upon against the Frenchislands.Political Letter, May 1811.t Political Letter, 1st October 1813.African.Chap. XII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 467islands. He reached Rangoon in October 1809, isoo.io.from whence the King of Ava desired that the missionmight be forwarded to his capital in the mostdistinguished manner.The incursions of some of the natives, termed Mimes from^ Burma.Thugs, from Burma, into the Company's territoryin Chittagong, with other circumstances, presentedobstacles to a satisfactory termination of themission. Disputes were continually occurring onthe frontiers of Chittagong and Tipperary, until atlength the two countries became involved in war.On Sir George Barlow's appointment as go causes of dis., . . 1 1 ,^ r^ 1 content in coastvernon-general beg vacated by the Crown, he army.was nominated, shortly after the recall of LordWilliam Bentinck, to the government of Madras,and reached that presidency in the month of December1807. During the provisional administrationof Mr. Petrie, personal questions had arisenwhich occasioned considerable party feeling.Some of them were connected with the grain department; and others arose out of the settlement ofthe Carnatic debts, under an arrangement adoptedwith the sanction of Parliament in 1805. Theviews of Sir George Barlow differed from thoseentertained by Mr. Petrie, who still remained amember of the council in the new government.The measures consequent on these differencescaused much public agitation.At the same time that Sir George Barlow was ^''* p^^*"^^o Barlow.appointed governor, Lieut-general Hay Mcdowell, General2 H 2 of ^' ""'''*"•RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.The commandatMadras excludedfromcouncil.1809. of his Majesty's service, then on the staff atMadras, and who had served long in India, wasnominated by the Court of Directors commandin succession to Sir John Cradock.The president of the Board of Control,* on recommendingGeneral M'Dowall for the office, suggestedthat he should be appointed, as usual, to aseat in council. The Court had determined, upongeneral views, for the government of a subordinatepresidency not to appoint the commander-in-chiefto a seat in council. Without impugningthe motives which influenced the executive bodyin this exercise of their undoubted prerogative,the exclusion was unprecedented, and most unfor-Effects. tunate in its effects. The moment selected foracting upon the new principle was not wellchosen. Until Lord Cornwallis proceeded to Indiaas governor-general and commander-in-chief in'1786, the law provided that the commander-in-chiefshould have the seat of second member incouncil ; but when his lordship held the twooffices, an act was specially passed, leaving itoptional with the Court to appoint a commander-in-chiefto council or not. This option had neverbeen exercised to the exclusion of any officerholding that station until the instance occurred inthe person of General Mcdowell. When MarquisCornwallis proceeded to India for the secondtime, in 1805, with the two appointments o1governor-theRight Hon. George Tierce.Chap. XII.] BRITISH POWER JN INDIA. 469governor-general and commander-in-chief, Lord 1809.Lake was superseded in the office of commander-in-chiefin India, and nominated provincial com-mander-in-chief; but in order to retain his lordshipin council, an act was specially passed admittingof a provincial commander-in-chief being appointedto a seat, although the office of commandmight be held by the governor-general.This circumstance was, perhaps, not sufficientlyattended to, as Lord Lake had resumed the officeof commander-in-chief on the death of Lord Cornwallisin October 1805, and it was not until 1807that General Mcdowell's exclusion took place.The proceeding towards General Mcdowell wasthus more strongly marked, and he appears tohave felt that it bore that character, as, in themonth of November, when intelligence of it reachedMadras, he addressed General Sir George Hewitt,the commander-in-chief in Bengal, desiring torelinquish the command at Madras, for the pur Gen. mcDow-pose of returning to Europe. Sir George Hewitt ?esi^!"^^ ^did not doubt his own competency to acquiescein General Mcdowell's request, but intimatedthat the regular channel was through the Govern-norand Council of the presidency to which hebelonged. It does not appear what intermediatesteps General Mcdowell adopted in the intervalbetween December 1807, when he received thecommunication from Sir George Hewitt, and the15th470 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI I.1809. 15th January 1809, when he addressed Sir GeorgeBarlow as the governor of Madras. In this letterhe adverted in strong terms to his exclusion from aseat in council, and stated that sixteen months'experience had satisfied him that he could notremain, with the prospect of any advantage to thepublic service ; he, therefore, determined that hisname should not be branded with the reproach ofhaving been the first general officer who retaineda situation after all hope of a restoration to itsformer distinction had expired. The Governmentacceded to his wish to resign, and ordered thesenior general-officer in the Company's service torepair to Madras. On the following day GeneralGen. M^Dow- Mcdowell addressed the Government underall's address to . i /. t r -tGovernment. strongly excited feelings ou measures 01 a militarynature against Travancore having been discussedand decided upon in council, whilst he was left inignorance of the circumstances ; also suggestingthe appointment of a different officer from theparty selected by Government for service in Tramquarter, vaucorc, and at the same time submitting a letteriTarrest^"^'^^ from the officer he recommended. The generalwas officially apprised on the 18th, that the Governmentabstained from all comment on the viewswhich he had expressed, but that the letter fromthe officer he had named was so disrespectfulin its terms, that the Government doubted whetherthey could permit him to remain in the stationhe then filled. A further letter from GeneralMcdowellChap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 471Mcdowell was received by the Government, refer issuingto his former opinion regarding the intendedmeasures to the southward, and intimating thathe should feel inconvenience from the officer selectedby Government being detached on the service,as he had seen fit to place his senior, thenquarter-master general, under arrest. To this theGovernment replied, that as he had placed thequarter-master-general in arrest, the assistantquarter-master-general would not be ordered onthe service for which he was originally selected.On the 19th, General Mcdowell, alluding tohis intention to quit the presidency, declared thathe had not been consulted on the military measuresin contemplation ; that he felt his situationmost painfully embarrassing, and that if, in perusingthe papers he had asked for, he should discoverthat the Court of Directors actually meantthat their commander-in-chief should be a merecypher, he should every hour have greater causeto rejoice that he had resigned a service, which,under such a position, he could only tend to degrade.He then pointedly alluded to the fact of Mr.Petrie, who had more than once filled the chair,having consulted him on all military measures, forwhich, he stated, he felt gratitude to that gentleman; he then expressed his belief that the officerwhose letter he had forwarded never intendeddisrespect towards the Government, and trustedtheir displeasure would be carried no farther. ThereplyRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1809. reply from the Government stated, that they werenot aware that any measures connected with theintended service had been withheld from him, andthat the whole of the papers would be sent to him.They expressed a desire, on all occasions to evincethe most scrupulous attention to his Excellency'sopinions : at the same time, there were occasionswhen the Governor in Council might feel it rightto exercise his own discretion in issuing directions,and they desired to avoid all further discussion onthe subject.This point being disposed of, the matter connectedwith the quarter-master general next cameunder consideration. That officer had representedto the Government the circumstances which hadled to his being placed in arrest. He appealed tothem for support and protection, and for the defenceof his public character. It appeared that hehad been called upon by the preceding com-mander-in-chief, Sir John Cradock, to report uponsome details connected with the department. Amongst other matters, hehad recommended the abolition of the '* Tent Contract,"as a system which might place an officer'spublic and private interests in opposition to eachother. This was deemed by the commander-in-chief,and by other officers, to reflect injuriouslyon the character of the commanding officer ofcorps.The Government called upon the Company'slawChap. Nit.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 473law officer for his opinion on the legality of the pro 1809.feeding-that officer stated that the paper in questiondid not contain any matter which could be theproper subject of the charges preferred against thequarter-master-general : that they ought not to besustained, and that the quarter-master-generalwas entitled to the support of the authority underwhom he acted to prevent his being brought totrial. The judge advocate-general fully supportedthe foregoing opinion, and observed, that*' whenever the law enjoins a duty, it protectsthe agent in the legal discharge of it."The Government earnestly recommended thecommander-in-chief to release the .General M'Dowall having been furnished withsome documents connected with that officer'srepresentation, not only declined a compliancewith the recommendation of Government, butintimated that it was his intention to prefer anadditional charge against the quarter-masters generalfor disrespect to the commander-in-chief.The Government immediately addressed a letter Government. , . p , . order release ofto the commander m-chief, ordering the release fromof the quarter-master-general from arrest. General arrest.M' Do wall having forwarded to the Governmentan address to the Court of Directors, from sundryofficers of the Madras army, setting forth certaingrievances, and amongst them that of the '* com-mander-in-chief's exclusion from council," embarked474 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1809. barked for Europe on the 28th January, withoutall embarks for tendering his formal resignation. He also leftlerven'/offen- behind a general order to be issued, in which theoXf to^be conduct of the quarter-master-general was stronglypublished. condemned. It having been published by thedeputy-adjutant-general, in the absence of hisprincipal, the Government issued a general order,removing General M'Dowall from the office ofcommander-in-chief.Such were the circumstances which led to theulterior proceedings of the European officers ofthe coast army — proceedings utterly unjustifiableunder any circumstances ; but which had been,in a great measure, promoted by the misguidedand reprehensible conduct of their commander-in-chief,whose duty it was to have set an exampleof obedience to the civil authority. That a causeof grievance existed cannot be denied, but that itwas an adequate defence for the mischievouscourse pursued by General Mcdowell, no one can,for a moment, contend.There ought not to be, in any well-regulatedsystem of government, grounds for a grievance,the removal of which cannot be secured by aproper representation to the constituted authorities.But for an army to take into its own handsthe power of redressing, what they themselves seefit to consider as a grievance, is incompatible withthe existence of all civil government.It is quite unnecessary to enter into any detailedaccountChap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 475account of the transactions of a deeply painful isocharacter that followed, but which have long sincepassed away ; they happily terminated in theunconditional submission of the officers to thecivil authority. The gallant and meritorious servicessubsequently rendered by those officers, inarduous and trying campaigns, afford the mostconvincing proofs that it was the error of the headand not of the heart, instigated by a misguidedchief, that led them into a momentary departurefrom a right course of action.Lord Minto, in the belief that his presencewould tend to restore a better state of things,proceeded in person to Madras, which he reached Lord Minto*■ * proceeds toonthe 11th September. His lordship had the Madras,gratification of finding that matters were revertingto a more satisfactory condition ; and in congratulatingthe Home authorities on the conclusion ofthe dangerous troubles which had agitated thepresidency, he ascribed the issue to the inflexiblefirmness of Sir George Barlow, which had preservedthe authority of legal government unbrokenand unimpaired by the dangerous example ofprosperous revolt.The necessity of mutual accommodation and His lordship'sjudicious re-concessions in the controversies and contentions marks.of mankind," his lordship remarked, *' renderscompromise indispensable amongst the elements /of human intercourse. But military sedition andrevolt was among the few exceptions to this salutary-/476 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1809. try and healing principle. The revolt of an army,of which the object is to overawe and control theJ Government, excludes compromise, being one ofthe evils for which the only remedy is a firm,vigorous, and determined opposition."The Governor-general bore the strongest testimonyto the conduct of Sir George Barlow, whichhe deemed worthy of the most distinguished countenance.An unfounded but rancorous disaffectionhad been an active principle with his opponents,and appears to have been caused by the steadyand inflexible discharge of his public duty.Throughout the proceedings, his Majesty's troopsand the whole of the native army manifested thestrongest feelings of devotion to the Government.There was one circumstance connected with theseevents which merits particular notice. Purneah,Admirable con the dcwau of the Mysore Government, who hadneah°the"de- acquired SO high a place in the estimation of Sirwan of Mysore. Arthur Wellesley,* and by whose excellent advicehe was implicitly governed, was frequently placedin most trying and difficult circumstances. Buthe invariably exhibited the warmest attachmentto the interests of the British Government. Anattempt was made by the field officer who hadpossession of the fortress of Seringapatam, toinduce Purneah to follow other counsel than thatgiven him by the Hon. Arthur Cole, the resident ;for which purpose he wrote to him that all hisdisposable♦ Vide pages 366 and 439.Chap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 477disposable articles were in the fort, and depend i809.dent upon the manner in which he conductedhimself. Purneah replied :That the Rajah's property and his was the same as theGovernor-generals, who was the preserver of both. Thathe had always considered the Resident's orders as one withthose of the Government ; and that, let what would happen,he should always continue faithful to his engagements to theCompany.Some horses being much wanted for H.M. 22dDragoons, during the foregoing unhappy proceedings,and few being bred in Mysore, Purneahsuggested the offer of the Rajah's stable horse,550 of which were fit for immediate work. Theywere accordingly placed at the disposal of Government.On delivering them over to the Resident,Purneah assured him that every opportunity offered himof evincing his attachment and gratitude to the BritishGovernment, added a new term of years to his life, and anadditional increase to his happiness.This exemplary conduct, at such a trying moment,was pointedly acknowledged by the Homeauthorities, iso iiThe French interests and influence in the East Reduction ofI . . 11-11 /» 1 Mauritius andwere, at this time, reduced by the capture of the Spice islands.Mauritius and of the Spice Islands, belonging tothe Dutch in the Eastern seas.An expedition, at the requisition of the select Expedition to^ ^ Macao.committee of supercargoes, was likewise sent,under478 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XIL1810-11. under Admiral Drury, to take possession of theIsland of Macao, at the entrance of the Cantonriver, in 1809. The acquisition was effected : butthe impressions produced in the minds of theChinese led to a stoppage of the trade ; a measurewhich spoke more forcibly than any other thatcould have been adopted for the maintenance ofthe Chinese authority.They would listen to nothing less than a withdrawalof the whole of the naval and militaryforces, which accordingly took place. Whenthe Court of Directors heard of the transaction,they expressed their strongest displeasureat the want of judgment shown by the selectcommittee in their communication to the SupremeGovernment. The president, and some othermembers of the select committee, were removed.A gentleman who had formerly filled the president'schair, was sent out to resume that station,as offering the best proof to the Chinese Government,that the measures which had been adoptedfor seizing on Macao,* were unsanctioned, anddisapproved of in England.Capture of The important measure which closed LordMinto's administration was the conquest of Javaand its dependencies. It was an achievement toohonourable to his lordship's government, as wellas to the instrument whom he selected for theenviable privilege of first diffusing the blessings ofBritish• Fide " British and Foreign intercourse with China."Chap. XII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 479British rule over a mild and simple people, who iso-ii.had been subjected to the severities of a colonialpolicy, administered with all the baneful resultswhich marked the government of its first Europeanconquerors, to be passed over without some moreparticular notice. An empire which, for two centuries,had contributed to the power, prosperity,and grandeur of one of the principal and mostrespected states of Europe, was wrested from theshort usurpation of the French Government, addedto the dominions of the British Crown, and convertedfrom a seat of hostile machinations andcommercial competition, into an augmentation ofBritish power and prosperity.In the year 1808, the late Sir Stamford (then services of Mr.Mr.) Barnes, was secretary to the Government of dress of thePrince of Wales' Island. The arduous nature ofhis duties, arising out of the arrangements consequenton the formation of a new establishment,many of the members having been attacked by illness,constrained him to seek repose and renovationin a change of scene. Mr. Raffles accordinglyrepaired to Malacca ; there he acquired the mostample and complete information connected withthe general trade, and islands forming the EasternArchipelago — the power and influence of the Dutchsettlements in those seas, the value of those islands,with reference to the trade between Europe and thekingdoms and countries situated to the eastward ofthe continent of India and the Malayan peninsula.His480 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XII.1810-11. His report of the fortifications of Malacca inducedthe Penang Government to refrain from carryinginto effect their demolition, a measure which hadbeen ordered with the view of deterring other Europeansfrom settling there, as well as to improve thenewly established settlement of Penang, by compellingthe natives to resort thither. The populationof Malacca was twenty thousand souls, attachedto it by birth and possessions, without the leastprospect of their being induced to emigrate. Thesecret committee of the Court of Directors applaudedthe zeal of Mr. Raffles, and sanctionedthe maintenance of the fortifications. Havingvisited the Governor-general at Calcutta on mattersconnected with the Eastern islands, he atthis time forwarded to Lord Minto, who was thenat Madras, a paper on the Malayan Archipelago.So highly did the Governor-general estimate thetalents of its author, that his lordship wished tohave nominated him to the government of theMoluccas, but previous arrangements interferedwith this intention.The extension of the French influence, andtheir possession of Java, from whence they couldcarry on their designs with both secrecy and facility,induced Mr. Raffles to submit his views onthe importance of reducing the resources of theenemy in the Eastern seas. The document carriedconviction to the mind of the Governor-general,who determined without delay to take measuresforChap. XII. ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 481for the conquest of Java, and to proceed on the iii.expedition in person, at least so far as Malacca,where Mr. Raffles, in the character of his lordship'sagent in the Malay states, acquired the mostminute intelligence, with the view of furtheringthe success of the intended measure.His lordship left Calcutta in the Monitor, Lord Minto*■ ^ proceeds tocruiser, for Fort St. George, on the 9th March Madras, andfrom thence tor1811. The troops from Bengal were to embark on Malacca.the 15th or 16th. On the 18th April his lordshipreached Penn g. The extent of information withwhich Mr. Raffles was enabled to furnish the on all points relating to countriesof which scarcely any thing was known, and thecomprehensive views with which he accompaniedhis reports, proved of infinite value.An incident that occurred at this stage of the judgment of. ,11 .1 - ^ . Mr. Raffles inproceedings marked the judgment and deci- selecting thesion of Mr. Raffles. The late period when theexpedition reached Malacca, caused some anxietyon account of the favourable monsoon, whichwas nearly terminating. A question arose as towhich of two passages should be followed, inthe course towards Java. The point called for animmediate determination ; the choice was to bemade between the northern route, round Borneo,which, from the little known of the navigation ofthose seas, was thought to be the only practicableone, especially for a fleet ; but how the dangersof the Barnabas passage, where only one shipVOL. II. 2 I couldRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1811.Governor-general'sconfidencein Mr.Raffles.could pass at a time, were to be avoided, no onecould suggest. Mr. Raffles had strongly recommendedthe south-west passage, between Cara-mata and Borneo, and '' staked his reputation onthe success which would attend it." The navalauthorities were opposed to it ; but Lord Mintoreposed full confidence in the judgment and localinformation of Mr. Raffles, by embarking with himin H.M. ship the Modeste, commanded by Capt.the Hon. George Elliott,* on the 18th June 1811,and leading the way on Mr. Raffles', sole responsibility.The result was entirely successful ; thefleet, consisting of ninety sail, was in six weeksin sight of Batavia, without a single accident. TheModeste alone would have done it a fortnight sooner.The expedition, under General Sir Samuel Auch-duty, landed on the 4th August, and the finalcapitulation took place on the 18th September.Lord Minto remained in the island six weeksafter the conquest, engaged in forming the government,and laying down principles for administeringits affairs. Its abandonment to thenatives had been seriously contemplated by otherauthorities, after all the immediate advantageshad been derived from its conquest ; but his lordshipchecked such an idea, and assumed, on his ownresponsibility, the power of acting upon morebenevolent and enlightened principles.The government of this newly-acquired empirewasNow Admiral Elliott.CKAr.XIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 483was conferred upon Mr. Raffles in the most iii.honourable manner by the Governor general, in Mr. Raffles -^ pointed lieutof the services he had rendered, governor.and in consideration of his peculiar fitness for theoffice. Mr. Raffles was designated lieut. governor.The charge was of a most arduous, extensive,and responsible nature. The difficulties were enhancedby his having become an object of jealousyto the Bengal civil service, the members of whichconsidered that a valuable prize was bestowed onone whom they looked upon as an alien, and thatit ought legitimately to have been held by a memberof their own establishment ; he had, likewise,to encounter similar feelings, arising from othercauses, on the part of a distinguished member of thenewly formed government in Java : but, to thehonour of the Dutch gentleman who had belongedto the previous council, and who was now associatedwith Mr. Raffles, the lieut-governor experiencedhis warmest support.Scarcely two months had elapsed from thedeparture of Lord Minto for Calcutta, when thecommander of the forces, who had highly distinguishedhimself in services consequent on the surrender,and had received the marked thanks ofthe Government, preferred some serious charges charges againstagainst the lieut-governor. Differences had occurredbetween Mr. Raffles and General Gillespie on theextent of the military establishment ; the lieut. -governor advocating retrenchments as most consolI 2 nant484 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1811. nant to the views of the Governor-general, whilstreenter!" ^ the general urged the increase of the militaryforces. The charges against the lieut-governorembraced a variety of points. The result of aninvestigation was in every way most honourable tohim, and the measures terminated in GeneralNightingale being appointed to succeed GeneralGillespie; thus 'relieving his government fromobstacles it had become next to impossible to surmount,and himself from personal vexation verydifficult to live under"*Hisraeasnres Relieved from this embarrassment, the lieutgovernmentsound and govcmor procccdcd to carry into effect the variousmeasures which marked his successful and enlightenedadministration. He had to contend withgreat financial difficulty ; the condition of thepublic resources being most deplorable. The difficultywas greatly aggravated by inevitable hostilitieswith Palambang and Djojocarta. Reliefwas devised in the sale of lands and in the reformof the currency. A system of land-revenue wasintroduced, founded on the same principle as arotary settlement, with which Mr. Raffles wasat that time entirely unacquainted. The Homeauthorities augured well of it, believing that thecolony would soon have been brought to liquidateits own expenses by the lieu t-governor's ** lenient,mild, and equitable administration." His regulationsalso for the judicial department and thepolice,Letter from the Governor-general to Mr. Raffles.Chap.XII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 485police, developed principles that were acknow- ^^^^*ledged to be sound, and entitled to much praise ;as were his views respecting Borneo, Barca, andJapan. His communications, both to his Majesty'sGovernment and to the Court of Directors, werefrequent and ample, but he could obtain no directinstructions upon scarcely any one point, savingthat of economy ; which was pressed with theearnestness attached to so important a point inthe affairs of the Company, who had at that timebeen petitioning Parliament for some advances onaccount of their disbursements for the publicservice.The affairs of Europe, too, at this juncture wereof too deep an interest to admit of much attentionbeing given to those of Java or Japan, the considerationof those subjects being at the moment asforeign to the minds of the King's ministers, as theplaces were distant to which they related. The uncertaintyuncertainty, too, whether the colony would be re- wTnT^finsTnic-gained by the Crown or transferred to the Com- EngLnd!™any, was another most unfavourable circumstanceconnected with his administration ; but, notwithstandingthese adverse events, his government ofJava presents an honourable instance of Britishrule. It exhibited the most liberal, beneficent, andphilanthropic principles. To notice one which hadfor its object the welfare of the natives, Mr. Rafflesintroduced vaccination, and set apart some landsunder the designation of the ** Jennerian lands,"forI486 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XII.1811. for the support of the system, which has beentToduced'''" '"' f*^^^d ^^ great a blessing to the natives not only ofJava but the surrounding states. He promotedliterature and science, and encouraged every plancalculated to advance the happiness of the people.He was a strenuous advocate for instructing thenatives, and for diffusing knowledge by all possiblemeans. He checked gaming ; he reprobated slagof opium, very ; and deeply deplored the demoralizingeffects arising from the curse inflicted upon thenatives by the introduction and use of opium. Hedescribed it as having struck deep into the habits,andextendeditsmalignant influence tothemoralsofthe people, by perpetuating its power in degradingtheir character and enervating their energies. Itat all times acts as a slow poison, undermining thefaculties of the soul and the constitution of thebody, rendering a person unfit for all kind oflabour, and an image of the brute creation. Theuse of the drug is so much the more dangerousbecause a person who is once addicted to it cannever leave it off.Dutch commis The Dutch commissioners who sat at the Haguesinners oppose • -, no 1 Jits importation. in 1803, remarked:That no consideration of pecuniary advantage ought toweigh with the European Government in allowing its use ;and they added,If we were to follow the dictates of our own heart onlyand what moral doctrine and humanity prescribe, no law,however severe, could be contrived which we would notproposeIChap. XI I.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 487propose to prevent at least that, in future, any subject of this 181 1.republic or of the Asiatic possessions of the state, should bedisgraced by dealing in that abominable poison. Yet weconsider this as absolutely impracticable, at present, withrespect to those places not subject to the state.It is, therefore, necessary at once and entirely to abolishthe trade and importation of opium, and to prohibit thesame under the severest penalties that the law permits, sinceit is a poison.The administration of the Earl of Minto, so faras regarded the political measures on the continentof India, was governed by the principles inculcatedfrom home. It was intended as a healingcourse to the lengthened state of hostilities in whichthe country had been so long involved, and as arelief from the financial pressure with which it hadbeen accompanied ; but the embers of a confederatedfeeling hostile to the British power were onlysmothered for a time, whilst the foreign conquests,so honourable to his lordship's judgment, necessarilyled to extensive disbursement in reducing thecolonial influence of the enemy, far heavier thanthe wars with the native states. The latter terminatedin the permanent extension of our dominionson the continent of India, whilst the foreign expeditionsgave us but temporary possession ofcolonies, which had no sooner experienced theblessings of British rule than they were restoredto their original possessors.488 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuap. Xlll.CHAPTER XIII.1813. Whatever estimate this country had formedof the value of our territorial possessions in India,Parliament appeared to consider that it dischargedits obligations towards that empire, by ratifying theterms agreed upon between the Government andthe Company, for a renewal of their exclusive privilegesof trade. The mercantile interests of theUnited Kingdom, more immediately connectedwith the commerce of the East, availed themselvesof each renewal to attempt some diminution ofthe privileges enjoyed by the Company, as theycontended that the country at large had a justright to participate in the India trade.These views had been powerfully urged forsome time previously to the measures of 1813,when the first great inroad in the Company'sexclusive privileges took place.Negotiation for Some Correspondence regarding a renewal ofCharter. the Charter had occurred so far back as the year1808, and was resumed at intervals, in communicationsrelative to the financial and other branchesof the Company's affairs.OnChap. XIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 489On the 22d of February 1813, a petition was isis.presented by the Company to Parliament, settingforth the principles upon which the union of theircommercial and political privileges had beenmaintained, and should be continued ; the commercialmonopoly being an instrument in thehands of the Company for political purposes, inthe government of India.On the 13th of March the House of Commons, Resolutions ofon the motion of Lord Castlereagh, resolved itself ^onT''^^''""into a committee, when his lordship submittedsundry resolutions, containing a modification ofthe system. Evidence was adduced at the instanceof the Company, at the bar of the House, commencingwith the examination of Mr. Hastings,on the 30th of March ; by which it was attemptedto be shown, that the views entertained by theopponents of the Company's exclusive privilegeswere fallacious, whilst the resort of parties toIndia, and the opening of the trade, would beproductive of the most serious effects to the stabilityof the British power there, and to the interestsof the Home revenue. The examinations were subsequentlycarried on before select committees ineach house, and published in two large quartovolumes. They contained much interesting matter,regarding the trade and intercourse with Indiaand China ; but had not the slightest effect inproducing any alteration in the resolutions originallysubmitted by the minister to the House.On490 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIII.1813. On the 26th of June a Bill was brought in, foundedupon the resolutions which passed the Commonson the 13th July, and a few days afterwards wasagreed to by the Lords without alteration.*The trade with India was thrown open in shipsof a given tonnage, under license from the Courtof Directors, on whose refusal an appeal lay to theBoard, to whom the Directors were to transmitthe papers with their resolution thereon. Theresort of parties to India for commercial andother purposes, was placed under similar provisions.In order to satisfy the doubts which had arisenregarding the outrun of the Company's commercialaffairs, the accounts were, in future, to beseparated, under the two heads of 'territory"and " commerce," according to a plan approved byParliament. It exhibited what portion of the extensiveestablishments, both in India and at home,came under each head of charge, and showed theresult of the Company's financial resources,whether arising from commerce or territory.A general authority was given to the Board overthe appropriation of the territorial revenues, andthe surplus commercial profits, which might accrueafter a strict observance of the appropriationclauses.Power of The Board were to have control over the collegeand seminary in England. The offices of governorsIt formed the Act of the 53d Geo. III. cap. 155.Chap. XIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 491nor-general, governors, and commanders-in-chief, isis.were now made subject to the approval of theCrown. Restoration of suspended or dismissedservants was not valid without the consent of theBoard ; neither could the Court of Directors grantany sum beyond £600 without their concurrence.An episcopal establishment was also authorized. Episcopal esta-petitionshad been presented to Parliament fromvarious parts of the kingdom, praying that provisionsmight be made for the resort of missionariesand other persons to India, who should be desirousof proceeding to that country, for the purpose ofintroducing among the natives useful knowledge andreligious and moral improvement. The apprehensionof danger, from attempts to diffuse a knowledge ofthe Christian religion amongst the natives, appearsto have encreased with the extension of our power.It will be seen that in the earlier periods of theCompany's history, measures were taken for thediffusion of Christianity amongst their own immediateservants, and likewise the natives. By theCharter of 1698, the Company were bound tomaintain a minister and schoolmaster in everygarrison and superior factory, and to set apart adecent place for the performance of divine worship.They were also required to have a chaplainto every ship of five hundred tons or upwards,whose salary was to commence from the ship sailingoutwards. Such ministers were to be approvedby the Archbishop of Canterbury or the Bishopoftestant doctrines.492 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuap. XIII.18J3. of London, and were to be at all times entertainedwith proper respect. Resident ministers in Indiawere to learn the '* Portuguese and Hindoolanguages, to enable them to instruct the Gentooand others in the Christian religion." On theunion of the two Companies in 1708, it was declaredby the charter, that the chaplain shouldhave precedence next after the fifth member ofcouncil at the factory.Desire of the The Company's records afford many instancesCompany to of tic iutd'cst which was felt in very early periodsfifbiTand Pro of their establishment, to promote the diffusionof the Christian faith ; one or two will now becited. In February 1659, writing to Madras, theCourt stated :We are content that Mr. Isaacson had been prevailed uponfor his longer stay with you, not doubting but that duringhis abode with you it hath, and will be his endeavour andstudy to promote the glory of God, and to instruct ourpeople in the knowledge and fear of the Almighty. It hathpleased a worthy member of our society, Mr. Thomas Rich,to present us with six volumes of books, containing the Oldand New Testament in several languages, it being his desirethat they may be sent to remain in your factories, hopingit may be a means to propagate and spread the Gospel inthose parts, which is his and our earnest desire by all meanspossible to advance and further. We have, therefore, ladenthem on our slip Smyrna Merchant, and recommend them(as a choice gift) unto you, to be carefully preserved andmade use of for that intent and purpose for which they aredesigned. The like volumes the said Mr. Rich hath givento be sent to Surat.Again,Chap. Xii] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 493Again, in the year 1663 : IliaWe have entertained Mr. Simon Mothers, a minister ofGod's word : one that we hope will not only by his preachingand doctrine instruct and direct our people in their wayto happiness, but also in his life and conversation be an exampleof holiness ; he proceeds on the Coronation. We havemade his salary £50 per annum, and have also disbursedthe sum of in books, a list whereof we herewith sendyou, which books we do appoint shall remain in the Fort,for the use of any succeeding minister after the return ordecease of the said Mr. Mothers.And to the agents and Council there in 1677 :We now send you a supply of one hundred bibles andtwo hundred catechisms, which we would have you disposeof there and at our subordinate factories, to such as youthink will make the best use of them ; and when any shallbe able to repeat the catechism by heart, you may give toeach of them two rupees for their encouragement ; and nowthat you have so many married families and children, fortheir due education we send one Mr. Ralph Orde to beschoolmaster at our Fort, at the salary of £50 per annum, tocommence from the time of his embarking here ; who is toteach all the children to read English, and to write andcipher, gratis ; and if any of the other nations, as Portuguese,Gentoo, or other, will send their children to school,we require that they be also taught gratis, and you are toappoint some convenient place for this use ; and he is likewiseto instruct them in the principles of the Protestantreligion ; and he is to diet at our table. He hath received£5 here in part of his salary, which you are to deductthere.The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,whose494 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIII.1813. whose labours had been directed to the sameobjects, having represented, in March 1744, thatthere were some vacancies by the removal of missionarieson the coast, the Court advised theirhaving permitted the Rev. Mr. Klein and the Rev.Mr. Breithaupt to take passage upon those ships,in order to carry on that good work among theIndians.In 1752 the Court agreed that the missionariessent out by the Society for promoting ChristianKnowledge should have the use of a church atCuddalore and at Madras — to continue in possessionof them during pleasure.And as a further encouragement to the said missionariesto exert themselves in propagating the Protestant religion,we do hereby empower you to give them, at such times asyou shall think proper, in our name, any sum of money,not exceeding five hundred pagodas, to be laid out in suchmanner, and appropriated to such uses as you shall approveof; and you are hereby directed to, give us, from time totime, an account of the progress made by them in educatingchildren and increasing the Protestant religion, togetherwith your opinion upon their conduct in general, and whatfurther encouragement they deserve.In 1752 the Court wrote to Bombay :As it will be greatly for the interest of the Company tohave as many of the soldiery and other our dependants inthe presidency of Bombay, instructed in the principles ofthe Protestant religion, we have thought proper to add twomore chaplains to your establishment, who are to reside atTellicherry and Anjengo, or wherever else you shall thinkproper to station them so as will best answer our intentions;andChap.XIIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 495and that we may have the advantage of a rising generation 1813.instructed in the same principles, we recommend it to youto form a plan for the setting up and establishing charity-schools,wherein the children of our soldiers, mariners,passes, and others, may be educated as well at the subordinatesas at Bombay. When you can reduce your plan topractice, you may depend upon our giving an assistancebecoming the Company, and we most earnestly recommendit to every one of our servants, and others who are in goodcircumstances, to contribute freely to an undertaking ofsuch utility to the presidency in general.When schools are erected in consequence of this recommendation,our chaplains are frequently to visit them, tosee what improvement the children make, and to give theirutmost assistance in instructing and conformity them in theprinciples and profession of the Protestant religion.The foregoing extracts evince the desire whichexisted in former times to extend the blessings ofChristianity in a country from whence Englandderived such pecuniary advantages.Religion is not to be propagated by the sword. General Re-or by force ; but lukewarmness on the one hand,and intemperance on the other, has each in itsturn been of great injury to the cause of Christianity,whilst ignorance presents the strongestand safest grounds upon which imposture can beerected. Thus Mohammedanism with all its horrorsof despotism, united with the less fierce but notless destructive creed of the Hindoo, have placedthe millions in the East in the wretched state ofmoral degradation and idolatrous impurity, panderingto the passions of ignorant and besottedmyriads,RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XI II.1813.Interestingacts of nativeChristian villagesin Tinnedmyriads, and enchaining them in a slavery both ofbody and soul, from which it may be the privilegeof a British Government to take measures foremancipating them.Great and laudable anxiety is manifested tocommunicate the improvements of law and thediscoveries of science. Why should there be ahesitation in desiring to impart to the natives ofIndia juster notions on the subject of religion ?We have the testimony of one of the Company'sown chaplains, an estimable and exemplary ministerof the established church, who, visiting in thesouth of Tinnevelley, found in the centre, twoentire Christian villages, one of five hundred andthe other of four hundred native Christians, withregular churches, native priests, catechists, andboys' and girls' schools. They were living as Christians,in harmony, without a vestige of idolatry tobe seen in either village, nor an idol to be found.Regular service in the church was held daily.Groups of women were to be seen assembled togetherunder the shade of the palmyra tree, spinningcotton and singing their Lutheran hymns to themotion of their wheels, while the men were at thesame time labouring in the field. *' It was like anoasis in the moral desert of the immense country."The Hindoo teshildar* bore the strongest testimonyto their conduct, as being an inoffensivequiet people; and that he should rejoice if all theinhabitantsA native collector under an European.Chap. XIII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 497inhabitants around were like them. The name of isis.the one village was Motherhood, the other Nazareth.They were a part of the labours of theChristian Knowledge Society in Tinnevelly.They had been without a missionary for tenyears.The late Sir Thomas Munro, writing from Madrason the 12th of October 1820, observed :I should expect more benefit from the circulation of short Opinion of Sirtracts by the natives, or of translations of short Europeantracts by natives, than from translations precipitately madeof the Bible, or any great work, by the missionaries. I haveno faith in the power of any missionary to acquire, in four orfive years, such a knowledge of any Indian language as toenable him to make a respectable translation of the Bible. Ifear that such translations are not calculated to inspire becomingreverence for the book. In place of translating theBible into ten or twelve languages in a few years, I wouldrather see twenty years devoted to its translation into one.If we hope for success, we must proceed gradually, and adoptthe means by which we may be likely to attain it. The disseminationof knowledge is, I think, the surest way ; and ifwe can prevail upon the native princes to give it the supportyou propose, it will be a good beginning. I shall communicatewith the Resident of Tanjore on the subject ; and if theRajah, who is now near Conjeveram on his way to Cassia,calls here, I will mention it to him.The opinions thus cautiously advanced by anauthority so much looked up to as Sir ThomasMunro, may tend to remove objections in mindsunaccustomed to consider the general questionVOL. II. 2 k of498 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIII.Ilia of supplanting the deep-rooted and universalprevalence of idolatry by the introduction of thepurer and milder principles of the Christianfaith.Education has been widely extended — the workof translating the Scriptures has advanced beyondthe most sanguine expectation, and with the aid• of such learning as to leave little ground forapprehension ; the distribution of tracts has likewisekept pace with the other means for disseminatingthe truth, free from party spirit or the dominanceof any particular establishment.The population of the whole world has beenstated at eight hundred millions, and that thereare not more than seven hundred missionaries,including those of the United Kingdom and ofAmerica, engaged in diffusing a knowledge of theScriptures among mankind — giving one missionaryto each million of souls.When we contemplate the self-laceration andtorture of the poor Hindoo — his swinging on hooksthat tear his very flesh from his bones — his walkingon spikes — his stiffening his arm above hishead — his burning his sightless eye-balls in theirsockets in the sun — and yet, after all this wretchedtorment and agony, his fear lest the flesh shouldnot be quite annihilated and be absorbed intopure spirit " — sufficient motives are presented toaid in diffusing a knowledge of that book whichhas been well described asAdaptedChap. XIII.]BRITISH POWER IN INDIA.Adapted to the wants and miseries of man ; which can riseto the highest grade of civilization, and stoop to the lowestpoint of the most debased barbarism ; which can satisfy allthe demands of the most exalted intellect, and be a feast tothe degraded Pariah, the wildest Arab of the desert, therude and unlettered Hottentot.1813.K 'ZRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.CHAPTER XIV.Isis.Earl of Moiraarrives asGovernor-general.Military establishments.Amidst the fluctuating counsels and conflictinginterests connected with the administration ofBritish India, junctures of particular emergencyarose which called for men of enlightened minds,capable of taking an enlarged view of the policyrequired by existing circumstances, and who werenot to be deterred by personal apprehensions fromencountering responsibility.Such was the state of affairs when the Marquessof Hastings, then Earl of Moira, was nominatedGovernor general.* The Earl of Minto resignedthe government to his lordship on the 4th of October1813. Lord Moira's attention was in thefirst instance directed to the state of the militaryestablishments, upon which he communicated hissentiments to the Court, and observed, that thearmy under the presidency of Madras was morenumerous than necessary, whilst that in Bengalwas insufficient to meet the demands of the service.The subject was subsequently alluded toin a letter from the Government, whose opinionnot only coincided with that of the Governor-general,18th November 1812.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 501general, but was strengthened by the conduct of iii.some insurgent chiefs in Arracan, and by the stateof affairs in Chittagong and Nepaul.The Nepaulese had made progressive encroach Affairs of cementssince the mission of Captain Kinloch in ^^"'1765. Between the years 1787 and 1812, morethan two hundred villages had been usurped bythe Goorkas.* Various disputed questions hadarisen regarding the boundary between the twogovernments, including some portion of the Oudeterritory. Colonel Bradshaw was deputed by theGovernor-general to negotiate for their settlement,in the hope that ulterior measures might beavoided. The pretensions of the Nepaulese commissioners,and their overbearing manner towardsColonel Bradshaw, rendered all accommodationhopeless. The necessity of operations, for thepurpose of maintaining the rights of the BritishGovernment and its allies, became indispensable :it was also important to convince the enemy thatthey could not persevere in a course of encroachmentand defiance with impunity. No pains werespared by the Government to arrive at a just conclusionregarding the rights of the British power,which were established beyond all question, afterthe most minute and laborious investigation. TheenemyNatives of Nepaul, called Goorkas, from a place of thatname, from which they issued about seventy years ago and graduallyreduced the various hill chiefs of the country. The Goor-kas being Hindooss, those in the valleys of Nepaul, called Ne-wars,are Buddhists in religion.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1814.enemy met these facts by unfounded and contradictoryassertions; the greatest prevaricationand evasion, with an entire absence of all truth intheir statements, characterized the whole courseof their proceedings. The passion of the Goor-kas for war had been inflamed by their successesover the hill chiefs beyond Kemaon, inwhich they had met with no check until the resultof their attack on Noli Kangra, and the successfulopposition made by Unmeet Sing to theiradvance in that direction. The Court of Directorshad expressed a belief that hostilities would beunavoidable, and the Governor-general was satisfiedthat the course which he felt constrainedto adopt would be regarded as one of unimpeachablejustice and necessity. As protracted operationsmight involve the Government in a contestat a less favourable juncture of affairs, he prohibitedall commercial intercourse with the Ne-pause,and withdrew the Company's factoriesfrom the Goorka provinces of Gurrwhal and Ku-macon;the supra car goes at Canton being apprizedof the actual state of relations withNepaul, for the purpose of guarding against anyunfavourable impressions on the minds of theChinese.It was now perceived, that a very erroneousestimate had been formed of the character of theenemy with whom we were about to contend.The immense extent of the Nepaul frontier, andtheChap. XIV.] British POWER IN INDIA. 503the exposed condition of our own ; the strength of iii.the Goorka country, and the novelty of the serviceto the troops, who were accustomed to an entirelydifferent species of warfare from that which wasto be entered upon, combined to render the planof operations one of considerable difficulty andanxious deliberation. The Governor-general accordinglydetermined to divide his forces intofour divisions. The principal, consisting of abouteight thousand troops, under Major-general Marley,was to act against the capital of Catmandoo,by the route of Muckwanpore. The second, underMajor-general Wood, was to proceed from ,for the purpose of resuming the landsin Bootwul and Sheoraj, and then to menacePulpa.The third, under Major-general Gillespie, was toproceed from Seharunpore, and seize the passes ofthe rivers Jumna and Ganges, in order to preventthe retreat of the enemy to the eastward ; whileMajor-general Ochterlony was to act against thewestern provinces of the Goorkas, under UnmeetSing Thappa. The forces of the Company werecombined with those furnished by the protectedhill states, and were to endeavour to expel theenemy from their conquests between the Jumnaand the Sutlej. A complete latitude was givento General Ochterlony, with authority to impartto Unmeet Sing, previously to his marching fromLoodianah, the general object of his intendedmovement. In order to satisfy the Maharaja ofour504 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1814. our friendly feelings and intentions, General Och-felonywas to apprize him, if needful, that anoffer had been made by Ummeer Sing Thappa tounite with the Company against him.Instructions were given to Mr. Metcalfee, theresident at Delhi, to institute inquiries of apolitical nature relative to the exiled Rajah ofSreenuggur, for the purpose of effecting an openingwhich might command the great roads of Tartary.In furtherance of these views Mr. Fraser, theassistant at Delhi, was deputed to Hardware, andNepauiwar. afterwards instructed to join General Gillespie'sdivision. In the prosecution of his mission hesubmitted an interesting report on the families andgovernment of the Rajahs of Sreenugger and Ghur-wall. The exiled rajah, Soodenun Sah, was thefiftieth consecutive uninterrupted successor to theraj, his great-grandfather having become heir ofthe rajahship before his birth, and continued togovern all his life, dying at the age of seventy-two.His grandson, Jyrunt Same, dying without issue,his widow, then only ten years of age, burnt herselfwith the body of her husband. The commercialintercourse between Ghurwal and Bootanconsisted chiefly of exports of small quantities ofcloth, and a good deal of grain, returned by gold,cow-tails, and nirbes, a medical root, Bootanhorses of a very small breed, musk, salt, and asmall quantity of China cloth. But Kemaon possessedgreat advantages over Ghurwal as a connectingChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 505netting district between India and Tartary, Boo isis.tan and China, on account of the easiness of passageand convenience of intercourse. Borax, salt,gold, cow-tails, nirbes, shawls, blankets, fineand coarse wool, and shawl-wool, were sold at thefairs.The forces of the Goorkas were estimated alto Efficient stategether at twelve thousand men. They where for the troops.most part clothed, armed, and disciplined, in imitationof the Company's sepoy; being sedulousin copying our military system and institutions.Their soldiers were found to be courageous, active,robust, obedient and patient under great privations,as well as intelligent and quick of apprehension.The natural strength of their country, the choicewhich they had of positions, and their peculiarmode of warfare, gave them great advantages.The troops sent against them under the four divisionsamounted to more than double their numbers.The Goorka officer commanding on the frontierhaving issued orders for poisoning all the wells, theGovernor general directed any party discoveredacting under such an atrocious command to be putto instant death, whatever might be his rank orcondition.The campaign commenced by the seizure of the Opening of theTilly pass into the Deyra Noon, on the 20th *^^"^p^'^"'August, by the troops under Colonel Carpenter ;and by that of the Kheree pass, on the 24th, underGeneral Gillespie, who afterwards fell, in hisheroic506 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai-xiv.1814. heroic but too hasty assault of the fort of Kalunga,kissed. ^^^'^ on the 30th October, in which Colonel Carpenterand Major Ludlow advanced most gallantly,and where Major Richards also highly distinguishedhimself. General Marginal unfortunatelyexhibited, during these operations, an excessof caution ; the movements, at the same time,of General Wood from Goruckpore, proved whollyabortive ; whilst that of General Marly drew downthe severe animadversion of the commander-in-chief,as evincing the grossest neglect and impotency.1813. The operations in Kemaon repaid in some measurethe disappointment experienced by the .Colonel Nicolls, aided by Lieut. -colonel Gardiner and Major Patton, were detachedby the Governor-general against Alcoran. A forceunder Major Patton having displayed great gallantryin attacking and defeating a body of theenemy, (their chief being mortally wounded,) Col.Nicolls at once determined to attack the fort ofAlcoran, which he took by assault in the mostrapid and brilliant manner, and then carried onoperations against other forts, still held by theenemy. The commanding officer and troops inthese operations gained the most unqualifiedapplause of the Governor-general. On the east ofthe river Coosie, Capt. Latter displayed goodjudgment, and rendered valuable service in hisnegotiations with the Rajah of Siccim, who manifestedChap. XIV] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 507rested a most determined spirit of opposition to Isis.the Goorkas.Major-general Ochterlony, who had been engaged success of Gen.in ineffectual negotiations with Ummeer SingThap-pa, the commander-in-chief of the Goorka force,advanced against the enemy's position at Rham-gur. The country was extraordinarily rugged, andnearly impassable for elephants, which presentedalmost insurmountable difficulties to the transportof ordnance and stores : but by a persevering andjudicious course of proceeding he overcame theseobstacles, and achieved a series of brilliant exploitson the heights of Malown, in the courseof which Lieut-colonel Thomson, Lieut-colonelArnold, Major Laurie, and other officers, highlydistinguished themselves ; Ummeer Sing havingbeen within musket-shot distance, with his coloursin his hand urging on his troops. This success againstthe Ramghur range of forts obliged the enemy toconfine himself to the fort of Malown, and causedhim great distress by occasioning numerous desertions: nevertheless, Ummeer Sing evincedno disposition to surrender. General Ochterlonyaccordingly pushed on operations against the fort,and gained possession successively of all the outworksand stockades : when he had completedhis preparations for battering the fort, and hadbrought his ordnance within a short distance,Ummeer Sing consented to capitulate. All the cessation offorts westward of the Jumna in the possession ofthe508 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1815. the Goorkas, were to be surrendered to the Britishforce. The forts in Gurhwal were also to beevacuated, by the Goorka troops retiring by theKemaon route across the Kali.Ummeer Sing, with the remaining garrison ofMalown, was to retire across the Kali, with theirarms, private baggage, and families, and twoguns.Tanjore Sing, in like manner, was allowed todepart from Jyetuck with three hundred unarmedfollowers and one gun ; a similar option wasextended to persons in other forts.The countries between the Jumna and Sutlejwere placed under the military command andpolitical control of Colonel Ochterlony, who wasappointed superintendant of political affairs, andagent of the Governor-general in the territories ofthe Seiks and the hill chieftains. Mr. Fraser wasto proceed to Sreenugger, with the designation ofcommissioner for the settlement of Ghurwal, andto report on all points on which the Governor-generalrequired information. Mines of iron, lead,and copper, were stated to be in Kemaon, which ifworked by European skill would prove productive.Hemp of a very superior kind was also furnishedfrom thence in abundance, whilst a road wassecured to the Ounces, or country possessing theshawl-wool.This apparent termination of hostilities withthe state of Nepaul was suspended by an indispositionChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 609position on the part of the Rajah to agree to the isis.required concessions. Communications were carriedon between an agent from Catmandoo andColonel Bradshaw, the political agent in Nepaul ;the latter being furnished, on the 15th June, withthe basis of a treaty, which the Governor-generalwas prepared to ratify, should the negotiationwith Gooroo Gujraj Messer prove satisfactory.The Hon. Edward Gardner was at the same timeauthorized to negotiate with Choutree Bum Sah,who commanded on the banks of the Kali. Theutmost desire was evinced by the Governor-generalto modify the demands of the British Government,and to render the stipulated cession as little objectionableas possible to the court of Catmandoo.On the 28th of November the agent from theRajah arrived at Segowley, having been previouslydetained by alleged indisposition. After somedelay, he signed, with Lieut-colonel Bradshaw,the treaty, which it was agreed should be ratifiedby the Rajah within fifteen days from the date onwhich it was executed and ratified by the Governin Council. The period within whichit was calculated the ratification from Catmandoowould arrive having expired without any communication,some doubts arose as to the good faithof the accredited agent. On the 5th of January a isle.despatch was received by the Supreme Governmentfrom Captain Bradshaw, dated the 28thDecember, stating that delay had arisen at ,510 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816. mandoo, occasioned by the intrigue of UmmeerSing Thappa, and that the agents had quittedColonel Bradshaw the same day, for the purposeof proceeding to Catmandoo, where they apprehendedthey should receive the ratification. TheGovernor-general, in the belief that fresh operationsmight be indispensable, determined to committo Sir David Ochterlony the conduct of thecampaign. That officer had arrived at Pinafore,and was entrusted with the sole conduct of allpolitical arrangements with the Goorka government.The force assembled on the occasion consistedof four divisions ; that under Sir D. Ochter-long was composed of 19,394 troops ; ColonelNicolls, 6,617 ; Major-general Wood, 4,866 ;Captain Latter, 2,445 ; making a total of 33,321men.Hostilities Sir D. Ochterlouy advanced through the greatrenewed. c^ i r i^ rei /»-r»i'i-Saul forest, to the foot of the pass oi Buhiaki,leading to Muckwanpore, which frontier he reachedat the close of January. From Muckwanpore hetransmitted detailed accounts of several severecontests in which he had been engaged with theenemy, who had maintained an o obstinate attackon the village where the British force was assembled.The fortress of Hurriapore was attackedand taken possession of, being evacuated by theenemy, who were repulsed in a sally they madewith desperate bravery.The treaty of December was ratified on the 15thofChap. XIV] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 5 1 1of March, and terminated the war with Nepaul ; isle.the Rajah renounced all claim to the lands in eluded.discussion before the war ; and ceded in perpetuityto the Company the low lands between theKali and Rapt, and the Rapt and Gunduck,excepting Bootwul. He also ceded the low landsbetween the Gunduck and Coosi, in which theBritish authority was introduced. He agreed neverto disturb the Rajah of Siccim, and not to receiveinto his service the subjects of any Europeanstate.The affairs of Oude, and the proposed reform in Affairs of. f Oude.the administration of the Vizier's government,were to have formed the subject of a personal conferencebetween his Excellency and the Governor-general: who, on the 20th of July, in his progressto the Upper Provinces, received intelligence ofthe vizier, Statut Ali Khan's death, at Lucknow,on the 11th of that month, after a sudden andsevere illness. Through the judicious conduct ofColonel Baillie, the resident, the elder son, Re-faut-ood-Dowlah's succession took place withoutany commotion. He was advised by the Governor-generalto assume the title of vizier of the empire,without awaiting the sanction of the Mogul, towhom it was suggested he should address anarzee, as a matter of courtesy. His Excellency'sintentions gave promise of a disposition to introduce512 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.XIV.1816. duce all regular forms into his government ; butthese early expectations were soon disappointed.The Vizier came to Cawnpore to meet the Govern; whilst there, on the 1 1 th of October,his Excellency, as a proof of regard to the Company,tendered, by way of loan, the sum of onecrore of rupees, and, at a subsequent meeting,proffered it as a free gift. This was declined bythe Governor-general ; but the sum was acceptedas a subscription to the loan at six per cent., theinterest to be payable in pensions granted by theVizier, which were to be transferred to the Company.At a subsequent period, the heavy pressureof the war with Nepaul, led to a communicationfrom the Governor-general, through the Resident,for a further loan of one crore, which was ultimatelygranted by the Vizier on the most friendlyterms.* This circumstance, together with the discussionon the proposed references, and the viewsof the Vizier, with the intended mode of satisfyinghim for the loan of the first crore, were made knownto the Court of Directors, in March 1816: theyreplied, in September 1817, in terms of generalapprobation, expressing their concurrence in hislordship's opinion, that in construing the terms ofthe recorded engagements with the Vizier, it wasrequired by every principle of justice, that themost liberal and comprehensive meaning shouldbe given to such articles of the treaty of 1801 '' aswereLetter from Lord Moira, 15th August 1815.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 513were in favour of that party, v^hose weakness pre isle.sent no security for him but in that good faithon which he has relied."On the conclusion of the Nepaul war, a treatywas entered into with the Vizier, on the 16th May1816, ceding to his Excellency, in full and perpetualsovereignty, the district of Kyreghur, alsothe low lands between that and the hills, withother countries; in consideration of which, thedebt of the second crore of rupees was entirelyannulled by the Vizier.During the early part of the war with Nepaul, sundial andScindiah and the Rajah of Nagpore had entered Berar. 'into an agreement for reducing the state of Bho-paul. Intelligence of the fact having reached theGovernor-general, his lordship adopted immediatemeasures for counteracting the design.The people of Cutch, in the district of Wagur, Cutch.having committed unprovoked depredations in themetals of the Peishwa and Guicowar, in the peninsulaof Kattywar, a force under Colonel Eastentered and captured the fortress of Ajar. TheRao of Cutch agreed to reimburse the Company,Major Ramsey being sent with a detachment toWagur, to reduce the uncivilized districts to theauthority of the Rao. His subjects were not tocross the gulph of Run for hostile purposes. Thefortress of Ajar was ceded to the Company. TheRao engaged to suppress the practice of piracy,and to make good depredations committed fromVOL. II. 2 L his514 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816. his forts. The district of Wagur was to undergo athorough reform. The slaughter of bullocks beingat variance with the religion of the Jharejahs andthe greater portion of the natives of Cutch, theCompany agreed to abstain from violating the religiousprejudices of the Rao's subjects.*During the operations against Nepaul, and thesettlement of the points between the Rao of Cutchand the Guicowar, with the affairs of Scindiah andBhopaul, the conduct of the court of Poonahhtowards the Guicowar presented matter whichdemanded the interposition of the British Government.Proceedings at Trimbuckjec Ganglia, a menial servant of thePeishwa, had ingratiated himself into favour withhis master, and become the efficient prime minister,although Sedasheo Munkaseir still retainedthat character. Repeated infractions of the treatyof Bassein had taken place whilst the Companystood in the character of arbitrator between thecourts of Poonahh and Baroda. The farm at Ahmedabadhad been granted, with other lands, ona ten years' lease, from the Peishwa to the Guico-war : its renewal being an important object withthe latter, a negotiation was opened for that purpose,and had reference also to the Peishwa'sinterest and direct influence in Guzerat. In orderto settle these points, Gungadhur Shastry wasdeputed by the Guicowar to Poonahh. The greatevasionTreaty, January 1816.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 515evasion which he encountered determined him to Isis.return to Baroda, and to leave the points to bearbitrated by the British Government. Everyendeavour was made to induce the Shastry torelinquish this intention ; the Peishwa and Trim-bucklesentirely changing their conduct towardshim. Bajee Rao, the Peishwa, even went so far asto propose that one of his daughters should bemarried to the Shastry 's son. Deceived by theseappearances, the Shastry abandoned his intentionof quitting the Peishwa's court, and even consentedto accompany his highness and Trimbuck-see on a pilgrimage to Nassick, and thence on avisit of devotion to Punderpore, leaving, at theearnest entreaty of the Peishwa and his minister,most of his attendants at Poonahh. On the 14th ofJuly 1815, the Shastry went to an entertainmentgiven to the Peishwa, and on his return homehe complained of fever, and desired that if anyperson came to request him to go to the temple,they would say he was indisposed. In the courseof half an hour, a message for that purpose camefrom Trimbuckjee ; it was repeated three times.To avoid offending Trimbuckjee, he consentedto go. Having been to the temple and con Guieowarsversed with Trimbuckjee, he proceeded on his tered.return home, when he was attacked by five armedmen, and literally cut to pieces. The Shastry 'speople having searched for the ** bits of his body,"picked them up and carried them home. On these2 L 2 circumstances516 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816. circumstances coming to the knowledge of theresident, Mr. Elphinstone, he demanded of thePeishwa that immediate measures should be takenfor apprehending Trimbuckjee. After some difficulty,he was delivered up and confined in thefort of Hannah, from whence he escaped in December1816.pindaric war. The Governor-general's attention was now directedto carrying on operations for the purpose ofexterminating the Pindarries. In January 1816large bodies of them had appeared on the northernbanks of the Kistna, with the supposed intentionof making inroads into territories subject to Madras.The rapidity with which these barbariansmoved was scarcely to be believed ; a circumstancewhich, coupled with the still more extraordinaryintelligence they possessed, baffled allattempts to intercept their retreat.The difficulty of obtaining any information regardingthese marauders was greatly enhanced,by the fear which their depredations had infusedamongst the people. Their success increased thenatural ferocity of their manners, devastation,violation, and death being the horrid concomitantsof their route. To escape the misery attendantupon their irruptions, families assembled together,and the torch was applied to the destruction oftheir habitations, in which they themselves perished,Chai'.XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 517wished, rather than fall a prey to the intolerable isle.scourge of such ruthless barbarians. The state andgrowing power of the Pindarries had been broughtto the notice of the Home authorities in a secretletter from Bengal, in August 1811, and onrepeated occasions in 1812, when the Governor-generalstated, that every prevention that it waspracticable to adopt with the limited number oftroops, especially of cavalry, compared with thegreat extent of the Company's dominions, was inprogress ; but all such measures were merely palliations,and it was confidently anticipated thatthe necessity would arise at some future time forundertaking a system of military and politicaloperations calculated to strike at the root of thisgreat and increasing evil.On this, as on other leading points of policy,regarding the events which were considered bythe Government to call for action on the part ofthe Supreme Council, much difference of opinionexisted in the judgment of parties, whose experiencein the general affairs of India was entitledto the greatest deference.The late Sir Thomas Munro considered theforce of the Pindarries to be greatly exaggerated,and that they possessed very little strength. Ifsuch were the facts, the inexcusable inertness ofthe Madras Government, in not securing the territoriesunder their control from the inroads ofsuch barbarians, was most culpable ; but the stateoftime.518 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XrV.J816. of that Government, at the period in question,appears to have been matter of astonishment,even amongst the leading civil and military authorities.LordMoira fhc instructions from Home, based upon thedeters hostileties for some principle of abstaining from all extended operations,or plans of general confederacy, had ledthe Governor-general to pause in pursuing thosemeasures which he saw could alone effectuallysuppress these marauders. His lordship was, however,apprized in 1815, that the Court's instructionswere not intended to restrain the exercise ofhis discretion upon any occasion where actual warupon the Company's territories might be commenced,and where the lives and properties ofBritish subjects might call for efficient protection.It is difficult to comprehend the policy which,under any circumstances, prohibited the applicationof means to repress such atrocities, withoutan appeal being first made to Europe, and ananswer received from thence. Yet such was thefact : and a governor-general who acted in oppositionto such a system, did so at the risk of hisbest interests and reputation. The Supreme Councilat length felt it necessary to represent to theCourt, that the annual expenditure of such acourse exceeded the most extravagant calculationsof the cost of a vigorous and decided systemof measures, which could alone effectually destroythe evil — mere temporising measures being whollyinadequateChap. XIV.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 519inadequate to its remedy ; and that they had isle.consequently determined, without further delay,That the adoption of vigorous measures for the earlysuppression of the Pindarries, had become an indispensableobligation of public duty.The disposition of the combined force assembledby order of the Governor-general and com-mander-in-chief, exhibited a masterly conceptionof the nature and extent of the countries to beoccupied, and of the principal points to be takenup. The general movement, owinsf to the rains, General are. arrangementsand the indisposition of Sir Thomas Hislop, towhom the command of the army in the Deccan sir ThomasHislop corn-wasconfided, were delayed till the month of hands armyof til 6 X^'GCCfl.IINovember 1816. The Governor-general marchedfrom Cawnpore, and crossed the Jumna on the26th of October, fixing his station on the Scindeon the 16th of November, as being a central positionbetween the forces stationed to the northwest,and those in Bundlecund and Chota Nag-pore.General Marginal, in Bundlecund, wasto advance towards Saugor, to co-operate withthe right of Sir Thomas Hislop's army, whichwas formed of Lieut-colonel Adams' division.The right division of the Bengal army, underMajor-general Donkin, was to advance towardsDhalpore, on the Chumbul, while the reserve,under Sir David Ochterlony, at Parte, was tocover Delhi, in order to support the negotiationswith the Rajpoot states and Ameer Khan, andeventually520 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816. eventually to attack the latter, or interpose betweenhim and Holkar.Another force, under Brig-general Tone, wasto assemble at Oontaree, on the frontier of Bear,to protect the line of the Upper Sonne, communicatingon its left with the Ramghur battalion,which was advanced to the frontier of ChotaNagpore.Another force, under Brig-general Herdsman,was to assemble at Mirzapore, and advance intoRea. The force in Buttock was deemed sufficientto guard that frontier against the enemy.The first division of the troops of the Deccan wascommanded by Sir Thomas Hislop in person ; thesecond, under Brig-general Doveton, was tobe posted in the neighbourhood of Akola ; the-third was under Sir John Malcolm, who pushedforward and crossed the Nerbuddah, near Tindal,on the 15th of November, in order to strike ablow against the Pindarries; the fourth, underBrig-general Smith, was to advance to a positionto cover the Peishwa's territory, and operate eventuallyagainst Holkar's possessions in the Deccan,besides being at hand to overawe the Peishwa.A respectable force was maintained at Hydrabad,Poonahh, and Nagpore. A corps of reserve wasassembled on the frontiers of the ceded districtsunder Madras; while Brig-general Munro, whowas engaged in settling the southern territoryrecently ceded by the Peishwa, was to occupythatiChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 521that country with a separate detachment ; the 18I6.whole being under the more immediate commandof Sir Thomas Hislop. To complete the line.Major-general Sir William Grant Heir had a forcein Guzerat, which was assembled in front of Baroda,prepared to move into Malwa, and to cooperate,according to circumstances, with SirThomas Hislop's division.Captain Close was the resident at Scindiah'scourt. Sir Charles (then Mr.) Metcalfee, was withHolkar at Delhi ; Mr. Jenkins, at Nagpore ; Mr.Russell, at Hydrabad ; and Mr. Elphinstone, atPoonahh.The extent and power of the assembled forceastonished Scindiah, who had calculated on thePindarries making their excursions, and effectingtheir retreat, comparatively unmolested. The -hopelessness of this result led him to fall in withthe propositions of the Governor-general, whichwere negotiated with great zeal, intelligence, andtemper, by Captain Close, qualities that wereconspicuous throughout the whole of that officer'sproceedings. Besides agreeing to aid in the extirpationof the Pindarries, the forts of Indiaand Asseerghur were to be garrisoned by Britishtroops : the flag of Scindiah was still to fly at thelatter fortress, he engaging not to leave the fortressof Gwalior during the impending operations.In order to prevent the revival of the predatorysystem in any shape, the British Government wasto*^:RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816.Duplicity ofScinUiali.1817.Treachery ofthe Peishwa.to be at liberty to form engagements with thestates of Oodapore, Joudpore, and Kotah, withthat of Boondee and others on the left of theChumbul : but whatever tribute was received byScindiah from such states, was to be secured tohim.During these negotiations, two messengers, conveyingletters from Scindiah's durbar to the courtof Catmandoo, were arrested. Waxen impressionsof Scindiah's great seal were discovered to be intheir possession, and likewise letters concealedbetween leaves glued together of a Sanscrit bookin their charge. The open letters and covers wereultimately sent to the resident at Catmandoo, whowas instructed not to make known the fact to thedurbar there; but to watch its proceedings, whilethe sealed letters were to be delivered publicly toScindiah, merely apprizing him of the manner inwhich they had come into our hands. These orderswere ably executed by Captain Close, Scindiahnot attempting any exculpation.Early in this year (1817) intelligence had beenreceived by Mr. Elphinstone, that TrimbuckjeeDangling* was at Phultaum, where he remainedthe greater part of February, changing his residenceto Punderpore, and extending his range asfar as the forts of Tanjore and Mymungur ; thathe had collected upwards of three thousand horse ;that he was in constant communication withPoonahh,Fide page 514. *Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 523Poonahh, and intended to set up his standard on 1817.the 18th of March. Mr. Elphinstone had strong-groundsfor believing that the Peishwa was privyto all these proceedings ; he nevertheless treatedthe insurrection on the part of Trimbuckjee asequally offensive to the Peishwa, and pointed outthe necessity of taking measures for putting itdown. Gocklah* had gone against the insurgents,and the Peishwa's ministers triumphantly referredto letters from Punderpore, denying that therewas any insurrection. In this the Peishwa joined,and called upon Mr. Elphinstone, if he differedin opinion, to take measures for suppressing it —the Peishwa himself being at the moment engagedin raising new levies, and placing his forts in astate of defence. The resident accordingly determinedto bring matters to an issue ; he noticedto his highness the breach he had committed inhis promises, and intimated, that if he persistedin increasing his force, the British Governmentwould feel called upon to take decided measures.Colonel Smith, with his light division, was orderedto draw towards Poonahh : he arrived on the 26thApril within four miles of that city. On the 7th Peishwa cons^ ^ ^ '' strained toMay, intelligence which the resident received come to terms.from Cuttack, and the proceedings of the insurgentselsewhere, determined him to demand fromthe Peishwa that Trimbuckjee should be deliveredup ; that he should engage within twenty-fourhoursVide page 289.524 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai.XIV.^^^'^' hours to surrender him within one month fromthat day, and that he should give up the forts ofSigurd, Pounder, and Ryeghur, as pledges forfulfilling such engagement : the latter fort wasone of uncommon strength. The conduct of thePeishwa had determined the Governor-general toseek securities for the future, in the imposition ofrestraints ; for which purpose a treaty was concludedby Mr. Elphinstone on the 13th June, andratified on the 25th July by the Supreme Government.The most important feature in thistreaty, was the disavowal of the Peishwa's paramountright, as the head of the Mahratta confederacy,and the cessation of the mutual receptionof vakeel by the Peishwa and all other states ;and the restriction imposed upon the communicationsof his highness with the foreign powers,except through the medium of agents of the BritishGovernment, as such vakeel had been knownto carry on clandestine intercourse. The Peishwarenounced all future claims on the Guicowar,which claims had, in fact, arisen from his positionas head of the Mahratta confederacy. He wasalso to be excluded from all concern in the affairsof Guzerat, and he agreed to restore to the Gui-coward,in perpetuity, the Ahraedabad farm, at theformer rent of four and a-half lacs. The tributefrom Kattywar was transferred to the Company.Provision was made to enable the Guicowar toreduce the claims of the Peishwa, by the paymentChap. XI v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 525ment of four lacs per annum, or standing on arbi 1817.oration.In lieu of the contingent force to be supplied invirtue of the treaty of Bassein, the Peishwa wasto place at the disposal of the British Governmentfunds for five thousand cavalry and three thousandinfantry. The Company acquired the northerncircles, with the Peishwa's possessions in Guze-rat, and the Kattywar tribute, with an extent ofcountry in the Carnatic, including the strong fortsof Darwar and Koosegul. The fort of Ahmednug-gur, held by the Company through sufferance, wastransferred to them in perpetual sovereignty; likewiseall the Peishwa's rights in Bundlecund andHindostan. He was thus excluded from all connexionor concern with the countries north of theNerbuddah. Provisions were also made relative tothe services of the southern jaghiredars.Nothing short of absolute and unavoidable necessitycould have induced the Peishwa to submitto terms so restrictive and humiliating. It was avirtual renunciation of his authority, an abandonmentof his position in the scale of nativestates, and his reduction to the condition of avassal of the British power. The treaty of Basseinhad been strongly condemned by the Home authorities,for the sacrifice it required at the handsof the Peishwa. As the same authorities had sinceexpressed the strongest objections to the reductionor humiliation of the native states, which, fromthe/y626 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.Isis. the extent of their dominions and their militaryhabits, were ranked as substantial and protectingpowers, it might be naturally inferred that therecent proceedings towards the state of Poonahhcould not escape animadversion ; but it was nowacknowledged that the course of events had satisfiedthe Court of DirectorsOf the irrepressible tendency of our Indian power toenlarge its bounds, and to augment its preponderance, inspite of the most peremptory injunctions of forbearancefrom home, and of the most scrupulous obedience to themin the Government abroad.*This admission speaks most forcibly when takenin connexion with the measures which were repeatedlycalled for under the peculiar circumstancesof Marquess Wellesley's administration.The effects of the treaty to which the Peishwahad consented was felt by his highness in all itsdegrading consequences. He persevered in followingup his military preparations, and refused therequest of the resident to send away any portionof the force he had collected at Poonahh ; and withwhich he occupied a menacing position in the neighbourhoodof the British camp, endeavouring, atthe same time, by unremitting means, to corruptthe fidelity of the native troops of the Company'sdetachment.These troops were accordingly removed fromthe position in which they had been placed, to oneselectedSecret Letter to Bengal, 5th January 1818.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 527selected by General Smith. This circumstance, J817.with the cantonment being on the alert on the29th October, the night previous to the arrival ofthe European regiment, caused by the requisitionof the resident, of which the Peishwa had gainedintelligence, removed the appearance of that confidencewhich had been kept up with his highness.His people talked openly of the impending destructionof the Company's detachment; whilst Outrages onone of the officers was attacked and plundered onhis way to Bombay in open day, only two milesfrom Poonahh. Mr. Elphinstone had ordered troopsfrom Seroor — a circumstance which had been noticedby the Peishwa, who, it was stated, hadremarked, that it was the third time we had assembledtroops at Poonahh, and that the last timewe had surrounded the city. Mr. Elphinstoneassured the vakeel of the Peishwa, that there Admirable cons1 ' ^ r-^ ^^^^ °^ Hon.were sufficient reasons for strengthening the Com- Mr. Elphin-stone.any's brigade. Subsequent movements inducedMr. Elphinstone, who throughout displayed themost admirable presence of mind and sound judgment,to withdraw the camp at Kirkee. The residencywas shortly attacked, plundered, and burnedby the Peishwa's troops. Lieut-colonel Burr ad Peishwa's111 • troops advancedto meet them, although possessing a very seated.inadequate force to contend with that of theenemy. A contest took place on the evening ofthe 5lh November, at the instance of Gocklah, inwhich Modo Dickshut, one of the ministers entrusted528 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1817. trusted with the surrey piitkah, or golden pennon,the standard of the Mahratta empire, was killed.Colonel Burr's force consisted of 2,500, that ofthe Peishwa being 25,000. The state of the country,and the disposition of the court of Poonahh,may be gathered from the fact that Cornets Hunterand Morrison, who had arrived within twenty milesof Poonahh, were compelled to lay down their armsCaptVaughan and made prisoners ; while Captain Vaughan andand his brother ,.,|-ij^rn i*murdered. his brother wcrc seized at Jullygong, on theirroute to Bombay, and put to death in the mostignominious manner, they offering no resistance.Poonahh was taken possession of by General Smithon the I7th of November, and the British flaghoisted at the palace, on the morning of whichthe Peishwa fled from his ancient capital. As inthe matter of the Pindarries, so in that of thePeishwa, the individual who takes an interest inconsulting the opinions of the best-informed par-^ties will find that the most opposite conclusionshave been apparently arrived at by the same distinguishedfunctionaries. The extension of the subsidiarysystem in 1805 had led to the retirementof the most enlightened statesman who had ruledin India. Sir Thomas Munro, in a letter to MarquisHastings, in August 1817, observed :I have many weighty objections to the employment of asubsidiary force ; its inevitable tendency is to bring everynative state into which it is introduced, stxnier or later, under\]\v exclusive power of the liritisli Government. It hasalreadyIC.iAr. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 529already done this in the Carnatic, it has made some progress 1816.in that of the Peishwa and the Nizam, and the whole ofthe territory of these princes will undoubtedly suffer thesame fate as the Carnatic.But in the following year, at the close of thewar in which Colonel Munro had so highly-distinguishedhimself, as to call forth universalapplause,He considered it fortunate the Peishwa had commencedhostilities, and forced the Government to overthrow hispower, the Mahratta Government having been one ofdevastation from its foundation. It was continually destroyingall within its reach, and never repairing. The effects ofits system had been the diminution of the wealth and populationof a great portion of the peninsula of India.If such was its character, its annihilation,whether by a subsidiary alliance or direct hostilities,was therefore to be desired.During these proceedings on the western side ofIndia, Marquis Hastings was following up hisplan for exterminating the Pindarries. The nextpower in importance at the moment which followedthe treaty with Scindiah, was the celebratedAmeer Khan,* the Patau chief, who possessed a Ameer Khan,large force of horse and foot, maintained entirelyby the plunder of the states of Jeypore and Joud-pore, and others in their vicinity ; they had, infact, been a prey to his rapacity and that of hisfollowers. He had been engaged for two years inplunderingVide page 454.VOL. II. 2 M530 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816. plundering Jeypore ; and he had been occupiedfor nine months against one fort, when the operationsnow in progress were undertaken. A treaty-wasconcluded through the instrumentality of Mr.Metcalfee, in Nov. 1817, guaranteeing to him,and to his heirs in perpetuity, the possessionshe held in Holkar's territories under grants fromthe Maharajah. Ameer Khan was to disbandhis army, with the exception only of such portionas was requisite for the internal management ofhis possessions ; he was to join in suppressing thePindarries, and not to enter into negotiation withany person whatever without the sanction of theBritish Government.Mr, Metcalfee The Governor-general at the same time deter-negotiatewith . . iTt/ri»/r ir -iHolkar. meed to negotiate, through Mr. Metcalf, withHolkar, whose state stood, with reference to thePindarries, in a similar position to that of Scin-dial. Since the insanity of its chief, JeswuntRow, it had fallen rapidly into decay. ToolsBaee, his favourite mistress, exercised the ascendancyin the public councils. The course ofevents led to her being placed under restraint, aswell as all the other ladies of Holkar's family,through the party who commanded the military,Conduct and Dhcrma Kower, a confidential servant, and a mandeath of Hern ^ ^ tt i . • ima Kower. ot great personal courage. He obtained possessionof the person of the insane chief, as well as of thepersons of Toolsah Baee and young Mulhar Row,the infant son of Jeswunt Row by a woman oflowChap.XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 531low rank. This proceeding brought forward Ameer isle.Khan, who, supported by the whole body of thePindarries, surrounded the troops of Holkar, inorder to save the family from the disgrace anddanger which they were exposed to by the act ofhis servant. Dherma, to extricate himself, resortedto the desperate expedient of taking hismaster with Toolsahah Baee and young Mulhar Rowinto a thick jungle, where he intended to havemurdered them, for the purpose of thus removingall causes of contention. A Mahratta chief, whenapprized of the circumstance, hastened to the spot,accompanied by such troops as he could collect atthe moment, and arrived in time to secure thecaptives from their state of imminent peril. Dher-ma and his associate were ordered for immediateexecution. The former manifested to the last thedaring courage he had invariably exhibited. Theexecutioner having made an ineffectual blow at hisneck with one hand, Dherma turned towards him,and with a stern look said, '* Take both hands,you rascal : after all it is the head of Dherma thatis to be cut off!" This fact is related by Sir JohnMalcolm, who received an account of it from awitness of the scene, and the expressions of Dhermawere confirmed by the executioner, who was atIndore in 1832.Jeswunt Row Holkar's death took place in 18 11,when Toolsahah Baee, who continued to conduct theaffairs, placed on the musnud his infant son,2 M 2 Mulhar532 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XIV.1816. Miilhar Row. An attempt was shortly afterwardsmade to subvert the authority of Toolsahah Baee,supposed to have been instigated by Scindiah, forthe purpose of setting aside Mulhar Row. Theplot was defeated, through the instrumentality ofAmeer Khan, from whom Toolsahah Baee heardthat she was publicly represented as an abandonedwoman. The truth of this representation causedher the greater irritation. A plan had at this timebeen devised for obtaining pecuniary aid fromScindiah, by ceding to him a portion of the Holkarterritory : it did not succeed. A second attemptto effect the same object caused a mutiny of thewhole of his army, which compelled Toolsahah Baeeto flee with young Holkar ; a succession of extraordinaryevents followed, involving treacheries andmurders. Among the latter was that of BalasaurSet, the dewan. He was suspected of being thechief instigator of the revolt on the part of thecommanders of the troops, and of their persistingin their clamorous demands. At the command ofToolsahah Baee, Balasaur's head was struck off.The troops cherished an active resentment againsther on account of this murder. A spontaneousapplication having been made from Holkar'sgovernment for our protection, the Governor-generalconcluded that state was willing to entercordially into his views. Mr. Metcalfee delegatedto Captain Tod the charge of conducting thenegotiation ; but it soon became apparent that agreatXIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 533great change had taken place at Holkar's court. isle.Engagements had been entered into betweenScindiah and Holkar, adverse to the British interests.It was intended to have acted upon themslowly and with caution, but the proceedings ofBajee Row precipitated a rupture. The party whoespoused the cause of the Peishwa received anadvance of a lac and sixty thousand rupees fromthe agents of his highness, a part of which sumwas distributed to the troops. The army under SirThomas Hislop accordingly crossed the Nerbud-da in November. The advanced divisions, underGeneral Malcolm and Colonel Adams, were sufficientto cope with the Pindarries ; but SirThomas, in accordance with the orders of theGovernor-general, intended to advance intoMalwa, although the accounts from Mr. Jenkins,the resident at Nagpore, led to the conclusion thatthe Rajah would commence hostilities.Early in the month of December, the wholeof the forces of Holkar had assembled abouttwenty miles from Mahidpore, to which placethey afterwards marched, in full expectation ofsuccess and large pecuniary gains from their operations.On the morning of the 20th of Decemberyoung Holkar was enticed away from thetent in which he was playing, and at the samemoment a guard was placed over Toolsahah Baee.This happened on the morning ; at night toolsBaee was taken from her palanquin to thebanksRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1816.Fatal chiefs.Battle of .banks of the Seepra, where her head was severedfrom her body, and the latter thrown into theriver, the common rites of a Hindoo funeralbeing denied to her remains. She was at thetime of this tragical event thirty years of age,handsome, and of fascinating manners, but of animperious and ungovernable temper and mostlicentious morals.The Patau chiefs became clamorous for battle ;they broke off the negotiation, and commencedplundering the baggage of the British army. Onthe 21st December, Sir Thomas Hislop determinedto attack the enemy. He had advancedbut a short distance, when his line of march wasopposed by their horse. He found the main armyadvantageously posted on the banks of the ,nearly opposite to Mahidpore, their leftflank protected by the river, their right by adeep ravine ; while their line, which could onlybe approached by one ford, was protected byseveral ruined villages. The bed of the river presenteda cover for the troops in forming, and toturn either of the flanks required a lengtheneddetour : it was accordingly determined to attackthem in front. The advance of the columns wasordered to the ford ; some light troops immediatelypassed, followed by the horse artillery, whichopened at the enemy's guns. The battery of thefoot artillery played from the right bank of theriver, in a situation enfiladed by some cannontheIChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 535the enemy had placed upon his left, which opened isle.a well-directed fire upon the ford. The first brigadeof infantry, after being formed, ascendedthe bank, and, in co-operation with the lighttroops, moved to the storm of the enemy's batterieson the left of his position; the advance oftheir corps being a preconceived signal for thegeneral attack of the whole line. The operationwas performed with great ardour and gallantry ;the fire of the enemy was most destructive, butthe troops pressed forward in the liiost undauntedmanner ; and although the enemy served theirguns till they were bayoneted, their whole linewas forced at every point, while a charge of cavalry,at the same moment, completed the rout.The whole of the enemy's artillery, amounting toseventy pieces of ordnance, was captured, and hefled towards Rampoorah. The loss on the partof the British was very severe. The assault on theleft flank of the enemy was headed with distinguishedgallantry by Sir John Malcolm, fromwhose counsels the commander-in-chief receivedthe greatest aid. Lieut-colonel Scott, Lieut. -colonel Mcdowell, commanding the brigade ofinfantry, and Lieut-colonel Russell and Major J.L. Lushington,* in the brilliant charges of the twobrigades of cavalry, received the highest encomiumsfor their zeal and intrepidity ; as likewiseMajor Noble, in the command of the horse artillery,Now Major-gen. Sir James Law Lushington, K.C.B.536 RISE AND Progress OF THE [Chap XIV.1816. very, his arrangements having produced the mostdestructive effects against the enemy. Lieut. -colonel Morrison, commissary-general, Lieut. colonelMurray McGregor, and Lieut-colonel theHon. L. Stanhope, deputy-adjutant and deputyquarter-master-general, were attached to the com-mander-in-chief, and rendered valuable service.Siege of Ha The unprovoked aggressions of Dya Ram andgaul. Bhugwunt Sing, zemindar in the Dooab, whoheld the two very strong forts of Hatrass andMoorsaum, on the peaceable inhabitants of Agra,the harbour which they also afforded to thievesand robbers, and their total disregard of all theconstituted authorities, — induced the Supreme Governmentto resent their conduct, especially withreference to the disposition evinced in the Patanpopulation in Rohilcund to rise in opposition toa regulation issued by Government.Hatrass was considered one of the strongestforts in India, being kept in perfect repair. On1817. the 11th February 1817, the place was investedby the forces under Major-general Marshall. Aftera fruitless negotiation, the siege was commencedon the 16th. The fortified town was taken on the23d, when approaches were made to the fort. Theworks being completed on the 1st March, forty-twomortars and three trenching batteries ofheavy guns began to play the following morning :in the evening a magazine in the fort blew up.Dya Ram effected his escape in the darkness oftheJChav.XIV.J BRITISH power in INDIA. 537the night, and the remainder of the garrison sur 1817.rendered.The Governor-general having taken the field,and the centre division of the grand army beingassembled at Secunderabad, information wasgiven to Scindiah of the intentions of the BritishGovernment ; and a note was delivered to himin October, remonstrating with him for havingharboured the freebooters. Discussions took place,which terminated in a treaty on the 5th Novem Treaty withn T 1 11 r Scindiah.ber : it was ratified by Scindiah on the day following; he engaged to afford every facility to theBritish troops in their pursuit of the Pindarriesthrough his territories, and to co-operate activelytowards their extinction. He was to furnish ^\^thousand auxiliary horse for the service of thecampaign, and his country and troops were to beregarded as those of an ally.Appa Sahib, the rajah of Nagpore, had not Affairs at Nag-observedthe terms of the treaty existing between ^^^^'him and the Company ; his contingent force wasnot maintained, and he evinced a strong dispositionto support the Peishwa. The Governor-generalwas led to conclude from the correspondencebetween Mr. Jenkins (the resident), and the durbarat Nagpore, that hostile intentions were actuallycherished by the rajah. These suspicionswere strengthened by the circumstance of a khi-haut having been sent from Poonahh, confirmingthe appointment of zuree putkali or general, onAppa538 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1817. Appa Sahib. The resident was requested to be presentat the ceremonial of investiture : this vias declined,as the Peishwa was in a state of hostilitywith the British Government, and had takenmeasures for the removal of the valuables from hispalace : the principal ministers had followed theexample ; troops were assembled in the neighbourhoodof Seetabuldee in considerable numbers, andguns were pointed to the strongest part of theBritish position. These circumstances led Mr.Jenkins to conclude that the negotiation on thepart of the rajah was delusive : he accordingly-madeapplication for reinforcements. In the meantimethe troops under Colonel Scott left their cantonments,and took post on the hill of Seetabuldee,which overlooks the residency and city of Nagpore.Battle of See At six o'clock P.M., whcu further arrangementstabuldee. . i i i iwere m progress to check the enemy, who appearedto be collecting in considerable numbers,an attack was made by the Arabs. They openeda fire on the small party belonging to the resident,and pressed in heavy bodies up the face of thehill against Captain Lord, who had endeavouredto support his men and maintain his post. Atthis critical moment Captain Fitzgerald, reinforcedby a native officer and twenty-five troopersof the Madras body-guard, charged an immensebody of the enemy's horse with their guns, whichwere captured, and immediately turned uponthem. The result of these operations terminatedinChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 539in the defeat of the enemy, who was dispirited by I817.the great and persevering gallantry displayed bythe little band attached to the residency. Mr.Jenkins* was present during the whole of the Animated con-action,and his animated conduct excited the Jenkins, thetroops to these great exertions. Mr. Southey, hisassistant, ** a gallant gentleman," who had exposedhimself in every position, fell severelywounded at the close of the action, and died at Death of Mr.the termination of the day. The whole of the ° ^ ^'troops behaved admirably, the engagement andassaults having lasted during a period of eighteenhours.Brig-general Doveton arrived at Nagpore onthe 12th December, with reinforcements. Measureswere taken to apprize the rajah of theterms which it was proposed to grant him, thetroops being in readiness to commence hostilitiesearly in the morning of the 14th, should he notaccede to the propositions. They had moved downthe hill where they were stationed, as the timehad elapsed at which the rajah's determinationwas to be made known. General Doveton wasthen informed that the orders had been given toput in his possession, by twelve o'clock, the wholeof the rajah's artillery ; and that his agent wouldarrive in camp for that purpose. Instead of actingon this intimation, the first battery of guns wasdrawnRichard Jenkins, Esq., Map., and a Director of the East-indiaCompany.540 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1817. drawn out to oppose the advance of the Britishforce ; but as General Doveton came unexpectedlyupon it, the enemy immediately quitted it. GeneralDoveton then proceeding to attack the enemy'smain body, posted in the Luckee-durrygardens, which movement was followed by adischarge from the whole of their batteries. Onthe 18th December the battery of the Britishtroops opened against the town. On the 26thCapture of terms wcrc granted to the enemy, and at two inNagpore ^Y ^ ^ .General Dove the aftcmoon the City was taken possession of byGeneral Doveton. The conduct of the Rajah ofNagpore had determined the Governor-general toexclude him from the musnud ; but before hislordship's instructions reached the resident,. Mr.Jenkins had, for many weighty and importantreasons, promised to restore him to power.1818. On being apprized of the Governor-general'sviews, he desisted from signing the treaty, otherwisethan subject to the Governor-generals confirmation,and on condition of the rajah ceding allhis territories north of the Nerbuddah, as well ascertainpossessions to the southward, and his rightsin Berar, Gurwilghur, Sirgoojah, and Jushpore,in lieu of the former subsidy and contingent, andother stipulations, to which the rajah agreed ; andhe returned to his palace on the 9th of January,which, with the city, were garrisoned by Britishtroops. Lord Hastings was not satisfied that AppaSahib was sincere. His whole conduct had createdjustIICfiAP. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 541just suspicions in the mind of his lordship. They 18I8.were confirmed by a refusal, on the part of thekilledars of the forts of Bhownagurh, UnderhandHannah, to surrender; whilst it also appearedthat Appa Sahib kept up intercourse byletter with Bajee Rao and others, who were believedto be opposed to the British interests. Mr.Jenkins, fully alive to these circumstances, madethem known in his communications through theGovernor-general's secretary. He determined totake measures for securing the rajah's person,and for bringing him from the palace to the residency,should he perceive any reason to apprehendhis attempt to escape. Circumstances connectedwith the murder of Bala Sahib, the laterajah of Nagpore, to which it was believed AppaSahib was a party, with other incontestable proofsof his treachery, induced Mr. Jenkins, on the 15thof March, to seize his person and convey him tothe residency. Three days afterwards, Mr. Jenkinswas apprized by Mr. Elphinstone that the Peish-wa had received a letter in the hand-writing ofAppa Sahib, proposing a combined movement;which was responded to by Bajee Rao, with ascheme for carrying the object into effect. Appa Appa sahibSahib, with his two ministers, were accordingly bad^^ef^Sissent to the fortress of Allahabad. On the route he ;;7' °" '^'made his escape at Raetorah, one march distantfrom Subbulpore, accompanied in his flight by sixsepoy and two of his attendants. Notwithstandinglarge542 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1818. large rewards were offered for his seizure, he foundan asylum and protection from Chin Sah, the thaisdeclared de poor of Hurry. The Governor-general determinedthroned from .the raj at Nag to declare him dethroned, and to proclaim as hissuccessor the son of Nana Goojur by the daughterof Rajah Ragojee, who died in 1816 ; BakeBaee, the widow of Ragojee, who was murderedby Appa Said, being nominated his guardian. Heattained his majority in 1826. The districts inBerar, including Gawilghur and Narvallah, cededby the Government of Nagpore, were consideredto be valuable acquisitions to the Nizam, beinginsulated within his highness's provinces. Theywere accordingly to be managed by his officers,and held in trust for the British Government.Bajee Rao Bajcc Rao, the cx-Pcishwa, whose flight hasbeen noticed, made his way first to the southwardacross the river Neera, followed by Brig-generalSmith, who had prepared for an active pursuit.Mr. Elphinstone, having made some progress inthe organization of a regular police and a provisionaladministration for the city of Poonahh, accompaniedGeneral Smith's division, under aknowledge of the views of the Governor-generalregarding the Peishwa. Mr. Elphinstone and GeneralSmith divided their force into two divisions :one, consisting wholly of cavalry and light troops,were to follow up the pursuit ; the other was toreduce the forts, and gradually occupy the country.The Peishwa having in his flight to the southwardpursued.IIChap. XTV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 543ward escaped beyond General Smith's pursuit, ^^^^•was constrained by the advance of General Prattler'sdivision to change his route : he took aneasterly direction as far as Oundupore, and thenstruck off to the north-west, followed by BrigsSmith, and passing between Poonahh andSeroor, advanced as far as Outdoor, pointing towardsNassick, having been joined by Trimbuck-see Ganglia with a considerable reinforcement.Finding that General Smith was in a position tointercept his retreat, he suddenly turned to thesouth, by the straight route for Poonahh, pursuedby General Smith. It was at this period that thegallant affair at Corygaum took place under CaptainStaunton. This officer, with a detachment Gallant affair atCorygaum.consisting of a detail of Madras artillery and twosix-pounders, and the second battalion of the firstBengal Native Infantry, about six hundred strong,and about three hundred auxiliary horse, marchedfrom Seroor for Poonahh at eight in the eveningof the 31st December. They reached the heightsoverlooking Corygaum about ten o'clock in theforenoon of the 1st of January, from whence thewhole of the Peishwa's army, amounting to twentythousand horse and several thousand infantry,were discovered in the plain, south of the Beemariver. Captain Staunton immediately moved uponthe village of Corygaum, with the view of occupyingit. He had scarcely succeeded in reachingit, when he was attacked in the most determinedmanner544 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XIV.1818. manner by three divisions of the Peishwa's choicestinfantry, supported by immense bodies of horse,with two pieces of artillery.The contest for the occupation of the villagelasted till nine p.m., during which every pagodaand house had been repeatedly taken and retaken.Towards the close of the evening the detachmentwas in a most trying situation ; nearly the wholeof the artillerymen had been killed or wounded,and also one-third of the infantry and auxiliaryhorse. The exertions made by the European officers,in repeatedly leading their men to the chargewith the bayonet, had diminished their numbers,leaving only Captain Staunton, Lieutenant Jones,and Mr. Wylie, an assistant surgeon, all muchexhausted, to direct the efforts of the remainingpart of the detachment, nearly frantic for the wantof water, and the almost unparalleled exertionsthey had made throughout the day, without anysort of refreshment during twelve hours, and aftera previously fatiguing march of twenty-eightmiles ! At length, under cover of the night, theywere enabled to procure a supply of water. Theenemy providentially abandoned the village, havingsustained an enormous loss in killed and wounded.At daylight on the 2d their force wasstill in sight, but did not make another attack.The detachment then moved on Seroor on thenight of the 2d, which they reached at nine inthe forenoon of the 3d, having had no refreshment,withChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 545with the exception of water, from the 31st of 18I8.December. Captain Staunton brought in nearlythe whole of the wounded, and both the guns andcolours of his regiment.*After this defeat, the Peishwa continued hisflight to the southward, the pursuit being takenup by General Prattler, who pushed him veryclose, but was unable to make any decided impression,although he followed him as far south asGokauk on the Gutpurba, having announced hisintention to invade Mysore. Finding the countryto the south of the Kistna raised against him by theable and active measures of General Munro, he Gen. Munro.contrived, by a sudden movement to the eastward,to get away to Sholapore, from whence BrigadierGeneral Munro wrote on the 16th of May:I am half blind; the heat is excessive, 108°; and not under100° in the day, for nearly a month. It has knocked upmany officers and men, and has nearly finished me.A junction was now formed between GeneralsSmith and Prattler. The fortress of Sattarah wasreduced after the opening of the mortar batteries,when Mr. Elphinstone raised the rajah of Satta-rah's flag, and declared it to be his intention torestore the rajah's authority : he also determinedto issue a proclamation detailing the cause of theruptureWhen intelligence of Captain Staunton's gallant conductreached the Court of Directors, they unanimously resolved topresent him with a sword ornamented with a suitable inscription,and with the sum of five hundred guineas.VOL. ir. 2 X546 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1818. rupture with the Peishwa; and announced thatjustice and order would be maintained ; that therevenue of the country not possessed by the rajahof Sattarah would be retained by the Company andcollected by them ; that all hereditary lands andannual stipends, all religious and charitable establishmentswould be protected, and all religioussects tolerated and their customs maintained, asfar as was just and reasonable. The farming systemwas to be abolished, and officers appointed tocollect a moderate revenue.Restoration of General Smith continued the pursuit, and fellSattarah by Mr. iu with the Pcishwa's force at Ashton, which hepins one. completely defeated on the 19th of February,gaining possession of the rajah of Sattarah and hisfamily, who were brought into camp, and subsequentlyre-established by Mr. Elphinstone at theircapital. The celebrated Gocklah,* the Peishwa'sbest general, fell in this action. He and Trimbuck-see were the advisers of the Peishwa throughout hislate infatuated course. The Peishwa now fled intoCandeish, having been joined on his route by someinfantry and Holkar, who had escaped from ,and by Gunput Rao of Nagpore, withthe remainder of Appa Sahib's army. His causenevertheless appearing to be hopeless, many ofthe principal jaghiredars opened communicationwith Mr. Elphinstone, and abandoned the causeof Bajee Rao. The Outwards set the example,beingFide pages 289 and 523.IChap. XIV] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 547being speedily followed by others, but they ob asiaserved a strict neutrality, the only chiefs of noteremaining with him being Appa Message of Neptune,and Rastia and his brother Chinamen the Vin-chorus.The settlement of the country south ofthe Kistna was assigned to Brigs-general Munro,who wrote from camp, Hobbles, 15th May 1818 :I am engaged in transforming some territories from themost turbulent and ambitious of all the Mahratta jaghire-tars, the Message of Apauree, to the Kolapor Rajah. Ishall not quit my command till I have done all the roughwork for ensuring the quiet of these men hereafter.The Peishwa found his progress to the northwardstopped by the return of Sir Thomas Hislopfrom Malwa to the Deccan ; in the course of whichroute he executed the killed of the fort of Tale Kiiiedarofnear, in consequence of the treacherous conductobserved by the garrison, after the gates had beenopened under surrender. Considerable doubtsexisted as to the killed being personally culpable,but the example was deemed necessary,under the aggravated circumstances and loss whichaccompanied the submission.Bajee Rao, who had eluded his pursuers for sixmonths, now found himself sorely pressed andattempted to advance into Malwa. Sir JohnMalcolm, who was at How on the 18th of May,stationed the forces under Lieut-colonels Russelland Corelli in positions he considered bestcalculated to prevent that step. On the eveN 2 king548 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1818. king of the 15th he learned that a vakeel hadarrived from the Peishwa at Barra, a place nearthe Nerbudda and about forty miles from How ;upon which Sir John determined to move towardsthat place, being quite satisfied that whether hewas to attack him or treat with him, it was not amoment for delay.Operations of Brig-general Munro had made conquests ofMunro. a scries of forts, and conducted other most gallantoperations, with a force on so small a scale asscarcely to have raised a hope that he could haveeffected such services.Colonel Adams took the fort of Chance bystorm at the close of May, and from the want ofammunition was constrained to convert the siegeof Mallygaum in Candeish into a blockade. BajeeRao clung to the vicinity of Asser, from whenceand from Berhampore he had been furnished withsupplies.Bajee Rao sur Sir John Malcolm arrived at Bekangong on therenders to Sir i r» -m /r • i.John Malcolm, 27th of May, at two clock m the morning, wheredelay. he had full communication with the vakeel ofBajee Rao by letter, and learned that the was determined to come to him. Lieut.Low was despatched by Sir John Malcolm to fixapersonal interview for him with the Peishwa.After considerable difficulty and with much reluctance,a meeting took place at the village ofKeree, on the 2d of June, when Sir John Malcolmwith all his family visited him. He appeared lowandChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 549and dejected, and retired for a private interview, isis.when he said that he had been involved in a warhe never intended ; that he was treated as anenemy by the state which had supported his familyfor two generations, and was at that momentin a position that demanded commiseration, andbelieved that he had a real friend in Sir John Malcolm.The latter replied, that every moment ofdelay was one of danger, and that he should eitherthrow himself at once on the British Government,or determine on further resistance. *show can I resistnow ? "he exclaimed, **I am surrounded." SirJohn Malcolm remarked that he was so, but hecould not complain ; that he still had the powerof escape as much as ever, if he wished to becomea freebooter and wanderer, and not accept theliberal provision designed lor him. He replied,with the flattery of which he was master, ** I havefound you, who are my only friend, and will neverleave you — would a shipwrecked mariner, afterhaving reached the port he desired, form a wish toleave it? " Still, upon the plea of a religious ceremony,and that it was an unlucky day, he wishedon the third to postpone till the next day surrenderinghimself up and accepting the propositions,by which he engaged to proceed to Hindostan, apension of not less than eight lacs of rupees perannum being secured to him. To this delay SirJohn Malcolm most positively objected. The firingof some guns in the quarter of Asser had a considerableRISK AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1818.TrimbuckjeeGanglia sent aprisoner toLunar.ScindiahaidsBajee Illo'sinterests.miserable effect upon him, and at eleven he determinedto come to Sir John Malcolm's camp.Trimbuckjee, on learning the dispersion of Ba-seeRao's force, retired to the neighbourhood ofNassick, where he was taken prisoner by MajorWanton, sent round to Bengal, and lodged inthe fort of Chunar. The exertions of Mr. Elphin-stone were very successful in effecting the introductionand establishment of the new government.The settlement of the Bheels in Candeish wasprosecuted by Captain Briggs, under Mr. Elphin-stone's direction, and the state of Sattarah waslikewise making favourable progress.The condition of the newly acquired provinces,and the measures adopted by the British Government(subjects of deep interest) properly formmatter for a separate work. The remaining fugitive,Appa Sahib, the ex-raja of Nagpore, wouldhave been captured near the fort of Asseerghur butfor Jeswunt Rao Sar, who sallied forth and savedhim from his pursuers. He proceeded from thenceto Lahore, where he was allowed to live in absoluteprivacy, on a very scanty allowance from UnmeetSing : a permission extended by that chief in amanner which showed his sincere desire not todissatisfy the British Government. It becameevident in the course of the proceedings connectedwith the temporary surrender of the fort of Assertrequired from Scindiah under the treaty ofNovember 1817, that secret communications andengagementsChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 551engagements were carried on between the Maha- asiarajah and Juswunt Rao Sar, the commandant, insupport of the fortunes of Bajee Rao, the ; a fact admitted by Scindiah, when theresident placed his highness's own letter in thehands of one of his principal ministers, whodeclared that it would be in vain to deny his master'shandwriting. It was acknowledged by Scin-dial ; he extenuated his conduct by appealing tothe embarrassment in which he stood in regard toBajee Rao. When he was apprized that the Governwould content himself with retainingAsseergurh, not as a punishment but as a security,he was greatly relieved, and still more so on beingassured that if his highness would deal candidlyin future, all should be buried in oblivion.When the Marquis of Hastings was pursuing Marquis ofHastings'shis route through the several districts of the revenue andLower Provinces in 1815, also during the whole of notes.his tour through the western provinces, he constantlyturned his attention to the several subjectsconnected with the revenue and judicial systems.His lordship forwarded to the Court two elaboratereports : the first in the revenue department,under date the 15th September 1815 ; the secondin the judicial department, of the 2d Octoberfollowing. The revenue minute, with its accompanyingdocuments, formed a body of valuableinformation, exhibiting the views and sentiments ofvarious ministerial revenue officers, and containingmanyRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.many useful and important suggestions respectingthe nature of the systems that had been pursued,and their operation on the body of the people.After offering suggestions for promoting the efficiencyand improving the system, his lordshipstated, he was by no means satisfied that he haddone justice to the subject; still he had soughtwith great earnestness to inform himself accuratelyon the spot, having had the means of recurringto the amplest sources of instruction. As ageneral position, he remarked, that the pecuniaryadvantages of the Company were in a rapidlyprogressive course, but they were at the sametime precarious.It was by preponderance of power that those mines ofwealth had been acquired for the Company's treasury, andby preponderance of power alone could they be retained.The supposition that the British power could discard themeans of strength and yet enjoy the fruits of it, was onethat would certainly be speedily dissipated ; in the state ofIndia, were we to be feeble our rule would be a dream, anda very short one.These remarks present a strong contrast to theviews taken by Marquis Hastings, when LordRawdon in 1802, and tend to corroborate everyopinion advanced by parties who have been consideredbest qualified to form a judgment on thesubject. His lordship's judicial minute reviewedthe subject under the three divisions of police,criminal justice, and civil judicature.Police »Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 553Police. — Anterior to 1792, the large indecent isis.dent jurisdictions of native magistrates, or founders,though acting under the eye of our ownrevenue officers, completely failed ; the substitutionof European magistrates produced no amendmentof the police of the country ; experience hadshown that the landholders were not to be trustedwith the exclusive management of the police oftheir own estates, as it had been frequently misappliedto purposes of private revenge ; indeed itspowers had been thus universally diverted. It was,therefore determined, in 1792, to introduce theThannadarree,* or stipendiary police institution,into Bengal. It was an operative mechanismwhich gave weight to the authority of government,and of its officers, and reduced the spirit of violenceand lawless rapine which seemed then toprevail under the collusive if not overt support ofthe landholders and farmers of every district. Itwas fully equal to the effectual performance of allthe duties of police which follow the actual perpetrationof crime. It may be compared with theexisting system of metropolitan police in thiscountry, being ** found equal to the best organizedsystems of Europe'* The same exclusive notionsof profession prevail, and they have the mostthorough conviction that their continuance inoffice and means of livelihood depend upon thesatisfactionFrom thanadaVf a petty police officer.554 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1818. satisfaction they may give to their superiors in thedischarge of the duties entrusted to them.Criminal Justice. — The legitimate object in thetrial and punishment of offenders beyond the hopeof correction, being the suppression of crimes bythe terror of example, the utility of punishment isdiminished and the effect of example is weakened,where the offence itself is nearly forgotten by thedelay in the punishment. The grand object foramending the administering justice, was findingthe means of accelerating the final sentence oncriminals, by the establishment of a separate courtof ultimate jurisdiction in the remote possessionsof the Company.Civil Judicature. — The judicial establishments,-notwithstanding the great and constant addition tothe enormous expense, were inadequate to the disposalof the suits. The list of undecided causesvas great, but the unknown number not broughtforward, from despair of a decision within a reasonabletime, constituted a grievance which baffledall calculation. A common peasant could notget redress for a trifling exaction, bitterly oppressiveto an indigent man, unless he couldabide a contest of from seven to nine years. It isimpossible to enter at length into the various pointswhich press themselves upon the mind, in consideringthis deeply important subject with referenceto India. It is one which has of late years beenattracting considerable attention. It had obtainedtheChap. XIV] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 655the early notice of Lord William Bentinck, in his asialordship's government of Madras in 1806, andagain when at the head of the Supreme Governing1828, and formed a prominent subject in theCharter Act of 1834.In testimony of the high sense which the Court 1819,of Directors entertained of the services the Marquis East-indiai Company voteHastings had rendered to the East-india Com- ^60,000 to^ ^ Marquis Hast-any,at the close of two glorious and successful i»gs.wars, as they appeared on the records of the Company; and being deeply impressed with a sense ofthe merits and services of his lordship, and of theunwearied assiduity with which he devoted himselfto the attainment of a comprehensive knowledgeof the Company's affairs, they recommendedto the Court of Proprietors to grant the sum of£60,000 from the territorial revenues of India, tobe laid out in the purchase of estates in any partof the United Kingdom, so that the fee simple ofsuch estates might be settled in a manner bestcalculated to perpetuate the sense entertained ofhis lordship's high and meritorious services asGovernor-general of the British possessions inIndia. The grant was unanimously confirmed bythe General Court on the 23d June 1819.During the further part of his lordship's administrationvarious discussions arose between thefunctionaries of the British and Dutch governments.Sir Stamford Raffles, who proceeded to Ben-cooled556 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1819. cooler with the designation of Lieut-governor atof^Sn^p^e"^ the close of 1817, was intimately acquaintedwith the various interests in that quarter, andwith the positions which presented the best meansfor successfully competing with the preponderatinginfluence of the Dutch, whose power hadbeen re-established in all its ancient authority.The conflicting questions that arose, formed subjectsof reference to Bengal. The possession ofSingapore ofl* point Romania, in the direct routeto China, upon which Sir S. Raffles had plantedthe British flag, brought matters to an open issue.The Marquis of Hastings recorded a minute, inwhich he did full justice to the zeal of Sir StamfordRaffles in his desire to uphold the Britishinterests, and earnestly pressed upon the Homeauthorities the expediency of coming to a settle-negotiationsment with the Dutch on the points in dispute.commissioners. Mr. Canning, then President of the Board of Controlsuggested the nomination of a select committee,with whom he could hold confidential communication,to enable him to meet the Netherlandscommissioners.Netherlands' The negotiations were greatly protracted fromthe necessity of reference, on various points, toIndia. The whole terminated in the treaty of 1824,by which the Dutch settlements on the continentof India, with Malacca, and the undisputed right toSingapore, were ceded to the British Government,the Dutch acquiring in exchange Sumatra, with allthetreaty.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 557the Company's rights on that island. The treaty, asia.which was signed at London on the 17th of March1824, afforded grounds for attacking the policy ofthe British Minister, who had been a party to thecessions at the peace of 1814, a policy which wasconsidered to be still recognized by the acknowledgmentof the Dutch monopoly in the SpiceIslands, until such time as the Government of theNetherlands should think fit to relinquish it.whatever was secured to Great Britain in theindian Archipelago, may, in a great measure, beAttributed to the perseverance and discernment[f Sir Stamford Raffles, who hoped, in some de'ee, to compensate his country for the abandon-lentof their former conquests. His conduct wastreated with severity by the Colonial Secretary, ini824, who, in ignorance of the leading pointswhich bore upon the subject, desired to draw offattention from the real merits of the question tohighly coloured and overcharged picture of the)duct of the Lieut-governor of Bencoolen,those principles, had they been followed out,would have secured infinitely better terms for theBritish interests.The office of governor of Bombay having becomeleant by the resignation of Sir Evan Nepean,T. Canning, as President of the Board, intimatedto the Court his readiness to confirm theelection of one of those eminent servants of theCompany, who had so highly distinguished themselves558 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chxv. XIV.1818. selves in the public employ. The Directors fullyappreciated this mark of confidence, and madechoice of the Hon. Mountstuart Elphinstone,whose name has been frequently noticed in thisvolume. He was nominated governor of Bombayin October 1818.The Vizier of Oude assumed the title of Kingin 1819. In 1820, Futteh Sing, the Guicowar,died, and was succeeded by Seajee Rao. Theconduct of Major Carnac,* the resident, washighly applauded by the Supreme Government,who expressed their sense of that officer's servicesto the Court of Directors.Missions were dispatched to Siam and Cochin-china,under Dr. Crawford, an assistant-surgeonon the Bengal establishment : Dr. Finlayson, thecelebrated naturalist, accompanying the mission.Marquis Hast The Marquis of Hastings had for some timeingsrei 8. entertained a wish to relinquish the government,and in the month of May 1822, intimated that heshould resign his charge. His lordship's administrationpartook of the character attached to thatof Marquis Wellesley. The course of policy confdenned by Lord Hastings, in former days, whenhe was but little acquainted with the affairs ofIndia, formed the model upon which his lordshipacted in the wars with the Pindarries and theMahratta chieftains. The course of his lordship'shighly distinguished service, extended over a protracted♦ Now Sir James Rivet Carnac, Bart.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 559traced period, and was considered to merit some isis.further marks of approbation. A proposition for anadditional grant was brought under consideration.Some questions arose on a subject connected withthe pecuniary transactions of the house of Messrs.William Palmer and Co., at Hydrabad, and the Affairs atr Tvr- mi t i i Hydrabad.government ot the Nizam. Ie proceeding led toresolution in the Court of Proprietors, in March24, which was followed by the production ofI the papers connected with the transactions ofat house. The question opened a wide field forsession, involving the general principle ofone-dealing between Europeans and the nativeinches.Much anxiety had been invariably manifestedthe Court of Directors to check such dealings :heir orders proving ineffectual, Parliament, byan Act in 1797, declared all pecuniary transactionswith native Princes, unless sanctioned byeDirectors, or by the Government abroad, toillegal. By the fifteenth article of the treatywith the Nizam, of the 12th October 1800, it wasclaret that the British Government "■ had nomanner of concern with any of his highness' sub-actsor servants, with respect to whom his lightsis absolute." The rajah Chundoo Loll, who,the year 1811, had become the real executiveminister of the Nizam's government, was supportedby the British Resident, in opposition toooneer-ool-Moolk, who had been chosen by theNizam560 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1819. Nizam. Mr. Henry Russell succeeded as residenton the 20th May 1811. The Nizam about thisperiod determined to investigate the accounts ofrajah Chundoo Loll, and also to inquire into hisconduct in the collection of the revenues. Anobjection vias taken by the rajah to the Nizam'smaking reference to subordinate officers for informationon points connected with such inquiry.This objection was supported by the Resident,who considered that it would have been fatal torajah Chundoo Loll's cause and authority.If (observed Mr. Russell) the rajah had been unablehimself to prevail upon the Nizam to relinquish the design,I should have concluded it an instance in which it wouldhave been absolutely necessary for me to interpose my influenceactively and decidedly in the rajah's support. ,and the persons connected with him, mayhave been intimidated by seeing that I was resolved tosupport the rajah.Such a proceeding, in defiance of the treaty,must have created a very unfavourable opinion ofour good faith, and presented a strong contrast tothe course pursued in the case of Mahomed ReaCawn, in 1772, who, merely on surmise, andprevious to any investigation, was brought downfrom the high office he had filled of dewan, as aculprit to Calcutta.* The attempt on the part ofthe British resident, at the present day, to throw ashield over the transactions of the minister of anative♦ Fide vol. i. pages 356-357.Chap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 5G1native prince, who desired to inquire into the isis.conduct of his servant, was sufficient to causeboth surprise and suspicion.The Nizam abandoned the inquiry in disgust.It was alleged that his highness was weak, andincompetent to the duties of his government, andthat he had the failing of avarice, so common toAsiatic princes. What less likely method couldhave been devised for infusing vigour into hiscouncils, or for promoting the blessings of Britishrule, than that which was adopted ?The establishment of the house of Messrs.William Palmer and Co., within the residency,followed on the 1st of August 1811. On the 6thApril 1814, two years and four months after thefirst establishment of the house, Mr. Russell, the Messrs wm.Palmer esta-resident,forwarded an application from Messrs. finished at WilliamPalmer and Co., requesting permissionto form a mercantile establishment at Hyderabadand accompanied it with an opinion that it wouldprove a source of general convenience and benefit :but no allusion whatever was made to the pastexistence of the firm, although, from the statementsubsequently obtained by order of Government,the accounts showed dealings with Chundoo Loll,on behalf of the Nizam's Government, between 1stAugust 1811 and the 6th September 1815, ofKs.71,63,196, or upwards of £700,000 : the ba Extent of theirtransactions.lance in favour of Messrs. William Palmer and Co.being Rupees nine lacs seven thousand, or nearlyVOL. II. 2 o £100,000.562 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1819. £100,000. In June 1814, the sanction of theSupreme Government was given to the establishmentof the house. From that period to the 26thAug. 1816, the transactions were comparatively-trifling.The debit against the Nizam had beenreduced in the sum of Rs. 1,57,159, leaving inrupees a balance of 7,50,233 in favour of Messrs.Palmer and Co.In June 1816, a doubt being entertained of thelegality of the money transactions of Messrs.William Palmer and Co. with the Nizam, theysought exemption from legal responsibility bysoliciting a license from Government, as requiredby the Act of 1797. In preferring the application,they stated: 'your transactions have alwaysbeen open and public : and whenever we haveconsidered them as connected with the government,they have been directly with the minister,who possesses the confidence and support ofthe British Government'' But the transactionsfrom August 1811 to April 1814 were not knownto the Government, and Mr. Russell states that itnever entered into his conception, nor could ithave entered into that of any body who knew thefacts as they then existed, that the pursuits whichthey contemplated bore any resemblance to a houseof business.It may be asked, what was the nature of theestablishment originally ? — No office nor establishment,and yet dealings to the extent ofnearlyChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 563nearly £700,000, occurring under an imperceptible 1819.progress.* The license, in accordance with theAct, was issued in August 1816; from that dateto May 1818, the transactions scarcely amountedaltogether to £90,000, whilst the unknown debitagainst the Nizam was, at the moment, not lessthan £75,000.tThe next proceeding on the part of Messrs. WilliamPalmer and Co., was an agreement to furnishthe sum of 52,000 rupees, monthly, for thepayment of one thousand of the Circarr horse inBerar. This account was kept separate from theHydrabad account. The latter, up to May 1818,presented a balance against the Nizam of Rs.14,69,755, or more than £165,000; that on accountof the Berar horse to the sum of Rs. 2,75,127,or £27,000, making an aggregate balance onthe two accounts of Rs. 17,44,882, or £179,000against the Nizam, up to the 19th May ; at whichperiod the only authorized transaction was that ofthe Berar horse, for which Messrs. Palmer wereto furnish 52,000 rupees monthly. On this accountthey received cash payments from the Governmentexceeding the cash payments of the house, butby adding allowances, and interest, and merchandize,and appropriating the payments receivedfrom the Nizam, partly to the Hydrabad balanceand partly to the Berar horse account, the balanceon the whole transaction amounted, intheVide Printed Papers, page 152. f Ibid, page 153.2 o25G4 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [ChapXIV.1819. the aggregate, to Rupees 17,44,882, or about£174,000.Another transaction was entered into in May1818, called the Aurungabad Account y by whichMessrs. William Palmer and Co. were to providetwo lacs of rupees monthly, at Aurungabad, forthe payment of the remaining three thousandhorse, four battalions of infantry, and the artillery.This measure was reported to the Bengalgovernment in December 1818. In January 1819,the Government called for certain explanations ofthe accounts, and appear to have been satisfiedwith the imperfect returns made to them fromHydrabad, as they had reference to a portiononly of the Aurungabad agreement, whichshowed a balance against the Nizam, from the19th May 1818 to the 23d January 1819, of Rs.11,09,125, or about £110,000: interest havingbeen charged at the rate of one and a-half permenses.The combined results of the Hydrabad, theBerar horse, and the Aurungabad accounts, fromMay 1818 to July J819, showed a debit againstthe Nizam and in favour of Messrs. WilliamPalmer and Co. of Rs. 32, 15,069, or upwards of£300,000.On the 19th May 1820, Rajah Chundoo Loll,being desirous of diminishing the expenses of thegovernment, and of prosecuting general measuresofVide Printed Papers, page 1 .'M>.Chap. XI v.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 565of reform, required the command of money to alarge extent : he accordingly applied to Messrs.William Palmer and Co. for the loan of sixtylacs. The house agreed to lend the sum on receivingfrom the Nizam's government assignmentof revenue to the extent of sixteen lacs annually,and provided the sanction of the Resident could beobtained to the transaction. The measure was supportedby the Governor-general and Mr. Kendall,but opposed by Mr. Stuart and Mr. Adam : thecast ng vote of the Governor-general carried the measure,which was sanctioned on the 15th July 1820;the rate of the interest on this was understood tobe about sixteen per cent. The accounts of thehouse being made up with the Nizam from the23d July 1819 to the 12th August 1820, the dateof the sixty lacs loan, the balance against theNizam and in favour of the house was increasedfrom Rs.32, 15,069, as it stood on the 23d July1819, to Rs. 61,70,380.The account of the sixty lacs loan was openedon the 12th August 1820, with two transfers fromthe Hydrabad account of Rs. 52,00,000 and8,00,000, being exactly the sixty lacs, which SirCharles Metcalfee discovered formed the pre-existingdebt. The answer given to the explanationrequired of the house was termed *' shuffling andevasive," and confirmatory of the suspicion thatthe sixty lacs loan was a fiction and a fraud ; theGovernor's.566 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XIV.1819, Governor general and the whole of the Councilconcurred in this opinion.Results. The minister gained nothing by this transaction.The measures of reform which he contemplatedintroducing, by means of this intended loan, wereidle dreams ; the government of the Nizam wasnot a whit the better for the apparent zeal of hisminister, or the professed liberality of the commercialestablishment, formed in the belief that itwould benefit the government of his highness,whilst the house obtained the sanction of the BritishGovernment to the whole of its extraordinarytransactions. Something of a complex arrangementappears to have been suggested for substitutinga bonus of eight lacs in lieu of interest, butno advantage accrued to the affairs of the Nizam,the calculation either way proving to be much thesame in point of amount.The transaction recalls the early crusadeswhich were made against the coffers of Asiaticprinces, and tarnishes the administration of a distinguishednobleman, who appears to have beenmade the dupe of designing men in the prosecutionof unsanctioned if not unlawful speculations.The Proprietors of East-india stock called forthe whole of the papers, which have been printedfor their information : whether with the view toany ulterior proceedings on the question is not yetapparent.TheChap. XIV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 567The Marquis Hastings quitted Calcutta in Jan. I823.823. In the passage home, his lordship drew outa summary of his administration, which was transmittedto the court from Gibraltar by the hands ofhis military secretary on the 5th May.His lordship's services were again brought underthe consideration of the Court of Directors, andon the 3d September a resolution was moved togrant his lordship, in consideration of his meritoriousservices, an annuity of £5,000 for the termof twenty years, for the benefit of his family. Aftera lengthened discussion, the motion of adjournmentwas lost by the votes on the question beingequal. The same result attended the propositionfor the intended grant.In August 1827, the sum of £20,000 was granted Vote of1 ^ r 1 , n , ^ ^20,000 tobythe Company to trustees, lor the benefit of the Marquis ofpresent Marquis when he came of age, in testis famiiy?^^ ^mony of the sense entertained by the East-indiaCompany of the services of his noble father.568 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.CHAPTER XV,1822.Mr. Canine: The circumstances which led to the nominationappointed ,of the Right Hon. George Canning, in March1822, as Governor general in succession to theMarquis Hastings, and Mr. Canning's subsequentresignation of that appointment in the month ofSeptember following, require a brief referenceto the state of public affairs in England at thatperiod.On the accession of his Majesty King Georgethe Fourth, the Queen's name was expunged fromthe liturgy. Overtures were made to her Majestyin the spring of 1820, to induce her to resideabroad : they were rejected by the Queen, whodetermined to repair to this country. On theQueen's arrival a message was sent down to theHouse of Lords from the King,* which led to theproceeding by a Bill of Pains and Penalties againsther Majesty.In the discussion which took place in the Houseof Commons, Mr. Canning defended the courseadopted by Ministers, who, he contended, in nowaystood in the character of the Queen's accusers.♦ 5th June 1820.Chap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 569accusers. He at the same time declared, that it was I822.his intention to abstain individually from all furtherinterference in the transaction. This declarationwas made advisedly, after a full communicationwith his colleagues, and as an alternativesuggested by them for his then retiring from theadministration. On the 22d June, a motion submittedby Mr.Wilberforce, in the hope that itmight produce an amicable adjustment, was carried^by 391 against 134; and was presented tothe Queen on the 24th, who rejected the proposition,on the ground that her Majesty declined toconsent to the sacrifice of any essential privilege,or to withdraw an appeal to those principles ofpublic justice, which are alike the safeguard ofthe highest and the humblest individual.On the same day that her Majesty's answerwas received by the House of Commons, Mr.Canning laid at the feet of the King the tender ofhis resignation. His Majesty commanded him toremain in his service, abstaining as completely ashemight think proper from any share in the proceedingsrespecting the Queen, and gave him fullauthority to plead his Majesty's commands for socontinuing in office. During the progress of theBill of Pains and Penalties, Mr. Canning was purposelyabsent from England, and returned onlyafter it had been withdrawn on the 23d November.Before this measure of withdrawal, as proposedin the Lords by the Earl of Liverpool, could beofficially570 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1822. officially noticed in the House of Commons, andwhile Mr. Penman was in the act of presentingto the House a message from the Queen, the deputyusher of the black rod entered the house,and delivered a message which could not beheard, for the incessant cry of ** withdraw." TheSpeaker, accompanied by some of the ministerialmembers, proceeded to the Lords, where assentwas given by commission to a private bill, andthe Chancellor acquainted the House, that parliamentwas prorogued until the 23d January.These proceedings, with the discussions whichmight ensue, determined Mr. Canning to renewthe tender of his resignation as president of theBoard of Control, which was accepted. In makingthese facts known to one of his constituents atLiverpool on the 22d December, he declared hisintention of absenting himself from England untilthis calamitous affair should be at an end. Heaccordingly did not return until June 1821. WhenMr. Canning retired from the head of the Board ofControl, the Court of Directors expressed theregret which they felt on the occasion. To thissentiment Mr. Canning fully responded, assuringthe Court of the satisfaction with which the officialintercourse had been carried on between theChairs and himself.The position in which Mr. Canning stood at thismoment, afforded the Court an opportunity of testifyingtheir sense of his peculiar fitness for theofficeChap. X v.] BRITISH POWER IN INHI A. 571office of governor-general, and they passed an 1822.unanimous resolution, in March 1822, nominatinghim thereto, in succession to the Marquis Hastings.The lamented death of the Marquis of London Death of Marquisof Longtook place on the 12th August following; dogberry.an event which led to the surmise that Mr. Canning,who had not yet sailed for Bengal, althoughnearly complete in his preparations, might bedetained in this country in the course of theofficial arrangements that would become necessary.But at a dinner given to him on the 30thAugust at Liverpool, as a farewell meeting beforeleaving England, he declared that he knew nothingmore than the gentlemen around him, ofthe future political arrangements for the country,and that he had not suspended his preparationsfor departure, nor had he any ground beyond thatwhich lay open to himself in common with allthe world, for apprehending that his departurewas likely to be intercepted.It was not very probable that talents so ad Mr. canning•^ * nominatedmiracle adapted, both for Parliament and office, secretary of•^ ^ . state for foreignwould be permitted to be lost to the Home ser affairs; resignsappointment tovice 01 the country. On the 18th of September, India.Mr. Canning was nominated secretary of state forforeign affairs : he consequently resigned intothe hands of the Court of Directors the appointmentwhich they had so honourably conferredupon him. India suffered much in the loss of amind so comprehensive and highly cultivated.Entertaining572 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.18?2. Entertaining most liberal views, and vv^ith opinionson some of the most important measures of theIndia government, entirely in consonance withthose of the most valued and revered instrumentswho had taken part in the administration of thatimmense and interesting empire.Sir Thomas Munro, who had been appointedgovernor of Madras in 1819, wrote to Mr. Canningfrom thence on the 1st of May 1823 :I would have written sooner had I not been prevented bythe expectation of seeing you in India. That hope is now atan end ; and as I can have no claim to intrude upon yourtime in your new duties, I write merely for the purpose oftaking leave of you as chief director of India affairs. Yournot coming has been a great disappointment to me : but Ido not regret it ; I rather, for the sake of the country, rejoicethat you have remained at home. Every man who feels forits honour, must be proud to see that there are public menwho prefer fame, founded on the exertion of great anduseful talents, to wealth and splendour. As minister, youcan still be of great service to India, by supporting measurescalculated for its advantage, and by giving India thesame freedom of trade as England. By not coming, you haveescaped the irksome task of toiling daily through heaps ofheavy long-drawn papers. I never had a very high opinionof our records, but it was not until my last return that Iknew that they contained such a mass of useless trash.*When the point of a successor to the importantoffice,It is a singular circumstance, that these two eminent menpaid the debt of nature within a few weeks of each other. Hadthe one returned home, as he originally intended, and the otherproceeded as governor-general, their lives might probably havebeen spared to their country.Chap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 573office, thus vacated, came under consideration, two JS23names were brought before the Court of Directors, appoint^'co-the Earl Amherst being proposed by the Chairs, '^''^^'■^'^''■''^'and Lord William Bentinck on his own appeal tothe Court. The latter personage observed, on thisas on all other occasions, that frankness and candourwhich are inherent qualities in an honourableand independent mind ; his lordship felt that hehad strong claims on the consideration of the East-indiaCompany ; he had rendered them good andfaithful service, and had been abruptly and unceremoniouslydismissed from office when in the actof following out principles admitted to have beensound and judicious. His lordship's previous acquaintancewith the affairs of India was a strong-additionalrecommendation. It was neverthelessdetermined that his lordship's further services inthe East should be postponed to a future day.Lord Amherst accordingly proceeded as governor-general,which office he assumed on the 1st ofAugust 1823: Mr. Adam having filled it fromJanuary 1822, when the Marquis of Hastingsquitted Bengal.The war with Ava, as had been the casewith Mysore in 1799, and with Nepaul in 1814,was devolved upon the Governor-general as alegacy by his predecessor. Lord Amherst found Causes of timehimself, in a few months after his arrival, constrainedto take measures for the support of theBritish power. Differences had been occasioned atan574 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1S23. an early period by the incursions of a race ofpeople called Mhugs.^ They were subjects of theking of Ava, and had sought refuge in the Company'sprotection from the cruelties of the Burmese,who had conquered their country, and inflictedupon them the greatest severities. Thecountenance which they felt thus extended, ledthem to attempt a recovery of the lands fromwhence they had been driven. Frequent skirmishesensued, and the Burmese pursuing thefugitives into the Company's provinces, led toaggressions, which it was endeavoured to settle,and in future prevent, by a mission to Ava; throughwhich it was anticipated a good understandingwould be established. But the sovereign of Avawas vain, haughty, and imperious. His successesagainst Munnipoor and Assam had inspired himwith high conceptions of his own prowess, andbrought him in more immediate contact with theBritish frontiers. Still Lord Hastings did notattach importance to this spirit, nor did his lordshipentertain the slightest apprehension of anirruption on the part of Ava. The object of theBritish Government was to maintain a peacefulcommercial intercourse, and to avoid all measuresthat might lead to any misunderstanding. Theconduct of the Burmese at the commencement of1824, rendered it impossible to maintain furtherpacific relations. Their chiefs, during a period ofpeace,Vide vol. i. page 568.Chap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 575peace, and without any previous attempt at explanationor negotiation, made a night attack on theisland of Shapooree, immediately below Tek Neuf,on the coast of Arracan, where they drove awaythe small guard of British troops stationed on theisland for its defence, several of whose lives weresacrificed ; and they thus took violent possessionof what was indisputable British property. On anexplanation of this conduct being demanded fromthe governor of Ava, the enemy vauntingly declaredtheir determination to retain possession ofthe island, and intimated that unless the right ofAva to Shapooree was distinctly admitted, thesovereign of that kingdom would invade the Britishterritories. Immediately following this attack,the commanding officer and some of the crew ofthe Company's cruiser Sophia were detained onshore by the Burmese and carried into the interior;and although ultimately released, it waswithout any explanation or apology for so unjustifiablea proceeding. Other hostile acts werecommitted, at the same time, by some Burmeseofficers commanding on the north-eastern part oftheir country, comprising the disputed boundarybetween Kulee and Munnipore, contiguous to Ca-char.They actually advanced their troops into thelatter provinces, and took post within five milesonly of the town of Sylhet, and only two hundredand twenty-six from Calcutta. Cachar was underthe protection of the British Government, fromwhence1824.576 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1824^ whence also the Burmese generals planned theconquest of Interea, immediately adjoining Ca-char: calling on the rajah to acknowledge hisallegiance to the government of Ava.Proclamation Thcsc repeated asrsrressions constrained theof war with r &0Ava. Governor-general to issue a proclamation on the5th of March, by which the Ava Government wasdeclared to be in the position of a public enemy.All British subjects, both European and native,were accordingly prohibited from holding communicationwith the people of that state until thedifferences were terminated. The causes of thesemeasures were then explained : — ** The deliberatesilence of the court of Amerapoora, as well as thecombination and extent of the operations undertakenby its officers, leave it no longer doubtful,that the acts and declarations of the subordinateauthorities are fully sanctioned by their sovereign.The Governor-general in Council, therefore, forthe safety of the subjects, and the security of ourdistricts, already seriously alarmed and injured bythe approach of the Burmese armies, has felt himselfimperatively called on to anticipate the threatenedinvasion. The national honour no less obviouslyrequires, that atonement should be had forwrongs so wantonly inflicted, and so insolentlymaintained : and the national interests equallydemand that we should seek, by an appeal toarms, that security against future insult and aggression,which the arrogance and grasping spiritofChap. XV.]BRITISH POWER IN INDIA,of the Burmese government have denied to friendlyexpostulation and remonstrance."The war in which the British Government wasabout to engage, was thus one of self-defence andviolated territory. In contemplating the measuresadopted for the prosecution of hostilities, the greatdeficiency of information possessed by the officialauthorities at Calcutta regarding the country, itsroutes, and passes, as well as the want of opinionand advice of experienced authorities on the bestcourse of operations, and the most favourableperiod for commencing them, was thoroughly apparent.It was not to be expected that LordAmherst, who, with the exception of the embassyto China in 1815, had been in no way connectedwith the East, should have any intimateacquaintance with the general state of affairs inIndia ; and still less could it be supposed thathe should possess any knowledge of a people,or the interior geography of a country, of whichthe official functionaries themselves appear tohave been so little cognizant. The advance fromBengal was at one time intended to have beenmade into Ava through Arracan, and the forceacting simultaneously, was to proceed from Ca-char;but Arracan was found too unhealthy toadmit of that plan being carried forward.At length, in the month of May, a considerableforce was assembled at Port Cornwallis, underVOL. II. 2 p Majores.force578 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1824 Major-general Sir Archibald Campbell and Com-bdicomm'^nds m^dore Grant. On the 11th of that month,Jo^r''"^^"^ Rangoon, the principal seaport of Ava, surrenderedto the British troops. A detachment fromthe main body of his force had been sent againstthe island of Hecuba, situated to the south ofAkyab, on the Arracan coast, under Brig-generalM'Creagh; and another against Nigra, at theentrance of the Irriwaddy, under Major Ahab.Both measures were successful : but the latterisland proved to be not worth retaining. On the10th of June a successful attack was made onthe enemy's stockades at Kemmundine ; thearmy advanced up the river, accompanied by theflotilla.On the 1st of July, the enemy made a generalattack on the British force, but were repulsed ;and in another engagement, on the 8th, the enemysuffered very severely. The steam-boat whichaccompanied the flotilla, was of the greatest service.In connexion with this fact it has beenrelated, that the Burmese had an ancient tradition,by which their capital would remain invincibleagainst all enemies, until a vessel shouldadvance up the Irriwaddy without oars or sails !This may have led the court of Ava to assumesuch ungrounded confidence ; although they, aswell as ourselves some few years before, couldnever have dreamed that a steam-boat, withoutoarsChap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 579oars or sails, would be advancing up their great 1824.river, in hostile array, towards the capital.*On the coast of Tenasserim, the valuable possessionsof Tavoi and Mergui were captured by aforce under Colonel Miles ; and an important conquestwas made on the 30th of October of Martaban,by a force dispatched from the Rangoonriver, under Colonel Godwin. The submission ofTenasserim followed, which brought the whole ofthe Burmese coast into subjection to the Britishauthority. On the 1st December Sir ArchibaldCampbell defeated the Bundoolah, who com- The Bundoo-^ . lah defeated.landed a force which was stated to consist offifty or sixty thousand men ; and the British generalstormed the works thrown up by the Avachief, which greatly dispirited their attempts atdefence. The Burmese war-boats were at thesame time successfully attacking the British flotilla; whilst the main army was thus making progressagainst the enemy, the Burmese gained anadvantage at Ramon, in Chittagong, and got possessionof the stockade station of Tek Naaf : buttheir troops in Silent retreated before a force underColonel Jones. After some operations at the ^^^^•opening of 1825, Sir A. Campbell made preparationsin February for advancing from Rangoontowards Prone.GeneralThis anecdote was related to the author by Colonel SirJohn Hopkins, who commanded the Madras artillery in theAva war.2p 2580 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [CirArXV.1825. General Cotton, with the flotilla under CaptainsAlexander and Chaos, of the Royal navy, advancedtowards Donabew, for the purpose of reducingthat stronghold of the enemy. The advancewas retarded by a variety of impediments, togetherwith the extreme intricacy of the passage andwant of water, with numerous shallows, whilethe enemy, well acquainted with the navigation,availed themselves of the opportunity to stationwar-boats, from which they greatly annoyed ourtroops. It was not till the 6th of March that theArmy reaches British forces reached a position two miles belowDonabew. r •Donabew. The enemy refusing to surrender, preparationswere made on the 7th to commence anattack on the stockade, with a detachment underColonel O'Donoghue and Major Hardy. Aftera gallant opposition by the enemy, they gainedthe first line of defence. On attempting the second,situated about six hundred yards from the pagodastockade, the enemy had made such effectualpreparations that, after severe loss, the detachmentwas constrained to retire ; when General Cotton,rather than risk the great loss which would eventuallyhave been entailed by pressing operations,of the success of which he had no doubt, determinedto remark and await reinforcements.Sir A. Campbell, from premature reports, believedthat the operations had been successful, and consequentlymade a retrograde movement and approachedDonabew, where he arrived on the 25th,andCiiAP. XV.British POWER IN INDIA.and opened a communication with General Cot ^825.ton.On the 27th batteries having been erected, theyopened on the 1st of April, and on the 2d Sir A.Campbell had the satisfaction to learn that theenemy were in full retreat : Donabew was takenpossession of, and Sir A. Campbell resumed hisadvance towards Prome, which place he entered British armyon the 25th of April. Rungpore had capitulated toColonel Richards on the 1st of July, by whichthe Burmese were expelled from Assam. GeneralShuldham was advancing amongst impenetrablejungles towards Munnipore, situated about twohundred miles west of the capital of Ava ; andGeneral Morrison succeeded in gaining possessionof Arracan, after defeating the enemy in severalbrilliant operations.On the 17th of September, negotiations for peace Negotiationswere carried on at Meeadi, between Lieut-colonel ^^^^^^^'Tidy and Lieutenant Smith and some Burmeseofficers, duly authorized by the Ava minister,when articles were exchanged between the parties,by which a cessation of hostilities from the17th of September to the 17th of October was totake place ; the chief minister from Ava was tomeet the British authorities on the 2d of October,to enter into negotiations. A line of demarcationwas to be drawn ; and as the state of the firstminister would not admit of his moving withoutan attendance of five hundred men with fire-arms,and582 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. .and five hundred with swords, so the Britishcommander would of course be attended by thesame number, should he deem it requisite. SirA. Campbell and Sir James Brisbane met the Avacommissioners on the 2d of October : these pacificNegotiations preliminaries terminated in the recommencementprove rui less. ^^ hostilities, the King of Ava refusing to ratifyany conditions which contemplated the cession ofterritory, or indemnification for the expenses ofthe war. As the rainy season had set in, no furtheroperations could be effected till October. Provisionshad to be conveyed from Rangoon, a distanceof one hundred and fifty miles up the Irriwaddy, bya flotilla under Captain Alexander, Ren. By commandof the king, his army of sixty thousand menadvanced to attack the British force at Prome.The enemy evinced considerable skill in takingup their position. Colonel M'Dougal being killedin reconnoitring their works, the event led to aretreat. The Burmese chief, on this movement,approached nearer to the British position, butwith great caution and considerable skill, defendinghis advance by the erection of stockades. Onthe 1st December 1825, Sir A. Campbell movedout of Prome to attack the enemy, dividing hisforce into two divisions, the right under GeneralCotton, the other commanded by himself. The ;;right division came first upon the enemy and dis |lodged him from his stockades ; the chief himselffell amongst the slain. Sir A. Campbell's forcemovedChap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 583moved on to attack the enemy in his retreat ; the 1825.pursuit and subsequent arrangements, conjunct ^leteT/dT"tion with the flotilla, completely effected the dis ^''^^'''^'person of the Burmese force on the eastern bankof the Irriwaddy, with the loss of all their artillery,ammunition, and military stores. GeneralCotton's force, intended to attack the enemy onthe western bank of the river, was accordinglyconveyed across by the flotilla on the 5th December,and carried the stockades, leaving a considerablenumber of the Burmese troops dead onthe field, and dispersing the remainder.Sir A. Campbell lost not a day in advancingtowards the capital : he reached Meeady on thei9th, and arrived within five miles of Patanogah,opposite Mallow, where the whole of the enemy'sforce was assembled. On the 26th they sent aflag of truce. On the 1st of January a conference 1826.was held, when, as at first, they resisted the paymentof money and the cession of territory : buton the 3d, the Ava commissioners finally signed Treaty of peace•^ , ^ concluded butatreaty, by which Arracan, Mergui, Tavoi, &c., stratified.were ceded to the Company. Assam, Cachar,and Munnipore were to be placed under princesnamed by the British Government; and a crore ofrupees was to be paid by instalments, for indemnificationof the expenses. The treaty was tobe returned ratified by the King within fifteendays. The Burmese were never sincere in theirbelief that it would be ratified, and their officerswishedRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.XV.Enemy againdefeated.182G. wished Sir A. Campbell to retire to Prome. The18th was the day on which the ratification wasto arrive. It did not appear; accordingly, onthe 19th the batteries erected by Sir A. Campbellopened upon the enemy's position. ColonelSale, of H.M. service, dropped down the river toassault the front of the enemy's position, whileother detachments, under General Cotton, andColonels Hunter, Godwin, and Parley, crossed toattack Mallow. Colonel Sale was wounded inhis boat ; but his detachment, under Major Firth,behaved admirably : the enemy were defeated onthe 25th January, and Sir A. Campbell marchedtowards Ummerapoora. On his march he wasassured through Mr. Price, an American missionary,and Mr. Sandford, a British prisoner, directfrom the King of Ava, that his Majesty desiredpeace, and wished to ascertain the lowest termsthat could be insisted on. But Sir A. Campbelldeclining to halt his army after what had takenplace, the enemy ventured another engagement,when Pagan Mew was taken possession of bythe conquerors, and no force being left to opposeany effectual check, the road was open to Umme-rapport.Valuable aid Throughout the whole course of the war theafforded by n/r j i-\Madras govern Madras Government, under Sir Thomas Munro,had given the most powerful and efficient support.Sir Thomas Munro had desired to be relieved fromhis charge in 1823 ; but the breaking out of thewar.Chap. XV. ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 585war, which event appears to have surprised him i826.even more than individuals in this country, determinedhim to remain at his post so long as he feltenabled to render any service. During the progressof the war he was incessantly engaged indiscussions and inquiries, and correspondence connectedwith its prosecution.A strong feeling: had arisen in Pendant adverse Dirticuit posies^ , ^ tion of Lordto Lord Amherst, owing to the protracted opera Amherst,tons, which it was inferred might have been terminatedmuch more rapidly. But his lordship'ssituation was one of great difficulty : he was newto India ; until within a few weeks of his nominationas governor-general, the idea of proceedingthither could never have entered into his contemplation; whilst the most extraordinary want ofinformation prevailed among the authorities atCalcutta regarding the Burmese, as well as theirmilitary power, their mode of warfare, their resources,and the population of their country. Thewar was not a matter of option, it was impelledby unavoidable necessity.The peace ultimately effected was attributed tothe firmness and judgment of Lord Amherst, bypersevering in offensive operations in opposition toall that was urged in favour of defensive measures.His lordship was in constant correspondence withSir Thomas Munro. An expression of the heartfeltobligations of the Supreme Government wasconveyed to that of Madras, for their ever-activeandI586 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1826. and cordial co-operation in the conduct of thewar: the Supreme Government felt happy toavow, that they were mainly indebted for itsprosecution to a successful issue, to the extraordinaryexertions of the Government of Fort St.George.Good conduct Not the Cast remarkable circumstance in theof the nativetroops. war was the alacrity and cheerfulness with whichthe native troops, without a single exception, andto an extent far beyond all precedent, disregardedtheir habits, attachments, and prejudices, andembarked on board ships, and proceeded to aforeign country ; submitting, without repining, tohardships and privations at the simple call of professionalduty. The most important and effectualaid was afforded by his Majesty's squadron, underEffectual aid of the late Sir James Brisbane, throughout the ope-squadron!^^ rations. Thanks were voted by Parliament and bythe East-india Company to the joint forces, navaland military, both King's and Company's, whichhad been engaged ; the Court of Directors confirmedthe grant of batt to the army by the BengalGovernment, and authorized an addition, makingthe total sum granted nearly half-million sterling.Affairs of' In tic early part of 1825, during the operationsBhurtpore. . ,-r-* i • r i r» iagainst the Burmese, the attention ot the BengalGovernment was called to the proceedings at thefortress of Bhurtpore, where Doorjun Sal, aidedby his brother Madoo Sing, attempted to usurpthe rights of Blunt Sing, their cousin, a minor,andChap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA 587and rightful heir to Buddoo Sing, the deceased I825.rajah. All exertions and intreaties on the partof the resident. Sir Charles Metcalfee, to induceDoorjun Sal to abstain from the course he waspursuing, proving fruitless, offensive operationswere resolved on. Its reduction became an ob siege deters■» r mined upon.sect 01 great importance, with reference to thegenerally received impression by the natives thatit was invulnerable, owing to the celebrated andsuccessful defence which it made when besiegedby Lord Lake in 1805. The late Bishop Hebeobserved : *' It is really strange how much importancehas been attached to the fortress of Hurts; even in the Carnatic, Sir Thomas Munrotells me, the native princes would not believe thatit ever could be taken, or that the Hats were notdestined to be the rallying point of India." Itwas a town of great extent, and every wherestrongly fortified, being surrounded by a mud wallof great height and thickness, with a very wideand deep ditch. The circumference of both townand fort was above eight miles, and the walls inall that extent were flanked with bastions at shortdistances, on which was mounted numerous artillery.The preparations for the attack were made ona large and complete scale, calculated to ensureultimate success. On the 10th of December, LordCombermere appeared before it with an army ofupwards of twenty thousand men, and a field ofmore than a hundred pieces of artillery. During thenight588 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Cuai-. XV.1825. night the enemy had cut the bund or embankmentof a lake to the northward, for the purpose of fillingthe broad and deep ditch : a most essential meansof defence, which had contributed largely to thesuccessful resistance of the place in 1805. Butthey had been too tardy with this operation : theBritish troops arrived in time to make themselvesmasters of the embankment, and repair the breachbefore a sufficient quantity of water had flowedinto the fosse to render it impracticable. The followingdays were occupied in reconnoitring theworks and determining the points of attack, untilthe battering train and its appurtenances shouldhave come up, the fortress occasionally firingupon the reconnoitring parties, and skirmishestaking place between small detachments and theenemy's cavalry encamped under the walls.Lord Combermere, desirous to save the womenand children from the horrors of a siege and of abombardment, like that which must follow fromsuch a battering train as he was about to employ,addressed a letter to Doorjun Sal on the 21st,calling upon him to send them out of the fort,promising them a safe conduct through the Britishcamp, and allowing four-and-twenty hours forthat purpose before he should open his fire uponthe town.Having received an evasive answer, his lordshipagain sent to him, allowing a further extension ofthe time for twelve hours : but the humane offerwasChat. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 589was not accepted. On the 23d, therefore, every 1825.thing being in readiness to commence operations,and the north-east angle of the works having beenfixed upon as the point of attack, the besiegers,under a heavy fire, took possession of a ruinedvillage called Kuddum Kundee, and of BuldeoSing's garden, and completed their first parallelat the distance of about eight hundred yards fromthe fort. On the morning of the 24th two batteries,erected at these two points, opened uponthe town, and on the 25th another more advancedbattery between them having likewise begun itsfire within two hundred and fifty yards of thenorth-east angle, the defences of the east side ofthat part of the works were in a great measuredestroyed. A battery was then constructed, bearingon the north face of the same angle, at a distanceof about two hundred and fifty yards. Therest of December was employed in a similarmanner, in strengthening the old batteries, erectingnew ones, and pushing forward the works ; aconstant fire, which left scarcely a roof uninjured,;being kept up against the town, while the enemy[seemed to be reserving his resources to the last;[and the operations of the besiegers were exposedto no material interruption. On the 3d January 1826.[1826 the artillery began to breach the curtains .[the ditches in front were found to be dry, andfrom the ruggedness of the counterscarp, offeredfewer obstacles than had been expected. Such,however.590 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1826. however, was the tenacity of the tough mud walls,that they resisted the effects of shot better thanmasonry would have done ; it was found that thebatteries were insufficient to breach them, andrecourse was had to mining. On the evening ofthe 6th, a mine was commenced in the scarp ofthe ditch on the northern face of the work, withthe purpose of improving the breach ; but theengineers, fearing that they might be discovered ifthey continued their operations during the day,sprung it at daylight on the following morning,when it was not sufficiently advanced to have anymaterial effect upon the wall ; in making a secondattempt, the miners were driven away, havingbeen countermined from the interior before theyhad entered many feet; and the gallery was subsequentlyblown up, it being discovered that theenemy were keeping watch in it. On the 14th,another mine, under one of the bastions, wasexploded too precipitately, and failed of its effect.Two more mines were immediately driven intothe same work, which were sprung on the 16th sosuccessfully, that with the aid of a day's battering,they effected an excellent breach, which wasreported to be practicable. On the 17th, the mineunder the north-east angle was completed, andthe following day was fixed for the storm.Early in the morning of the 18th, the troopsdestined for the assault established themselves inthe advanced trenches, unperceived by the enemy.TheIChap. XV] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 591The left breach was to be mounted by the brigade i826.of General Nicolls, headed by the seth Regiment ;that on the right, by General Reynell's brigade,headed by the 14th regiment ; the explosion of themine under the north-east angle was to be thesignal for the attack. At eight o'clock the minewas exploded with terrific effect ; the whole ofthe salient angle, and part of the stone cavalier inthe rear, were lifted into the air, which for sometimewas in total darkness ; but from the minehaving exploded in an unexpected direction, orfrom the troops having been stationed, in consequenceof miscalculation, too near it, the ejectedstones and masses of earth killed, in their fall,several men of the regiment at the head of thecolumn of attack, and severely wounded threeofficers. They fell so thickly about Lord Comber-merehimself, that Brigadier-general Combe,who was standing next to him, was knocked down,and two sepoy, who were within a few feet of him,were killed on the spot. The troops immediatelymounted to the assault with the greatest order andsteadiness, and, notwithstanding a determinedopposition, carried the breaches. The left breachwas the more difficult of the two ; the ascent wasvery steep, but the troops pressed on, and quicklysurmounted it, the grenadiers moving up it slowlyand resolutely, without yet drawing a trigger inreturn for the vollies of round shot, grape, andmusketry which were fired upon them. Some oftheI592 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1826. the foremost of the enemy defended the breach, forafew minutes, with great resolution ; but as theexplosion of the mine had blown up three hundredof their companions they were soon compelled togive way, and were pursued along the ramparts.Whenever they came to a gun which they couldmove, they turned it upon their pursuers, butthey were immediately killed by the grenadiersand the gun upset. In two hours the whole rampartsurrounding the town, although bravely defendedat every gateway and bastion, along withthe command of the gates of the citadel, were inpossession of the besiegers, and early in the afternoonthe citadel itself surrendered. Brigadier-generalSleigh, commanding the cavalry, havingbeen entrusted with preventing the escape of theenemy's troops after the assault, made such a dispositionof his forces, that he succeeded in securingDoorjun Sal, who with his wife, two sons, andone hundred and sixty chosen horse, attempted toforce a passage through the 8th Light Cavalry.The loss of the enemy could not be computed atless than four thousand killed ; and owing to thedisposition of the cavalry, hardly a man bearingarms escaped. Thus, as by the surrender of thetown all the stores, arms, and ammunition fellinto the possession of the victor, the whole militarypower of the Bhurtpore state might be consideredas annihilated. The fortifications weredemolished ; the principal bastions and parts ofseveralChap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 593several curtains were blovi^n up on the 6th of Fe *^''^^'february; it being left to the rains to complete theruin. The fatty bourg, or " bastion of victory,"built, as the Bhurtporeans vaunted, with thebones and blood of British soldiers who fell in theassault under Lord Lake, was now laid low, andamong its destroyers were some of those very menwho, twenty years before, *shad been permitted,"in the boasting language of the natives, *' to flyfrom its eternal walls." In fact, the fort, in amilitary point of view, was in a state of completeruin, open in every direction, and would demandas much expense, or nearly so, to render it againformidable, as would raise another in a new position.All the other fortresses within the rajah'sdominions immediately surrendered : the inhabitantsreturned to their abodes, and the rajah wasreinstated in his authority. Lord Combermerebroke up his camp to return to Calcutta on the20th February, and arrived there early in April.Thanks were voted by Parliament and by theEast-india Company; the prize-money arisingfrom the capture, granted to the Company bythe King, was ordered by the Court of Directorsto be distributed among the army.In January 1826 the Bombay Presidency was corpore.involved in a discussion with the Rajah of Colapore,a small independent Mahratta state in theprovince of Bejapoor. The British Government,anxious to avoid a rupture, endeavoured, throughVOL. ir. 2 Q the594 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1826. the resident, to adjust the difference which hadarisen, without having recourse to extreme measures.The rajah, deaf to all remonstrance, andblind to the real interests of his state, continuedto disregard the advice offered to him ; he raisedadditional levies of troops, and at once placed himselfin a hostile attitude : which rendered it incumbenton the Government to prepare againstaggression. Their remonstrance not only remainedunanswered, but the rajah, at the head of largebodies, commenced plundering the properties andterritories of his own dependent chiefs, and thoseunder the special protection or guarantee of theBritish Government, extorting money from theinhabitants by means of excessive cruelties. Thusforced into active operations, Colonel Welshmarched from Belgium with the whole of thedisposable troops of that station, crossed theGutpurba river on the ruth September, and subsequentlytook up a position in the vicinity ofKatabughee, in the Colapore territories, the inhabitantsof which flocked in numbers to ColonelWelsh's camp, soliciting protection. These measureshad the desired effect ; the questions pendingwith the state of Colapore were brought to asatisfactory conclusion without recourse to actualhostilities ; arrangements were entered intofor securing the peace and tranquillity of thecountry, and to prevent, on the part of the rajah,any violation of his engagements. The articles ofagreementThos. Munro.ICfiAi'. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 595agreement were confirmed by the Governor-gene ^827.oral on the 24th January 1826.At this period the public service suffered a Death of sirsevere loss in the death of that eminent individual,Sir Thomas Munro, whose name and opinionshave been so often referred to in this volume. Hisinteresting life, which is already before the public,renders any lengthened allusion to his services unnecessary.Nevertheless, a brief reference to someof the leading points connected with his earlylabours, and to the circumstances under which hisstay in India was so long protracted, may correctsome misapprehension which exists regarding theattention paid by the Court of Directors to his desireto be released from the charge of his government.His early and valuable labours were renderedin the revenue branch, after he was placed underColonel Reade in 1792. On his return to Englandin 1808, he threw a completely new light uponmany questions connected with the revenue andjudicial systems, and was an authority muchreferred to in the progress of the discussions whichpreceded the Charter Act of 1813. In the followingyear he returned to Madras, at the head of acommission formed for the purpose of revisingthe judicial system. The principle upon whichthe judicial system had been first introduced intothe British possessions in India was highly applauded,and the character venerated from whomit proceeded ; but the experience of twenty years2 Q 2 in596 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1827. in Bengal had furnished unequivocal evidencethat it was impracticable, with every possible extensionof the establishment, to render it adequateto the great end for which it was instituted, viz.the speedy and impartial administration of justice.The expenditure had been augmented fromthe sum of £220,000, at which the annual chargefor the provinces of Bengal, Bahar, and Orissa,was calculated, exclusive of the charge of policeand the diet of prisoners, to the sum of £306,000 ;whilst in 1809-10 the charge had increased, includingthe ceded and conquered territory, onlyto £870,000 ; and the arrears of causes had goneon until, in Bengal, in 1812, the number was163,000!* and the expenses of the judicial governmentfor India amounted to £1,261,344.How well and effectually Sir Thomas Munrodischarged the important trust reposed in him,may be gathered from the fact that, in the year1815, under the Madras presidency, before the introductionof the new system, the number of causesdecided by the zillah judges, assistant judges,and registers, was 7,298 ; and by the native judicatureswhich then prevailed, was 30,687, whilstin 1817, by the European officers, it was 4,749 ;and by the native offices, 66,302, showing a numberin favour of the latter period of 32,436.Colonel Munro quitted Madras in January 1819,and landed in England in June following. HehadJudicial Letter to Madras, April 1814.Chap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 597had scarcely been at home more than a few weeks, 1827.when he was nominated governor of Madras, withthe rank of major-general and K.C.B., in successionto the Hon. Hugh Elliott. He proceededto India in the December following, and landedat Bombay, where he was received by the Hon.Mountstuart Elphinstone in May, and sailed fromthence in June for Madras, where he again arrivedexactly within one year and a-half from the periodof his last quitting that settlement.In every position in which Sir Thomas Munrowas placed, he acquired the esteem and attachmentof both natives and Europeans. After thelengthened period which he had already passedin India, he did not propose protracting his stayin charge of the government beyond three, or atmost four years.He accordingly addressed a letter to the Chair Proceedings of° "^ , . the Court ofman and Deputy Chairman of the Court of Di Directors to\^ *' meet Sir Thos.rectors from Booty, on the 25th September 1823, Monroe's wishes. . to be relievedm which he requested permission to resign the from the go-situationof governor of Madras in December1824, or January 1825. This letter reached theIndia-house on the 15th March 1824, and waslaid before the Court on the next day, when thefollowing answer was written by the commandof the Court : —The Hon. Major-general Sir T. Munro.Sir:I am commanded to assure you, that the Court regret thatany circumstances should deprive the East-india Companyof598 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XV.1827. of talents and qualifications so peculiarly fitted to the highand important station which you are about to relinquish.The Court further command me to state, that they wouldstill have reposed that trust in your hands with entire confidence,not only from the experience of your past services,but fortified by the motives which have prompted the tenderof your resignation ; they, however, believe that theyshall best consult your wishes by taking measures for theappointment of a successor within the period specified in yourletter. In making this intimation, I obey the instructionsof the Court in conveying to you the expression of theirsincere desire, that yourself and family may reach yournative land in safety, and that you may enjoy in honourableretirement the satisfaction arising from a consciousness ofhaving discharged the duties of an extended career of publicservice with advantage to the East-india Company, and inpromoting the happiness and welfare of the natives of thecountry in which you have so long resided.East-india House, 16th March 1824.The breaking out of the Burmese war, whichwas wholly unexpected by Sir Thomas Munro,induced him to forego all thoughts of relinquishinghis post so long as hostilities continued. Onthe 28th May 1826, when that war was terminated.Sir Thomas Munro, had been constrainedto part with Lady Munro and his childrenon account of the health of one of the latter.He was most anxious to be relieved at the earliestpossible moment, and addressed the Court to thateffect. His letter was received in London in themonth of September. At that period of the yearhisChap. XV.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 599his Majesty's ministers are not generally in town, I827.neither is a full Court of Directors to be calculatedupon. The nomination of a successor toa man like Sir Thomas Munro was not to besettled in a moment. The appointment of theRight Hon. S. R. Lushington was made in Jan.1827, being within as short a time as could bereasonably expected ; and on the same day thatmeritorious servant of the Company, Major-generalSir John Malcolm, was nominated governor ofBombay, in succession to the Hon. M. Elphin-stone.Both Mr. Lushington and Sir John Malcolmsailed for their respective governments in Julyfollowing, in which month the lamented death ofSir Thomas Munro took place at Pattercondah,near Booty, caused by an attack of cholera.The *' touching correspondence," justly sotermed by Mr. Gleig, in his Life of this distinguishedand lamented public servant, shows howgreat was the sacrifice which he made to meetwhat he felt to be the paramount call of publicduty, when he parted with his family on theirembarkation for England. What those feelingsmust have been when all hope had for ever closedof their again meeting, it would be in vain to imagine; but there is nothing calculated to causegreater pain to the authorities, who had desired hisservices, than the belief that unnecessary delay, orinattention to the wishes of so valued a servant,was600 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. XV.1827. was evinced by the Court. The simple statementalready given will prove that not to have been thecase. The Directors, on the receipt of the melancholyand unexpected intelligence, came to thefollowing resolution :At a Court of Directors, held on Wednesday the 28thNovember 1827 :Resolved unanimously, That this Court has learnt withfeelings of the deepest concern the decease of Major-generalSir Thomas Munro, K.C.B., late governor of Fort St.George, and its regret is peculiarly excited by the lamentedevent having occurred at a moment when that distinguishedofficer was on the point of returning to his native land, inthe enjoyment of his well-earned honours, after a long andvaluable life, which had been devoted to the interests of theCompany and his country.That this Court cannot fail to bear in mind the zeal anddevotion manifested by Sir Thomas Munro, in retainingcharge of the government of Madras, after he had intimatedhis wish to retire therefrom, and at a period when thepolitical state of India rendered the discharge of the dutiesof that high and honourable station peculiarly arduous andimportant ; and this Court desires to record this expressionof its warmest regard for the memory of its late valuableservant, and to assure his surviving family that it deeplysympathizes in the grief which so unexpected an event musthave occasioned to them.Lord Amherst proceeded to the Upper Provincesin 1827. On his lordship's visit to Delhi,a final settlement took place of the relations, inwhich the British Government in India stoodtowards the King of Delhi. It terminated theimpliedChap. XV. 1 BRITISH POWER IN India 601implied vassalage previously rendered, or was presupposedto exist towards the royal family, bythe British Government. The event created, verynaturally, a strong sensation at the time, as itwas the first instance of our openly and decidedlyasserting the independence of the British power ;it was generally stated that the crown of Hindostanhad been transferred to the British nation.The event is said to have been viewed withdeep melancholy by the royal family and theirdependents. They felt, whatever privations they .might have suffered from the Mahrattass, their titleto the sovereignty of India had been invariablyacknowledged. They were now, for the first time,divested of it. The feeling of the public, however,corroborated the opinion expressed by GeneralWellesley, that the natives were the mostindifferent people, as to their governors, of any hehad met with.* They seemed on the present occasionto be unconcerned in the matter : and contemplated,without surprise, our assumption of acharacter, ** which had been purchased with thetalents, treasure, and blood of our nation."Lord Amherst having returned to the presidency,embarked in H.M.S. Herald at the close ofMarch, for England, resigning the provisionalgovernment into the hands of W. B. Bay ley, Esq.Vide page 216.602 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.CHAPTER XVI.1827.Lord William The wishes expressed by the Court of Directorspointed goTe'r- in their resolution of July 1809, that Lord Wm.nor-genera. bentinck's ** valuable qualities and honourablecharacter might be employed as they deserved,for the benefit of his country," had been fullyrealized.Although the blow which his lordship's feelingsand interests had received in the East, could notbe repaired by employment in Europe, his countrybenefited by his unceasing devotion to advancethe honour of her arms, during an arduous courseof service in Portugal, Spain, Sicily, and otherparts in the Mediterranean.The period had at length arrived when his lordshipwas again to proceed to India, and assumethe highest post in administering the affairs of theBritish Government.Being nominated governor-general in July 1827,his lordship embarked at Plymouth in H.M.S.Undaunted, in February 1828, and reached theCape in May, where he met Earl Amherst, whohad arrived at that colony in H.M.S. Herald, fromBengal.TheChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 603The Undaunted reached the Sandheads on the 1828.2d July, where she was met by the Enterprizesteamer, from which his lordship landed at Calcuttaon the 4th, when he assumed charge of thegovernment.The circumstances under which Lord WilliamBentinck entered upon the high and responsibleoffice were by no means calculated to propitiatepublic feeling in India.The supremacy of the British power, although state of affairsmore fully established than at any former period,had been effected at so large a cost, as to call formeasures of the most searching economy. Considerablereductions had been made in the militaryestablishments, at the close of the Pindaric andMahratta campaigns in 1819; but the accessionof territory consequent upon the operations, between1815 and 1819, was attended by large augmentationsof the civil establishments and charge.Hostilities with the Burmese were not terminateduntil 1826. The expenditure in that war, and inthe reduction of Bhurtpore, had occasioned anincrease in the registered debt of India, between increase ofthe years 1824-25 and 1827-28, of £13,007,823.* ^"^'^^^^'•A period of war is never favourable to economy; causes.but a great portion of the expense entailed on theIndian finances had been caused less by the pressureof extraordinary and occasional outlay, thanby continued progressive increase of disbursementinVide Finance Report, 1832.IRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1828.Retrenchmenturged uponGovernor-general.Lord WilliamBentinck'sviews.in every department. It was admitted that reasonsmight have existed, taking each department separately,to justify such increase ; but the aggregatewas found to have occasioned a large excess ofoutlay beyond the resources from whence it oughtto be defrayed.The necessity of retrenchment had been stronglyurged in the despatches to India, and Lord WilliamBentinck embarked for that country in possessionof the views entertained by the Homeauthorities on this important branch of his lordship'sfuture administration.Animated by an anxious desire to discharge hisduty towards the East-india Company and hiscountry, and cherishing the most benevolentviews for improving the condition and promotingthe happiness of the native population, his lordshipdetermined to see and judge for himself. Onhis arrival at the seat of government, he accordinglyannounced his readiness to receive the mostun reserved communication from all classes, andallowed of the most perfect freedom of the press,but without giving up the power of complete control: conscious that measures based upon soundprinciples, would stand the test of public scrutiny;and satisfied that, although they might for a timeprove unpalatable to some portions of the Indiancommunity, they would ultimately be found topromote the general interests of the empire.Amongst the earliest measures of his lordship'sgovernmentof Finance.»Chap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 605government was the appointment of two com- ^^'^smittens of finance, the one civil and the other ot^commTtoesmilitary, composed of the most intelligent officersfrom each presidency, for the purpose of revisingthe establishments of the three governments.Similar committees had been formed when LordCornwallis proceeded to India in 1786, and againby Lord Wellesley in 1 798. They met at Calcutta.The civil committee was directed to enquire intothe civil establishments in the general, judicial,revenue, and marine departments ; with some fewlimitations, they were left free to push their enquiriesto the utmost extent to which they mightconsider it necessary or expedient to carry them.The military committee was to act upon similarprinciples, and, with few exceptions, directed toembrace in their investigation all matters connectedwith military finance.Circumstances, however, arose which renderedit inexpedient to continue the labours of the militarycommittee, and determined his lordship tosubmit, at some future time, his views on theseveral points connected with the Indian army.His lordship, fully alive to the ** universal dislike"which he had incurred by enforcing ordersfor reductions which he knew to be most odious,observed :I have done my duty: and this conviction, as I knowfrom dreadfully dear-bought experience, is the only consolationthat defies all contingencies.I trust,RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE[Chap. XVI.1828.Carries intoeffect reductionsorderedby Court.Reductionsurged fromhome.I trust, however, that the Court will support their servant,who, upon principle alone, has deemed obedience tobe a paramount duty under the given circumstances. Inanew case, I shall always assume the utmost latitude ofdiscretion; but where a whole case has been more than onceunder consideration and returned for execution, I shall obeythe orders : the responsibility does not rest with me.The unfavourable impressions against his lordshipcreated by his obedience to orders from England,v^^ere strengthened by the conduct of thecommander-in-chief in India, who addressed aletter of remonstrance to the Government, after thepublication of the general order directing the executionof the Court's instructions. This injudiciousact on the part of so high a public functionary,who was also a member of council, was followedby a general expression of dissatisfaction on thepart of the officers, from whom numerous memorialswere sent in to the Government ; whilst furtherand repeated injunctions were received fromhome for measures of economy, the despatchespointing out various charges v^^hich might be reduced.The Court observed :*Our object in furnishing you with such documents, is toindicate some of the principal heads to which your attentionshould be directed, in those efforts to restore our financeswhich you are laudably engaged in making, and to thesteady prosecution of which we cannot too earnestly exciteyou.Again, in another despatch, where a generalreviewFinance Letter to Bengal, 10th March 1830.IChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 607review was taken of the finances of India, the 1828.attention of Government was drawn to it.As a matter of importance vastly increased in such aseason of financial pressure as that which now prevails.*These repeated exhortations were not to be disregarded; measures of economy were undoubtedlyindispensable, but it is not very easy toform a correct idea of the conflicting feelingswith which the head of a government has tocontend, in fulfilling injunctions so materiallyaffecting personal interests, especially of an army.The ungrateful task was certain to entail odiumupon the party least entitled to bear it.In January 1829, the Governor-general visited Tour to thethe north-eastern stations in Bengal, via Malta,Purneah, Singapore, and Rungpore, returningto the presidency on the 3d February ; and on the23d embarked on the Enterprize steamer, for the Proceeds top.W. Island,eastward. An official notification was issued thesame day, that his lordship, on his return, wouldgive private audience to native gentlemen, and toall natives of respectability who might wish tosee him, on making application for that purposethrough his private or military secretary. A communicationwas likewise invited of all suggestionstending to promote any branch of the nationalindustry; to improve the commercial intercourseby land and water ; to amend any defects in theexisting establishments ; to encourage the diffusionFinance Letter to Bengal, 25th I\Iay 1830,608 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. XVI.1829. sion of education and useful knowledge ; and toadvance the general prosperity of the Britishempire in India. The invitation was addressed toall native gentlemen, landholders, merchants, andothers, and to all Europeans, both in and out of theservice, including " that useful and respectablebody of men," the indigo planters, who, fromtheir uninterrupted residence in the Mofussil, hadpeculiar opportunities of forming an opinion uponthe various subjects.The Enterprize, steamer, reached Prince ofWales' Island on the 6th March, Malacca the10th, and Singapore the 11th. From the lattersettlement she returned on the 13th to Penang,which she left on the 18th for Savoy, were shearrived on the 22d. On the 24th she was atAmherst, from whence the Governor-generalvisited Moulmein. On the 28th, the steamerproceeded to Akyab, which she reached on the2d April, and arrived with his lordship at Calcuttaon the 4th of that month.His lordship's The result of this inspection was a strong confirmedby those fiction ou his lordship's mind that Prince of Wales'redncing^Rw! Island aud its dependencies should be abolishedas a separate government, and annexed to Bengalor Madras, under a more simple and less expensiveform of administration. A minute to this purportwas recorded by the Governor-general, inorder that his views might receive the sanction ofthe Directors. At the same moment, instructionswereIChap.XVI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 609were received from the Court, which entirely con isis.firmed his lordship's views ; Prince of Wales'Island, with its dependencies, being no longercontinued as an independent government, butannexed to Bengal.Various questions pressed themselves upon the General affairs1 > • of residencies,Governor-general s attention in connexion with &c.the residencies of Delhi and Lucknow ; the collectorateof Singapore ; the commissioner atMeerut ; the state of Bundlecund ; the deteriorationof the police ; the state of gang robbery; andthe prevalence of heinous crimes of every descriptionat Cawnpore and Furruckabad, includingthose of dacoity and thuggism ; the progressmade in the settlement and surveys of the WesternProvinces; the state of our connexion with Malwa,Hydrabad, and Nagpore, and other minor chiefs,and likewise with Persia. As the Company'sconnexion with Central India became more fixed central India.and immediate, it was of importance to obtain allpossible information regarding the territories comprisedin such a vast extent of country. Politicalagents had been appointed to act in Malwa, underthe resident, at Indore. The selection of properinstruments had been carefully attended to ; everythingdepending upon their integrity, judgment,and temper. Captains Spears, Elves, and Macdonald,had been chosen by Sir John Malcolm,and proved themselves admirably qualified for theduty. Their reports on the general state of theVOL. II. 2 R country610 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1828. country were full of interest. Captain Spears,who had been long employed, was unfortunatelypoisoned at Bonswarra, in the Bagur province, in1831. The parties who perpetrated the deed beingconvicted on circumstantial evidence only, thepunishment of their crime was confined to transportationfor life.Abolition of The close of the year 1 829 was marked by theSUtt66.memorable act of the British Government which^^V abolished the horrible rite of suttee.The Bengal Government had assured the Courtof Directors in 1824, that nothing but the apprehensionof evils infinitely greater than those arisingfrom the existence of the practice, could inducethem to tolerate it for a single day.*The Directors apprized the Supreme Government,in July 1827, in reply to the foregoing despatch,that they were fully sensible of the manyembarrassing considerations with which the questionwas beset, when looked at practically. Whether,in what degree, and in what mode, the ordinarycourse of civilization, and the results of whichexperience warranted the anticipation from itsadvancement, might be accelerated by a judiciousand seasonable interposition of the authority orinfluence of the Government, were questions whichthe Court felt to be deserving of the most seriousdeliberation and inquiry. They accordingly committedthe matter to the counsels of the BengalGovernment,Letter Iron Bengal, 3(1 December 1824.Chai. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 611Government, aided by the information and local isis.experience of the Company's servants ; acknowledgingat the same time,That one of the difficulties attendant on the considerationof the subject arose out of the difference of opinion whichprevailed among the ablest public functionaries, as to the,safety and expediency of any interference on the part ofGovernment for the suppression of Suttee.*Lord William Bentinck lost no time in adoptingmeasures to effect the desired object. The greatpreponderance of the most intelligent and experiencedof the civil and military officers, consultedby the Governor-general, was in favour of theabolition : they considered that it might be effectedwith perfect safety. The Council stated, in thewords of the Governor-general :We are decidedly in favour of an open, avowed, and generalprohibition, resting altogether upon the moral goodnessof the act, and our power to enforce it.-fIt was not matter of surprise that a feeling ofrepugnance should be manifested by a portion ofthe native community, at so decided an interferencewith a practice which had long been maintainedas a religious rite.Not less than 310 instances of women havingburned themselves on the funeral piles of theirdeceased husbands occurred in the year 18 1 5. JPetitionsLetter to Bengal, 25th July 1827.f Fide Judicial Despatch from Bengal, 4th December 1829,laid before Parliament 4th June 1830.J Fide Parliamentary Papers, 1819.2 R 2RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1828.Feelings of thenatives onAffecting instanceof Suttee.Petitions were accordingly presented to thethe Supreme Government, in the month of January,by certain Hindooss, complaining of such interferenceand infraction of their ancient rites andusages. Lord William Bentinck replied, by advancingadditional reasons in support of the measure,and stating that an appeal was open to theKing in Council. At the same time, other hindoopresented an address to his Lordship, expressingtheir deep sense of gratitude for the valuableprotection afforded to the lives of the Hindoofemale part of the subjects of the British Government,and for his Lordship's humane and successfulexertions in rescuing them from the grossstigma which the practice of suttee had hithertoattached to their character.An affecting instance of the repugnance of afemale of high rank to the observance of the rite,is to be found in the conduct of Ahalya Baee, whohas been already noticed as an extraordinary character,in ruling the Holkar possessions in Malwa.*She had lost her only son. Her remaining child, a daughter,was married, and had one son, who died at Mhysir.His father died twelve months afterwards. His widow immediatelydeclared her resolution to burn with the corpse ofher husband. Her mother and her sovereign left no effortuntried, short of coercion, to induce her to abandon her fatalresolution. She humbled herself to the dust before her,and entreated her, as she revered her God, not to leave herdesolate and alone upon earth. Her daughter, althoughaffectionate,inde page 280.Chap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 613affectionate, was calm and decided. " You are old, mother," 1^2^-she said, " and a few years will end your pious life. Myonly child and husband are gone, and when you follow, lifeI feel will be insupportable ; but the opportunity of terminatingit with honour will then have passed by !"' Themother, when she found all dissuasion unavailing, determinedto witness the last dreadful scene. She walked in theprocession, and stood near the pile, where she was supportedby two brahmins, who held her arms. Although obviouslysuffering great agony of mind, she remained tolerably firmtill the first blaze of the flame made her lose all self-command; and while her shrieks increased the noise made bythe exulting shouts of the immense multitude that stoodaround, she was seen to gnaw in anguish those hands shecould not liberate from the persons by whom she was held.After some convulsive efforts, she so far recovered as to joinin the ceremony of bathing in the Nerbuddah when thebodies were consumed. She then retired to her palace,where for three days, having taken hardly any sustenance,she remained so absorbed in grief that she never uttered aword. When recovered from this state, she seemed to findconsolation in building a beautiful monument to the memoryof those she lamented.For this touching but melancholy relation, thereader is indebted to Sir John Malcolm, who wentto the spot where the afflicting scene occurred,with the venerable Baramul Dada, the managerof Mhysir, and one of Ahalya Baee's favourite servants.Although much affected, he took a melancholydelight in showing the spot where the pilewas made, and that where his mistress stood to witnessher daughter's sacrifice. The event occurredabout614 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai. XVI.1828. about 1793. The temple she erected is stated to beof the most beautiful and finished workmanship.Well might the measure be hailed by the friendsof humanity with heartfelt satisfaction. Lord WilliamBentinck has remarked,There prevail throughout India, as in the darkest ages ofEuropean history, the same ignorance and superstition, thesame belief in witchcraft, the same confidence in charms andincantations, the same faith in astrology and omens, thepractice of human immolation of all sexes and ages, andmany other barbarous customs opposed to true happiness,and repugnant to the best feelings that Providence hasplanted in the human breast : and it is by the gradualoperation of European influence over the immense mass ofnative population, that their barbarous, and often cruel andidolatrous customs, can be eradicated, and supplanted bydomestic comfort, security of person and property, andadvancement in education and morals.It is satisfactory to know, that neither the originalmeasure abolishing Suttee, nor the virtualconfirmation of it by the rejection of the appeal tothe Privy Council, produced any want of confidence,or the least degree of alarm, on the part ofthe Hindoo population.Remarks on As education advances, and the British powerof idolatry. is Still further extended and becomes more firmlyfixed, the question of how far we are to tolerateidolatry in India, will press itself more stronglyupon the consideration of the governing power.Where religious rites and offices are not flagrantlyopposed to the rules of common humanity or decency,Chap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 615X.cency, they may, from our position in India, 1828.demand toleration, however false the creed bywhich they are sanctioned. Such concession inno degree exceeds that which is extended to doubtfulcreeds in the United Kingdom. But tolerationand protection must go hand in hand in India, orthe safety of the individuals engaged in the celebrationof their rites, however absurd or much tobe lamented, would not be provided for. Such )toleration, however, in no way enjoins a participlenation or assistance in such worship, so as to videntify the British authorities, in the eyes of the )people, with it. ^^ ^^^At the close of January, Lord William Ben short tour totinct proceeded on a short tour to the Upper Provinces.Provinces, visiting Goruckpore, Burden, Yah,Patna, Benares, Juanpore, and other civil andmilitary stations, examining the different publicestablishments and departments. His lordshipcomplimented the natives on the public spiritwhich had prompted them to engage in works ofgeneral utility, such as the construction of roads,bridges, &c., and encouraged those who had thereputation of taking a proper interest in the welfareof their riots. After inspecting the stud depotsin the Central Provinces, he returned on the lothMarch, after a rapid but comprehensive tour, bythe Sunderland to Calcutta.His lordship watched, with anxious solicitude. Education of*■ ^ the natives.the education of the natives : the reports sent homein616 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chaf.XVI.J829. in the course of the year gave the most promisingaccounts of the progress made in the acquisitionof the English language. According to the testimonyof Mr. Bird, of the civil service, the desireto learn the English language was extending universallyat the principal stations in the Mofussil.There was no religious prejudice against it, while,by giving complete access to European ideas andsentiments, it has the strongest tendency to weakenthe prejudices of the natives against the otherbranches of education given at the Governmentinstitutions. The English class at the Madrissahad furnished well-qualified members for the stationof vakeel at the several courts, as well as forthat of law-officers in the native courts : and therewere three thousand youths studying the Englishlanguage at Calcutta.The affairs of the Company in China had in-china. duce the Select Committee to solicit support fromthe Governor general, and the presence of someof his Majesty's ships of war. His lordship wiselydetermined to ascertain the exact position in whichthe supercargoes stood towards the local government,before he acquiesced in the extensive requisitionmade for an armed force. Sir CharlesMetcalfee, whose reputation stood so deservedlyhigh in public estimation, offered his services forthe purpose of effecting, if possible, an amicabletermination of the differences. He was to haveproceeded in a steamer, which it was calculatedwould1830.Affairs inChai'. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA 617would reach the factory in thirty days, from Cal 1830.cotta : but the mission was fortunately renderedunnecessary by the receipt of accounts from thesupercargoes, that a good understanding had beenrestored, and that the trade was proceeding asusual.The proposition for constituting a legislative Legislativecouncil in India, had been for some months underthe consideration of the Government. Before theGovernor-general quitted the presidency for theUpper Provinces, he transmitted, in a despatch tothe Court of Directors, in the month of October,the draft of a proposed Bill, which had been preparedin communication with the judges of theSupreme Court, for the purpose of being submittedto Parliament. The measure was taken uponthe discussion of the Charter in 1833, andforms a prominent part of the provisions of thenew Act.Questions of great interest and importance re- Question as toremoving theharding the revenue, the police, and the judicial Council.system, as well as other matters of moment inthe Upper and Western Provinces, comprisingalso Central India, demanded the close and personalinspection of the Governor-general. Hislordship was most anxious to carry with him intothese parts the members of council and the secretaries,in order to form a government on the spot,for the purpose of discussing and deciding on themost eligible course to be pursued in each matterasRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI1830.The law precludingtheCouncil actingup the country,the Governor-generalproceedsto theUpper Provincesalone.as it arose. No doubt as to the law permitting ofsuch a measure had occurred to his lordship ; andhe was fortified in this intention by the concurrentopinion of Sir Charles Metcalfee. Precedent toowas in its favour ; for when Mr. Duncan, governorof Bombay, was deputed to Surat in 1799,*the Governor-general intimated to him that hewould carry the powers of government with him.In the present instance, the law was declared tobe opposed to the proceeding, and that the powersof government could alone be exercised at Calcutta.His lordship was accordingly constrainedto proceed in his individual capacity, and to formhis own judgment on the state of affairs, and themeasures which might be rendered necessary.Strong objections have been taken to these toursby a governor-general. If made merely to gratifycuriosity they are unjustifiable, even upon theground of expense alone. But under the nativerule, a circuit was made annually by the chief, forthe purpose of hearing and seeing in person theactual circumstances and condition of the peopleand country ; and in the instance in question therewas ample justification.An official announcement was made in October,of the Governor-general's intention to quit thepresidency, in prosecution of his tour, in orderthat all persons having occasion to address hislordship might be guided in despatching theirlettersI'idc paj,rc 270.CiiAP.XVL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 619letters to meet him in the course of his route, ^^^^•which was to embrace Allahabad, Bundlecund,Cawnpore, Lucknow, Bareilly, Moradabad, andMeerut. Rajah Gopaul Sing, on the arrival of theGovernor-general at Buxar, presented an address,thanking his lordship for having abolished suttee.Passing Candour and Massouree, the Governor-generalproceeded through the Shoon, by TheretoSaharunpore, and ascended the hills to Saba-too,at the commencement of April 1831. QuittingSimlahh in October, his lordship proceeded toCooper, on the banks of the Sutlej. On the23d of that month the interesting interview took interview with^ Unmeet Sig.place with the Maharajah Unmeet Sing, whichterminated in cementing the good understandingexisting between the British Government and thechief of Lahore.During the stay of the Governor general at Mission of^ -^ 111 \:\tvX. Burnes.Simlahh, Lieutenant Burnes, who had been on amission to the Maharajah from Bombay, in 1831,with a letter from the King of England, and apresent of some horses, joined his lordship's camp.Having successfully navigated the Indus, andbeing anxious to explore the countries of CentralAsia, lying between that river and the Caspian,he not only obtained the Governor-general's sanctionfor the prosecution of the object, but receivedfrom his lordship the most liberal encouragementin his undertaking.The result of this officer's researches were forwarded620 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1830. warded from Calcutta in his own charge, he being-deputedto England to afford information on thevarious subjects connected with his mission. Thepolitical condition, the commercial relations, themilitary capabilities, and the geographical featuresI of the countries between the Caspian and the Indus,were fully developed. General views of policy,with reference to those countries, were also prepared,and sent hence by the Governor-general'sAlso ot Colonel orders. His lordship being desirous to effect asanders ^ treaty with the Ameer of Scinde, despatched ColonelPorringer in the character of envoy from theSupreme Government, for the purpose. He leftBombay on the 4th December 1831 with his assistants,and reached Hydrabad, on the Indus, onthe 26th January. His judicious conduct fullyjustified the selection which had been made bythe Governor-general. He inspired those suspiciouschiefs with a confidence which led to the conclusionof treaties for opening and navigating thatriver.These proceedings having caused some anxiousinquiries by Unmeet Sing, Captain Wade repaired,under the orders of the Governor-general, to theMaharajah's court, and not only satisfied the mindof his highness as to the object, in which he fullyconcurred, but also obtained his adherence to thetreaty, and his zealous co-operation for openingthe other rivers in the Punjab. The Governor-generalproceeded by Kurnaul to Delhi.TheChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 621The affairs of the residency at this capital of ipso.the king, called for the presence of the supreme Deim.^^authority. The royal family had for some timebeen rising into a degree of importance in publicestimation, neither known to or appreciated bythe Government.The relation in which the British power was tostand towards the King of Delhi, was finally settledduring Lord Amherst's visit in 1827. Hismajesty appealed against that decision to theKing of England, and deputed Ram Mohun Royfor the purpose of prosecuting the matter. Thisfact was not known when that intelligent and distinguishednative quitted Bengal for Europe. Itwas an attempt to gain the mastery over theBritish representative, that is, the Governor-general,who was looked upon somewhat in the characterof nail or vakeel of the Company. Theattempt by the king at an appeal made a considerableimpression in favour of the royal family,and the influence of his majesty, whose popularitywas also promoted at this time by the conductof the acting resident at Delhi. He insulted, andbeat the passengers in the open streets, wheneverthey omitted to make obeisance to him. Thistreatment naturally gave great offence to thepeople, and even excited sensation throughoutUpper India. The people had no means of redress ;there was no law to appeal to, no regular processwhereby they could secure relief from such intolerableG22 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.lam tolerable conduct. They were thus subject to thearbitrary will of the acting resident, whose distancefrom all controlling authority left him atliberty to follow his own inclinations. It at lengthled to the people abstaining from appearing abroadwhen the acting resident was in the habit of takinghis rides. None but the king himself was free fromthe caprice of this gentleman. His majesty protestedagainst it, and by coming publicly forward,the acting resident was removed by the Governor-general,and this circumstance tended to strengthenthe opinion of the rising power of the King ofDelhi, through whose interference so high anofficer had been sent away.An effectual remedy was alone to be foundagainst those acts of aggression, by the introductionof laws, as in the other part of the Britishterritories. A clear exposition of the position inwhich the royal family stood towards the SupremeGovernment was necessary, to maintain the opinionof the supremacy of the British power.Much depends upon the character, and qualification,of the individual filling the office of residentat these courts. Assumption of authority onthe one hand, or too adulatory a course of conducton the other, is equally to be avoided ; a firmbut conciliatory demeanour, with a regard to thenative feelings and prejudices, being best calculatedto ensure a satisfactory discharge of theduties. There were many other points upon whichtheChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 623the Governor-general had intended to enter upon I832.his return from Ajmere, but his lordship's detentionthere, coupled with the state of his health,constrained him to proceed to Calcutta withoutrevisiting Delhi. ig33Proceeding by Ao^ra, the Governor-several congress at*^ "^ ^ ^ Ajmere,reached Ajmere, where he was met in January bythe Earl of Clare, who had succeeded Sir JohnMalcolm in the government of Bombay. LordClare, in the progress of his journey to join theGovernor-general, visited Baroda. During hislordship's brief sojourn at the residence of theGuicowar, he prevailed so far in removing theunfavourable impressions which had been createdin the mind of his highness, by the operation of atreaty which had been formed with the BritishGovernment, that, on his return from the congressin Rajpootana, Lord Clare found the Guicowarprepared to enter generally upon the subject ofhis relations towards us. After frequent discussions,his lordship, with great judgment and discretion,effected an arrangement, which terminatedin fully establishing sentiments of amity andconfidence in the mind of his highness towards theBritish Government.The Governor-general returned to Calcutta onthe 2d February 1833, having had the opportunityof judging of the real character of the local officers,both natives and Europeans, as well as ofthe native princes, our allies or dependents, and oftheRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1833.Lord WilliamBentinck appointedcom-mander-inches.1831-32.Affairs of HyderabadandOude.the general face of the country — advantages onlyto be obtained by personal inspection, which hadbeen so strongly felt by Lords Cornwallis andWellesley, and by their lordships' successors.In the month of May 1833, Lord William Bentinckwas appointed commander-in-chief in India,in succession to General Sir Edward Barnes.This was the third instance of the two offices ofgovernor-general and commander-in-chief beingunited in the same person.*The affairs of Hydrabad, and the general ruleof the Nizam, engaged the attention of the SupremeGovernment, whilst those of Mysore led toa proclamation in the month of October, declaratoryof the assumption by the British Governmentof the administration of that kingdom. The stateof Oude likewise came under the consideration ofthe Governor-general. The imbecility of the kinghad defeated the reforms that were effecting in hiscountry, and its affairs were fast relapsing intotheir ancient condition of anarchy and confusion.The misgovernment of that kingdom has been asubject of frequent and earnest remonstrance onthe part of the British Government, during thewhole of the thirty-two years which have elapsedsince the conclusion of the subsidiary treaty. LordWilliam Bentinck was fully empowered to takefinal and decided measures for assuming the governmentfor a certain period. y• Lord Cornwallis, 1786 ; Lord Hastings, 1813; Lord Wm.Bentinck, 1833.CiiAF. XVI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 625In consequence of the appearance of a real dis 1831-32.position on the part of the king, though at thislate hour and probably under an impression ofalarm, to reform his administration, the Governor-generaldetermined to suspend the execution ofthis extreme measure, to which all the authoritiesboth in India and in Europe, had always entertainedso strong a repugnance ; and thus to affordthe king another opportunity of retrieving his characterand that of his administration.At the close of 1831, disturbances arose in the Disturbances. T • • 1 • T n caused by fana-baronetdistrict, within a very short distance 01 tics in Baronet.Calcutta. The authors were a body of fanaticalMahomedans ; the leader, a man named MeerMiss Alee, commonly called Tittoo Meer, whohad been a wrestler or a Sugar deceit, and had forthree or four years disseminated in that part of thecountry the reforming tenets of Seyud Ahmed,with the view of reviving Mohammedanism in itsoriginal purity and strictness. He had collectedthree or four hundred followers of that sect fromamong the riots, weavers, and others of the lowerclass of Mahomedans. Their outrages against thegeneral feeling were on some occasions checkedby the police. Complaints against them weremade to the zemindar, who imposed a fine, whichobtained the irritating name of *' the fine uponbeards'" Tittoo Meer's followers being careful tolettheirs grow. This tax was resisted ; the sectappealed against it, and, not obtaining immediateVOL. II. 2 s redress.626 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chav.XVL1831. redress, they resolved on taking summary vengeance.They assembled in numbers, under pretextof giving an entertainment to some fathers,and at length began by seizing and killing a cow,sprinkling the blood over the walls of a Hindootemple, and hanging up the carcase in front ofthat building — a Brahmin was also killed. Astheir numbers augmented, they increased inconfidence, killing bullocks, plundering villages,seizing riots, extorting from them supplies ofgrain, compelling them to profess their tenets, andeven sending out parties to lay hands on the policedarogahs ; one of the joint magistrates of Baronet,who went out against them with a few of theCalcutta militia and a body of police officers, beingresisted, and repulsed with some loss. The magistrateof Kishnagur proceeded on the followingday, with a numerous party of police and severalEuropean indigo-planters ; but, after reconnoitringthe insurgents, made a precipitate retreat, and itwas not until three days afterwards, viz, the 1 9thof November, that a force sent by the Governmentfell in with and attacked them, when Meer Tittoo,with fifty of his followers, was killed, and threehundred taken prisoners. An investigation into theorigin of the disturbances was instituted by orderof the Government : the result proved that it wasnot attributable to any permanent or extendedspirit of disaffection. Its importance was chieflyowing to the local authorities being ignorant ofthei/ \Chap. XVI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 627the circumstances in which it had its origin. The misgovernmentstrongly enforced the necessity, onall occasions, of vigilance on the part of the officersto passing circumstances, which, although unimportantand insignificant, unless checked at theoutset may lead to consequences little contemplatedeither by their authors, or by those whoseduty it is to preserve order and tranquillity in thedistrict to which they may be attached.Disturbances had occurred in the month of chotaNag-January m the extensive zemmdarry of Chota Khoiewar.Nagpore, part of the Ramghur district, comprisingan area of ninety-five miles in length and eighty inbreadth, of which the rude tribe of the Holes arethe native inhabitants, and form the great mass ofthe population. Special commissions were nominatedby the Government with extensive powers toenquire into the causes, and suggest measures forthe future prevention of such occurrences. Theywere terminated by the surrender of most of theinsurgent leaders, and, at the close of the monthof April, the authority of the Government wasfully established.The insurgent kangaroo of Manning had ren proceedings attered operations necessary on the part of the Britishauthorities at Malacca. After a protractedand partially successful defence by the kangarooagainst the troops which had advanced for thepurpose, Taboo, the residence of the kangaroo,was taken, and tranquillity restored. The British2 s 2 relationsMalacca.G28RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.Ava andCachar*1831-32.Revenue andjudicial sys-tents.relations with Ava, and the affairs of the provinceof Cachar, occupied the consideration of the SupremeCouncil.The Governor-generals attention was directedto other important matters having relation to therevenue and judicial systems — the registered debtof India — steam navigation — and the state of commercialcredit at Calcutta.The knowledge acquired by Lord William Bentinck,when at Madras, respecting the revenueand judicial systems, enabled him to take up thegeneral subject, which demanded the serious andimmediate attention of the Government.His lordship, in December 1828, recorded aminute explanatory of his views for introducing abetter system of revenue management, and for amore prompt administration of civil and criminaljustice.The objects, with reference to the revenuebranch, were to keep the executive and controllingpowers separate, and to establish a more effectualsuperintendence and control over the executiverevenue officers, in order to relieve the Governmentfrom a portion of the references, by the institutionof an authority between the Governmentand the Board of Revenue, who immediatelydirected the executive, but who, it was evident,had been less vigilant and active than their dutyand their relation towards the Government demanded.TheCjiap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 629The collectors were to be required to make mi I831-32.note reports, and to be careful that their ruba-carries exhibited a bond-side statement of theiractual proceedings. The tahsildars were also toreport what measures they had adopted to checkthe conduct and acts of the amiens. One greatdefect that had pervaded the acts of the rulingauthorities, in all these measures regarding therevenue arrangements, was ignorance of the actualstate and condition of the country. It was observedduring the consideration of the subject at thistime.That, were any one to proceed from the most remote ofour western districts to the province of Rohilcund, andthence, crossing the centre of the Dooab, into the countryof the Boondelahs, he would be struck with the varietieswhich the character and social relations of the people, noless than the physical circumstances of the regions themselves,present; and that wonder would cease that gross errorshad been committed, when one plan, and the partial experienceof one place, had been employed in the regulation ofthe general revenue affairs. The necessity of a considerablevariety of scheme, and a proportioned variety of agents,would become more apparent, if again entering the Domainthe vicinity of its termination at Allahabad, crossingover Goruckpore, and thence passing through the fertileregions of Benares and Bahar into the alluvial plains ofBengal.Several revenue commissioners were, accordingly,nominated, each being vested with the authorityover a moderate tract of country, and actinginterestRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1831-32. intermediately between the collectors of districtsand a general board stationed at the presidency.One of the Governor general's objects in histour to the Upper Provinces was to ascertain, by |personal inspection and inquiry, what progress hadbeen made in carrying into effect Regulation VI T. of1822, which empowered collectors to define, settle,and record the rights and obligations of the variousclasses of persons possessing an interest in theland, or in the rent or produce thereof ; it was aduty which involved a complicated judicial investigation,requiring much labour, but it had notbeen followed up ; there was an evident want ofactive and zealous service in the prosecution of itsprovisions. Ten years had elapsed since the enactmentof the regulation, and little or nothing hadbeen done.The feeling was adverse to the ** Munro" modeof settlement, which was considered inapplicableto the provinces under the presidency of Bengal,where it was stated that the business of *' settle-merrymaking" was to fix the portion of the existingrents to be taken as revenue, and not to assessthe rents to be taken by the cultivators : whereasthe business, both in Bengal and at Madras, shouldbe first to ascertain what rent or revenue, the rightof the Government, would yield from the lands tobe assessed. This point being adjusted, the nextwas to decide what portion of that right, whetherthe whole or only the greater part, should beassessed,IChai. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 631assessed, as the Government defiant ; what pore 1831-32tion relinquished, and in whose favour. Thesewere the real points for the exercise of considerationand discretion : the acknowledged basis ofevery revenue settlement in India being, the rightof the Government to a certain share of the grossproduce of every inch of cultivated ground.The question is one upon which the prosperityand welfare of the people absolutely hinges, anddemands the most careful and deliberate consideration.Nothing is to be more strongly deprecatedthan any decision founded upon mere assumed data.Lord William Bentinck recorded, in a minutedated at Simlahh, the 26th September 1832, hissentiments on this interesting question. Referringto proprietary rights in the temporary settledprovinces, his lordship states :I feel quite satisfied, after mature reflection on this branchof the subject, that the only proprietors known are theRiots, which term comprises the whole agricultural community,and that the Zemindarree or Talookdarree tenure isadventitious and artificial, being, generally speaking, acreation of the Mogul government, and the talookdar, orzemindar, (not the village zemindar, or males,) himselfbeing originally neither more nor less than a contractor withGovernment for its revenue.His lordship fully concurred in the opinion,That generally, at one time, the lands in India wereoccupied by Riots, who had a right of perpetual occupancy ;they were the hereditary tenants and cultivators of the land ;that from them the revenue was collected by the officers ofGovernment,632 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1831-82. Government, and that to thedemandof Government there wasno limit. By long practice there was something establishedthat was considered to be a kind of standard, beyond whichthe Government would not readily go ; but it was alwaysunderstood that the Government had a right to go as far as itpleased.*Assuming that the Government and the hereditaryriots are the joint tenants or proprietors ofthe soil, the ryot is entitled to the portion whichdoes not belong to the Government. The latter, ifit pleases, may appoint a third party as a receiver,and give him a share of what the Government isentitled to as its due, but beyond that the zemindar,or third party, be he whom he may, has noright to share, as all beyond the claim of theGovernment belongs to the ryot.It is still believed to be an open question as towhat system shall be introduced in the unsettledprovinces. All that has been adduced and advancedof late on the interesting question of the revenuesettlement, tends to confirm the belief, that thepermanent arrangement of 1793 was carried forwardThe claims of the riots have been ably advocated in aninteresting memoir by Mr. Haled, printed in Calcutta for privatecirculation in 1832, in which an attempt is made to tracethe system of land tenure and principle of taxation from theearliest periods of Hindoo history to which existing recordsrefer — to follow them during the period of Mahometan dominion— to show them as they existed at the accession of the Britishrule, — and finally, to vindicate the errors of legislationcaused by a departure from the original system, and the consequenceswhich have ensued.bChap.XVI] BRITISH power in INDIA. 633ward in the absence of that real information, in iS3i-32.regard to the nature of land tenures in India, whichis essential to a correct decision upon a question,equally important to the state and to its subjects.The utmost extent to which it would seem to bejudicious to go, at any period, is that of grantinglong leases. But energy, with fit and proper instruments,may accomplish much. There must besomething radically defective in a system whichconstrains the Government to act under an erroneousprinciple in a measure so vitally affectingall interests, but most especially where those ofby far the most numerous and weakest are certainto be more or less sacrificed. A greater boon couldnot be conferred upon the natives than the suggestionof any remedial measures which wouldafford relief to the oppressed, ** without subvertinga state of things privileged by an existence of halfa century." Whatever differences of opinion maybeentertained regarding the permanent settlement,the motives which actuated its supporters cannotbe impugned.The great object of the revenue arrangementsfor the ceded and conquered provinces, as proposedin 1831-32, was to secure for their inhabitantsall the advantages of the permanent settlementin Bengal, without its defects.Upon the question of civil and criminal justice,the files of appeals had greatly increased ; thegaol deliveries had been retarded ; and such wasthe634 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1831-32. the condition of the civil and criminal administration,that a few months' residence in India hadsatisfied his lordship of the necessity of effectingsome reform, in a state of things calculated to entailirremediable consequences upon the country.It was apparent, that the arrear of suits could notbe disposed of without the extension of nativeagency. The Governor-general had strenuouslyadvocated the further employ of the natives, andthat they should be treated with that confidencewhich would prove the best stimulus to exertion,and the qualifying themselves for the variousduties in the administration of their country.Besides attaching them by the strongest of allties to the Government, it would raise their moralcharacter ; the prospect of reward by honourableemploy is the surest means of infusing correctprinciple : but a perseverance in excluding themfrom every high office of trust and emolument,could not fail to render them dispirited, low-minded,and even dishonest and deceitful. Hislordship was satisfied that native probity andtalent might be immediately found, (exercisingdue caution in the selection of instruments,) insufficientabundance, to justify the present introductionof them into the administration of justice,and accordingly suggested a measure,For increasing the powers of the MoonsifFs and S udderAmiens, in the trial of civil suits, for authorising theappointment of principal Sudden Amiens at the zillah andcityCHAr. XVI. J BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 635city stations, for modifying the powers and duties of the 1331-32.zillah, city, and provincial courts in connexion with thosearrangements, and for enlarging the sphere of selection withregard to the offices of MoonsifF and Vakeel.A regulation was framed to effect these provisions,and Government passed a resolution forcarrying it into operation in November 1831.The state of the Company's financial affairs had Financial. - . arrangementsinduced the Supreme (government to devise va abroad.pious measures, materially affecting the registereddebt of India. The Accountant-general in Bengalstands towards the Government there in somewhatthe same position as the Chancellor of the Exchequerin this country towards the Ministry; withthe exception, that the Chancellor of the Exchequeris a member of the cabinet, whilst in Bengalhe is an executive officer only. In the councilat Calcutta, as in the cabinet at home, any importantchange is discussed as to its merits and probableeffects, before it is adopted as an act of theGovernment, and promulgated for public notice ;but at home, any point of great moment may bereserved without inconvenience for the meetingof a full cabinet, whereas in India the head ofthe Government may be absent from the councilon distant and important service, as in formerinstances. The measure to be determined uponmay nevertheless call for immediate decision, rendering636 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. XVI.1831-32. during a previous reference to the Governor-generalimpracticable. Such was stated to be thecase v^ith regard to some of the schemes agitatedduring the absence of Lord William Bentinck inthe Upper Provinces. The accountant-generalin 1831 submitted to the vice-president in councila plan, involving the discharge of a considerableportion of the registered debt of 1825,coupled v^ith a scheme for the relief of the GovernmentTreasury, should circumstances renderit necessary. The proposition upon M^hich theplans in question where based, was in the firstinstance sent to the Governor-general, then upthe country, for his decision. His lordship replied,The determination of the question submitted to himdepended upon two circumstances : 1st. Whether the conditionof the cash balances, and the expected surplus ofrevenue, were such as to make the Government independentof loan resources ; 2d. Whether the supplies furnished bymeans of the investment or advances on private bills hadprovided for the expected demands from Europe ; and tosatisfy his mind upon these points, his lordship desired tohave some more detailed information.Statements were accordingly ordered ; but asdelay would arise in preparing them, an immediatedecision was urged upon his lordship, whichinvolved the discharge of a million and a-halfsterling of the five per cent. loan. In consequenceof this representation, Lord William Bentinck consentedto the measure, on the express understanding,Chap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 637standing, that the entire payment of all political 1831-32.loans was assumed in the then cash balance forApril 1831, and that no requisition had beenmade for a bullion remittance to Europe ; adding,however, that he did not look upon the paymentof a funded debt of old standing necessarily good,and to be resolved upon the instant means wereavailable for the purpose, and under the hazard ofhaving in the course of the year to resort to anew loan ; neither did he conceive that the chargeof a few days' interest in the amount proposedfor payment was, in a project of such magnitude,a consideration that should weigh against theadvantage of mature deliberation. Shortly afterthe measure had been announced to the public,the requisition for a bullion remittance to Europewas received by the Government from the Courtof Directors. There is little doubt that, had hislordship been furnished with the information hedesired on the first reference of the matter, hewould have withheld his assent ; but before thiscall for a remittance had reached Calcutta, theaccountant-general proposed a further plan forpaying off another portion of the five per cent,debt, and that a loan would be opened at four percent.,to which the holders of the five mighttransfer their paper ; the whole being submittedas an experiment, to which the Governor-general'ssanction was solicited. His lordship replied,That any mere experimental measure, not founded, ashe638 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.ia31-32. he considered the one submitted to be, upon any solidfoundation or expectation of success, was very liable to bedeprecated ; and that, at all events, the re-opening of thefour per cent, loan was a necessary preliminary to otheroperations.In March 1832, another plan was brought beforethe vice-president in council by the accountfor converting the five per cent,debt into stock, bearing a lower rate of interest,by discharging two millions sterling of that debt.An advertisement was issued without any communicationwith the Governor-general, as it wasonly considered to be following out a course ofoperation previously sanctioned. As an additionalreason for not referring it to his lordship, it wasurged, that in all matters of finance affecting extensiveclasses of persons, and more particularlyin transactions connected with public loans, it wasessential that Government should act with promptitude,and allow as little time as possible tointervene between the date when a propositionis known to be submitted, and that of the finaldetermination thereon ; as the interval is to thepublic always one of anxiety and doubt, of intrigueand false speculations, which open the doorto mischievous jobbing, and even to frauds.The Home authorities animadverted in verystrong terms upon this proceeding, and pointedlydirected, that in future no resolution materiallyaffecting the finances of India should be taken intheChap. XVI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 639the absence of the Governor-general, without not 1831-32.only his full knowledge of the grounds uponwhich it might be brought forward, but also hisentire concurrence in the act itself. '* The judgmentof the Governor-general was applauded, inrejecting such fallacious documents as the Indiaestimates had lately been." The Government weredirected to inform the Court of Directors immediatelyof all important financial measures. Theletter dated at Calcutta in March was not receivedin London till the 10th December, four weeksafter a letter of the 1st of May had arrived here.** These measures were considered to afford astriking illustration of the inconvenience whichresults from the absence of the Governor-generalfrom the presidency."They also prove the importance of the financialmeasures of a government being conducted uponsound and steady principles, avoiding those vacillationswhich prove equally injurious to the interestsof the state and to those of the public creditor.It is not to be expected that the person selectedfor the post of governor general should possess allthe requisite knowledge to guide his colleagues toa right decision on such questions ; it is rather tothe other members of council, who from long residencein India may have become conversant withthem, that a right judgment would be looked for.But the principal party is the official officer ofGovern ment,i;/3. the accountant-general, who, it istoG40 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XVT.1831-32. to be presumed, is selected for his peculiar fitnessto advise the Government on all great measures offinancial arrangement ; and yet the estimates oflate years are described as ** fallacious documents!"The Governor-general may be called away byduties equally important to the interests of thestate, as in the instances of Lord Cornwallis, in1792 ; Lord Wellesley, in 1799; Lord Minto, in1811 ; Lord Hastings, in 1814 ; and Lord WilliamBentinck, in 1831. On the latter occasion thestate of the revenue administration, from valencethe pecuniary resources of the Government aredrawn, having demanded his lordship's personalsupervision, as already pointed out.Comments and strictures may proceed fromhome, and serve as salutary warnings to theGovernments abroad ; but, under the existingsystem, it is in India where the efficient executivemust be found. Much stress had been laid uponthe delay which occurred in transmitting to Englandthe advices on the subject of the financialchanges, as affecting the registered debt. If aquicker communication of the intended measureswould have led to an effective interposition, itpresents an additional reason in favour of steamcommunication.Steam navis Fourteen years have elapsed since the subjectfiffttionof Steam Navigation with India was firstbroughtChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 641brought to the notice of the Home authorities in a 1831-32.despatch from Bombay of May 1823.The practicability of establishing a monthlycommunication was pointed out : but there wereno means of ascertaining what might be the cost.Still it was felt to be of great moment to theinterests of India that the experiment should betried, as it would in all probability facilitate themeans of communication with the mother country,and thereby change their entire relation one towardsthe other. This was followed by a communicationfrom the Government of Bengal, in whichreference was made to the result of a public meetingheld at Calcutta for the purpose of promotingthe object : a committee had been formed andsubscriptions opened. Although the Governmentwere by no means sanguine, and entertained considerableapprehensions, in the persuasion that thewhole was fraught with danger, they consented tosubscribe twenty thousand rupees ; which measurereceived the sanction of the Court of Directors,who applauded the zeal manifested by thepublic at Calcutta on the occasion.The schemes contemplated in the establishmentof steam navigation with and in India, were — theroute by the Cape of Good Hope — the navigationof the Euphrates to Bussorah, and from thence tothe Persian Gulph and India — the route by theMediterranean to Alexandria, Cairo, and Suez, bythe Red Sea to India — the internal navigation ofVOL. II. 2 T India,G42 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1831-32. India, and the establishment of sea-going steamersin the Indian seas,vos-age by the The route by the Cape was first accomplishedEnfer^izl^ by Captain Johnson, who commanded the Enterprize,which vessel was of four hundred andseventy tons burthen, with two engines of onehundred and twenty-horse power. She quittedfalmouth for India on the 16th of August 1825,and reached Diamond Harbour in Bengal on the7th of December, a space of one hundred andthirteen days ; of which she was one hundred andthree under weigh, sixty-four of those steamingand thirty-nine under sail. The total distance wasthirteen thousand seven hundred miles. The greatestrun by sail in twenty-four hours was two hundredand eleven miles, the least thirty-nine. Thegreatest by steam assisted by sail was two hundredand twenty-five, the least eighty. The powerof the engines was not considered commensuratewith the tonnage ; the depots for coals were notwell arranged, and a disappointment was experiencedin not making the trade wind. These cir- ^substances operated unfavourably, and it was alsothe first attempt. tVith the experience alreadyacquired, eighty to eighty-five days is the timecalculated for future voyages; but the route by theCape is questionable. The Enterprize was builtValue of the by a society of thirty-two gentlemen. After sheEnterprize and iitti n -i i-r> itwo other reached India she was transferred to the bengalAvawar. Government for £40,000, which, together withpassage-thon.Chap.XVL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 643passage-money, nearly paid the first cost. She 1831-32.was immediately employed in the Burmese war,and proved of infinite benefit to the public servicein making the passage to and from Rangoon. Onthe occasion of the treaty of Malown, she saved toGovernment six lacs of rupees, by reaching Calcuttain sufficient time to prevent the march oftroops from the Upper Provinces. Two othersteamers were employed in the Irrawaddy riverabove Rangoon, and greatly facilitated the operationsagainst the enemy.The navigation of the Ganges was the next ex River navigatemade in the presence of Lord WilliamBentinck, who, immediately on his arrival, calledfor reports upon the best mode of carrying forwardthe internal river navigation. An elaboratereport was prepared by Mr. Prince, to whomevery facility was given by the public departmentsin collecting and digesting the materials.From Calcutta to Allahabad the distance iseight hundred miles, and was performed in twentydays : by sail it would have occupied three months.The steaming is only carried on during the day,the dangers of the river rendering night work impracticable.The two vessels were the Hooghlyand Berhampoota : the former one hundred andfifty tons burthen, with two of Maudsley's engines,each of twenty-five-horse power ; her draft,four feet. She was built at Calcutta. The desiredobjects were rapidity and security. They conveyed2 T 2 treasure.RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XVI.1 83-32.Iron steamers.Route by theRed Sea andthe Mediterranean.Voyage of theHugh Lindsay.treasure, commissariat, military, and medicalstores, stamped paper, and small parcels. Troopswere also conveyed, and likewise the junior officerswho are at the charge of Government. Theannual cost to Government on these accountsamounted to £40,000, which was ample to meetthe charge of the steamers.These vessels were to be replaced by ironsteamers, built by Maudsley, taken to pieces andsent out. They had been found admirably calculatedfor the purpose, being much cooler, perfectlyfree from smell and also vermin, and impossibleto be struck by lightning, the iron being an universalconductor, taking the lightning off directto the water. They were formed to draw onlytwo feet, as adapting them for the navigation ofthe Indian rivers. Eight iron vessels have beensent out, four of them being tug vessels, one hundredand twenty-five feet long, twenty feet beam,with two engines of thirty horse power, the otherfour being accommodation vessels. The greatestadvantage is to be expected from the introductionof steam-boat navigation into the interior, especiallyon the Indus.The next experiment was made with referenceto the establishment of a steam communicationwitji England, by the Red Sea. The first vesselwas the Hugh Lindsay, built of teak at Bombay,41 1 tons, builder's measurement, with two eighty-horsepower engines, by Maudsley. She was fittedasChai.XVI] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 645as an armed steamer. Her first voyage from Bomb ipso.bay was commenced the 20th March 1830. Thecoal depots were at Aden, Juddah, Cosseir, andSuez. To Aden, 1,641 miles, in ten days andnineteen hours : at Aden five days and twentyhours shipping coals, badly arranged : left Aden6th April for Mocha, landed there on the 7th atnine a.m. : left Mocha for Juddah at half pastfive P.M. on the 8th : arrived at Juddah on the12th, at six p.m., 557 miles in four days andtwelve hours : on the 17th, having been detainedfor coals, left for Suez. Anchored at Suez on the22d April, being twenty-one days six hours fromBombay, steaming, and thirty-two days six hours,including stoppages.The voyage, therefore, to England, notwithstandingall delays, would have been performedin sixty-one days. The Hugh Lindsay left Suez,on her return to Bombay, on the 26th April, andarrived the 29th May, during which she was nineteendays fourteen hours steaming.Her second voyage commenced, from Bombay,the 5th December 1830, with Sir John Malcolmon board. She arrived at Cosseir the 27th December,having been steaming sixteen days sixteenhours, and making in the whole twenty-two days,stoppages included. Had a steamer been at Alexandria,letters might have reached England infifty-three days. The Hugh Lindsay returned withthe Earl of Clare, who, with his suite, embarkedat646 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1831. at Cosseir the 30th December, and reached Judahharbour the 8th January, where they weredetained forty-six days for want of coal. Theyleft Juddah on the 23d February, and arrived atBombay on the 20th March.The third voyage commenced, from Bombay,on the 5th January 1832 ; reaching Suez on the4th February, being twenty-one days sixteen hours.The weather was very unfavourable for steaming.Letters might have reached England in fifty-eightdays. On the 20th February she left Suez forCosseir. Reached Bombay on the 23d March.Her fourth voyage was from Bombay, the 10thJanuary 1833, reaching Cosseir the 9th February,and Suez the 13th.These voyages offered the only means to judgeof the practicability of a prospective attempt regardinga regular steam communication. It wasassumed that none would be attempted with Suezduring the south-west monsoon; but this idea wascombated by Mr.Waghorn, whose boldness ofassertion, it was stated, might mislead. CaptainWilson, commanding the Hugh Lindsay, accordinglysubmitted a supplement to the log in supportof his views, in opposition to those advanced byMr. Leghorn. Captain Wilson's opinions have notbeen practically refuted, but the general impressionis in favour of the practicability of navigatingthe Red Sea in a south-west monsoon.The novelty of the undertaking, the heavy buildofChap. X VI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 647of the vessel, and the inadequate power of the i^^-engines, were against her. Mr. Leghorn appearsto have abandoned every other pursuit in order tofollow up his favourite object of establishing steamnavigation via Egypt. His labours have been mostzealous, and he has succeeded in fixing himselfin that country, where he appears to have gainedthe confidence of the Pacha, and of his highness'sfunctionaries, having laid down a regular plan forthe transmission of despatches and letters to andfrom India and Europe.The evidence before the Select Committee of the Resolutions ofHouse of Commons, in June 1834, led to a roscommonlution in favour of a regular and expeditious communicationby steam as an object of great nationalimportance : that the route between Bombay andSuez, during the north-east monsoon, had beenestablished, and that measures should be immediatelytaken for the regular establishment of steamcommunication from India, by the Red Sea — hisMajesty's Government and the East-india Companyto consider whether from Bombay or Calcutta: and that, by whatever line, the net chargewas to be equally borne by the Government andthe East-india Company, including the charge ofthe expense of the land conveyance from theEuphrates, on the one hand, and the Red Seaon the other, to the Mediterranean.As the physical difficulties on the line of the RedSea were confined to the months of June, July,August,648 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1832. August, and September, and those on the Euphratesto November, December, January, and February,the effectual trial on both lines would opena certain communication with the Mediterranean,only changing the line of the steam vessels onboth sides, according to the seasons. It was tobe recommended to his Majesty's Government toextend the line of the Malta packets to such partsin Egypt and Syria as would complete the communicationbetween England and India, and thata grant of £20,000 be made by Parliament fortrying the experiment with the least possibledelay.Navigation by The result of Colonel Chcsuey's expedition onthe Euphrates, i-i^i i i-iip itthe Euphrates has been laid before the public.After encountering extreme difficulties and greatperils, he has demonstrated the practicability ofnavigating that river, and ascertained the tractabilityof the Arabs. Arrangements are in progressto give effect to the recommendation of the committee,under an agreement between his Majesty'sGovernment and the Company.Without imputing blame to any particular quarter,it is a singular circumstance, that althoughmost parties, when they have examined into thequestion of steam navigation with India, concurin the policy and expediency of the measure; itsprogress, without some one leading individual willpersonally taking an interest in pressing it on,would be defeated, mainly from inertness on theoneChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 649one side, and an indisposition, from a doubt of its 1832.practicability or usefulness, on the other.Lord William Bentinck has not been backwardin giving his best support to the measure, which hehas warmly advocated, both in India and at home.In the autumn of 1832, the conduct of the Coorgwar.rajah of Coorg constrained his brother-in-law,China Buswah, accompanied by his wife, whowas sister to the rajah, to seek refuge by flight,with twenty followers, from the Coorg territories.They arrived at the Mysore residency in September,and claimed Mr. Cassamajor's protection.The rajah determined to pursue his sister, DewanAmajee, towards whom he meditated the mostprofligate conduct. In the progress of his measureshe committed atrocious acts of cruelty, and atlength determined to invade the territory of Mysorefor the purpose of rescuing his sister, and toadopt hostile movements if necessary to his object.Mr.Cassmajor was accordingly instructed, inJanuary 1833, to obtain a personal interview withthe rajah of Coorg, for which purpose he visitedMukurree, where he learned the merciless rule ofterror exercised over the Coorghas. He discoveredthat intrigues had been carried on by the servantsof the Mysore commissioners, and that a disaffectedspirit had been manifested towards the Company'sgovernment by that of Coorg, as well asby the state of Mysore. At the same time, Sirja-pah Nick, the polygar of Territory, who hadtaken650 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai.XVL1833L taken part in the revolts in the western districts,against the authority of the rajah of Mysore,but had made his submission, on being directedto proceed to Bangalore, absconded with hisfamily: a reward was offered for his apprehension,and the Coorg rajah was requested to deliver himup, should it appear that he had taken refuge inhis territories. It was discovered, in the month ofJuly, that he had been received with honours inthe Coorg territory, and that considerable bodiesof men had proceeded from Bellamy to join theinsurgent polar. The rajah of Coorg was apprizedby Mr. Cassamajor, that his sister andbrother-in-law had gone from Mysore to Bangalore,and he was desired to give up SirjapahNick. This application elicited a disrespectfulletter from the rajah, in which he complained ofrefuge being given to fugitives from his territories,and stated that the polar, Sirjapah, had notbeen there. The disturbed state of the Mysoreterritory, the aid given by the polar, and thesupport extended by the Coorg rajah, inducedSir Frederick Adam, the governor of Madras, todepute Mr. Greene to the rajah, in the month ofSeptember. This was followed by the polarcapturing a talook.The aspect of affairs determined the Governor-generalto proceed without delay to Madras. Aletter from his lordship to the rajah of Coorg wasdespatched, for the purpose of being presentedthroughChap. XVL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 651through Mr. Gramme, announcing the intention of istathe Governor general to proceed to Mysore for thepurpose of meeting the rajah, when his lordshiptrusted all points in dispute would be settled. Tothis the rajah did not reply. The Governor-general,on reaching Madras, sent another letter, advisinghis arrival, and expressing a hope that his highnesshad released Mr. Gramme's agent (whom hehad forcibly detained), and that the negotiationmight be resumed, in order to a satisfactory termination.All attempts to effect a pacific arrangementproving ineffectual, the Governor-general directeda force to be prepared to act against Coorg, ColonelFrazer being nominated in the character ofpolitical agent. The operations were so promptlyand effectually carried forward under BrigadierLindsay, Cab., with Lieut-colonel Stewart, ColonelsWaugh, Miles, and Foulis, that Mudde-kerry, the capital, surrendered on the 6th, andthe rajah himself on the 10th April. The mostatrocious murders had been perpetrated under theorders of that sanguinary chief. Not a legitimate-borndescendant, by the ties of blood, remainedalive ! It was accordingly determined that the 1834Coorg territories should be brought under Britishrule ; the grounds for this measure being detailedin a minute recorded by the Governor-general,when at Bangalore, in the month of March.The welfare of a country, and the interests ofa greatRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.Depressedstate of thecommercialcommunity atCalcutta.a great portion of the community, are alwaysmore or less affected by commercial prosperity.These interests were still further and more intimatelyaffected in India, where the limited extentof European residents engaged in mercantile andbanking pursuits, necessarily drove the partiesseeking profitable investment for their capital orsaving into the hands of the agency houses, asoffering the only means of profitable employment,with greater interest, than the government loansafforded, which were also liable to the fluctuationsof uncertain councils.Previously to 1813, the commercial transactionsin India were in comparatively few hands. Themembers of the firms were composed principallyof gentlemen who had been in the civil or militaryservice. They joined the houses in the beliefthat their qualifications were better fitted formercantile pursuits, and that their interests wouldbe better advanced in that line. They were thedistributors, rather than the possessors of capital.The same system continued : partners came inwithout capital, and the houses became the depositoriesof the accumulation of the civil and militaryservants of the Company. The extreme spiritof speculation, which, with all its baneful effects,had been so severely felt in this country, beganto be experienced in India in the year 1826. Aninstance occurred in 1827 at Calcutta, whichoperated most injuriously on the minds of thenativeCiiAP. XVI.f BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 653native traders and manufacturers. One of the ^s^-agency houses had been long insolvent, and hadsold by a judgment-bond to another firm, whichsupported it while it was gathering in, mostlyupon credit, large quantities of produce of allkinds in the interior. At the moment when allhad been collected, or was in transit to the presidency,judgment was entered upon the bond inthe Supreme Court, and the community of theinterior saw the goods they had provided, andlooked upon as their security, torn from undertheir eyes, without the hope of a fraction of theirvalue being set apart to satisfy their claims. Unfortunately,the failure of this firm was not theonly one of its kind.*In the early part of 1833, the mercantile communityat Calcutta suffered the most severe pressure.The agency houses indicated such instability,as to leave but faint expectation of theirbeing able to bear up against the pressure, notwithstandingthe disposition evinced by the to extend every practicable aidthat could be prudently afforded. The anticipatedcrisis took place, and in the month of January1834, the last house stopped payment.It is impossible to do more than to refer briefly closing remarkson Lordand imperfectly to the leading points of an admit wiiiiamBen-tinct's administration,which extended over a period of seven distraction.years, and which comprised such a variety ofmeasures,Finance Letter to Bengal, 2d April 1828.054 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVf.1833. measures, carried forward under novel and peculiarcircumstances.There had scarcely been a preceding Government,in which some prominent event had notthrown comparatively into the shade the less attractivematters, intimately connected with thewelfare and happiness of the people, and with theinternal government of the country.It was the fortune of Lord William Bentinck toenter upon the office of governor general at atime when antecedent events had given a tone tothe several branches of the service, by no meanscalculated to diminish the onerous duties imposedupon the head of the Indian administration.To carry into execution measures of economyand retrenchment, on points irritating to the feelingsof the body constituting our main hold uponour eastern empire, was not only an unwelcomebut a difficult task, requiring much firmness,tempered with judgment and discretion. TheGovernor-general discharged his duty, at muchcost to his personal feelings ; at the same timecontending with unflinching determination againstindiscretions, emanating in quarters where theGovernment would naturally have expected tomeet with aid and support, in the performance ofa great public trust.Measures relating to the civil branch of theservice, but not more palatable to its members,were imperatively called for : but their introductioninfused a spirit of energy and zeal, wheresupinenessCfTAP. XVI. ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 655supineness or laxity of control had suffered inert ^833.ness or apathy to creep in. The difficulties of theGovernor-general's position were enhanced by avariety of reports, calculated to unsettle the publicmind regarding the future system for governingIndia. An extensive inquiry, instituted by Parliament,had been prosecuted amidst fluctuatingministries, each entertaining, so far as could begathered, opposite views of the principles uponwhich a future settlement should be made betweenthe public and the Company: a state ofthings, materially influencing the whole frame ofIndian society, but more particularly that portionat the seat of government. Publications emanatingfrom members high in the service, evincedlittle respect for the authority in whose name theaffairs were administered, whilst an unbridledfreedom of comment was indulged on the conductof their representative in India. Much of thefeeling was to be traced to the effects of the overwhelmingruin caused by the universal failures ofthe agency houses : havoc and dismay was spreadthroughout all branches. Savings had been depositedby the servants, in the cherished expectationthat they would enable them to return toclose their lives in their native land ; but at onefell swoop they saw their little all swallowed up,their prospects blasted, and themselves left toprolong an unwilling and cheerless service, withbroken spirits, and minds soured by severe andunexpected disappointment.Amidst656 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI.1835. Amidst a state of things so little calculated tohislordshlp^on make a favourable impression upon the Indianhis departure, community, Lord William Bentinck, nevertheless,received a series of addresses, bearing the strongesttestimony which could be offered to the valuableservices of a high public functionary, on retiringfrom the scene of his labours. The value of suchtestimonies vias enhanced by the qualified termsin which they were expressed.It was not an indiscriminate eulogy, but thehonest avowal of men who were sensible thatthe Governor-general had conferred benefits onIndia which demanded a public acknowledgment.The address from the mercantile communitydeclared, that they felt themselves impelledby a strong sense of duty to contributetheir humble testimony in approval of numerousmeasures, completed or in preparation, having fortheir object the general improvement of the country,the moral and social advancement of its vastand varied population, and the development, inparticular, of its commercial and agricultural resources.They well observed, that in many respectshis lordship's administration had necessarilybeen of a character widely different from those ofhis predecessors. Theirs were days of war anddiplomacy, and profuse expenditure; to his lordshiphad fallen the more painful task of consolidating,preserving, and organizing ; of repairingthe deep wounds in the public finances ; of contendingwith an alarming deficit, and of enforcingtheChap. XVI.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 657the remedy of severe economy and retrenchment, 1835.by which the charges of India had been verygreatly reduced, and the Company's treasury considerablyrelieved.The native population meeting at the HinduCollege declared that his lordship had done everythingkind for them ; the only act of unkindnesswas parting with them. They expressed theirveneration for his lordship's person and character,and their gratitude for the enlarged spirit of justiceand benevolence with which the natives had beentreated, under his administration.At a public meeting at the Town Hall, a resolutionwas passed, requesting his lordship to permithis statue to be erected in some conspicuous partof Calcutta, to be of bronze, and equestrian, andto be executed by Clan trey.Lord William Bentinck quitted Calcutta inMarch 1835.The Court of Directors, on learning that hislordship's health constrained him to relinquishthe government, passed the following Resolutionon the 26th September 1834 :Resolved, That this Court deeply lament that the stateof Lord William Bentinck's health should be such as todeprive the Company of his most valuable services ; andthis Court deem it proper to record, on the occasion of hislordship's resignation of the office of Governor-general,their high sense of the distinguished ability, energy zealandintegrity, with which his lordship has discharged thearduous duties of his exalted station.VOL. II. 2 UCs RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. Xvi.CHAPTER XVII.The progressive acquisition of the territorialpossessions has now been traced, from the firstformation of the Company's commercial factoriesto the establishment of the British power as theparamount authority in India.A perusal of the first volume of this work musthave gone far to satisfy the reader, that nothingcould be more unjust than the charge broughtagainst the Company, ofProsecuting extravagant projects and expensive wars, forthe purpose of extending their dominions.The contents of the present volume will asclearly demonstrate that the Parliamentary declaration,which was passed in order to effect endswhich were supposed to have been defeated bywant of power in the Company, proved utterlyimpotent and ineffectual, and it was not untilmore than seventy years had elapsed from our firstcontention for political supremacy, that the Homeauthorities were constrained to acknowledge themselvessatisfied of theIrrepressible tendency of our Indian power to enlarge itsbounds, and to augment its preponderance, in spite of themost peremptory injunctions of forbearance, and the mostscrupulous obedience to them in the governments abroad.TheChai.XVIL] BRITISH power in INDIA. 659The fact is, that the British empire in India hasbeen acquired in direct opposition to the viewsboth of Parliament and of the Company ; theconquest having been made by those eminentstatesmen and warriors, who where compelled tosuch a course of policy in order to maintain ourposition in that country.If the Company, in the discharge of what theyhonestly felt to be their duty, desired to checkthe advance of our armies, their management ofthe financial resources, and their conduct of thetrade, contributed to supply the means which theirextended operations demanded, as well as todefray the cost of the vast establishment, both inEngland and in India, without any direct chargeon this country.It was the constitutional objection raised in1784, which led to the Company being maintainedas a political instrument in the Indiasystem. The same objection, strengthened bythe extension both of territory and commerce, hasbeen used as an argument on each subsequentrenewal of the charter : whilst an attentive observerof passing events must have seen that theinfluence, which was guarded against with somuch jealousy, has, in fact, been imperceptiblyintroduced in all the great and leading points, andthat the last change has largely contributed toproduce this result.There's no ground for imputing to the Minister,2 u 2 at660 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.at either of the periods when arrangements tookplace with the Company, any intention to bringabout such a result : and, certainly, least of allcan the Ministry of 1833 be charged with suchintentions: although they had many supportersfor otherwise appropriating the initiatory patronage,such supporters being found amongst thosewho differed politically with his Majesty's Government.Reserving to a future opportunity the considerationof this important branch of the question, inconnection with the present system, as affectingthe interests of India, reference will now be madeto the measures following the Act of 1813, andterminating in that of 1833, which wrought soextraordinary a change in the character of theCompany, and of the position in which they standtowards those territories that so long formed thesubject of discussion between the Company andthe Crown.Power had been reserved to Parliament in theAct of 1813, to make further regulations for thedirect and circuitous trade with places within thelimits of the Company's charter,In pursuance of this reservation, the CircuitousTrade Act was passed in 1814. In 1817 the Maltaand Gibraltar Trade Act took place. In 1820,Committees of Parliament were nominated for thepurpose of inquiries into the foreign trade of thecountry, and the means of extending it.Among:Chap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 661Among other branches of trade, that with Indiaand China was especially adverted to.In May 1820, Mr. Canning, then president ofthe India Board, (who had moved, in 1813, torestrict the Company's term in the China trade toten instead of twenty years,) pressed on the attentionof the Court of Directors the expediency ofestablishing an entrepot in the Eastern Archipelago,where British ships might take in tea forforeign Europe ; and pointed out the expediencyof the Court's allowing a portion of their tonnageto China for the use of the British public.The Court, feeling the reciprocal aids of territoryand commerce to be essential to the constitutionof the Company, who had carried on the governmententrusted to them in a way acknowledgedto have been highly beneficial, both to the mothercountry and to its Indian possessions, declined,under these circumstances, being parties to anychange in the China trade, as fixed by the Actof 1813.The Committee of the Commons, in their report Report onforeign trade.on the foreign trade m July 1821, stated that theycould not concur in all the apprehensions entertainedby the Company of the consequences of apartial relaxation of their monopoly, but they, atthe same time, admitted that great and just importancewas attached by the Company to theChina monopoly, as the profits from it constitutedthe principal resource from which their dividendwas1821.I662 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.was paid, and that such trade was, in fact, themain prop of the Company's financial system.*In 1821, the last measure which remained tocomplete the extent of relaxation in the Indiatrade under the reserved clause in the Act of 1813,was effected, by which British ships were permittedto carry on trade between all parts withinthe limits of the charter, and all ports, whether inEurope or elsewhere, belonging to countries inamity with Great Britain.The Company also consented to relinquish therestriction as to the tonnage of ships engaging inthe India trade, which by the Charter Act hadbeen fixed at not less than three hundred and1824-28. fi toils.Discussion on The attention of the House of Commons wasIndia trade andproduce. drawn by Mr. Whitmore to the policy of equalizingthe duties on East-india sugar. The advantagesto be derived from our trade with Indiagenerally were also enlarged upon : but the motionfor a Committee of the House thereon was rejected.Similar motions, in 1824 and 1825, werelikewise unsuccessfuLIn May 1827, and shortly after Mr. Canninghad been gazetted as first lord of the Treasuryand chancellor of the exchequer, Mr. Whitmoremoved for the appointment of a select committeeto inquire into the trade between Great BritainandReport on Foreign Trade, 1821; No. 746 ParliamentaryPapers.Chap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. G63and India. On that occasion he pressed upon theattention of the House the necessity of dissolving,what he termed the China monopoly. The motionwas opposed, on the ground that the proper timewould come when the whole subject would beripe for consideration ; but, at that moment, itwas considered the most prudent course to abstainfrom entering into the discussion.*On the 12th May 1829, Mr. Huskisson presenteda petition from the merchants of Liverpool,praying for the removal of all restrictions o-n thetrade with India and China ; on which occasionhe stated, that it was humiliating to our pride andgood sense, that English ships should be excludedfrom traffic with China, which trade was exclusivelymonopolized by the East-india Company.This proceeding was followed up by Mr. Whit-more,on the 14th May, who then brought forwardthe general question of the trade with India andChina. He again dwelt upon the impolicy ofmaintaining a monopoly for the conduct of theChina trade, and insisted upon the necessity of amost searching inquiry by Parliament. The motionfor a committee was withdrawn at the instance ofMinisters, who fully admitted the necessity whicheexisted for inquiry, but urged its postponementuntilMr. Canning, who succeeded Lord Liverpool, died in themonth of August 1827. In January 1828, the Duke of Wellingtonbecame prime minister. Mr. Huskisson resigned hisoffice of secretary of state for the colonies on the 20th May1828.I664 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVll.until the Parliamentary notice should be given tothe Company.1830. In the month of February 1830, Lord EUen-theTJrdrand borough moved foF the appointment of a Selectthe™ffaireof" Committee of the House of Lords, to enquire intothe Company. ^^^ ^^^-^^ ^^ ^^^ Company, and into the tradebetween Great Britain, the East-indies, and China.His lordship adverted to the state of the Indianfinances, and pointed out the necessity for economyin every branch of the administration ; observing,at the same time, that it was impossiblefor any government, in this or any other country,to issue stronger orders than those which had beenissued by the Court of Directors, for the reductionof expenditure in every department of the statein India ; adding, that the Company had affordedall the aid in their power to increase the facilitiesgiven to the external and internal trade of India.His lordship stated, that the most importantquestion for Parliament to decide was, first, whetherit would be possible to conduct the governmentof India, directly or indirectly, without theassistance of the Company? and, secondly, whetherthat assistance should be afforded in themanner in which it had hitherto been afforded, orsin some other way ?Mr. Secretary Peel, moved in the House of!Commons, on the same day, for a Committee forasimilar purpose. He stated, that he proposedits appointment with the plain and honest view ofhavingChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 665having a full, perfect, and unreserved investigationwith respect to the affairs of the Company,and not for the purpose of ratifying any engagementpreviously existing between the Governmentand the Company. In fact, no such engagement,open or secret, express or implied, existed.* Mr.Peel, in his great legislative measure on the revisionof the criminal code in 1827, made especialreference to India, for which a separate provisionwas subsequently introduced.Committees were appointed bv both the Houses. Report fromthe Lords.The report from the Committee of the Lords waslaid before the House in 1830. It represented,that the inquiry prosecuted by their lordshipshad embraced a great variety of subjects, includingthe finances of India, and the means of increasingthe territorial revenues. In allusion tothe latter subject it was remarked, ** The chiefmanufactures of India having been supplanted toa great extent by the manufactures of England,not only in the market of this country but in thatof India itself, it has become an object of thedeepest interest to improve the productions of thesoil ; the Committee, therefore, instituted a fullinquiryThis declaration was occasioned by a supposed statement,in a letter from Lord Ellenborough to Sir John Malcolm, thatthe Government were prepared to renew the charter, whereasit was declared by Mr. George Banks, that the word ought tohave been review. Whatever the statement may have been,there was nothing on the records to lead to the slightest beliefthat the charter would be renewed.IRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.Report fromthe Commons.Company'sstatements ns*to trade andfinance impugned.inquiry into the quality of the silk and of thecotton of India, and into the measures whichmight be adopted for their improvement ; theylikewise made inquiries as to sugar, tobacco, andother articles of Indian produce."The report from the Committee of the Commonsrepresented, that they had proceeded to an examinationof the state of the trade with China,intending to postpone, until that should be completed,their inquiry into the condition of theIndian finances.The proceedings which took place in the progressof the examination before the Committee,rendered it impossible to separate questions sointerwoven in the Company's system as those oftrade and finance. The opponents of the Companyknew that, if they could succeed in provingthat the alleged advantages derived from the Chinatrade were without foundation, not only all plea foracontinuance of the exclusive privilege could besetaside, but that the pecuniary claims advancedby the Company would also be rendered untenable.They accordingly contended, that so far fromthe profits of the Company's trade having paid thedividend on their capital stock and the interest onthe bond debt, and likewise afforded aid to theIndian finances, that all deficiency had been suppliedfrom the territorial revenue ; and they roundlyasserted, that the Company had, in point of fact,no commercial capital whatever !InCiiAP.XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 667In support of these views, it was also attemptedto be shewn that the Company had acted illegallyin fixing the upset price of tea at their sales, andthereby forfeited their exclusive privilege, andrendered themselves liable to penalties for a breachof the law.The evidence adduced bv the Company * on Evidence inL J support ot thethese points, proved beyond all doubt, that in Company'saccounts.regard to the upset price of tea, they had actedin strict accordance with the law ; that the calculationsin support of an opposite view wereutterly fallacious ; and that the assertion of theCompany's commerce having derived aid from theterritorial revenue, was not only at direct variancewith the opinion of the Committee of the Houseof Commons on the Foreign Trade in 1821, butwas likewise diametrically opposed to the resultsof all the accounts laid before Parliament since1814, by which it was clearly shewn that theIndian revenues had fallen short of the territorialcharges.The death of his Majesty King George theFourth on the 26th June, led to the prorogation ofParliament on the 23d July, and to its subsequentdissolution.On Tuesday the 12th October, the Chairs had, interview bee^ . . All tween Duke ofby appointment, an interview at Apsley-house Wellington andwith the Duke of Wellington and Lord Ellen borough, Imiborough. His Grace stated, that as the period for ari Deputy."theFide Evidence of J. C. Melville, Esq., 29th April 1830.I668 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVI I.the notice to the Company of the termination oftheir exclusive privileges in 1834 had arrived, theydesired to see the Chairs, in order to ascertainwhat the views and intentions of the Companywould be, in the event of its being consideredexpedient that the Court of Directors should continueto exercise functions similar to those nowentrusted to them in the government of India, butthe Company no longer to possess the monopolyof the China trade.The Chairs expressing their individual opinions,replied, that they were satisfied the Company hadno view, with respect to the government of India,beyond that of being an useful instrument in theexecution of an important national trust, and thatthey would not be indisposed to continue theirservices to the public, provided the requisite meanswere ensured to them, by which they might beenabled to administer the government consistentlywith their own character, and for the benefit ofthis country and of India. That, financiallyspeaking, there was a large annual deficit, whichwas met principally through the China trade.There was the question also of remittance. That,under the existing system, the Indian territoryhad access to all the commercial capital of theCompany, which assistance the Company hadbeen willing to afford, so long as their trade hadyielded a dividend of ten and a-half per cent.That, under any contemplated change, the CourtofChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 669of Directors would feel it to be their first duty tosecure the interests and property of their constituents,who, it could be hardly expected, wouldconsent to any portion of their capital remainingat hazard without ample guarantee andsecurity.The Duke of Wellington and LordEllenboroughconsidered, that the Proprietors had full securitiesfor their capital stock, and for the dividend at itspresent rate, in the commercial assets, and in thevalue of the fixed property in India, which mightbe judged to appertain to the Company in itscommercial capacity. Other points were advertedto, and it was intimated, that when what hadpassed should have been communicated to aSecret Committee of Correspondence, the Dukeand Lord Ellenborough hoped to be informed ofthe result.The same being laid before a Secret Committeeof Correspondence, on the 20th October, the Committeerecorded a minute, in which they stated,that they were far from offering any objection toan early and a full consideration of the generalquestion ; but they had not anticipated beingcalled upon, within fourteen days of the meetingof Parliament, for an opinion upon a supposedplan ; nor did the Committee see the necessity ofconnecting the notice by Parliament with anymention of the subject in the King's speech at theopening of the session, where such notice was tobe670 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.be given. In 1792, only a few months elapsedbetween its being noticed from the throne and therenewal. In 1813, only one year, although thenegotiation had commenced in 1808. They thenexpressed sentiments in full accordance with thosestated by the Chairs at Apsley-house, and theirreadiness to enter fully into the question, wheneverhis Majesty's Ministers should see fit tosubmit any specific proposition for a future arrangementbetween the Public and the Company ;little hope could be entertained that the Companywould be allowed to retain any of theirexclusive commercial privileges.The new Parliament met on the 26th October.The resignation of the Duke of Wellington'sministry followed the division on the motion asto the Civil List on the 15th November, and on the22d Earl Grey was gazetted as prime minister.His lordship could not be supposed to havehad much concern with the affairs of India : stillit was a question upon which a decision was imperativelydemanded. The commercial interestspressed for it : it was not possible to separate thequestions of government and trade ; and yet whatminister could have been expected, on so suddenan accession to office, to deal with a subject whichdemanded mature and deliberate consideration,more particularly at a period of much public excitement,caused by discussions affecting theancient institutions of the country.Mr.'Chap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. G7 1Isti.Mr. Grant, as president of the Board of Con committee ontrol,* moved, on the 4th February 1831, for the a^jt^.S^re-appointment of the committee on East-indiaaffairs ; but within a month after its nominationParliament was prorogued, with a view to its Dissolution ofimmediate dissolution. Parliament.The new Parliament met on the 14th June, and NewPariia--^ T T ren ' ment. and re-on the 28th the committee on JKast- India affairs appointment ofwas renewed, on the motion of Mr. Grant, when ii?dhi"affa1rs!^"some remarks were made, condemnatory of thecourse pursued by the Company, in not havingpetitioned for a renewal of their charter. Theconduct of the Directors, who were also membersof the committee, was questioned, because theyhad not called witnesses, by which the formercommittee had found themselves without matterto proceed with.The Court of Directors, charged with the interestsof their constituents, felt that the mostprudent course for them was to abstain from petitioningParliament, leaving it to the Company'sadversaries to make out their case ; at the sametime reserving the right, whenever they might seefit again to exercise it, of meeting, and of controverting,if possible, the allegations advanced bytheir opponents. The Court withheld nothing.They had invariably expressed a desire to affordthe most ample information, both oral and documentary.Then the Right Hon. Charles Grant, now Lord Glenelg.C72 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XVII.nectary. Conscious of the rectitude of the coursewhich they had pursued, in administering theweighty and important trust committed to them,they left it to the wisdom of Parliament to followout the scheme which had been proposed foreliciting the truth.At an interview between the president and theChairs, on the 7th July, the latter, with referenceto an allegation, that the opponents of the Companycomplained of an unwillingness on the partof the Company to afford information, stated, thatthe Company's officers were examined on thefinancial accounts and the China trade, and thatthe committee then sitting was quite competentto summon whom they pleased to give evidence.It was also observed, in reply to a declaration,that obstacles and difficulties had prevented theopponents of the Company from making out theircase, and that the Company should now come forwardand shew grounds to entitle them to a renewalof their charter : that the case of the Company hadbeen established by the failure of their opponents ;for, as they had been unable to establish misrule,it was fair to conclude that the government of theCompany had been generally good. If any partof their administration was assailed, measuresmight be taken, by summoning proper evidencein the Committee, to vindicate it, and if errorsexisted, to remedy them; and that when the CompanyChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 673any came before Parliament as petitioners, theywould be prepared to support and defend theiradministration. The Chairs proved that negotiationhad always preceded petition ; and theyurged, in the strongest terms, the necessity ofbeing put in possession of the views of hisMajesty's Government at the earliest possibleperiod.The president then stated, that there was noalternative but for himself to take a more directand leading part in the proceedings of the Committee.The question had, in fact, become one offinance.The opponents of the Company having beencompletely foiled in their endeavours to prove thatthe revenue, and not commerce, had yielded themeans of paying the dividends and commercialcharges, and that the upset price in the sale oftea had been illegally fixed, now determined toimpugn the general integrity of the Company'saccounts. This was, in fact, the only remainingpoint ; and had it been proved vulnerable, the publicmight have proposed their own terms, and haveplaced the Company at the entire mercy of Parliament,without any apparent plea of justice torest upon in support of the interests of the Proprietors.For this purpose, Mr. Langton, a merchantof Liverpool, and one of the deputation sentup to oppose the renewal of the Company's charter,had been requested by those with whom heVOL. II. 2 X acted,674 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XVII.acted, to compare the statements made by theCompany's officer before the Committee, on the7th June 1830, of the results of the commercialand territorial branches of the Company's affairs,with the accounts, in order to ascertain how farthey might be implicitly relied upon. This gentleman*stated to the Committee, as the result of hislabours.That the whole debt in India at the close of 1780, as wellthat owing before the acquisition of the territory as thattaken from the revenues, beyond the amount of disposablesurplus replaced by loan, must be considered as a commercialdebt ; and if, from that time to the close of 1828, Indiahad been relieved from the payment of the interest on thatdebt, all other receipts and payments remaining the same,the country would have been upwards of .£'52,000,000richer, that it would not have had a shilling of debt, andwould have had dfi'l 0,000,000 more in its coffers !To the foregoing statement he adhered in hissubsequent examination on the 26th July, whenhe declared,I have, however, no doubt of the general correctnessof my view of these accounts.Being asked his opinion as to the generalcharacter and manner in which the Company'saccounts had been framed, he replied ^My opinion coincides with that of every one with whomI have ever conversed on the subject, and who had lookedinto the accounts. What that opinion is, I hardly need say.I amEvidence of Thomas Langton, Esq., 21st July 1831.Chap. XVII ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 675I am disposed to believe, not only from my own limitedexperience, but from the sentiments of many other mercantilemen, that there can be no transactions, however complicated,which accountants of talent, ability, and experience,could not set forth and display in such a form, as thatthey should be intelligible to all men of a plain understanding,and not unacquainted altogether with the nature ofaccounts; and whenever, between individuals, accounts ofan unintelligible character, and contradictory in their details,are presented, there will never be but one inferencedrawn from them, that either ignorance or had faith presidedtheir preparation.Here was a direct charge against the Company,not founded merely upon the opinion ofMr. Langton, but an opinion coinciding with thatof every one with whom he had conversed on thesubject.It was, however, clearly shewn by the evidenceof the Company's officer, on the 30th August, thatthe attempt to establish the Indian debt as adebt created for commercial purposes, was whollyopposed to the repeated declarations of Parliament,in 1793, 1811, 1812, and 1813, and that the converseof the proposition had long been settled bycompetent authority. Parliamentary documentswere proved to have existed where Mr. Langtonimplied that they were only accounts of theCompany's accountant-general ; and it was alsoproved, that the results had been examined andsanctioned by a committee of the House of (Commons.It was, likewise, shewn, that in Mr. ton's670 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap.XVII.ton's statements great omissions had been made,and many erroneous charges inserted, and thathis conclusions had been arrived at in utterignorance of the various political causes whichhad occasioned the accumulation of politicaldebt.*On the 20th September Mr. Langton had theopportunity of affording the Committee explanationson his former evidence, and on the refutationgiven to it by the Company's finance officer. Instead,however, of meeting and controverting theerroneous statements and inferences charged uponhim by the Company's officer, he dealt in generalities,and declared, that he was satisfied therecould never be two opinions as to the Company'saccounts amongst men of business.The objections, and imperfect and unmeaningexplanations, given by Mr. Langton on his cross-examination,were such, that even his coadjutorswere constrained to admit his failure.The session terminated in the month of October.On the 27th January 1832, the president of theBoard I moved for the re-appointment of a selectcommittee, and observed, that the committeeswhich had already sat in both houses, had collecteda great mass of valuable information, but ithad been put together in an irregular and confusedmanner, and, he apprehended, many importantpointsFide Evidence, 30th August 1831 (4433, 4444).f Right Hon. Charles Grant.Chap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN India. 677points had not been touched upon. When he proposedthe committee, twelve months before, hefelt that it was not desirable that the Governmentshould take any prominent or leading part.That at that time there were two parties, and ofcourse there were two at the present time : thosewho approved a renewal of the privileges of theCompany, and those who were opposed to theirrenewal. He expected from the controversy, thatthe truth would be elicited by each party endeavouringto prove his own case. But the Court ofDirectors did not feel themselves called upon toenter into the examination of the question at all ;and those who were opposed to them, owing toparticular circumstances, were unable to do justiceto their own case.From what has already been stated, it will havebeen seen that, immediately after the charter of1813 had been concluded, unceasing endeavourswere made to interfere with, and impair, theexclusive privileges of trade enjoyed by theCompany. Hence it was apparent, that the mostdetermined opposition would be given to a renewalof any of their privileges, and that it would bealmost hopeless on the part of the Company toexpect, in the conflicting state of parties, with theadverse feeling which existed to the maintenanceof any thing wearing the character of monopoly,and more especially after the opinion expressed byhis Majesty's Ministers, on the 30th October 1830,as678 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chas. XVII.as to the China trade, that any petition could havebeen presented with a reasonable hope of its meetingwith a favourable reception. On all formeroccasions, when the Company petitioned Parliament,the general prayer of such petition hadreceived the countenance of the minister of theday. But the case was now totally altered. TheCompany were opposed from all quarters ; theyfound no direct countenance on the part of hisMajesty's Government ; they were left to meet asthey could the charges brought against them, asaffecting both their commercial and financialtransactions ; and when a complete refutation hadbeen given to statements which went to impugnthe integrity of the whole of their accounts,no opinion was expressed, that such refutationwas in any degree satisfactory. But if the positionof the Company was novel, so was thatof the Minister. A preceding administration hadcandidly declared there must be an end to theChina monopoly ; it could not therefore be expectedthat a new ministry, of avowed liberalcommercial principles, should have supported thecontinuance. It necessarily - became a matter ofaccount between the public and the Company,the India minister being the guardian of the jointpurse.The motion for a general committee on theaffairs of the East India Company being accededto, it was divided into six sub-committees, viz.Public,Cjiap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 679Public,Finance and Accounts — Trade,Revenue,Judicial,Military,Political or Foreign.Their labours terminated in August 1832. Theseveral reports were laid before the House, andordered to be printed. They consisted of 8,149pages of close print, which, with the matteralready given to Parliament, made an aggregate ofbetween thirteen and fourteen thousand closelyprinted pages of large quarto.The Public Report touched upon the Home Government— Local Government — Law — Natives —Ecclesiastical — Patronage — Education, Civil andMilitary — Education, Natives — Press — Intercoursewith India — Settlement of Europeans.The Revenue Report upon the Land Revenue —Salt Monopoly — Opium Monopoly — Transit DutiesCustoms — Sayer and Barry — Town Duties —Wheel Tax — Tobacco — Post Office — Stamps —Pilgrim Taxes.The Judicial Report, Military Reporting Politicaland Foreign, on the several matters connectedwith the administration of justice, and the conditionof the army, and the Company's political relations;and lastlyThe Finance Report,Notwithstanding the scrutiny which had beenalready680 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap XVII1832. already instituted into the financial accounts ofFurther scrub >-, i . , ,tiny info the the Company, the suggestion thrown out byaccounts! ^ Mr. Langton was adopted : — The Board of Commissionersengaged a professional accountant, distinctfrom the establishment either at the Boardor the India House, for the purpose of examiningMr. Penning, the accounts. This gentleman (Mr. Bennington)ton's evidence. , , , , r i t i •snpportsCom- possessed uo knowledge OT the Indian accounts.niems/^''^^" When examined before the Committee, two monthsafter he had been engaged in the investigation, herepresented, that he had experienced difficulties inentering into an examination, from apparent discrepancies; but admitted, that he had no reasonto question the accuracy of the statements of theaccounts, taken simply as statements. At the closeof the month of July, after this gentleman hadbeen occupied for seven months in the scrutiny,he reported, that territory had gained, from1814-15 to 1828-29, exclusive of interest, the sumof £3,507,423, by using the Board's rate of exchangein repaying the sums advanced by commerceto territory ; that the average profit of theIndia and China trade for the fifteen years wasAppendix to £1,009,047. That of the commercial profits forpagTii'. * the fifteen years, £4,923,021 had been directlyapplied to territorial purposes, to the liquidationof Indian debt, or in a manner that operated toprevent its increase. He then referred to the statementsof Mr. Langton, Mr. Wilkinson, and Mr.Rickards, and observed, *' it was only necessarytoCjiai'.XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 681to compare the statements of those parties witheach other, to shew their insufficiency for the objectswhich they had in view." Mr. Langton consideredterritory as the only ostensible party inIndia ; Mr. Rickards and Mr. Wilkinson regardedcommerce as the only ostensible party.If, added Mr. Bennington, concession weremade, that certain payments clearly territorialwere a charge upon the Company's trade, thenit might be admitted, notwithstanding mistakesand omissions in their statements, that the debt ofIndia had been mainly incurred in support of commerce; but these concessions cannot be made. Thepayments arose in territorial and political causes,and not in the wants of commerce, and were quitesufficient to account for the increase of the Indiandebt since 1793, without supposing that any partof its produce had been applied to the augmentationof the Company's commercial property. Theaugmentation of that property since 1793 appearsto have resulted from the gradual accumulation ofcommercial profit, together with the increase ofsubscribed"capital at that time authorized.*A more triumphant result, as proving the accuracyof the Company's accounts, could not havebeen desired. It was a result confirmed by thedeliberate conviction of the Parliamentary Committee,who, in their report regarding the financialoperations of the Company, expressed themselvesin the following terms : — <t rp,20th July 1832.682 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.Opinion of " The finances of India have derived advantageCommittees from their existing connexion with the commerceof the Company ; through the direct applicationof surplus commercial profit, and by the rates ofexchange at which the Board of Control decided,that the territorial advances from commerce inEngland should be repaid to commerce in India."Charters The negotiation with his Majesty's Governmentopened. respecting the charter, was opened in the afternoonof the 10th December, when the Chairman andDeputy Chairman had an interview with EarlGrey and Mr. Grant. His lordship stated, thata paper was in the possession of Mr. Grant, whichcontained an outline of the leading points it wasthought necessary to touch upon in the first instance.After it had been read, a conversation ofsome length passed upon the general question.The Chairs then took their leave, with the understandingthat a copy of the paper should be forwardedto them. It was accordingly transmittedto the Chairman the same evening, and was ultimatelylaid before the Court.The Hints contained twenty-nine propositions.Of these the first eight related to the cessation oftrade, the surrender to the crown of all the Company'sassets, commercial and territorial, with alltheir rights and possessions, for an annuity of£630,000 per annum. The annuitants to retainthe character of a Joint Stock Company.The next eleven related to the patronage, andinvolvedChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 683involved the continuance of the East-india College.The twenty third related to the free resort ofBritish subjects to India.The remaining six to the powers of the Board.The question soon assumed its real character,viz, one of finance, dividing itself into two parts :the claims of the Proprietors on the one side ;the other, the sufficiency of pecuniary means toenable the Company to fulfil the political functionswith which they might be charged in theproposed plan.The Directors supported the first, upon theground that the Company had acquired propertyamply sufficient to provide an investment in consolsequal to the required dividend. On the second 1033point, they expressed their apprehension, that the Negotiatingabolition of the Company's commercial privileges testy's Minis-woulddeprive them of the means, hitherto derivedfrom trade, to meet the deficiencies in the Indianrevenues. A communication to this effect wasmade to the President of the Board by the Chairs,on the 3d January 1833. It was replied to byMr. Grant, on his return from Scotland, on the Mr. Grant's12th February, in a letter which contained an able company^^^^^^^^and argumentative exposition of the circumstances ^"^^"*in which the Company were placed, and of theirrights, as well as those of the public. It wasstated that his Majesty's Ministers considered,Notwithstanding too much past defect and error, and inspite684 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai. XVII.spite of much remaining imperfection, the political administrationof India through the Company, had secured to theinhabitants of that country so considerable a measure of theadvantages which it was the proper object of a Governmentto confer, and evinced so much susceptibility of receivingimprovement, suggested by experience and reflection, thatthey would not be justified in lightly proposing to disturbthe system in its essential elements. That by a carefulobservation of the practical effects of the blended system oftrade and government, the Company ought, as soon aspossible, to be released from commercial dealings ; and thatthe interests of the nation would be best consulted by nolonger continuing the China trade as an exclusive privilege,though he did not deny the merit claimed to the Chinatrade by the Company, in having both discharged the costof remittance, and also supplied the deficiency of revenue.With respect to the competency of India to answer all thejust demands on her exchequer, no rational doubt couldexist. A revenue which, notwithstanding fluctuations, hadduring the last twenty years been steadily progressive ;which, estimated according to parliamentary rates of exchange,had now reached the annual amount of twenty-twomillions, and which promised still to increase ; a territoryalmost unlimited in extent; a soil rich and fertile, and suitedto every kind of produce ; great resources not yet explored ;a people, generally speaking, patient, frugal, laborious, improving,and evincing both desire and capacity of furtherimprovement ; these, he thought, were sufficient pledges thatour treasury in the East, under wise management, would bemore than adequate to meet the current expenditure.It was admitted, that '* the proposition of hisMajesty's Ministers involved a surrender, but italso involved an equivalent;" and the Court wereapprized,Chap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 685apprized, that, ** to accept or reject it rested withthe East-india Company." They were at the sametime informed, that should the Company contemplatetrading, apart from the exercise of politicalfunctions, on a footing of free competition, suchtrade, in the judgment of his Majesty's Government,could not be profitable ; and the Court wereapprized ** with all plainness," that the interestsof the Company in the commercial property, whichthey regarded as exclusively commercial, wereinvolved in a multiplicity of doubts and entanglements,from which an escape seemed to be next toimpossible, except through some such comprehensivescheme as that proposed. At all events, a detailedand minute inquiry would be necessary, toset the matter at rest ; but the very institution ofsuch an inquiryWould give a severe shock to the credit of the Company.Such inquiries are usually protracted beyond the estimatedtime. In the given case, the examination would extend backthrough the transactions of nearly a century, and wouldapply to property both in India and in England, and afloat,and, as to a great portion of it, placed under very peculiarcircumstances. In the interim the charter expires, the Chinamonopoly is at an end, and in what situation, it was asked,were the East-india Stock-holders ? From what fund werethe dividends to be paid ? In what manner were the commercialoperations of the Company, even those in progress,to be carried forward ?The Court of Directors controverted the views court's views.taken with reference to the financial operations ofIndiaRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.Mr. Grantnames guaranteefund.Court desiresfurther information,andstate theirclaims.India when the Company should be deprived of alltrade.They stated their readiness to meet the most searchinginquiry as to the Company's accounts, although the doubtthrown upon them, after the extraordinary tests to whichthey had been subjected, created some surprise. They expressedtheir desire to meet the question upon the principleof liberal compromise ; but contended for some guarantee,or some collateral security, for the payment of the dividends,and ultimately for the capital if necessary.The Court were assured, that his Majesty'sGovernment desired to fortify the interests of theProprietors by some collateral security in theshape of a sinking fund, formed by the investmentof a portion of the commercial assets in the nationalstocks; the sum of £1,200,000 was proposed to theCourt for that purpose. After offering explanationsupon some other points, it was stated, thatMinisters felt it to be their duty to call for a decisionon the arrangement as it then stood ; andintimated that it would not be in their power toentertain the proposal of any additions or modificationsin the character of the conditions, precedentto the adoption of the plan on the part of theCompany.The Court, nevertheless, asked for further explanationconnected with the proposal. Theyremarked.That the Company were called upon to surrender everythingwhich they possessed as a corporation : — their capital,computed at more than twenty-one millions sterling, everyitemChap Xvi.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. G87item of which was commercial in its origin and present character; — their right to trade, most valuable when consideredin connexion with that capital, and with the position whichthe Company had established here and abroad, and whichright, if they chose to exercise it, would greatly interferewith, if not altogether prevent, the advantages whichprivate merchants expected to reap from a free trade withChina ; — their pecuniary claims, some sanctioned by aCommittee of Parliament both in principle and amount,and all recognized either by Parliament, or in Parliament,by ministerial statements : — their lands, forts, and factoriesin India, for which, they contended, they had as good atitle as that by which any property is held ; — and finally,their claims in respect of the territory at large, which Parliamenthad always reserved. The right of the Companyhad been questioned, but the Court were satisfied of thevalidity of their claims ; at the same time they were notinsensible to the difficulty of realizing and possessing themselvesof them, if the King's Government were adverseto the Company. They then pressed the addition of Court ask for.^'SgijOOO three per cent, stock to the .£>1,200,000 pro l^'^ZmLposed by Ministers as a guarantee fund : they also desired fund, and anile^ J o -^ of publicity.to know the term for which the annuity was to be granted.They urged the necessity of their possessing the opportunityof giving publicity to their views, on important differenceswith the Board of Commissioners, by an appeal toParliament ; publicity as a rule, and not as an exception,being, in the judgment of the Court, the most effectualmethod that could be devised for maintaining a wholesomecheck upon the Board of Commissioners.The Court likewise pressed the continuance to them ofthe power to make pecuniary grants of limited amountwithout reference to the Board. They appealed to pastexperience, to shew whether any abuse had existed in theexerciseG88 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chai.XVII.exercise of that power ; and if, as they were persuaded, nosuch abuse could be proved, they relied upon its beingdetermined that the power should still remain with regardto the home establishment. They were satisfied, if theamount fixed for its expense was not to be varied at thepleasure of the Board, but only in the event of an alterationin the extent of the establishment, or in circumstancesaffecting the scale of remuneration generally, as it wouldalways be the desire of the Court to keep their establishmentwithin bounds, consistent with efficiency, and withwhat was due to those who devoted themselves to the Company'sservice. They contended against the Board's possessingany power over the right of recall, to be exercisedby the Court, of governors-general, governors, and com-commander-in-chief. It appearing to be contemplated thatMinisters should, to some extent, be invested with thepower of appropriating the commercial property, and thatoutstanding commercial obligations and the claims of theCompany's commercial servants were to be made over withthe property of the Crown, to be dealt with as Ministersmight see fit, the Court apprehended that, upon no principleof law or equity, could claims and obligations unconnectedwith the territorial government, and arising solelyout of contracts and engagements which the Company hadentered into as a commercial corporation acting under aperpetual charter, be transferred from the Company toany person or persons whatsoever.The duration of the annuity, and the term forwhich the government of India was to be continuedto the Company, were points still undecided.Forty years was accordingly named byhis Majesty's Ministers as the term for the former;but it was thought better to leave the term oftheChap. XVII ] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 689the Company's proposed political functions open.With regard to appeals, it was suggested that allcases in which pecuniary claims of an old datewere revived, and concerning which the Courtand the Board differed (such as those which hadunfortunately occurred of late,* there should bylawbe provided means, if any could be devised,of referring them to the consideration and decisionof some independent authority or judicature. Anassurance was given, that the consideration due tothose meritorious servants of the Company, whoseinterests might be affected by the change, wasfully participated in by the Government.The Chairs, with reference to the foregoingexplanations, intimated to the President, that aGeneral Court had been specially summoned forthe 25th, but that the Court could not submit tothe Proprietors any distinct recommendation uponthe subject ; and they feared it would be impossiblefor them, at any time, to lend their sanctionto the proposed scheme, unless the Companyretained the administration of the country for thetime during which their interests were to be identifiedwith it.The whole of the correspondence which had proceedings oftaken place was laid before the Proprietors on the praetors.25thVide Papers printed for the Proprietors, as to pecuniaryclaims of British subjects on Native Princes of India, 1834.VOL. II. 2 Y090 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.25th March.* They met on the 15th April, forthe purpose of taking it into consideration ; onwhich day a resolution was submitted by Sir JohnMalcolm, and discussed by the Proprietors onthe 16th, 18th, 19th, 22d, 23d, and 25th April.Various amendments having been proposed andconsidered, the following resolution, on the mainquestion, was agreed to by the Court, as the questionto be decided by ballot, viz.That, having attentively considered the correspondencewhich was laid before the Proprietors on the 25th ultimo,this Court must, in the first place, express their cordialapprobation of the conduct of the Court of Directors, inmaintaining, as they have done, with judgment, zeal, andability, the rights and interests of the East-india Company.That, on reviewing the intimate connexion which has solong subsisted between India and the Company, this Courtdesire to record their conviction, that the Company canhave no other object, in undertaking to administer theterritorial government for a further term, than the advancementof the happiness and prosperity of our nativesubjects ; and that, if Parliament, in its wisdom, shouldconsider, as his Majesty's Ministers have declared, thatthat great object may be best promoted by continuing theadministration in the hands of the Company, having,through the Court of Directors, suggested, as it was theirduty to do, the difficulties and dangers, political as wellas financial, which beset the dissolution of the connexionbetween♦ A dissent by H. St. George Tucker, Esq. of the 30th Marchwas also laid before the General Court, stating his reasons forwithholding his full and unqualified assent to the large and importantconcessions " extorted from the Company in the courseof the negotiation." — (Negotiation Papers, p. 11 3.)Chap. XVIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 691between the territorial and the commercial branches oftheir affairs, will not shrink from the undertaking, evenat the sacrifices required, provided that powers be reserved,to enable the Company efficiently to administerthe government, and that their pecuniary rights andclaims be adjusted upon the principle of fair and liberalcompromise.That the Company, however, looking to the presentand prospective state of the Indian finances, to the aidwhich the territory derives from the trade, and to theprobable difficulty of effecting remittances from Indiaunder the proposed system, are of opinion, that it is notreasonable that ' the Company's assets, commercial andterritorial, with all their possessions and rights, shall beassigned to the Crown, on behalf of the territorial governmentof India,' in exchange, as proposed by his Majesty'sMinisters, for an annuity of ten and a half per cent, forforty years, payable in England out of the territorialrevenues, and redeemable at the end of that period at therate of dE'lOO for every £5. 5s. of annuity, except on thefollowing conditions, viz.First. — That the sum to be set apart for a GuaranteeFund, be extended to such an amount as, uponreasonable calculation, will be sufficient, with theaccumulations during forty years, to redeem the annuityat the expiration of that term ; and that inthe event of India failing in any one year to remitsufficient funds to pay the dividend, the deficiencyshall be supplied out of the Guarantee Fund, anysums which may be taken for that purpose beingmade good to the fund by subsequent remittancesfrom India.Secondly. — That the Company exercising the samepowers as they now possess under their charter, shall2 y 2 continue692 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.continue to administer the government of India for adefined period, not less tian twenty years ; and if deprivedof it at the expiration of that term, or at anytimesubsequently thereto, they shall be allowed theoption of demanding payment of the principal, at therate of ^100 for each £5. 5s. of annuity ; and wheneverpaid off, they will be entitled, if they shall seefit, with their capital, or any portion thereof, to resumetheir undoubted right to trade, which it is nowproposed by his Majesty's Ministers should be inabeyance.Thirdly. — That during the period of the Company'sadministration of the territorial government,all measures, involving direct or contingent expenditure,shall originate with the Court of Directors,and be subject, as at present, to the control of theBoard of Commissioners, under the restrictions ofthe existing law ; and further, that sufficient powersbe reserved to the Company to check, by a system ofpublicity to both Houses of Parliament, or by someother means, any acts of the Board which may appearto the Court of Directors to be unconstitutional,to militate against the principles of good government,to interfere with substantial justice to our allies, orto invalidate or impair the security for the dividend ;andFourthly. — That a sufficient power be retainedover the commercial assets, to enable the Court ofDirectors to propose to the Company, and ultimatelyto the Board, for their confirmation, a plan for makingsuitable provision for outstanding commercial obligations,and for such of the commercial officers andservants of the Company as may be affected by theproposed arrangements.ThatChap. XVII] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 69)^That the Court of Directors be requested to communicatethis resolution to his Majesty's Ministers.The same was carried by the ballot on the3d May, the votes being477 for the question,52 against the question.425 majority.Thus, notwithstanding the claims put forth to Ministers agree• 1 i r j i 1 r i. A. to certain mo-commercialproperty ot the value oi twenty-one visitations.millions sterling, and to territorial possessions,forts, and factories, with as good a title as thatby which any property is held, only one monthintervened between the first announcement of theproposed scheme to the Proprietors and its adoption,with some modification, with only fifty-twodissentients out of five hundred and twenty-ninevotes : the latter number being scarcely a fourthpart of the Proprietors as a body, and little beyonda third part of the number who have voted infavour of a candidate for the direction !The president of the Board, on the 27th May,expressed the satisfaction with which his Majesty'sMinisters learned the termination of the appeal tothe ballot ; and that they were happy to understandfrom it that the Proprietors, though notregarding with unqualified approbation the planlaid before them, were, on the whole, prepared toassent to its adoption, should it receive the sanctionofRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.Increase guaranteefund.Dividend tohave a preference.Company toadministergovernmentof India fortwenty years.Board not tohave a veto onrecall by Court.of Parliament. He stated it to be the anxiouswish of his Majesty Ministers to accommodatethemselves, as far as practicable, to the views andfeelings of the Company, and in this dispositionthey re-considered the resolution of the Proprietorsof the 3d May.They accordingly agreed to increase the guaranteefund to two millions, the sum which had beenrecommended by the Court of Directors.*The dividend to have a preference over everyother payment.The Company to administer the government ofIndia for a defined period of twenty years.With regard to the words in the resolution,exercising the same powers as the Company nowpossess under their charter," Mr. Grant stated,thatHe did not know whether they were introduced with anyspecific reference : but to the general propositions which theyexpressed, his Majesty's Ministers, through him, had repeatedlydeclared their adherence, and they were not awarethat it was, in the slightest degree, impaired by any modificationthey contemplated in the existing system. Whateverchanges Parliament might, in its wisdom, see fit to adopt,could, he did not doubt, be made, without detriment to thesubstantial authority of the Company.If the words had been inserted in consequence of the hintthrown out in the memorandum, that the Board should havea vetoA Secret Committee of the whole Court, on the 18th ofMarch 1833, had decided in the negative on a proposition forincreasing the guarantee fund to £3,000^000.— (NegotiationPapers, page 92 )Chap. XVIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 695a veto on the recall of governors and military commandersin India, it was not the intention of his Majesty's Ministersto insist on that suggestion. They also agreed, that if,at the expiration of the term, or at any subsequent period,the Company are deprived of the poetical government, theProprietors shall have the option, at three years' notice, ofbeing paid off, at the rate of £100 for every £5. 5s. ofannuity ; and that the Proprietors, whenever paid off, shallbe entitled, if they see fit, to resume their undoubted rightto trade, which is now to be placed in abeyance""To the suggestion, that sufficient powers be reserved to Rule of Partialr^ 111 /•IT- 11 nectary publieCompany to check, by a system oi publicity to both city rejected.Houses of Parliament, or by some other means, any acts ofthe Board which may appear to the Court to be unconstitutional,Ministers saw no plan which was not, on publicgrounds, liable to grave objection. They offered no oppositionto the Court's retaining sufficient power over theCompany's commercial assets to provide for outstandingobligations.These several modifications of the plan of hisMajesty's Government were acknowledged with*' much satisfaction by the Court," who also expressedtheir persuasion, that their constituents,equally with themselves, would appreciate thespirit of frankness and conciliation in which thosemodifications had been conceded. The two remainingpoints, being the Guarantee Fund and theprovision for publicity, were deemed of vital consequence,viz, the Guarantee Fund to be made up£3,000,000 ; the object of publicity to be effectedby a communication to Parliament of the facts ofa difference between the Board and the Court, andto69GRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.Resolution ofthe Court ofDirectors onthe modifications.to be made after the orders had been despatched.It was observed in reply,That as to the Guarantee Fund, an accumulation of evensix millions would be amply sufficient to obviate financialdifficulty, in effecting any arrangement that might be suggestedby the condition of paying the full amount of twelvemillions ; and that the Proprietors, under the proposedarrangement, if paid off before the period at which theguarantee should have reached twelve millions, would havethe same advantage as if the fund provided had been larger ;and if not paid off before that period, they would have thesame advantage as if the term of redemption were extended.As to the question of publicity, his Majesty's Governmentwere satisfied that, for all practical purposes, the Courtwere already invested with sufficient powers, and they consequentlyobjected to the introduction into the home systemof any principle of which they could not admit the necessity,and which, whatever precise shape it might assume, couldnot fail to operate prejudicially to good government.The President then stated, that, " in coming to a close,he felt it his duty, on the part of his Majesty's Ministers,to request that the present communication might be consideredas final, and that no want of respect, on his part,would be ascribed to him, in asking, on the part also of hisMajesty's Ministers, that the Company would be pleased topronounce an opinion unconditionally and conclusively"*The Court of Directors resolved, that as theprinciple contended for by the Company was admitted,to the extent that, if paid off before theGuarantee Fund had become twelve millions, theywould have the same advantage as if the term ofredemption were extended, and considering alsothat,♦ Negotiation Papers, page 198.Chap.XVIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 697that, by the modifications which Ministers hadallowed, the Company obtained a material additionto the amount first proposed, and that thefund was rendered available to secure the dividendas well as stock, they were prepared, should it bethepleasure of Parliament to limit the sum to twomillions, to recommend the Proprietors to defer tosuch an arrangement.The Court adhered to the opinion, repeatedlyexpressed, as to some measure of publicity to beexercised as a rule, and not as a privilege ; andthey entertained a confident expectation, thatParliament, taking the same view, would makesuitable provision.*The Chairman and Deputy Chairman dissented chairs dissent,from this view of the Court, because they consideredthat the Company had a right to a GuaranteeFund of three millions, and because they deemeda rule of publicity indispensable, and cited thecase of the Calcutta bankers, and of Hydrabad, inproof of that necessity : considering, also, that bysuch a rule, ** promptness in decisions would bepromoted, justice readily afforded, and heavy lawcharges avoided. "fThe resolution of the Court of Directors was Resolution ofCourtadoptedNegotiation Papers, page 203.f Ibid., page 208 : — C. Marjoribanks, W. Wigwam, Esqrs.,lOth June 1833.George Smith, Esq., concurred in this dissent.Dissents were likewise recorded by H. St. G. Tucker, Esq.th June 1833.698 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.adopted by the General Court on the 10th ofJune.Debate. House On Thursday the 13th June, Mr. Grant, in aon Revolutions Committee of the whole House, brought beforeGrant! ^ ' Parliament the subject of the Company's charter.The whole of the transaction was to be entirely free fromthe finances of this country. The ability of the Indian territorieswas not to be doubted. The intentions with regardto the internal government of India were then pointed out.It was proposed to establish a fourth government in theWestern Provinces ; to extend the powers of the Governor-general; to appoint a Supreme Council, to whom powerwas to be given to make laws for India, and to define thejurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The presidencies ofMadras and Bombay were to be made more subordinateto the Government-general, and their Councils reduced.The following resolutions were then moved : —1st. That it is expedient that all his Majesty ""s subjectsshall be at liberty to repair to the ports of theempire of China, and to trade in tea and in all otherproductions of the said empire, subject to such regulationsas Parliament shall enact for the protection ofthe commercially political interests of this country.2d. That it is expedient that, in case the East-indiaCompany shall transfer to the Crown, on behalf of theIndian territory, all assets and claims of every descriptionbelonging to the said Company, the Crown, onbehalf of the Indian territory, shall take on itself allthe obligations of the said Company, of whatever description,and that the said Company shall receive fromthe revenues of the said territory such a sura, and paidin such a manner, and under such regulations, as Parliamentshall enact.J3d. ThatChap. XVII.] BRITISH Power IN INDIA. 6993d. That it is expedient that the government of theBritish possessions in India be entrusted to the saidCompany, under such conditions and regulations asParliament shall enact, for the purpose of extendingthe commerce of this country, and of securing the goodgovernment, and promoting the moral and religiousimprovement of the people of India.Mr. W. Williams Wynn, who had filled theoffice of president of the Board for a longer periodthan any other party, dwelt at considerable lengthon the mode of electing the Directors. He wasopposed to the number being continued at twenty-four,and to the party choosing them being theProprietors of East-india Stock, who, he contended,were incompetent to judge of the requisitequalifications. The absence of responsibility-waswhat he objected to throughout the system.A summary of the principal provisions of theproposed Bill, exclusive of those relating to thetrade, the political administration of India, andthe terms of the compromise, was transmitted tothe Chairs by Mr. Grant on the 24th June. Onthe 27th the other provisions of moment were forwardedto the Court, and on the 29th a printedcopy of the Bill.*On the 2d July the Court communicated their Court's sentmerits on thesentiments to Mr. Grant, Bin.On the subject of the admission of Europeans into India,the state of the law, and on the proposed provisions relativeto the construction of the Indian governments. They concurredNegotiation Papers 1833, page 259,700 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.cursed in the necessity of some suitable restraint on Europeans,such as should be adequate to the protection of thenatives. They stated, that any plan calculated to improvethe condition of the natives, by abolishing slavery, withoutdoing violence to the feelings of caste or the rights of property,could not fail to meet with the Court's cordial approbation;and that the more extensive employment of thenatives as servants of the local governments, was in accordancewith the views which the Court had for many yearsexpressed and acted upon. As to the formation of an uniformsystem of law, the Court in no way objected to theinquiry, but doubted whether, in the present state of Indiansociety, it would be found practicable to accomplish thatuniformity of law, which had not yet been found attainablein our long settled and highly civilized country.Upon the proposals affecting the constitution of theIndian Governments the Court remarked, that the policyhitherto approved and enjoined by Parliament had been, tomaintain India in strict dependency on Great Britain, andto unite efficiency abroad with the exercise of constant andvigilant control at home. The local governments separatelyconstituted, with sufficient power to the Supreme Governmentto enable it to provide for a general identity of system,were by law subjected to the Court and the Board.The Court had enjoined the Supreme Government, in 1828,to make a reference to England on all matters involving achange of principle, or increase of establishments and expenseof large amount, as a general rule, except the publicservice urgently called for a greater promptitude of actionthan would consist with such a reference. The proposedchange placed the whole control in the Supreme Government,thereby not only interfering with the control exercisedby the Home authorities, but investing the Governor-generalwith a sway almost absolute, and rendering itscarcelyChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 701scarcely possible always to select a fit person to be entrustedwith authority of such magnitude. The additional labourthrown on the governor-general would be great. TheCourt conceived, that the separation of the upper provincesof Bengal into a distinct presidency might be effected withoutincurring the charge of a fourth presidency : and theydeemed the removal of councils from Madras and Bombayto be very objectionable, as depriving the governors (presumingthat they would still be appointed from home) ofthat aid which was most essential in the affairs of government.The armies of Madras and Bombay were still to becontinued separate, but the plan proposed to deprive thecommanders-in-chief of those armies of the seats in councilwhich had hitherto been usually allotted to them ; upon thisthe Court suggested the exercise of the greatest caution anddeliberationsThe Court expressed their satisfaction, that the Billreserved to them the necessary powers regarding the lawswhich the Supreme Government might enact affecting thenatives, and likewise the provincial courts, which laws werealso to be subject to the King's approbation.With reference to the contemplated alterationin the number of the Directors, the Court declaredtheir deliberate opinion, that the continuance ofthe number as fixed by charter was not only essentialto their independence, but that a reductionwould be an infraction of the privileges which theProprietors exercised, which privileges it had beenarranged with his Majesty's Government shouldcontinue.On the 3d July the proposed Bill was laidbeforeUpon this point, vide pages 470 to 473.702 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.Court's obser- before the Court, each clause being separatelyBiii"^ on e ^Qjjgj(]gi.e(j^ On the 9th, the Court approved of apaper of observations and suggestions on the Bill.Amongst others, they pointed out the necessity ofsome modification in clauses 28 and 29, subjectingthe whole of the Court's correspondence with individualsin this country to the cognizance, and evenapproval, of the Board; which, if persevered in,would reduce the Court to a 'mere machine." Thisprovision was not contemplated in the originalHints, butts retained in the Act. It was, in a greatmeasure, to be attributed to the evidence of agentleman who had long filled the office of secretaryto the Board of Control. Notwithstanding theopportunity which this appointment afforded, ofacquiring information on the India system generally,it will be perceived from the evidence beforethe public Committee, that the duties of theBoard are considered to have been very imperfectlyperformed before 1807. But facts are diametricallyopposed to such a conclusion. TheBoard took the most minute interest in everymatter not purely commercial. The formation ofthe Committees at home, and even the home establishmentof the Company, with the allowances,as well as Boards and Councils abroad, weresuggested by the Commissioners. Regular budgetswere submitted to Parliament by the Presidentup to 1805. The departmental arrangementof the Board was consequent upon the introductionChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 703tion of the Revenue and Judicial systems, underthe advice of Col . Munro, who arrived in Englandat that time from Madras.A clause was also suggested by the Court, tobar all pecuniary claims after the lapse of a givennumber of years. The question of abolishing slaverywas pointed out as needing great caution. Onthe proposed extension of the ecclesiastical establishment,which had increased from £40,000 to£100,000 per annum, the Court addressed a separateletter to the Board ; and they suggested that,as the means of oriental instruction in this countrywere largely extended, it would be the better toabolish the East-india College, and appoint atest, by which the qualification of all parties tobe nominated writers should in future be governed.On the clause which provided for four candidatesbeing sent up.The Court had no hesitation in submitting it as their opinion,in reference to the general diffusion of the means ofliberal education throughout the country, including theoriental languages, as regards both European and orientalinstruction, and to the disadvantage which results from confiningthe associations of youth destined for foreign service'to companions all having the like destination ; that it is bothunnecessary and inexpedient any longer to maintain thatinstitution, and that the great expense which it now occasionsmight be saved. They had not the least doubt that asystem of public examination, sufficiently high, might beprovided to secure adequately qualified parties.In support of this opinion, it may suffice torefer704 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.refer to the names of the following distinguishedservants, amongst others, mentioned in the presentvolume, viz. Sir George Barlow, Colonel Kirkpatrick,Mr. Webb, the Hon. Mountsuart Elphin-stone, Colonel Wilks, Sir Thomas Munro, SirBarry Close, Sir John Malcolm, Captain Sydenham,Mr. Ramsden, Mr. Elphinstone, Mr. Adam,Sir Charles Metcalfee, all of whom were in theservice previously to the establishment of the College.The Proprietors so fully concurred with theDirectors, that they petitioned the House of Commonsin July 1833, and represented.That they were deliberately convinced that efficiencywould be more likely to be obtained in a general system ofeducation, brought to the standard of a high test of examination,than in any exclusive system ; the Court urged theabolition of the college as a measure strongly recommendedby considerations of expense, as the maintenance of thatinstitution had, in the last term, caused a charge upon Indiaat the rate of upwards of ten thousand pounds per annum,when there were less than thirty students within its walls;and they also submitted the important fact, that in thecourse of the last ten years, the college had at one time beenunequal to supply the requisite number of writers, and itwas then more than adequate to the supply.Every consideration appears to recommend thatthe repeal of the objectionable clause in the Act,and the abolition of the college, should be carriedforward simultaneously.Mr. Grant acknowledged the paper of observationsChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 705tons and suggestions, and although unable at themoment to advert in writing to the several points,he assured the Court that they had engaged, andcontinued to engage, his serious attention. ^The Bill was presented to the House of Com- Bin introduced-^ 1-in ' '"^^ ^^^ Housemons by Mr. Grant, and read a first time on the of commons.28th of June.The resolutions of the Commons relative to the Resolutions of.the Commonsaffairs of the Company had been communicated at debated in theaconference to the Lords on the 17th June, by Lords.whom they were taken into consideration on the5th July : on which occasion, the Marquis of Lans-down,adverting to the means of India to meetthe charge, stated,That it was owing in a great measure to the exertions ofthe Governor-general, Lord William Bentinck, in fearlesslycarrying into effect measures of economy transmittedto him from the Home authorities.The Resolutions of the Commons were agreed to,and ordered to be communicated at a conferenceon Tuesday, the 9th July.The second reading of the Bill took place in the Debate on theBill in theHouse of Commons on the 11th July, when a commons,motion was made.That the confiding the political administration of our second 'possessions, with the interests of one hundred Commons! °million of people, to the direction of a Joint Stock Company,and taxing the natives of those countries for the paymentof the dividends of a mercantile concern to the constantlyvarying holders of East-india stock, is a question involvingtoo many important considerations to be hastilyVOL. II. 2 z decidedRISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.decided on, more especially for so long a term as twentyyears; and that, as the other business of the session isalready more than sufficient to occupy the whole time andattention of the Legislature to bring it to a satisfactory completion,it is expedient that a short Bill be passed for theopening of the trade with China, in April 1834, and thatall the arrangements which may be thought desirable forthe administration of India, should be deferred till nextsession.The Bill was read a second time and committedfor Friday.On the 23d July, the Bill, as amended in Committee,having been fully considered by the Courtof Directors, they addressed a letter to the Presidentof the Board, requesting that, as there wasno provision in it for a regular communication toParliament in cases of a difference between theBoard and the Court, a sufficient time might beallowed to enable the Proprietors to petition Parliament,should they see fit, against the Bill ;also stating, that they objected to an augmentationof charge on account of new appointments,and to a continuance of the East-india College,together with the proposed mode of nominatingWriters.The President declined to interfere with thearrangement which had been made for the Billbeing read a third time on the 26th.*On♦ J. R. Carnac, Esq. recorded a dissent on the 26th July tothe Court's resolution approving the petition to Parliament,becauseChap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN linda. 707On the morning of that day the Proprietors company petittion against theagreed to a petition, Bin.Praying that the House would make provision for reportingdifferences between the Board and the Court to Parliament,and representing that the Bill would effect a seriouschange in the constitution of the subordinate Governments,and place an excess of power in the hands of the Governor-general.They urged the appointment of a lieutenant-governorfor the Western Provinces, in lieu of a fourth presidency,and stated that the proposal to vest the executivegovernments of Madras and Bombay in Governors withoutCouncils, was open to serious objections. The expense ofa new government at Agra was pointed out, as well as thaton account of the proposed increase in the ecclesiasticalestablishment, and the needless charge that would be incurredby maintaining the college at Aylesbury, and prayingto be heard by counsel in support of the petition.The Bill was read a second time, and committed second readingin Lords ;for Monday the 5th ; on which day the petition company's^ , „ 1 , 1 V, 1 /> petition pre-fromthe Company was presented by the Earlof seated.Shaftesbury. The House declined to hear counselin support of the petition.Various amendments having been adopted, theCommittee adjourned to Monday the 7th, whena petition was presented by the Earl of Aberdeenin behalf of the Carnatic creditors, complainingof the situation in which they were placed bythe Bill. The Marquis Lansdown having agreedtobecause he thought too much stress had been laid upon some ofthe points urged on the attention of Parliament ; also explaininghis views on the general question.2 Z 2708 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.to attend to the subject, the Bill was further discussed,and, on the suggestion of the Duke ofWellington, the wordsWhereas it is expedient that slavery should cease throughoutthe said territories,were omitted.On the 9th August, at the instance of the Marquisof Lansdown, the fifth member of Councilwas excluded from sitting or voting, except whenthe Council should be engaged in making lawsor regulations, thus removing the objection toa fifth member encumbering the Council in itsexecutive capacity. An amended clause was alsointroduced as to slavery, subjecting any proposedlaws regarding it, as suggested by the Governor-generalin Council, to approval by the Court ofDirectors before promulgation.xou^"' ^" ^^^ *^^^ August the Court of Directorsactors on came to the following resolution :Resolved, That the East-india Bill having arrived atits last stage in the House of Lords, it becomes the dutyof the Court of Directors to submit to their constituents afinal opinion regarding that Bill as it now stands; andwhilst the Court are still impressed with the belief, thatthe cessation of the Company's trade will greatly weakenits position in this country, and consequently impair itsefficiency in the administration of the government of India;whilst, also, they regard with much anxiety the increaseof powers given by the said Bill to the Board of Commissionersfor the Affairs of India, and greatly regret thatParliament has not provided some rule of publicity to actasChap. XVI I] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 709as a salutary check both upon the Board and the Court ;and whilst, further, the Court entertain the most seriousapprehensions of the injurious effect upon the finances ofIndia, which must result from the loss of the trade as a sourceof direct profit, and as a safe and beneficial channel ofremittance, and from the new charges which the Billimposes ; yet, reviewing all the correspondence which haspassed with his Majesty ""s Ministers upon this subject,trusting that the extensive powers of the Board will beexercised with moderation, and so as not to interfere withthe independence of the Company as a body acting intermediatelybetween the King's Government and the Governmentof India, which independence all parties have admittedit to be of vital importance to maintain, and relying withconfidence that Parliament will interpose for the relief ofany financial difficulties into which the Company mayunavoidably be cast through the operation of extensivechanges which the Bill proposes to effect, — the Court ofDirectors cannot do otherwise than recommend to the Proprietorsto defer to the pleasure expressed by both Housesof Parliament, and to consent to place their right to tradefor their own profit in abeyance, in order that they maycontinue to exercise the government of India for the furtherterm of twenty years, upon the conditions, and under thearrangements embodied in the said Bill.The Chairman and Deputy dissented from thatresolution.*William Astell, Esq., and fourteen other Directors,addressed a letter to the Proprietors, statinggenerally the grounds which induced them tosupport the recommendation to accept the Bill.WilliamCampbell Marjoribanks and William Wigwams Esqrs.710 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE LChap.XVII.The attention of the President having beencalled to some requisite modifications in the Bill,and to the expediency of measures being takenfor equalizing the duties on the produce and manufacturesof India imported into this country, the16th August was appointed for the opinion of theProprietors being taken on the subject. When itwas resolved by the ballot,*That this Court cannot contemplate without apprehensionand alarm, the great and important change about to beintroduced in the system which has been so long and soadvantageously acted upon, as regards the administrationof the Government of India, through the instrumentality ofthe East-india Company, whilst exercising the joint functionsof government and commerce, or view the provisionsof the Bill now before Parliament, intituled " An Act foreffecting an Arrangement with the East-india Company,and for the better government of his Majesty's IndianTerritories, till the Both day of April 1854," without fullyparticipating in the sentiments and apprehensions expressedby the Court of Directors in their resolution of the 12thinstant, and throughout their correspondence with hisMajesty's Ministers ; but referring to the resolution of theGeneral Court of the 3d May, and to that of the 10th Junelast, and to the various modifications which have beenconsented to on the part of Government, and since introducedinto the Bill in the course of its progress throughboth♦ For the question 173Against 64Majority for 109Chap. XVII.] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 711both Houses of Parliament ; and fully aware of the difficultcircumstances in which the Company is placed, this Courtthinks it expedient to defer to the determination of theLegislature, relying on its wisdom and justice, in the eventof the expectations held out in the correspondence alludedto being disappointed, for such further legislative measures,as the interests of India and those of the East-india Companymay require. Having thus recorded their sentimentswith regard to the Bill before the Court, and confirmed thecompromise contained therein, this Court desires solemnlyto assure his Majesty's Government and the country, thatthey will, to the utmost extent of the functions with whichthey are about to be invested, contribute to give effect to theBill when it shall become law, and promote, to the best oftheir ability, the happiness of India, and the honour andprosperity of the East-india Company.The Bill was read a third time in the House of ReadatUrdT 1 1 -I ^ 1 A -I 1 *™^ ''" ^^^Lords on the 16th August, and passed on the Lords, andfollowing Monday. On the 28th the Royal Assent given to it.was given to it by Commission.The change which it has made in the characterof the Company is as great, as the rapidity withwhich it was effected was extraordinary. Scarcelysix weeks intervened between the announcementof the scheme to the General Court, and its adoptionin principle by a ballot of eight to one in itsfavour.It was a strong testimony to the judgmentand foresight manifested by the Court of Directtors in the management of the Company's commercialaffairs, that, on so sudden and unexpected712 RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE [Chap. XVII.petted a termination of those operations, the financialout-turn should have secured a continuationof the same rate of dividend as had been enjoyedby the stockholders for the preceding forty years,when the Company were in possession of theirexclusive privileges, and also provide for thefoundation of an accumulating guarantee fund fortheir principal of twelve millions.The Rise and Progress of the BritishPower in India has now been traced, from thefirst incorporation of the late United Company ofMerchants of England trading to the East-indies,to the period when the converse of the propositionsubmitted to Parliament in 1783 was adoptedby the Legislature, and agreed to by the Proprietors.The Author has endeavoured to avoid all partyfeeling, in the preparation of this political narrative.When an opportunity is afforded of contemplating,free from official engagements, eventsand circumstances with which previous occupationmay have rendered an individual in some degreefamiliar, facts may present themselves, and causesmay be discovered which were before permittedto pass unheeded. Impressions may likewise havebeen created by early and continued associations,to which a mind, under other circumstances,might not have been ^uiyectncl."^ ' ItChap. XVIL] BRITISH POWER IN INDIA. 713It is with no common feelings of satisfactionthat the Author, whilst preparing this last sheetfor the press, has perused a resolution of theCourt of Directors, granting to the Most Noble theMarquis Wellesley the sum of twenty thousandpounds. Those parties whose means are at alldependent on India, and who are cognizant withthe eminent services of that distinguished statesman,must acknowledge the debt of gratitudedue to that noble lord. The opinion containedin this Work at the close of the review of hislordship's administration, has been in print someweeks. It was expressed in entire ignorancethat any further testimony was intended to markLord Wellesley's brilliant career ; and it is asource of much gratification to find, that the conclusionwhich had been arrived at, is sanctionedby the Honourable Executive Body of the East-indiaCompany.A review of the existing system, in connexionwith the internal administration of British India,must form the subject of a separate work.FINISPrinted by J. L. Cox andros, 75. Great Queen Street,Lincoln's-inn Fields.