On the economy of machinery and manufacturesBYCHARLES BABBAGE, ESQLONDON:CHARLES KNIGHT PALL MALL EASTTHIS VOLUMEIS INSCRIBEDAS A TRIBUTE OF RESPECTAND GRATITUDEBYTHE AUTHOR.LONDON :PRINTED BY R. CI.AY, BREAD-STREET-HIIX.PREFACE.The present volume may be considered as oneof the consequences that have resulted from theCalculating-Engine, the construction of which Ihave been so long superintending. Having beeninduced during the last ten years to visit a considerablenumber of workshops and factories,both in England and on the Continent, forthe purpose of endeavouring to make myselfacquainted with the various resources of mechanicalart, I was insensibly led to apply tothem those principles of generalization to whichmy other pursuits had naturally given rise.The increased number of curious processes andinteresting facts which thus came under myattention, as well as of the reflections which theysuggested, induced me to believe that the publicationof some of them might be of use to personswho propose to bestow their attention onthose inquiries which I have only incidentallyconsidered. With this view it was my intentionA 2IV PREFACE.to have delivered the present work in the form ofa course of lectures at Cambridge ; an intentionwhich I was subsequently induced to alter. Thesubstance of a considerable portion of it has,however, appeared among the preliminary chaptersof the mechanical part of the EncyclopaediaMetropolitan.I have not attempted to offer a complete enumerationof all the mechanical principles whichregulate the application of machinery to artsand manufactures, but I have endeavoured topresent to the reader those which struck me asthe most important, either for understanding theactions of machines, or for enabling the memoryto classify and arrange the facts connected withtheir employment. Still less have I attemptedto examine all the difficult questions of politicaleconomy which are intimately connected withsuch inquiries. It was impossible not to traceor to imagine, among the wide variety of factspresented to me, some principles which seemedto pervade many establishments ; and havingformed such conjectures, the desire to refuteor to verify them gave an additional interestto the pursuit. Several of the principles whichI have proposed, appeared to me to have beenunnoticed before. This was particularly thePREFACE. Vcase with respect to the explanation I have givenof the division of labour ; but further inquirysatisfied me that I had been anticipated byM. Gioja, and it is probable that additionalresearch would enable me to trace most of theother principles, which I had thought original,to previous writers, to whose merit I may perhapsbe unjust from my want of acquaintancewith the historical branch of the subject.The truth however of the principles I havestated, is of much more importance than theirorigin; and the utility of an inquiry into them,and of establishing others more correct, ifthese should be erroneous, can scarcely admitof a doubt.The difficulty of understanding the processesof manufactures has unfortunately been greatlyoverrated. To examine them with the eye of amanufacturer, so as to be able to direct othersto repeat them, does undoubtedly require muchskill and previous acquaintance with the subject ;but merely to apprehend their general principlesand mutual relations, is within the power ofalmost every person possessing a tolerable education.Those who possess rank in a manufacturingcountry, can scarcely be excused if they areVI PREFACE.entirely ignorant of principles whose developmenthas produced its greatness. The possessorsof wealth can scarcely be indifferent toprocesses which nearly or remotely have beenthe fertile source of their possessions. Thosewho enjoy leisure can scarcely find a moreinteresting and instructive pursuit than theexamination of the workshops of their owncountry, which contain within them a rich mineof knowledge, too generally neglected by thewealthier classes.It has been my endeavour, as much as possible,to avoid all technical terms, and to describein concise language the arts I have had occasionto discuss. In touching on the more abstractprinciples of political economy, after shortlystating the reasons on which they are founded,I have endeavoured to support them by facts andanecdotes; so that whilst young persons mightbe amused and instructed by the illustrations,those of more advanced judgment may find subjectfor meditation in the general conclusionsto which they point. I was anxious to supportthe principles which I have advocated by theobservations of others, and in this respect Ifound myself peculiarly fortunate. The Reportsof Committees of the House of Commons uponPREFACE. Vivaciousbranches of commerce and manufactures,and the evidence which they have at differentperiods published on those subjects, teem withinformation of the most important kind, rendereddoubly valuable by the circumstances underwhich it has been collected. From these sourcesI have freely taken, and I have derived someadditional confidence from the support they haveafforded to ray views.*CHARLES BABBAGE.Dorset Street, Manchester Square,June 8, 1832.I am happy to avail myself of this occasion of expressingmy obligations to the Right Hon. Manners Sutton, the Speakerof the House of Commons, to whom I am indebted for copiesof a considerable collection of those reports.PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.In two months from the publication of the first edition ofthis volume, three thousand copies were in the hands of thepublic. Very little was spent in advertisements ; the booksellers,instead of aiding, impeded its sale ; • it formed no partof any popular series, — and yet the public, in a few weeks, purchasedthe whole edition. Some small part of this success,perhaps, was due to the popular exposition of those curiousprocesses which are carried on in our workshops, and to theendeavour to take a short view of the general principles whichdirect the manufactories of the country. But the chief reasonwas the commanding attraction of the subject, and theincreasing desire to become acquainted with the pursuits andinterests of that portion of the people which has recentlyacquired so large an accession of political influence.A greater degree of attention than I had expected has beenexcited by what I have stated in the first edition, respectingthe "Book-trade." Until I had commenced the chapter, "Onthe Separate Cost of each Process of a Manufacture," I had• I had good evidence of this fact from various quarters ; and beingdesirous of verifying it, I myself applied for a copy at the shop of a booksellerof respectability, who is probably not aware that he refused toprocure one even for its author.PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. IXno intention of alluding to that subject : hut the reader willperceive that I have throughout this volume, wherever Icould, employed as illustrations, objects of easy access to thereader ; and, in accordance with that principle, I selected thevolume itself. When I arrived at the chapter, " On Combinationsof Masters against the Public," I was induced, forthe same reason, to expose a combination connected withliterature, which, in my opinion, is both morally and politicallywrong. I entered upon this inquiry without the slightest feelingof hostility to that trade, nor have I any wish unfavourable toit;but I think a complete reform in its system would add toits usefulness and respectability. As the subject of that chapterhas been much discussed, I have thought it right to take a viewof the various arguments which have been advanced, and to offermy own opinion respecting their validity: — and there I shouldhave left the subject, content to allow my general characterto plead for me against insinuations respecting my motives ; —but as the remarks of some of my critics affect the characterof another person, I think it but just to state circumstanceswhich will clearly disprove them.Mr. Fellowes, of Ludgate-street, who had previously been thepublisher of some other volumes for me, had undertaken thepublication of the first edition of the present work. A short timeprevious to its completion, I thought it right to call his attentionto the chapter in which the book-trade is discussed ; withthe view both of making him acquainted with what I hadstated, and also of availing myself of his knowledge in correctingany accidental error as to the facts. Mr. Fellowes,differing from me entirely respecting the conclusions I hadarrived, at," then declined the publication of the volume.If I had then chosen to apply to some of those otherbooksellers, whose names appear in the Committee ofThe Trade," it is probable that they also would havedeclined the office of publishing for me ; and, had ray objectX PREFACE TO THEbeen to make a case against the trade, such a course wouldhave assisted me. But I had no such feeling?; and havingprocured a complete copy of the whole work, I called with it onMr. Knight, of Pall Mall East, whin until that day I had neverseen, and with whom I had never previously had the slightestcommunication. I left the book in Mr. Knight's hands, with arequest that, when he had read it, I might be informed whetherhe would undertake the publication of it ; and this he consentedto do. Mr. Knight, therefore, is so far from being responsiblefor a single opinion in the present volume, that he saw itonly, for a short time, a few days previous to its publication.It has been objected to me, that I have exposed too freelythe secrets of trade. The only real secrets of trade are industry,integrity, and knowledge : to the possessors of these no exposurecan be injurious ; and they never fail to produce respectand wealth.The alterations in the present edition are so frequent,that I found it impossible to comprise them in a supplement.But the three new chapters, "On Money as a Medium ofExchange;" — " On a New System of Manufacturing;" — andOn the Effect of Machinery in reducing the Demand forLabour ; " will shortly be printed separately, for the use of thepurchasers of the first edition.I am inclined to attach some importance to the new systemof manufacturing ; and venture to throw it out with the hopeof its receiving a full discussion amongst those who are mostinterested in the subject. I believe that some such system ofconducting manufactories would greatly increase the productivepowers of any country adopting it; and that our own possessesmuch greater facilities for its application than othercountries, in the greater intelligence and superior education ofthe working classes. The system would naturally commence insome large town, by the union of some of the most prudent andactive workmen ; and their example, if successful, would be;SECOND EDITION. XIfollowed by others. The small capitalist would next join them,and such factories would go on increasing until competitioncompelled the large capitalist to adopt the same system ; and,ultimately, the whole faculties of every man engaged in manufacturewould be concentrated upon one object — the art of producinga good article at the lowest possible cost : — whilst themoral effect on that class of the population would be usefulin the highest degree, since it would render character offar greater value to the workman than it is at presentTo one criticism which has been made, this volume is perfectlyopen. I have dismissed the important subject of thePatent-laws in a few lines. The subject presents, in my opinion,great difficulties, and I have been unwilling to write upon it,because I do not see my way. I will only here advert to onedifficulty. What constitutes an invention? — Few simple mechanicalcontrivances are new; and most combinations maybeviewed as species, and classed under genera of more or lessgenerality; and may, in consequence, be pronounced old ornew, according to the mechanical knowledge of the person whogives his opinion.Some of my critics have amused their readers with thewildness of the schemes I have occasionally thrown out ; and Imyself have occasionally smiled along with them. Perhaps itwere wiser for present reputation to offer nothing but profoundlymeditated plans, but I do not think knowledge will bemost advanced by that course ; such sparks may kindle theenergies of other minds more favourably circumstanced forpursuing the inquiry. Thus I have now ventured to give somespeculations on the mode of blowing furnaces for smeltingiron ; and even supposing them to be visionary, it is of someimportance thus to call the attention of a large population,engaged in one of our most extensive manufactures, to thesingular fact, that four-fifths of the steam power used to blowtheir furnaces actually cools them.XU PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.I have collected, with some pains, the criticisms* on the firstedition of this work, and have availed myself of much informationwhich has been communicated to me by my friends, for theimprovement of the present volume. If I have succeeded inexpressing what I had to explain with perspicuity, I am awarethat much of this clearness is due to my friend, Dr. Fitton, towhom both the present and the former edition are indebtedfor such an examination and correction, as an author himselfhas very rarely the power to bestow.Several of these have probably escaped me, and I shall feel indebtedto any one who will inform my publisher of any future remarks.Nov. 22, 1832.CONTENTS.Those Chapters and Sections marked with an asterisk are added inthe present Edition.INTRODUCTION.STATEMENT OF THE OBJECT AND PLAN OF THE WORK.CHAPTER I.SOURCES OF THE ADVANTAGES ARISING FROM MACHINERYAND MANUFACTURES.England peculiarly a Manufacturing Country, § 1. Its Manufacturesspread throughout the World, 2. Proportions ofAgricultural Population in various Countries, its gradualIncrease in England, 3. Sources of the advantages derivedfrom Machinery and Manufactures, 4. Additions to HumanPower. Experiment on Force to move a Block of Stone, 5.Economy of Time. Gunpowder, 6. Convenience ofSpeaking Tubes, 7. Diamond for cutting Glass ; its Hardness,8. Employment of Materials of little J'alue. Gold-beaters'Skin ; horny Refuse ; old Tin Ware, 9. Of Tools,10. To arrange Needles, 11. To place their Points inone Direction, 12. Substitute for Hand; Nail making, 13.Shoe-machinery; Sash-lines, 14. Division of the Objectsof Machinery. To produce Power ; to transmit Force andexecute Work; general Principles, 15. Wind; Water, 16.Steam ; Force not created, 17. Economy of Time in variousModes of dividing the Root of a Tree, 18. Chinese Mode ofconveying Cotton compared with European, 19.XIV CONTENTS.CHAPTER II.ACCUMULATING POWER.When the Work requires more Force than can be producedin the time allowed for its Operation. Fly-wheel, Rolling-iron,§ 20. Anecdote of punching Plate-iron, 21. Pile-engine,22. Effects of the power of Gunpowder in expellingdifferent charges. Le Vaillant experiment with water substitutedfor shot, 23. Phenomenon of Fulminating Powder,24. Velocity of a Wave passing through Deal, supposedto be greater than through Tallow, 25. Reasoning on theTheory of Explosion, 26.CHAPTER III.RtCULATlNG POWER.Governor of Steam-engine. Ditto moving in Water at Chatham,§ 27. Cataract for regulating Engines in Cornish Mines, 28.Uniform supply of Fuel to Steam-engine. ConsumingSmoke, 29. Vane regulated by Resistance of Air. StrikingClock, 30. Suggestions for the adaptation of a Vane orFly to an instrument for measuring the altitude of Mountains,31.CHAPTER IV.Increase AND DIMINUTION OF VELOCITY.Fatigue arising from Rapidity of muscular Exertion, contrastedwith its Magnitude, § 32. Most advantageous Load for aPorter, 33. Tags of Boot-laces, 34. Spinning by Hand andby Wheel. Machines to wind Riband and Sewing Cotton,35. Tilt-hammer driven down by a Spring, 30. Sites37. Safety of Velocity in Skating, 38. Applicationof sudden force to a flat-bottomed Boat to increase thespeed. Reaction of the Water, 39. Great Velocity of movingbodies an impediment to the full effect of their weight,40. Essential importance of Rapidity in Mining Operations,41. Smoke-jack, 42.CONTENTS. XVCHAPTER V.EXTENDING THE TIME OF ACTION OF FORCES.Watches and Clocks. Common Jack. Automatons, § 43.Jack useful for physical Experiments, also to agitate ChemicalSolutions, and Polish Mineral Specimens, 44.CHAPTER VI.SAVING TIME IN NATURAL OPERATIONS.Tanning, § 45, Impregnation of Timber with Tar, &c. Accidentto Boat of a Whaling Ship, 46. Bleaching Linen, 47.Evaporation of Water of Brine Springs, 48, 49. Deepeningof Rivers in America, 50. Ascending Rapids, 51. Positionof Church Clocks. Defective arrangement of the Post-OfficeLetter-Boxes. Proposition for the remedy, 52.CHAPTER VII.EXERTING Forces TOO GREAT FOR Human POWER, AND ExecutingOPERATIONS TOO DELICATE FOR HUMAN TOUCH.Difficulty of making a large Number of Men act simultaneously.Statue of Peter the Great. Egyptian Drawing, § 54.Communication by Signals ; Clapper of the Capstan ; Rodof Iron, 55. Rivets used when Red-hot, 56. SpinningCotton. Steam-boats, 57, 58. Damping Paper for BankNotes, 59. Separation of dense Particles by Fluid suspension,60, 61. Application of Heat for removing the filamentsof Cotton in Muslin and Patent Net, 62.CHAPTER \ III.REGISTERING OPERATIONS.Pedometer. Counting Machines for Carriages. Steam-engine,§ 63. Machine for measuring Calicoes, 64. Tell-tale, 65.Instrument to measure Liquor drawn from Casks, 66. Tomeasure Liquor remaining in Casks, 67. Gas-meter, 68.XVI CONTENTS.Water-meter, 69, 70. Machine for registering the Average offluctuating Forces. Barometer Clock, 71. Scapement movementof Clocks and Watches. New Instrument to denotethe detests on the dial-plate of the Stop-watch, 72. Alarums,Repeating Clocks and Watches, 73. Instrument to ascertainthe direction and intensity of an Earthquake in theNight ; Occurrence at Odessa, 74.CHAPTER IX.ECONOMY OF MATEItlALS EMPLOYED.Cutting Trees into Planks, § 75. Printing-ink. Experiment,76.CHAPTER X.OF THE IDENTITY OF THE WORK WHEN IT IS OF THE SAMEKIND, AND OF ITS ACCURACY WHEN OF DIFFERENT KINDS.Top of a Box turned in Lathe, § 77. Accuracy of Work executedby Tools, 78. By Turning, 79.CHAPTER XI.OF COPYING.Oj Printing from Cavities. Copper-plate Printing, § 82. Engravingon Steel, 83. Music Printing, 84. Calico Printingfrom Cylinders, 85. Stencilling, 86. Printing Red CottonHandkerchiefs, 87, 88. Printing from Surface. Printingfrom Wooden Blocks, 89. From movable Type, 90. FromStereotype, 91. Calico Printing, 92. Oil-cloth Printing, 93.Letter Copying, 94. Printing on China, 95. LithographicPrinting, 90, 97. Reprinting old Works by Lithography,98. Lithographic Printing in Colours, 99. Register Printing,100. Copying by Casting. Iron and Metals, 102.Casts of Vegetable Productions in Bronze, 103 — 105. Castsin Plaster, 106. Casting in Wax. Imitations of Plants;CONTENTS. Xviof the Human Body, 107. Copying hy Moulding. Bricks,Tiles, Cornice of Church of St. Sterno, 109. EmbossedChina, 110. Glass Seals, 111. Square Glass Bottles withNames, 112. Wooden Snuff-boxes, 113. Horn KnifeHandles. Umbrella Handles, 114. Tobacco-pipe making,116. Embossing on Calico; on Leather, 117, 118. swaying,119. Engraving by Pressure on Steel. Bank Notes.Forgery, 120, 121. Gold and Silver Mouldings, 122. OrnamentalPapers, 123. Copying by Stamping. Coins andMedals, 125. Military Ornaments, 126. Buttons and NailHeads, 127. Lichen, 128. Copying by Punching. Boiler-plates,130. Tinned Iron, 131. Buhl-work, 132. Cards forGuns, 133. Gilt Paper Ornaments, 134. Steel Chains 13o.Copying with Elongations. Wire Drawing, 137. BrassTube Drawing, 138. Leaden Pipes, 139. Iron Rolling, 140.Vermicelli, 142. Copying with altered Dimensions. Pentagraph,143. Turning, 144, Rose Engine Turning, 145.Copying Dies by Lathes, 146. Shoe Lasts, 147. CopyingBusts, 148. Screw-cutting, 149. Printing from CopperPlates with altered Dimensions, 150. Engraving fromMedals, 151 — 153. Veils made by Caterpillars. Weightof various Fabrics, 154. Copying through six Stages inPrinting this volume.CHAPTER NilON THE METHOD OF OBSERVING MANUFACTORIES.Skeleton, General Inquiries, § 156. Skeleton for each Process,157.CHAPTER XIII.ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN MAKING AND MANUFACTURING.Economical Principle, § 159. Difference between Making andManufacturing ; Expedition and profitable advantage of thelatter, 16 J.hXVlll CONTENTS.CHAPTER XIV.OF MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE.Introduction of Metals as Currency, § 162. Base and SpuriousCoins, 163. Sub-division of Money ; by decimals, 164, 165,Property valued by the Standard of Currency, 166. Papermedium, 167. Banking-houses, 168. The Clearing-house,169, 170. Economy of the Paper medium; Security of theMetallic medium; Depreciation of Coin; Depreciation ofPaper; inconvenience in the deficiency of Supply, 173.Superabundance of Coin the reduction of a paper issue, 174.Effects of reduction in the value of Money, 175.CHAPTER XV.ON THE INFLUENCE OF VERIFICATION ON PRICE.Modification of general Principles, § 177. Verification ofSugar, Tea, Flour, 178. Doctoring Trefoil, and Clover,179. Flax, 180. Difficulty of distinguishing " single press"Lace, 181. Stockings, 182. Watches, 183. Measures ofarticles of Linen Drapery, 184. Apothecaries and Druggists,185. Impossibility of verifying the Value of PlatedWare, 186. Effect of Number of Proprietors on Price, 187,Loss incurred in ascertaining the Legality of Price ; Conveyanceof Parcels, 188. Verification by Name, 189. Ice,Oil of Caput, 190. Stock Purchases, 191. Forestalling,192.CHAPTER XVI.ON THE INFLUENCE OF DURABILITY ON PRICE.Degree of Durability in Articles. Paper, Pens, PreciousStones, § 193. Tables, Chairs, Looking-glasses, Copper,Gold, Iron, Lead, Silver, 194.CONTENTS. XIXCHAPTER XVI I.ON PRICE, AS MEASURED BY MONEY.List of Prices of various Articles in 1818, 1824, 1828, 1830,§ 197. Another List, for 1812, 1832, § 198. Advice aboutsuch Lists, 199. Causes of Alteration of Money Price, 200.Table of Elements of Alteration, 201. Price of Plate Glassin London, Paris, and Berlin. Price of large Plates, 202.Comparative Calculation, 203. Middle-men, 204. ]\Iiddle-men of Italy, 205.CHAPTER XVin.OF RAW MATERIALS.Nature of Raw Material, § 206. Gold and Silver Leaf, 207.Venetian Gold Chains, 208. Watch-spring, 209. Tablesof Price of Raw Material and Labour in various Manufactureof France, 210. Price of Bar-iron in various Countries,211. Price of Lead, 212.CHAPTER XIX.ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.Causes of its Advantages, § 213. Time required for learningan Art, 214. Waste of Materials in learning, 215. Timelost in changing Occupation ; change of Tools, 216, 217.Skill acquired by frequent Repetition of the same Process.Nail-making; Signing Bank Notes, 2 18, 2! 9. Contrivanceof Tools, 221. New Principle of the Advantage of the Divisionof Labour, 222, 223. Pin-making, English, 224—231.Table of Cost of making English Pins, 232. Ditto FrenchPins, 233, 234. American Pin-making Machine, 235.Examination of its Merits, 23G.XX CONTENTS.CHAPTER XX.ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.Great French Tables of Logarithms, § 237—243. On per-morning Arithmetical Calculations by Machinery, 244.Explanation of Mathematical Principle. Table of SquareNumbers with Differences, 244. Illustration by threeClocks, 245. Distribution of Labour in Mines, 248.CHAPTER XXLON THE COST OF EACH SEPARATE PROCESS IN A Manufacture.Comparative Value of Cotton of Java in various Stages ofManufacture, § 251. Statement of Expense of printing thepresent Volume, 252. Observations on Statement, 253 —255. Effect of Duty on Paper, 256. Charge for Advertisements,257, 258.CHAPTER XxiiON THE CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF LARGE FACTORIES.Principle on which large Factories are established, § 259.Transport of Materials, 260. Machine for making Patent-networking eight Hours a-day. Same Machine workingtwenty-four Hours requires three Sets of Men. Porter to admitdifferent Sets of Workmen. Workman to keep Machinesin Repair, 26 L Application of Steam to Weaving, 262.Lighting by Gas, 263. Accountant's Department, 264.Effects of large Factories, 265. Economy of Raw Produce ;exemplified in Horns, 266. Middle-men. Confidence inCharacter, 267. Extent of Confidence, 268. Breach of Confidence: Needles without Eyes, 269. Instance of Confidence,270. Drawbacks, 271. Sending Agents to distant Countries.Extract from the Report of the Committee of the House ofCommons relating to Factory System, 272.CONTENTS. XXICHAPTER XXIII.ON THE POSITION OF LARGE FACTORIES.In the Line of Cheap Modes of Conveyance ; Fuel, Water,Power, § 273. Mississippi, 274. Steam-boats on thatRiver, note. Accumulation of Factories establishes regularMarkets, 27-5. Removal of Factories, 276, 277. Facilitiesfor removing different Machines, 278. Important Suggestionsto Workmen on this Subject, 279.CHAPTER XXIV.ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.Periodical. Effect where there are not large Establishments.System of Compensation, § 280. Effect on large Factories.Two Remedies, 281. Diminished Production. DiminishedCost of Production, 282. Effects in driving Capitalto other Employments, 283. New mode of smelting Ironto meet reduction of Profits ; Statement at the Clyde Ironworks,284. Observations on the practicability of the NewMode, objections stated, and conclusions drawn, 285 — 292.CHAPTER XXV.INQUIRIES PREVIOUS TO COMMENCING ANY MANUFACTORY.Expense of Tools and Machines. Supply of Raw Material, § 293,294. Probable Demand. Dolls' Eyes, 295. Tolls onSteam carriages. Effect of Atmosphere, of Wheels, and ofHorses' Feet on Roads, 296. Draught of Carriages overvarious kinds of Roads. Draught up various Inclinationsat six, eight, and ten Miles per Hour, 297. Time in whichReturns can be made ; Facility of introducing new Articles,298. Probable Opposition to new Manufacture, 299.CHAPTER XXV I.ON A NEW SYSTEM OF MANUFACTURING.Opposition of Workmen, § 300. Participation in the Profits byWorkmen ; the Mines in Cornwall, Flintshire, YorkshireXxi CONTENTS.and Cumberland, 301, 302. Proposed new Plan of Remuneration; Union of Small Capitals ; Division of Profit; Rewardfor Improvements; Occupation in Slackness; Removal ofcauses for Combination : Objections met as to Partnershipsand refractory Artisans; Whaling Ships, 303 — 312.CHAPTER XXVII.ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY.Power of inventing Mechanical Contrivances not very rareProjects to prevent Forgery of Bank-notes, § 313. BestCombinations of Machinery rare. Drawings to be madeto determine all the Movements, 314. Experiments forall the physical or chemical circumstances. Punching Letterson Copper, 315. Causes of Failure in Machines, 316. Wantof Stiffness in Framing, 317. Experiment should be triedwith good Workmanship, 318. Same Experiment repeatedat distant Intervals, 319. Expense of view Machine, 321.Advice to Projectors, 322, 323.CHAPTER XXVIII.PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THE APPLICATION OF Machinery.Alien many things of the same kind are required, § 324. Wherefew things perfectly accurate are required, 325. WhereEconomy of Time is required. Newspapers, 326. " TheTimes," 327. " Chambers' Journal," 328. Conveyance ofLetters, 329. Steam carriages, 332. Diving Vessel, 333.Slide of Alpnach, 334.CHAPTER XXIX.ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY.Engines to produce Power last long, § 335. Improvements increaseProduction, 336. Age of Watches, 337. Machineslet for Hire. Unexpected Effect of a Change in the Rent ofCONTENTS. XxiiStocking Frames, 338. Stamps, and Dies, and SteamPower let out, 3il. Suggestions on Steam and Air; practiceat the Mint, 342. Cheaply manufactured articles lessdurable, 344.CHAPTER XXX.ON COMBINATIONS AMONGST MASTERS OR WORKMEN AGAINSTEACH OTHER.Rules in particular Factories, § 345. Larger Societies, 3-51.Objects of them, 352. Effects, 353. Gun Barrels, 354.Fear of Combination causes Expense; Coal and Iron Works,358. Causes Removal of Factories, 3(i0. The Truck System,363. Payment of Wages in Goods, 366.CHAPTER XXXI.ON COMBINATIONS OF MASTERS AGAINST THE PUBLIC.Instances, § 368. Gas and Water Companies, 369. Coal-owners,371. Booksellers, 372. Profits on the present Volume, 373.Combination of Booksellers, 376. Remedy proposed, 393.Reviews, 394.CHAPTER XXXII.ON THE EFFECT OF MACHINERY IN REDUCING THE DEMANDFOR LABOUR.Competition between Machine and Hand Labour, § 396. Machinesdo not throw human labour out of employ ; CrushingMill in Cornwall ; the Stretcher ; weaving by Hand andPower Loom, 399.CHAPTER XXXIII.ON The EFFECT OF TAXES AND OF LOCAL RESTRICTIONSUPON MANUFACTURES.Taxes on Paper, on Windows, § 406. Excise Regulations, 408.Effects of Duties, 409. Insurance on Smuggling, 410XXIV CONTENTS.Bounties, 413. Effects of Removal of a Monopoly in theBobbin-net Trade, 415. Present State of that Trade, 417.Number and Distribution of Machines, 420. Of Patents,422. Expense, 423. Of Copyright, 424. Of limited Partnerships,425.CHAPTER XXXIV.ON THE EXPORTATION OF MACHINERY.Reason for and against, § 427. Competition between Manufacturerin poor and in rich Country, 429. Impossible toprevent Exportation of all whilst that of any is permitted,432. Makers of new Machines interested in supplying theHome Market, 433. Foreign Orders charged higher, 434.Comparison of internal Communications in England andFrance, 441. Manchester Rail-Road, 442.CHAPTER XXXV.ON THE FUTURE PROSPECTS OF MANUFACTURES, ASCONNECTED WITH SCIENCE.Union of Theory and Practice, § 443. Difficulties opposed toCultivation of Abstract Science, 444. Royal Society, 445.British Association for the Promotion of Science, 446.Effect of Public Opinion on Science, 448. Manufacturersdiscovered Iodine and Brome, 450. Peruvian Bark, 451.Views of the Future, 453. Conclusion.ON THE ECONOMYMANUFACTURES.INTRODUCTION.The object of the present volume is to point outthe effects and the advantages which arise from theuse of tools and machines ; — to endeavour to classifytheir modes of action ; — and to trace both the causesand the consequences of applying machinery to supersedethe skill and power of the human arm.A view of the mechanical part of the subject will,in the first instance, occupy our attention, and tothis the first section of the work will be devoted.The first chapter of the section will contain someremarks on the general sources from whence theadvantages of machinery are derived, and the succeedingnine chapters will contain a detailed examinationof principles of a less general character. Theeleventh chapter contains numerous subdivisions,and is important from the extensive classificationit affords of the arts in which copying is so largelyB2 ON THE Economyemployed. The twelfth chapter, which completes thefirst section, contains a few suggestions for the assistanceof those who propose visiting manufactories.The second section, after an introductory chapteron the difference between making and manufacturing,will contain, in the succeeding chapters, a discussionof many of the questions which relate to the politicaleconomy of the subject. It was found that thedomestic arrangement, or interior economy of factories,was so interwoven with the more generalquestions, that it was deemed unadvisable to separatethe two subjects. The concluding chapter of thissection, and of the work itself, relates to the futureprospects of manufactures, as arising from the applicationof science.OF MANUFACTURES.CHAP. I.SOURCES OF THE ADVANTAGES ARISING FROMMACHINERY AND MANUFACTURES.(1.) There exists, perhaps, no single circumstancewhich distinguishes our country more remarkably fromall others, than the vast extent and perfection to whichwe have earned the contrivance of tools and machinesfor forming those conveniences of which so large aquantity is consumed by almost every class of thecommunity. The amount of patient thought, of repeatedexperiment, of happy exertion of genius, bywhich our manufactures have been created and carriedto their present excellence, is scarcely to be imagined.If we look around the rooms we inhabit, or throughthose storehouses of every convenience, of everyluxury that man can desire, which deck the crowdedstreets of our larger cities, we shall find in the historyof each article, of every fabric, a series of failureswhich have gradually led the way to excellence;and~we shall notice, in the art of making^even themost insignificant of them, processes calculated toexcite our admiration by their simplicity, or to rivetour attention by their unlooked-for results.(2.) The accumulation of skill and science whichhas been directed to diminish the difficulty of producingb24 ADVANTAGESmanufactured goods, has not been beneficial to thatcountry alone in which it is concentrated ; distantkingdoms have participated in its advantages. Theluxurious natives of the East,* and the ruder inhabitantsof the African desert are alike indebted toour looms. The produce of our factories has precededeven our most enterprising travellers. "1" Thecotton of India is conveyed by British ships roundhalf our planet, to be woven by British skill in thefactories of Lancashire : it is again set in motion byBritish capital ; and, transported to the very plainswhereon it grew, is repurchased by the lords of thesoil which gave it birth, at a cheaper price than thatat which their coarser machinery enables them tomanufacture it themselves. J(3.) The large proportion of the population of thiscountry, who are engaged in manufactures, appearsfrom the following table deduced from a statementin an Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, by theRev. R. Jones. —" The Bandana handkerchiefs manufactured at Glasgowhave long superseded the genuine ones, and are now conssued in large quantities both by the natives and Chinese."Crawford's Indian Archipelago, vol. iii. p. 505.f Captain Clipperton, when on a visit at the court of the SultanBello, states, that " provisions were regularly sent me fromthe sultan's table on pewter dishes with the London stamp ;and I even had a piece of meat served up on a white wash-handbasin of English manufacture." — Clipperton's Joamet/,p. 88.X At Calicut, in the East Indies (whence the cotton clothcalled calico derives its name), the price of labour is one-seventhof that in England, yet the market is supplied from Britishlooms*OF MACHINERY.For every Hundred Persons employed in jlgr'icuUure, there are,Agriculturists.In Italy 100 .In France 100 .In England 100 .Non-agriculturists.. 31. 50. 200The fact that the proportion of non-agriculturalto agricultural persons is continually increasing,appears both from the Report of the Committeeof the House of Commons upon manufacturers'Employment, July, 1830, and from the still laterevidence of the last census ; from which documentthe annexed table of the increase of population inour great manufacturing towns, has been deduced.INCREASE OF POPULATION PER CENT.IdolI'llTotalNames of Places.tototoI'll.1821.1831.to 1831.ManchesterGlasgow.161Liverpool * . . . .NottinghamBirminghamGreat Britain . . .14-215-715-552-5J Thus, in three periods of ten years each, duringeach of which the general population of the countryLiverpool, though not itself a manufacturing town, hasbeen placed in this list, from its connexion with Manchester,of which it is the port.6 ADVANTAGEShas increased about 15 per cent., or about 52 percent,upon the whole period of thirty years, thepopulation of these towns has, on the average, increased132 per cent. After this statement, thererequires no further argument to demonstrate thevast importance to the well-being of this country, ofmaking the interests of its manufacturers well understood and attended to.(4.) The advantages which are derived from machineryand manufactures seem to arise principallyfrom three sources : The addition which they make tohuman joower. — The economy they produce of humantime. — The conversion of substances apparently commonand worthless into valuable products.(5.) Of additions to human power. With respectto the first of these causes, the forces derived fromwind, from water, and from steam, present themselvesto the mind of every one ; these are, in fact, additionsto human power, and will be considered in afuture page : there are, however, other sources ofits increase, by which the animal force of the individualis itself made to act with far greater thanits unassisted power ; and to these we shall at presentconfine our observations.The construction of palaces, of temples, and oftombs, seems to have occupied the earliest attentionof nations just entering on the career of civilization ;and the enormous blocks of stone moved from theirnative repositories to minister to the grandeur orpiety of the builders, have remained to excite theastonishment of their posterity, long after the purposesof many of these records, as well as the namesof their founders, have been forgotten. The differentOF MACHINERY. 7degrees of force necessary to move these ponderousmasses, will have varied according to the mechanicalknowledge of the people employed in their transport ;and that the extent of power required for this purposeis widely different under different circumstances,will appear from the following experiment, which isrelated by M. Redeem, Sur Bart de Batir. Ablock of squared stone was taken for the subject ofexperiment ; lbs.1. Weight of stone 10802. In order to drag this stone along the floor ofthe quarry, roughly chiselled, it required aforce equal to 7583. The same stone dragged over a floor ofplanks required Go 24. The same stone placed on a platform ofwood, and dragged over a floor of planks,required 6065. After soaping the two surfaces of woodwhich slid over each other, it required . . 1826. The same stone was now placed upon rollersof three inches diameter, when it requiredto put it in motion along the floor of thequarry 347. To drag it by these rollers over a woodenfloor 288. When the stone was mounted on a woodenplatform, and the same rollers placed betweenthat and a plank floor, it required 22From this experiment it results, that the forcenecessary to move a stone alongPart of its weight.The roughly-chiselled floor of its quay isnearly \Along a wooden floor \ADVANTAGESPart of its weight.By wood upon wood |If the wooden surfaces are soaped ^With rollers on the floor of the quarry . jjOn rollers on wood ^On rollers between wood ^At each increase of knowledge, as well as on thecontrivance of every new tool, human labour becomesabridged. The man who contrived rollers, inventeda tool by which his power was quadrupled. Theworkman who first suggested the employment ofsoap or grease, was immediately enabled to move,without exerting a greater effort, more than threetimes the weight he could before.*(6.) The economy of human time is the next advantageof machinery in manufactures. So extensiveand important is this effect, that we might, if we wereinclined to generalize, embrace almost all the advantagesunder this single head : but the elucidationof principles of less extent will contribute morereadily to a knowledge of the subject; and, asnumerous examples will be presented to the reader inthe ensuing pages, we shall restrict our illustrationsupon this point.As an example of the economy of time, the use ofgunpowder in blasting rocks may be noticed. Severalpounds of powder may be purchased for a sumSo sensible are the effects of grease in diminishing friction,that the drivers of sledges in Amsterdam, on which heavygoods are transported, carry in their hand a rope soaked intallow, which they throw down from time to time before thesledge, in order that, by passing over the rope, it may becomeOF MACHINERY. 9acquired by a few days' labour : yet when this isemployed for the purpose alluded to, effects are frequentlyproduced which could not, even with the besttools, be accomplished by other means in less thanmany months.The dimensions of one of the blocks of limestoneextracted from the quarries worked for the formationof the breakwater at Plymouth, were 26^ ft. long,13 ft. wide, and 16 ft. deep. This mass, containing above4800 cubic feet, and weighing about 400 tons, wasblasted three times. Two charges of 50lbs. each weresuccessively exploded in a hole 13 feet deep, thebore being 3 inches at top and 2h inches at bottom :lOOlbs. of powder were afterwards exploded in therent formed by those operations. Each pound of gunpowderseparated from the rock two tons of matter, ornearly 4500 times its own weight. The expenseof the powder was 61. ^ or nearly 7hd. per lb. : theboring occupied two men during a day and a half,and cost about 9s. ; and the value of the produce was,at that time, about 45Z.(7.*) The simple contrivance of tin tubes for speakingthrough, communicating between different apartments,by which the directions of the superintendantare instantly conveyed to the remotest parts of anestablishment, produces a considerable economy oftime. It is employed in the shops and manufactoriesin London, and might with advantage be used indomestic establishments, particularly in large houses,in conveying orders from the nursery to the kitchen,or from the house to the stable. Its conveniencearises not merely from saving the servant or workmanuseless journeys to receive directions, but fromlU ADVANTAGESrelieving the master himself from that indispositionto give trouble, which frequently induces him toforego a trifling want, when he knows that lies attendantmust mount several flights of stairs to ascertainhis wishes, and, after descending, must mount againto supply them. The distance to which such a modeof communication can be extended, does not appearto have been ascertained, and would be an interestingsubject for inquiry.(8.) The art of using the diamond for cutting glasshas undergone, within a few years, a very importantimprovement. A glazier's apprentice, when using adiamond set in a conical ferrule, as was always thepractice about twenty years since, found great difficultyin acquiring the art of using it with certainty ;and, at the end of a seven years' apprenticeship, manywere found but indifferently skilled in its employment.This arose from the difficulty of finding theprecise angle at which the diamond cuts, and ofguiding it along the glass at the proper inclinationwhen that angle is found. Almost the whole of thetime consumed and of the glass destroyed in acquiringthe art of cutting glass, may now be saved bythe use of an improved tool. The gem is set in asmall piece of squared brass with its edge nearlyparallel to one side of the square. A person skilledin its use now files away the brass on one side until,by trial, he finds that the diamond will make a cleancut, when guided by keeping this edge pressed againsta ruler. The diamond and its mounting are nowattached to a stick like a pencil, by means of a swivelallowing a small angular motion. Thus, even the beginnerat once applies the cutting edge at the properOF machinery. 11angle, by pressing the side of the brass against a ruler;and even though the part he holds in his hand shoulddeviate a little from the required angle, it communicatesno irregularity to the position of the diamond,which rarely fails to do its office when thus employed.The relative hardness of the diamond, in differentdirections, is a singular fact. An experienced workman,on whose judgment I can rely, informed me thathe has seen a diamond ground with diamond powderon a cast-iron mill for three hours without its beingat all worn, but that, on changing its direction-vvithrespect to the grinding surface, the same edge wasground away.(9.) Employment of materials of little value. Theskins used by the goldbeater are produced from theoffal of animals. The hoofs of horses and cattle, andother horny refuse, are employed in the productionof the prussiate of potash, that beautiful, yellow,crystallized salt, which is exhibited in the shops ofsome of our chemists. The worn-out saucepans andtin ware of our kitchens, when beyond the reach ofthe tinker's art, are not utterly worthless. Wesometimes meet carts loaded with old tin kettles andworn-out iron coal-skittles traversing our streets.These have not yet completed their useful course ;the less corroded parts are cut into strips, punchedwith small holes, and varnished with a coarse blackvarnish for the use of the trunk-maker, who protectsthe edges and angles of his boxes with them ; theremainder are conveyed to the manufacturing chemistsin the outskirts of the town, who employ themin combination with pyroligneous acid, in making ablack die for the use of calico printers.12 ADVANTAGES(10.) Of Tools. The difference between a Tool anda Machine is not capable of very precise distinction ;nor is it necessary, in a popular explanation of thoseterms, to limit very strictly their acceptation. A toolis usually more simple than a machine ; it is generallyused with the hand, whist a machine is frequentlymoved by animal or steam power. The simpler machinesare often merely one or more tools placed in aframe, and acted on by a moving power. In pointingout the advantages of ^00/5, we shall commencewith some of the simplest.(11.) To arrange twenty thousand needles thrownpromiscuously into a box, mixed and entangled inevery possible direction, in such a form that theyshall be all parallel to each other, would, at firstsight, appear a most tedious occupation ; in fact, ifeach needle were to be separated individually, manyhours must be consumed in the process. Yet this isan operation which must be performed many times inthe manufacture of needles ; and it is accomplishedin a few minutes by a very simple tool; nothing morebeing requisite than a small flat tray of sheet iron,slightly concave at the bottom. In this the needlesare placed, and shaken in a peculiar manner, bythrowing them up a very little, and giving at thesame time a slight longitudinal motion to the tray.The shape of the needles assists their arrangement ;for if two needles cross each other, (unless, which isexceedingly improbable, they happen to be preciselybalanced,) they will, when they fall on the bottom ofthe tray, tend to place themselves side by side, andthe hollow form of the tray assists this disposition.As they have no projection in any part to impedeOF MACHINERY. 13this tendency, or to entangle each other, they are, bycontinually shaking, arranged lengthwise, in three orfour minutes. The direction of the shake is now-changed,the needles are but little thrown up, butthe tray is shaken endways ; the result of which is,that in a minute or two the needles which were previouslyarranged endways become heaped up in awall, with their ends against the extremity of thetray. They are then removed, by hundreds at atime, with a broad iron spatula, on which they areretained by the fore-finger of the left hand. As thisparallel arrangement of the needles must be repeatedmany times, if a cheap and expeditious method hadnot been devised, the expense of the manufacturewould have been considerably enhanced.(12.) Another process in the art of making needlesfurnishes an example of one of the simplest contrivanceswhich can come under the denomination of atool. After the needles have been arranged in themanner just described, it is necessary to separatethem into two parcels, in order that their points maybeall in one direction. This is usually done bywomen and children. The needles are placed sidewaysin a heap, on a table, in front of each operator,just as they are arranged by the process above described.From five to ten are rolled towards thisperson with the forefinger of the left hand ; thisseparates them a very small space from each other,and each in its turn is pushed lengthwise to the rightor to the left, according to the direction of the point.This is the usual process, and in it every needlepasses individually under the finger of the operator.A small alteration expedites the process considerably :14 ADVANTAGESthe child puts on the forefinger of its right hand asmall cloth cap or finger-stall, and rolling out of theheap from six to twelve needles, he keeps them downby the forefinger of the left hand, whilst he pressesthe forefinger of the right hand gently against theirends : those which have the points towards the righthand stick into the finger-stall; and the child, removingthe finger of the left hand, slightly raises theneedles sticking into the cloth, and then pushes themtowards the left side. Those needles which had theireyes on the right hand do not stick into the fingercover, and are pushed to the heap on the right sidebefore the repetition of this process. By means ofthis simple contrivance each movement of the finger,from one side to the other, carries five or six needlesto their proper heap ; whereas, in the former method,frequently only one was moved, and rarely morethan two or three were transported at one movementto their place.(13.) Various operations occur in the arts in whichthe assistance of an additional hand would be a greatconvenience to the workman, and in these cases toolsor machines of the simplest structure come to ouraid : vices of different forms, in which the material tobe wrought is firmly grasped by screws, are of thiskind, and are used in almost every workshop ; but amore striking example may be found in the trade ofthe nail-maker.Some kinds of nails, such as those used for defendingthe soles of coarse shoes, called hobnails, requirea particular form of the head, which is made by thestroke of a die. The workman holds one end of therod of iron out of which he forms the nails in his leftOF MACHINERY. 15hand ; with his right hand he hammers the red hotend of it into a point, and cutting the proper lengthalmost oiF, bends it nearly at a right angle. He putsthis into a hole in a small stake-iron immediatelyunder a hammer which is connected with a treadle,and has a die sunk in its surface corresponding to theintended form of the head ; and having given onepart of the form to the head with the small hammerin his hand, he moves the treadle with his foot, disengagesthe other hammer, and completes the figureof the head ; the returning stroke produced by themovement of the treadle striking the finished nailout of the hole in which it was retained. Withoutthis substitution of his foot for another hand, theworkman would, probably, be obliged to heat thenails twice over.(14.) Another, though fortunately a less generalsubstitution of tools for human hands, is used toassist the labour of those who are deprived by nature,or by accident, of Some of their limbs. Those whohave had an opportunity of examining the beautifulcontrivances for the manufacture of shoes by machinery,which we owe to the fertile invention of Mr.Brunei, must have noticed many instances in whichthe workmen were enabled to execute their task withdecision, although labouring under the disadvantagesof the loss of an arm or leg. A similar instanceoccurs at Liverpool, in the Institution for the Blind,where a machine is used by those afflicted with blindness,for weaving sash-lines ; it is said to have beentheinventionof a person suffering under that calamity.Other examples might be mentioned of contrivancesfor the use, the amusement, or the instruction of the16 ADVANTAGESwealthier classes, who labour under the same naturaldisadvantages. These triumphs of skill and ingenuitydeserve a double portion of our admiration whenapplied to mitigate the severity of natural or accidentalmisfortune ; when they supply the rich withoccupation and knowledge ; when they relieve thepoor from the additional evils of poverty and want.(15.) Division of the objects of machinery. Thereexists a natural, although, in point of number, a veryunequal division amongst machines : they may beclassed as ; \st. Those which are employed to producepower ; and as, 2dly. Those which are intended merelyto transmit force and execute work. The first of thesedivisions is of great importance, and is very limitedin the variety of its species, although some of thosespecies consist of numerous individuals.Of that class of mechanical agents by which motionis transmitted, — the lever, the pulley, the wedge, andmany others, — it has been demonstrated, that nopower is gained by their use, however combined.Whatever force is applied at one point can only heexerted at some other, diminished by friction and otherincidental causes ; and it has been further proved, thatwhatever is gained in the rapidity of execution is compensatedby the necessity of exerting additional force.These two principles, long since placed beyond thereach of doubt, cannot be too constantly borne inmind. But in limiting our attempts to things whichare possible, we are still, as we hope to shew, possessedof a field of inexhaustible research, and ofadvantages derived from mechanical skill, which havebut just begun to exercise their influence on our arts,and may be pursued without limit, — contributing toOF MACHINERY. 17the improvement, the wealth, and the happiness ofour race.(16.) Of those machines by which we producepower, it may be observed, that although they are tousimmense acquisitions, yet in regard to two ofthe sources of this power, — the force of wind and ofwater, — we merely make use of bodies in a state ofmotion by nature ; we change the directions of theirmovement in order to render them subservient toour purposes, but we neither add to nor diminishthe quantity of motion in existence. When we exposethe sails of a windmill obliquely to the gale,we check the velocity of a small portion of the atmosphere,and convert its own rectilinear motioninto one of rotation in the sails ; we thus change thedirection of force, but we create no power. Thesame may be observed with regard to the sails of avessel ; the quantity of motion given by them is preciselythe same as that which is destroyed in theatmosphere. If we avail ourselves of a descendingstream to turn a water-wheel, we are appropriating apower which nature may appear, at first sight, to beuselessly and irrecoverably wasting, but which, upondue examination, we shall find she is ever regainingby other processes. The fluid which is falling froma higher to a lower level, carries with it the velocitydue to its revolution with the earth at a greater distancefrom its centre. It will therefore accelerate,although to an almost infinitesimal extent, the earth'sdaily rotation. The sum of all these increments ofvelocity, arising from the descent of all the fallingwaters on the earth's surface, would in time become18 ADVANTAGESperceptible, did not nature, by the process of evaporation,convey the waters back to their sources ; andthus again, by removing matter to a greater distancefrom the centre, destroy the velocity generated byits previous approach.(17.) The force of vapour is another fertile sourceof moving power ; but even in this case it cannot bemaintained that power is created. Water is convertedinto elastic vapour by the combustion of fuel.The chemical changes which thus take place are constantlyincreasing the atmosphere by large quantities ofcarbonic acid and other gases noxious to animal life.The means by which nature decomposes these elements,or converts them into a solid form, are notsufficiently known : but if the end could be accomplishedby mechanical force, it is almost certain thatthe power necessary to produce it would at leastequal that which was generated by the original combustion.Man, therefore, does not create power; but,availing himself of his knowledge of nature's mysteries,he applies his talents to diverting a small andlimited portion of her energies to his own wants :and, whether he employs the regulated action ofsteam, or the more rapid and tremendous effects ofgunpowder, he is only producing on a small scalecompositions and decompositions which nature is incessantlyat work in reversing, for the restoration ofthat equilibrium which we cannot doubt is constantlymaintained throughout even the remotest limits ofour system. The operations of man participate inthe character of their author ; they are diminutive, butenergetic during the short period of their existence :OF MACHINERY. 19whilst those of nature, acting over vast spaces, andunlimited by time, are ever pursuing their silent andresistless career.(18.) In stating the broad principle, that allcombinations of mechanical art can only augment theforce communicated to the machine at the expense ofthe time employed in producing the effect, it might,perhaps, be imagined, that the assistance derived fromsuch contrivances is small. This is, however, by nomeans the case : since the almost unlimited varietythey afford, enables us to exert to the greatest advantagewhatever force we employ. There is, it is true,a limit beyond which it is impossible to reduce thepower necessary to produce any given effect, but itvery seldom happens that the methods first employedat all approach that limit. In dividing the knotted rootof a tree for fuel, how very different will be the timeconsumed, according to the nature of the tool madeuse of ! The hatchet, or the adze, will divide it intosmall parts, but will consume a large portion of theworkman's time. The saw will answer the samepurpose more quickly and more effectually. This,in its turn, is superseded by the wedge, which rendsit in a still shorter time. If the circumstances arefavourable, and the workman skilful, the time andexpense may be still further reduced by the use of asmall quantity of gunpowder exploded in holes judiciouslyplaced in the block.(19.) When a mass of matter is to be removeda certain force must be expended ; and upon theproper economy of this force the price of transportwill depend. A country must, however, have reacheda high degree of civilization before it will have20 ADVANTAGES OF MACHINERY.approached the limit of this economy. The cotton ofJava is conveyed in junks to the coast of China;but from the seed not being previously separated,three quarters of the weight thus carried is notcotton. This might, perhaps, be justified in Java bythe want of machinery to separate the seed, or by therelative cost of the operation in the two countries.But the cotton itself, as packed by the Chinese, occupiesthree times the bulk of an equal quantity shippedby Europeans for their own markets. Thusthe freight of a given quantity of cotton costs theChinese nearly twelve times the price to which, bya proper attention to mechanical methods, it mightbe reduced.*Crawford's Indian Archipelago.ACCUMULATING POWER. 21CHAP. II.ACCUMULATING POWER.(20.) Whenever the work to be done requiresmore force for its execution than can be generated inthe time necessary for its completion, recourse mustbe had to some mechanical method of preserving andcondensing a part of the power exerted previously tothe commencement of the process. This is mostfrequently accomplished by a fly-wheel, which is infact nothing more than a wheel having a very heavyrim, so that the greater part of its weight is near thecircumference. It requires great power applied forsome time to put this into rapid motion ; but whenmoving with considerable velocity, the effects are exceedinglypowerful, if its force be concentrated upon asmall object. In some of the iron works where thepower of the steam-engine is a little too small for therollers which it drives, it is usual to set the engine atwork a short time before the red-hot iron is readyto be removed from the furnace to the rollers, and toallow it to work with great rapidity until the fly hasacquired a velocity rather alarming to those unusedto such establishments. On passing the softenedmass of iron through the first grove, the enginereceives a great and very perceptible check ; and itsspeed is diminished at the next and at each succeedingpassage, until the iron bar is reduced to such asize that the ordinary power of the engine is sufficientto roll it.22 ACCUMULATING POWER.(21.) The powerful effect of a large fly-wheel whenits force can be concentrated on a point, was curiouslyillustrated at one of the largest of our manufactories.The proprietor was shewing to a friend the methodof punching holes in iron plates for the boilers ofsteam-engines. He held in his hand a piece ofsheet-iron three-eights of an inch thick, which heplaced under the punch. Observing, after severalholes had been made, that the punch made itsperforations more and more slowly, he called to theengine-man to know what made the engine work sosluggishly, when it was found that the fly-wheel andpunching apparatus had been detached from thesteam-engine just at the commencement of his experiment.(22.) Another mode of accumulating power arisesfrom lifting a weight and then allowing it to fall. Aman, even nth a heavy hammer, might strike repeatedblows upon the head of a pile without producing anyeffect. But if he raises a much heaver hammer to amuch greater height, its fall, though far less frequentlyrepeated, will produce the desired effect.When a small blow is given to a large mass ofmatter, as to a pile, the imperfect elasticity of thematerial causes a small loss of momentum in thetransmission of the motion from each particle to thesucceeding one ; and, therefore, it may happen thatthe whole force communicated shall be destroyedbefore it reaches the opposite extremity.(23.*) The power accumulated within a small spaceby gunpowder is well known ; and, though not strictlyan illustration of the subject discussed in this chapter,some of its effects, under peculiar circumstances, areACCUMULATING POWER. 23SO singular, that an attempt to explain them mayperhaps be excused. If a gun is loaded with ballit will not kick so much as when loaded with smallshot ; and amongst different kinds of shot, thatwhich is the smallest, causes the greatest recoil againstthe shoulder. A gun loaded with a quantity of sand,equal in weight to a charge of snipe-shot, kicks stillmore. If, in loading, a space is left between thewadding and the charge, the gun either recoils violently,or bursts. If the muzzle of a gun has accidentallybeen stuck into the ground, so as to bestopped up with clay, or even with snow, or if itbe fired with its muzzle plunged into water, the almostcertain result is that it bursts.The ultimate cause of these apparently inconsistenteffects is, that every force requires Time to produceits effect ; and if the time requisite for the elasticvapour within to force out the sides of the barrel, isless than that in which the condensation of the airnear the wadding is conveyed in sufficient force todrive the impediment from the muzzle, then the barrelmust burst. It sometimes happens that these twoforces are so nearly balanced that the barrel onlyswells; the obstacle giving way before the gun isactually burst.The correctness of this explanation will appear bytracing step by step the circumstances which ariseon discharging a gun loaded with powder confinedby a cylindrical piece of wadding, and having itsmuzzle filled with clay, or some other substancehaving a moderate degree of resistance. In thiscase the first effect of the explosion is to produce anenormous pressure on every thing confining it, and24 ACCUMULATING POWER.to advance the wadding through a very small space.Here let us consider it as at rest for a moment, andexamine its condition. The portion of air in immediatecontact with the wadding is condensed ;and if the wadding were to remain at rest, the airthroughout the tube would soon acquire a uniformdensity. But this would require a small interval oftime ; for the condensation next the wadding wouldtravel with the velocity of sound to the other end,from whence, being reflected back, a series of waveswould be generated, which, aided by the friction ofthe tube, would ultimately destroy the motion.But until the first wave reaches the impediment atthe muzzle, the air can exert no pressure against it.Now if the velocity communicated to the wadding isvery much greater than that of sound, the condensationof the air immediately in advance of it may bevery great before the resistance transmitted to themuzzle is at all considerable ; in which case themutual repulsion of the particles of air so compressed,will offer an absolute barrier to the advance of thewadding.If this explanation be correct, the additional recoil,when a gun is loaded with small shot or sand,may arise in some measure from the condensationof the air contained between their particles ; butchiefly from the velocity communicated by* the explosionto those particles of the substances in immediatecontact with the powder being greater thanthat with which a wave can be transmitted throughthem. It also affords a reason for the success ofa method of blasting rocks by filling the upper partof the hole above the powder with sand, instead ofACCUMULATING POWER. 25clay rammed hard. That the destruction of thegun barrel does not arise from the property possessedby fluids, and in some measure also by sand andsmall shot, of pressing equally in all directions, andthus exerting a force against a large portion of theinterior surface, seems to be proved by a circumstancementioned by Le Vaillant and other travellers,that, for the purpose of taking birds withoutinjuring their plumage, they filled the barrel of theirfowling pieces with water, instead of loading themwith a charge of shot.(24.*) The same reasoning explains a curiousphenomenon which occurs in firing a still morepowerfully explosive substance. If we put a smallquantity of fulminating silver upon the face of ananvil, and strike it slightly with a hammer, it explodes; but instead of breaking either the hammer orthe anvil, it is found that that part of the face of eachin contact with the fulminating silver is damaged.In this case the velocity communicated by the elasticmatter disengaged may be greater than the velocityof a wave traversing steel ; so that the particles atthe surface are driven by the explosion so near tothose next adjacent, that when the compelling forceis removed, the repulsion of the particles within themass drives back those nearer to the surface, withsuch force, that they pass beyond the limits of attraction,and are separated in the shape of powder.(2.5.*) The success of the experiment of firing atallow candle through a deal board, would be explainedin the same manner, by supposing the velocityof a wave propagated through deal to be greaterthan that of a wave passing through tallow.26 ACCUMULATING POWER.(26.*) This reasoning ought, however, to be admittedwith caution ; and perhaps some inducementto examine it carefully may be presented by tracingit to extreme cases. It would seem, but this is not anecessary consequence, that a gun might be made solong, that it would burst although no obstacle filledup its muzzle. It should also follow that if, afterthe gun is charged, the air were extracted from thebarrel, though the muzzle be then left closed, thegun ought not to burst. It would also seem tofollow from the principle of the explanation, that abody might be projected in air, or other elastic resistingmedium, with such force that, after advancinga very short space, it should return in the same directionin which it was projected.REGULATING TOWER, 27CHAP. III.REGULATING POWER.(27.) Uniformity and steadiness in the rate atwhich machinery works, are essential both for itseffect and its duration. The first illustration whichpresents itself is that beautiful contrivance, thegovernor of the steam-engine ; which must immediatelyoccur to all who are familiar with that admirablemachine. Wherever the increased speed of theengine would lead to injurious or dangerous consequences,this is applied ; and it is equally theregulator of the water-wheel which drives a spinning-jenny,or of the wind-mills which drain our fens. Inthe dock-yard at Chatham, the descending motionof a large platform, on which timber is raised, isregulated by a governor ; but as the weight is veryconsiderable, the velocity of this governor is stillfurther checked by causing its motion to take placein water.(28.) Another very beautiful contrivance for regulatingthe number of strokes made by a steam-engine,is used in Cornwall : it is called the Cataract, anddepends on the time required to fill a vessel plungedin water, the opening of the valve through which thefluid is admitted being adjustable at the will of theengine man.(29.) The regularity of the supply of fuel to thefire under the boilers of steam-engines is another mode28 REGULATING POWER.of contributing to the uniformity of their rate, andalso economizes the consumption of coal. Severalpatents have been taken out for methods of regulatingthis supply : the general principle being tomake the engine supply the fire with small quantitiesof fuel at regular intervals by means of a hopper, andto make it diminish this supply when the engineworks too quickly. One of the incidental advantagesof this plan is, that by throwing on a very smallquantity of coal at a time, the smoke is almost entirelyconsumed. The dampers of spits and chimneysare also, in some cases, connected with machinesin order to regulate their speed.(30.) Another contrivance for regulating the effectof machinery consists in a vane or fly, of littleweight, but presenting a large surface. This revolvesrapidly, and soon acquires a uniform rate, which itcannot greatly exceed, because any addition to itsvelocity produces a much greater addition to theresistance it meets with from the air. The intervalbetween the strokes on the bell of a clock is regulatedin this way, and the fly is so contrived, thatthe interval may be altered by presenting the armsof it more or less obliquely to the direction in whichthey move. This kind of fly, or vane, is generallyused in the smaller kinds of mechanism, and, unlikethe heavy fly, it is a destroyer instead of a preserverof force. It is the regulator used in musical boxes,and in almost all mechanical toys.(31.*) This action of a fly, or vane, suggests theprinciple of an instrument for measuring the altitudeof mountains, which perhaps deserves a trial, since,if it succeed only tolerably, it will form a much moreREGULATING POWER. 29portable instrument than the barometer. It is wellknown that the barometer indicates the weight of acolumn of the atmosphere above it, whose base isequal to the bore of the tube. It is also known thatthe density of the air adjacent to the instrument willdepend both on the weight of air above it, and on theheat of the air at that place. If, therefore, we can measurethe density of the air, and its temperature, theheight of a column of mercury which it would supportin the barometer can be found by calculation.Now the thermometer gives information respecting thetemperature of the air immediately ; and its densitymight be ascertained by means of a watch and a smallinstrument, in which the number of turns made by avane moved by a constant force, should be registered.The less dense the air in which the vane revolves,the greater will be the number of its revolutions inagiven time : and tables could be formed from experimentsin partially exhausted vessels, aided bycalculation, from which, if the temperature of the air,and the number of revolutions of the vane are given,the corresponding height of the barometer might befound.*To persons who may be inclined to experiment uponthis or any other instrument, T would beg to suggest theperusal of the section " On the Arc of Observing," Observationson the Decline of Science in England p. 170. — Fellowes,1828.30 INCREASE AND DIMINUTIONCHAP. IV.INCREASE AND DIMINUTION OF VELOCITY.(32.) The fatigue produced on the muscles of thehuman frame does not altogether depend on theactual force employed in each effort, but partlyon the frequency with which it is exerted. Theexertion necessary to accomplish every operationconsists of two parts : one of these is the expenditureof force which is necessary to drive the toolor instrument ; and the other is the effort requiredfor the motion of some limb of the animal producingtl^e action. In driving a nail into a piece of wood,one of these is lifting the hammer, and propelling itshead against the nail ; the other is, raising the armitself, and moving it in order to use the hammer.If the weight of the hammer is considerable, theformer part will cause the greatest portion of theexertion. If the hammer is light, the exertion ofraising the arm will produce the greatest part of thefatigue. It does therefore happen, that operationsrequiring very trifling force, if frequently repeated,will tire more effectually than more laborious work.There is also a degree of rapidity beyond which theaction of the muscles cannot be pressed.J (33.) The most advantageous load for a porterwho carries wood up stairs on his shoulders, has beeninvestigated by ^M. Coulomb ; but he found fromOF VELOCITY. 31experiment that a man walking up stairs-without anyload, and raising his burden by means of his ownweight in descending, could do as much work in oneday, as four men employed in the ordinary way withthe most favourable load.(34.) The proportion between the velocity withwhich men or animals move, and the weights theycarry, is a matter of considerable importance, particularlyin military affairs. It is also of great importancefor the economy of labour, to adjust theweight of that part of the animal's body which ismoved, the weight of the tool it urges, and the frequencyof repetition of these efforts, so as to producethe greatest effect. An instance of the saving of time .by making the same motion of the arm execute twooperations instead of one, occurs in the simple art ofmaking the tags of boot-laces : these tags are formedout of very thin, tinned, sheet-iron, and were formerlycut out of long strips of that material intopieces of such a breadth that when bent round theyjust enclosed the lace. Two pieces of steel haverecently been fixed to the side of the shears, by whicheach piece of tinned-iron as soon as it is cut is bentinto a semi-cylindrical form. The additional powerrequired for this operation is almost imperceptible ;and it is executed by the same motion of the armwhich produces the cut. The work is usually performedby women and children ; and with the improvedtool more than three times the quantity oftags is produced in a given time.*(35.) Whenever the work is itself light, it becomesnecessary, in order to economize time, to increase theSee Transactions of the Society of Arts, 1826.32 INCREASE AND DIMINUTIONvelocity. Twisting the fibres of wool by the fingerswould be a most tedious operation : in the commonspinning-wheel the velocity of the foot is moderate,but by a very simple contrivance that of the threadis most rapid. A piece of cat-gut passing round alarge wheel, and then round a small spindle, effectsthis change. This contrivance is common to a multitudeof machines, some of them very simple. Inlargeshops for the retail of ribands, it is necessary atshort intervals to " take stock," that is, to measureand re-wind every piece of riband, an operation which,even with this mode of shortening it, is sufficientlytiresome, but without it would be almost impossiblefrom its expense. The small balls of sewing-cotton,so cheap and so beautifully wound, are formed bya machine on the same principle, and but a few stepsmore complicated.(36.) In turning from the smaller instrumentsin frequent use to the larger and more importantmachines, the economy arising from the increase ofvelocity becomes more striking. In converting castinto wrought iron, a mass of metal, of about a hundredweight, is heated almost to white heat, andplaced under a heavy hammer moved by water orsteam power. This is raised by a projection on arevolving axis ; and if the hammer derived its momentumonly from the space through which it fell,it would require a considerably greater time to givea blow. But as it is important that the softenedmass of red-hot iron should receive as many blowsas possible before it cools, the form of the cam orprojection on the axis is such, that the hammer, insteadof being lifted to a small height, is thrown upOF VELOCITY. 33with a jerk, and almost the instant after it strikesagainst a large beam, which acts as a powerful spring,and drives it down on the iron with such velocitythat by these means about double the number ofstrokes can be made in a given time. In the smallertilt-hammers, this is carried still further : by strikingthe tail of the tilt-hammer forcibly against a smallsteel anvil, it rebounds with such velocity, that fromthree to five hundred strokes are made in a minute.In the manufacture of anchors, an art in which asimilar contrivance is of still greater importance, ithas only been recently applied.(37.) In the manufacture of scythes, the length ofthe blade renders it necessary that the workmanshould move readily, so as to bring every part of iton the anvil in quick succession. This is effected byplacing him in a seat suspended by ropes from theceiling : so that he is enabled, with little bodily exertion,to vary his distance, by pressing his feet againstthe block which supports the anvil, or against thefloor.(38.*) An increase of velocity is sometimes necessaryto render operations possible : thus a personmay skate with great rapidity over ice which wouldnot support his weight if he moved over it moreslowly. This arises from the fact, that time is requisitefor producing the fracture of the ice : as soonas the weight of the skater begins to act on any point,the ice, supported by the water, bends slowly underhim ; but if the skater's velocity is considerable,he has passed off from the spot which was loadedbefore the bending has reached the point whichwould cause the ice to break.34 INCREASE AND DIMINUTION(39.*) An effect not very different from this mighttake place if very great velocity were communicatedto boats. Let us suppose a flat-bottomedboat, whose bow forms an inclined plane with thebottom, at rest in still-water. If we imagine somevery great force suddenly to propel this boat, theinclination of the plane at the fore-part wouldcause it to rise in the water ; and if the force wereexcessive, it might even rise out of the water, andadvance, by a series of leaps, like a piece ofslate or an oyster shell, thrown as a " such anddrake. '^If the force were not sufficient to pull the boat outof the water, but were just enough to bring its bottomto the surface, it would be carried along with akind of gliding motion with great rapidity ; for atevery point of its course it would require a certaintime before it could sink to its usual draft of water ;but before that time had elapsed, it would haveadvanced to another point, and consequently havebeen raised by the reaction of the water on theinclined plane at its fore-part.(40.*) The same fact, that bodies moving withgreat velocity have not time to exert the full effectof their weight, seems to explain a circumstancewhich appears to be very unaccountable. It sometimeshappens that when foot-passengers are knockeddown by carriages, the wheels pass over them withscarcely any injury, though, if the weight of thecarriage had rested on their body, even for a fewseconds, it would have crushed them to death. Ifthe view above taken is correct, the injury insuch circumstances will chiefly happen to thatOF VELOCITY. 35part of the body which is struck by the advancingwheel.(41.*) An operation in which rapidity is of essentialimportance is in bringing the produce of minesup to the surface. The shafts through which theproduce is raised are sunk at a very great expense,and it is, of course, desirable to sink as few of themas possible. The matter to be extracted is thereforeraised by steam-engines with considerable velocity ;and without this many of our mines could not beworked with profit.(42.) The most frequent reason for employingcontrivances for diminishing velocity, arises from thenecessity of overcoming great resistances with smallpower. Systems of pulleys, the crane, and manyother illustrations might also be adduced here asexamples ; but they belong more appropriately tosome of the other causes which we have assigned forthe advantages of machinery. The common smoke-jackis an instrument in which the velocity communicatedis too great for the purpose required, and it istransmitted through wheels which reduce it to a moremoderate rate.d2EXTENDING THE TIMECHAP. V.EXTENDING THE TIME OF ACTION OF FORCES.(43.) This is one of the most common and mostuseful of the employments of machinery. The halfminute which we daily devote to the winding-up ofour watches is an exertion of labour almost insensible; yet, by the aid of a few wheels, its effect isspread over the whole twenty-four hours. In ourclocks, this extension of the time of action of theoriginal force impressed is carried still further; thebetter kind usually require winding up once in eightdays, and some are occasionally made to continue inactionduring a month, or even a year. Anotherfamiliar illustration may be noticed in our domesticfurniture : the common jack by which our meat isroasted, is a contrivance to enable the cook in a fewminutes to exert a force which the machine retailsout during the succeeding hour in turning the loadedspit ; thus enabling her to bestow her undividedattention on the other important duties of her vocation.A great number of automatons and mechanicaltoys moved by springs, may be classed under thisdivision.(44.) A small moving power, in the shape of ajack or a spring with a train of wheels, is often of greatconvenience to the experimental philosopher, and hasbeen used with advantage in magnetic and electricOF ACTION OF FORCES. 37experiments where the rotation of a disk of metal orother body is necessary, thus allowing to the inquirerthe unimpeded use of both his hands. A vane connectedby a train of wheels, and set in motion by aheavy weight, has also, on some occasions, been employedin chemical processes, to keep a solution in astate of agitation. Another object to which a similarapparatus may be applied, is the polishing of smallspecimens of minerals for optical experiments.38 SAVING TIME INCHAP. VI.SAVING TIME IN NATURAL OPERATIONS.(45.) The process of tanning will furnish us witha striking illustration of the power of machinery inaccelerating certain processes in which natural operationshave a principal effect. The object of this artisto combine a certain principle called tanning withevery particle of the skin to be tanned. This, in theordinary process, is accomplished by allowing theskins to soak in pits containing a solution of tanningmatter : they remain in the pits six, twelve, or eighteenmonths ; and in some instances, (if the hides are verythick,) they are exposed to the operation for twoyears, or even during a longer period. This lengthof time is apparently required in order to allow thetanning matter to penetrate into the interior of athick hide. The improved process consists inplacing the hides with the solution of tan in closevessels, and then exhausting the air. The effect isto withdraw any air which may be contained in thepores of the hides, and to aid capillary attraction bythe pressure of the atmosphere in forcing the tan intothe interior of the skins. The effect of the additionalforce thus brought into action can be equal only toone atmosphere, but a further improvement has beenmade : the vessel containing the hides is, after exhaustion,filled up with a solution of tan ; a smalladditional quantity is then injected with a forcing-naturalOPERATIONS. 39pump. By these means any degree of pressure maybegiven which the containing vessel is capable ofsupporting ; and it has been found that, by employingsuch a method, the thickest hides may be tannedin six weeks or two months.(46.) The same process of injection might be appliedto impregnate timber with tar, or any othersubstance capable of preserving it from decay ; andif it were not too expensive, the deal floors of housesmight thus be impregnated with alumine or othersubstances, which would render them much lessliable to be accidentally set on fire. In some casesit might be useful to impregnate woods with resins,varnish, or oil ; and wood saturated with oil might, insome instances, be usefully employed in machineryfor giving a constant, but very minute supply of thatfluid to iron or steel, against which it is worked,Some idea of the quantity of matter which can beinjected into wood by great pressure, may be formed,from considering the fact stated by Mr. Scores, respectingan accident which occurred to a boat of one ofour whaling-ships. The harpoon having been struckinto the fish, the whale in this instance, diveddirectly down, and carried the boat along with him.On returning to the surface the animal was killed,but the boat, instead of rising, was found suspendedbeneath the whale by the rope of the harpoon ; andon drawing it up, every part of the wood was foundto be so completely saturated with water as to sinkimmediately to the bottom.(47.) The operation of bleaching linen in the openair is one for which considerable time is necessary ;and although it does not require much labour, yet,from the risk of damage and of robbery from long40 SAYING TIME INexposure, a mode of shortening the process washighly desirable. The method now practised, althoughnot mechanical, is such a remarkable instanceof the application of science to the practical purposesof manufactures, that in mentioning the advantagesderived from shortening natural operations, it wouldhave been scarcely pardonable to have omitted allallusion to the beautiful application of chlorine, incombination with lime, to the art of bleaching.(48.) Another instance more strictly mechanicaloccurs in some countries where fuel is expensive,and the heat of the sun is not sufficient to evaporatethe water from brine springs. The water is firstpumped up to a reservoir, and then allowed to fallin small streams through faggots. Thus it becomesdivided ; and, presenting a large surface, evaporationis facilitated, and the brine which is collected in thevessels below the faggots is stronger than that whichwas pumped up. After thus getting rid of a largepart of the water, the remaining portion is driven offby boiling. The success of this process depends onthe condition of the atmosphere with respect tomoisture. If the air, at the time the brine fallsthrough the faggots, holds in solution as muchmoisture as it can contain in an invisible state, no morecan be absorbed from the salt water, and the labourexpended in pumping is entirely wasted. The stateof the air, as to dryness, is therefore an importantconsideration in fixing the time when this operationis to be performed ; and an attentive examination ofits state, by means of the hygrometer, might be productiveof some economy of labour.(49.) In some countries, where wood is scarce, theevaporation of salt water is carried on by a largeNATURAL OPERATIONS. 41collection of ropes which are stretched perpendicularly.In passing down the ropes, the water deposits thesulphate of lime which it held in solution, andgradually incrusts them, so that in the course oftwenty years, when they are nearly rotten, they arestill sustained by the surrounding incrustation, thuspresenting the appearance of a vast collection ofsmall columns.(50.) Amongst natural operations perpetually alteringthe surface of our globe, there are some whichit would be advantageous to accelerate. The wearingdown of the rocks which impede the rapids of navigablerivers, is one of this class. A very beautifulprocess for accomplishing this object has been employedin America. A boat is placed at the bottomof the rapid, and kept in its position by a long ropewhich is firmly fixed on the bank of the river nearthe top. An axis, having a wheel similar to the paddle-wheelof a steam-boat fixed at each end of it, is placedacross the boat ; so that the two wheels and theirconnecting axis shall revolve rapidly, being drivenby the force of the passing current. Let us nowimagine several beams of wood shod with pointediron fixed at the ends of strong levers, projectingbeyond the bow of the boat, as in the annexed representation.42 SAVING TIME INIf these levers are at liberty to move up and down,and if one or more projecting pieces, called cams,are fixed on the axis opposite to the end of eachlever, the action of the stream upon the wheels willkeep up a perpetual succession of blows. The sharp-pointedshoe striking upon the rock at the bottom,will continually detach small pieces, which the streamwill immediately carry off. Thus, by the mere actionof the river itself, a constant and most effectual systemof pounding the rock at its bottom is established.A single workman may, by the aid of a rudder, directthe boat to any required part of the stream ; and whenit is necessary to move up the rapid, as the channelis cut, he can easily cause the boat to advance bymeans of a capstan.(51.) When the object of the machinery just describedhas been accomplished, and the channel issufficiently deep, a slight alteration converts theapparatus to another purpose almost equally advantageous.The stampers and the projecting pieces onthe axis are removed, and a barrel of wood or metal,surrounding part of the axis, and capable, at pleasure,of being connected with, or disconnected from theaxis itself, is substituted. The rope which hithertofastened the boat, is now fixed to this barrel ; andif the barrel is loose upon the axis, the paddle-wheelmakes the axis only revolve, and the boatremains in its place : but the moment the axis isattached to its surrounding barrel, this begins to turn,and winding up the rope, the boat is graduallydrawn up against the stream ; and may be employedas a kind of tug-boat for vessels which have occasionto ascend the rapid. When the tug-boat reaches theNATURAL OPERATIONS. 43summit the barrel is released from the axis, andfriction being applied to moderate its velocity, theboat is allowed to descend.(52.*) Clocks occupy a very high place amongstinstruments by means of which human time is economized: and their multiplication in conspicuous placesin large towns is attended with many advantages.Their position, nevertheless, in London, is often veryill chosen ; and the usual place, half-way up on a highsteeple, in the midst of narrow streets, in a crowdedcity, is very unfavourable, unless the church happento stand out from the houses which form the street.The most eligible situation for a clock is, that itshould project considerably into the street at someelevation, with a dial-plate on each side, like thatwhich belonged to the old church of St. Dunstan,in Fleet-street, so that passengers in both directionswould have their attention directed to the hour.(53.*) A similar remark applies, with much greaterforce, to the present defective mode of informingthe public of the position of the receiving housesfor the twopenny and general post. In the lowestcomer of the window of some attractive shop is founda small slit, ^dth a brass plate indicating its importantoffice so obscurely, that it seems to be an objectrather to prevent its being conspicuous. No strikingsign assists the anxious inquirer, who, as the momentsrapidly pass which precede the hour of closing,torments the passenger with his inquiries for thenearest post-office. He reaches it, perhaps, just as itis closed ; and must then either hasten to a distantpart of the town in order to procure the admissionof his letters, or give up the idea of forwarding44 SAVING TIME IN NATURAL OPERATIONS.them by that post; and thus, if they are foreignletters, he may lose, perhaps, a week or a fortnightby waiting for the next packet.The inconvenience in this and in some other cases,is of perpetual and every-day occurrence ; and though,in the greater part of the individual cases, it maybeof trifling moment, the sum of all these producesan amount, which it is always worthy of the governmentof a large and active population to attendto. The remedy is simple and obvious : it wouldonly be necessary, at each letter-box, to have a lightframe of iron projecting from the house over the pavement,and carrying the letters G. P., or T. P., orany other distinctive sign. All private signs are atpresent very properly prohibited from projectinginto the street: the passenger, therefore, would atonce know where to direct his attention, in order todiscover a post-office; and those letter-boxes whichoccurred in the great thoroughfares could not fail tobe generally known.FORCES TOO GREAT OR TOO DELICATE. 45CHAP. VII.EXERTING FORCES TOO GREAT FOR HUMAN POWER,AND EXECUTING OPERATIONS TOO DELICATE FORHUMAN TOUCH.(54.) It requires some skill and a considerableapparatus to enable many men to exert their wholeforce at a given point ; and when this number amountsto hundreds or to thousands, additional difficultiespresent themselves. If ten thousand men werehired to act simultaneously, it would be exceedinglydifficult to discover whether each exerted hiswhole force, and consequently, to be assured thateach man did the duty for which he was paid. Andif still larger bodies of men or animals were necessary,not only would the difficulty of directing thembecome greater, but the expense would increase fromthe necessity of transporting food for their subsistence.The difficulty of enabling a large number of mento exert their force at the same instant of time hasbeen almost obviated by the use of sound. Thewhistle of the boatswain performs this service onboardships ; and in removing, by manual force,the vast mass of granite, weighing above 1400 tons,on which the equestrian figure of Peter the Great isplaced at St. Petersburghh, a drummer was always46 FORCES TOO GREATstationed on its summit to give the signal for theunited efforts of the workmen.An ancient Egyptian drawing was discovered afew years since, by Champollion, in which a multitudeof men appeared harnessed to a huge block ofstone, on the top of which stood a single individualwith his hands raised above his head, apparently inthe act of clapping them, for the purpose of insuringthe exertion of their combined force at the samemoment of time.(55.*) In mines, it is sometimes necessary to raiseor lower great weights by capstans requiring theforce of more than one hundred men. These workupon the surface ; but the directions must be communicatedfrom below, perhaps from the depth of twohundred fathoms. This communication, however, isaccomplished with ease and certainty by signals : theusual apparatus is a kind of clapper placed on thesurface close to the capstan, so that every man mayhear, and put in motion from below by a rope passingup the shaft.At Wheal Friendship mine in Cornwall, a differentcontrivance is employed : there is in that mine aninclined plane, passing underground about two-thirdsof a mile in length. Signals are communicated by acontinuous rod of metal, which being struck below,the blow is distinctly heard on the surface.(56.) In all our larger manufactories numerousinstances occur of the application of the power ofsteam to overcome resistances which it would requirefar greater expense to surmount by means of animallabour. The twisting of the largest cables, the rolling,hammering, and cutting large masses of iron,OR TOO DELICATE. 47the draining of our mines, all require enormousexertions of physical force continued for considerableperiods of time. Other means are had recourseto when the force required is great, and the spacethrough which it is to act is small. The hydraulicpress of Branch can, by the exertion of one man,produce a pressure of 1,500 atmospheres; and withsuch an instrument a hollow cylinder of wrought ironthree inches thick has been burst. In rivettingtogether the iron plates, out of which steam-engineboilers are made, it is necessary to produce as close ajoint as possible. This is accomplished by using therivets red-hot: while they are in that state the twoplates of iron are rivetted together, and the contractionwhich the rivet undergoes in cooling draws themtogether with a force which is only limited by the tenacityof the metal of which the rivet itself is made.(57.) It is not alone in the greater operations ofthe engineer or the manufacturer, than those vastpowers which man has called into action, in availinghimself of the agency of steam, are fully developed.Wherever the individual operation demanding littleforce for its own performance is to be multiplied inalmost endless repetition, commensurate power isrequired. It is the same " giant arm" which twiststhe largest cable," that spins from the cotton plantan " almost gossamer thread." Obedient to the handwhich called into action its resistless powers, ibcontends with the ocean and the storm, and ridestriumphant through dangers and difficulties unattemptedby the older modes of navigation. It is thesame engine that, in its more regulated action, weavesthe canvass it may one day supersede ; or, with48 FORCES TOO GREATalmost fairy fingers, entwines the meshes of the mostdelicate fabric that adorns the female form.*(58.) The Fifth Report of the Select Committee ofthe House of Commons on the Holyhead Roads furnishesample proof of the great superiority of steamvessels. The following extracts are taken from theevidence of Captain Rogers, the commander of oneof the packets : —Question. Be so good as to acquaint the committee inwhat manner the communication has been kept open"between Holyhead and Dublin by steam packets, andwhat has been the success of the experiment of establishingthem on that station.Answer. We have done every thing that could be doneby steam boats ; and they will go, no doubt, when a sailingvessel will not, — that has been proved.Quest. Are you not perfectly satisfied, from the experienceyou have had, that the steam vessel you commandis capable of performing what no sailing vesselcan do ?Ans. Yes.Quest. During your passage from Gravesend to theDowns, could any square-rigged vessel, from a first-ratedown to a sloop of war, have performed the voyage youdid in the time you did it in the steam boat ?Ans. No ; it was impossible. In the Downs we passedseveral Indiamen, and 150 sail there that could not move"down the channel; and at the back of Dungeness we"passed 120 more.The importance and diversified applications of the steam-enginewere most ably enforced in the speeches made at apublic meeting, held (June 1824) for the purpose of proposingthe erection of a monument to the memory of James Watt ;these were subsequently printed.iOR TOO DELICATE. 49Quest. At the time you performed that voyage, withthe weather you have described, from the Downs toMilford, if that weather had continued twelve months,would any square-rigged vessel have performed it?Ans. They would have been a long time about it ; probably,would have been weeks instead of days. \ sailingvessel would not have beat up to Milford, as we did, intwelve months."(59.) The process of printing on the silver paper,which is necessary for bank-notes, is attended withsome inconvenience, from the necessity of dampingthe paper previously to taking the impression. Itwas difficult to do this uniformly ; and in the old processof dipping a parcel of several sheets together intoa vessel of water, the outside sheets becoming muchmore wet than the others, were very apt to be torn.A method has been adopted at the Bank of Irelandwhich obviates this inconvenience. The whole quantityof paper to be damped is placed in a close vesselfrom which the air is exhausted ; water is thenadmitted, and every leaf is completely wetted ; thepape is then removed to a press, and all the superfluousmoisture is squeezed out.(60.*) The operation of pulverizing solid substancesand of separating the powders of variousdegrees of fineness, is common in the arts : and asthe best graduated sifting fails in effecting this separationwith sufficient delicacy, recourse is had to suspensionin a fluid medium. The substance whenreduced by grinding to the finest powder is agitatedin water, which is then drawn ofl*: the coarsest portionof the suspended matter first subsides, and thatwhich requires the longest time to fall down is the50 FORCES TOO GREATfinest. In this manner even emery powder, a substanceof great density, is separated into the variousdegrees of fineness vi^hich are required. Flints, afterbeing burned and ground, are suspended in water, inorder to mix them intimately with clay, which is alsosuspended in the same fluid, for the formation ofporcelain. The water is then in part evaporated byheat, and the plastic compound, out of which ourmost beautiful porcelain is formed, remains. It isa curious fact, and one which requires further examinationthan it has yet received, that, if this mixturebe suffered to remain long at rest before it is workedup, it becomes useless ; for it is then found that thesilex, which at first was uniformly mixed, becomesaggregated together in small lumps. This parallelto the formation of flints in the chalk strata deservesattention.*(61.*) The slowness with which powders subside,depends partly on the specific gravity of the substance,and partly on the magnitude of the particlesthemselves. Bodies, in falling through a resistingmedium, after a certain time acquire a uniformvelocity, which is called their terminal velocity, withwhich they continue to descend : when the particlesare very small, and the medium dense, as water, thisterminal velocity is soon arrived at. Some of thefiner powders even of emery require several hours tosubside through a few feet of water, and the mudpumped up into our cisterns by some of the waterSome observations on this subject, by Dr. Fitton, occurin the appendix to Captain King's Survey of the Coast ofAustralia, vol. ii. p. 397. London, 1826.OR TOO DELICATE. 51companies is suspended during a still longer time.These facts furnish us with some idea of the greatextent over which deposits of river mud may bespread; for, if the mud of the Mississippi sinkthrough one foot of water in an hour, it will becarried by the Gulph stream, which moves at aboutthe rate of three miles an hour, to a distance of 1500miles before it has sunk to the depth of 500 feet.(62.*) A number of small filaments of cotton projectfrom even the best spun thread, and when thisthread is woven into muslin they injure its appearance.To cut these off separately is quite impossible,but they are easily removed by passing themuslin rapidly over a cylinder of iron kept at a dullred heat : the time during which each portion of themuslin is in contact with the red-hot iron is too shortto heat it to the burning point ; but the filamentsbeing much finer, and being pressed close to thehot metal, are burnt.The removal of these filaments from patent net isstill more necessary ; and it is performed most effectuallyby passing the net rapidly through the flameof a stream of gas.E 252 REGISTERING OPERATIONS.CHAP. VIII.REGISTERING OPERATIONS.(63.) One great advantage which we may derivefrom machinery is from the check which it affordsagainst the inattention, the idleness, or the dishonestyof human agents. Few occupations are more wearisomethan counting a series of repetitions of the samefact ; the number of paces we walk affords a tolerablygood measure of distance passed over, but the valueof this is much enhanced by possessing an instrument,the pedometer, which will count for us thenumber of steps we have made. A piece of mechanismof this kind is sometimes applied to count thenumber of turns made by the wheel of a carriage, andthus to indicate the distance travelled : an instrument,similar in its object, but differing in its construction,has been used for counting the number ofstrokes made by a steam-engine, and the number ofcoins struck in a press. One of the simplest instrumentsfor counting any series of operations, was contrivedby Mr. Donkin.*(64.) Another instrument for registering is used insome establishments for calendering and embossing.Many hundred thousand yards of calicoes andstuffs undergo these operations weekly ; and as theprice paid for the process is small, the value of theTransactions of the Society of Arts, 1819, p. 116.REGISTERING OPERATIONS. 53time spent in measuring them would bear a considerableproportion to the profit. A machine has,therefore, been contrived for measuring and registeringthe length of the goods as they pass rapidly throughthe hands of the operator, by which all chance oferroneous counting is avoided.(65.) Perhaps the most useful contrivance of thiskind, is one for ascertaining the vigilance of a watchman.It is a piece of mechanism connected with aclock placed in an apartment to which the watchmanhas not access ; but he is ordered to pull a stringsituated in a certain part of his round once in everyhour. The instrument, aptly called a tell-tale y informsthe owner whether the man has missed any, and whathours during the night.(66.) It is often of great importance, both forregulations of exercise as well as for the interest ofthe proprietor, to know the quantity of spirits or ofother liquors which have been drawn off by thosepersons who are allowed to have access to the vesselsduring the absence of the inspectors or principals.This may be accomplished by a peculiar kind of stopcock,— which will, at each opening, discharge only acertain measure of fluid, — the number of times thecock has been turned being registered by a countingapparatus accessible only to the master.(67.) The time and labour consumed in gaugingthe contents of casks partly filled, has led to an improvementwhich, by the simplest means, obviates aconsiderable inconvenience, and enables any personto read off, oji a scale, the number of gallons containedin any vessel, as readily as he does the degreeof heat indicated by his thermometer. A small stop-registeringOPERATIONS.cock connects the bottom of the cask with a glasstube of narrow bore fixed to a scale on the side ofthe cask, and rising a little above its top. The plugof the cock may be turned into three positions : inthe first, it cuts off all communication with the cask :in the second, it opens a communication between thecask and the glass tube : and, in the third, it cuts offthe connexion between the cask and the tube, andopens a communication between the tube and anyvessel held beneath the cock to receive its contents.The scale of the tube is graduated by pouring intothe cask successive quantities of water, while thecommunication between the cask and the tube isopen. Lines are then drawn on the scale oppositethe places in the tube to which the water rises ateach addition, and the scale being thus formed byactual measurement,* the contents of each cask areknown by inspection, and the tedious process ofgauging is altogether dispensed with. Other advantagesaccrue from this simple contrivance, in thegreat economy of time which it introduces in makingmixtures of different spirits, in taking stock, and inreceiving spirit from the distiller.(68.) The gas-meter, by which the quantity of gasused by each consumer is ascertained, is anotherinstrument of this kind. They are of various forms,but all of them intended to register the number ofcubic feet of gas which has been delivered. It is verydesirable that these meters should be obtainable ata moderate price, and that every consumer shouldThis contrivance is clue to Mr. Heneky, of High Lowborn,in whose establishment it is in constant use.REGISTERING OPERATIONS. 55employ them ; because, by making each purchaserpay only for what he consumes, and by preventingthat extravagant waste of gas which we frequentlyobserve, the manufacturer of gas will be enabled tomake an equal profit at a diminished price to theconsumer.(69.) The sale of water by the different companiesin London, might also, with advantage, be regulatedby a meter. If such a system were adopted, muchwater which is now allowed to run to waste would besaved, and an unjust inequality between the ratescharged on different houses by the same company beavoided.(70.*) Another most important object to which ameter might be applied, would be to register thequantity of water passing into the boilers of steam-engines.Without this, our knowledge of the quantityevaporated by different boilers, and with fire-placesof different constructions, as well as our estimation ofthe duty of steam-engines, must evidently be imperfect.(^71.) Another purpose to which machinery forregistering operations is applied with much advantageis the determination of the average effect of naturalor artificial agents. The mean height of the barometer,for example, is ascertained by noting its heightat a certain number of intervals during the twenty-fourhours. The more these intervals are contracted,the more correctly will the mean be ascertained ; butthe true mean ought to be influenced by each momentarychange which has occurred. Clocks havebeen proposed and made with this object, by whicha sheet of paper is moved, slowly and uniformly,before a pencil fixed to a float upon the surface of the56 REGISTERING OPERATIONS.mercury in the cup of the barometer. Sir DavidBrewster proposed, several years ago, to suspend abarometer, and swing it as a pendulum. The variationsin the atmosphere would thus alter the centre ofoscillation, and the comparison of such an instrumentwith a good clock, would enable us to ascertain themean altitude of the barometer during any interval ofthe observer's absence.*An instrument for measuring and registering thequantity of rain, was invented by Mr. John Taylor,and described by him in the Philosophical Magazine.It consists of an apparatus in which a vessel thatreceives the rain falling into the reservoir tilts overas soon as it is full, and then presents another similarvessel to be filled, which in like manner, when full,tilts the former one back again. The number of timesthese vessels are emptied is registered by a train ofwheels ; and thus, without the presence of the observer,the quantity of rain falling during a wholeyear may be measured and recorded.Instruments might also be contrived to determinethe average force of traction of horses, — of the wind,of a stream, — or of any irregular and fluctuatingeffort of animal or other natural force.(72.*) Clocks and watches may be considered asinstruments for registering the number of vibrationsperformedbyapendulumorabalance. The mechanismby which these numbers are counted is technicallyAbout seven or eight years since, without being aware ofSir David Brewster's proposal, I adapted a barometer, as apendulum, to the works of a common eight-day clock; it remainedin my library for several months, but I have mislaid theobservations which were made.REGISTERING OPERATIONS. 57called a scapement. It is not easy to describe : butthe various contrivances which have been adopted forthis purpose, are amongst the most interesting andmost ingenious to which mechanical science has givenbirth. Working models, on an enlarged scale, arealmost necessary to make their action understood bythe unlearned reader; and, unfortunately, these arenot often to be met with. A very fine collection ofsuch models exists amongst the collection of instrumentsat the University of Prague.Instruments of this kind have been made to extendtheir action over considerable periods of time, and toregister not merely the hour of the day, but the daysof the week, of the month, of the year, and also toindicate the occurrence of several astronomical phenomena.Repeating clocks and watches may be consideredas instruments for registering time, which communicatetheir information only when the owner requiresit, by pulling a string, or by some similar application.An apparatus has recently been applied to watches,by which the hand which indicates seconds leaves asmall dot of ink on the dial-plate whenever a certainstop or detent is pushed in. Thus, whilst the eye isattentively fixed on the phenomenon to be observed,the finger registers on the face of the watch-dial thecommencement and the end of its appearance.(73.) Several instruments have been contrived forawakening the attention of the observer at timespreviously fixed upon. The various kinds of alarumsconnected with clocks and watches are of this kind.In some instances it is desirable to be able to set58 REGISTERING OPERATIONS.them so as to give notice at many successive anddistant points of time, such as those of the arrival ofgiven stars on the meridian. A clock of this kind isused at the Royal Observatory at Greenwich.(74*.) An earthquake is a phenomenon of suchfrequent occurrence, and so interesting, both from itsfearful devastations as well as from its connexion withgeological theories, that it becomes important topossess an instrument which shall, if possible, indicatethe direction of the shock, as well as its intensity.An observation made a few years since at Odessa,after an earthquake which happened during the night,suggests a simple instrument by which the directionof the shock may be determined.A glass vase, partly filled with water, stood on thetable of a room in a house at Odessa; and, from the coldnessof the glass, the inner part of the vessel above thewater was coated with dew. Several very perceptibleshocks of an earthquake happened between three andfour o'clock in the morning ; and when the observergot up, he remarked that the dew was brushed off attwo opposite sides of the glass by a wave which theearthquake had caused in the water. The line joiningthe two highest points of this wave was, of course, thatin which the shock travelled. This circumstance, whichwas accidentally noticed by an engineer at Odessa,*suggests the plan of keeping, in countries subject toearthquakes, glass vessels partly filled with treacle,or some unctuous fluid, so that when any lateralmotion is communicated to them from the earth, theMemoires de Academic des Sciences de Petersburghh,6e serve torn. 1 p 4.REGISTERING OPERATIONS. 59adhesion of the liquid to the glass shall enable theobserver, after some interval of time, to measurethe direction of the shock.In order to obtain some measure of the verticaloscillation of the earth, a weight might be attachedto a spiral spring, or a pendulum might be sustainedin a horizontal position, and a sliding index bemoved by either of them, so that the extreme deviationsshould be indicated by it. This, however,would not give even the comparative measure accurately,because a difference in the velocity of therising or falling of the earth's surface would affect theinstrument.60 ECONOMY OF MATERIALS.CHAP. IX.ECONOMY OF THE MATERIALS EMPLOYED.(75.) The precision with which all operations bymachinery are executed, and the exact similarity ofthe articles thus made, produce a degree of economyin the consumption of the raw material which is, insome cases, of great importance. The earliest modeof cutting the trunks of a tree into planks, was bythe use of the hatchet or the adze. It might, perhaps,be first split into three or four portions, andthen each portion was reduced to a uniform surfaceby those instruments. With such means the quantityof plank produced would probably not equal thequantity of the raw material wasted by the process :and, if the planks were thin, would certainly fallfar short of it. An improved tool, completely reversesthe case : in converting a tree into thickplanks, the saw causes a waste of a very small fractionalpart; and even in reducing it to planks ofonly an inch in thickness, does not waste morethan an eighth part of the raw material. When thethickness of the plank is still further reduced, as isthe case in cutting wood for veneering, the quantityof material destroyed again begins to bear a considerableproportion to that which is used ; and hencecircular saws, having a very thin blade, have beenemployed for such purposes. In order to economizeECONOMY OF MATERIALS. 61still further the more valuable woods, Mr. Bruneicontrived a machine which, by a system of blades, cutoffthe veneer in a continuous shaving, thus renderingthe whole of the piece of timber available.(76.) The rapid improvements which have takenplace in the printing-press during the last twentyyears, afford another instance of saving in the materialsconsumed, which has been well ascertained bymeasurement, and is interesting from its connexionwith literature. In the old method of inking type,by large hemispherical balls stuffed and covered withleather, the printer, after taking a small portion of inkfrom the ink-block, was continually rolling the ballsin various directions against each other, in order thata thin layer of ink might be uniformly spread overtheir surface. This he again transferred to the typeby a kind of rolling action. In such a process, evenadmitting considerable skill in the operator, it couldnot fail to happen that a large quantity of ink shouldget near the edges of the balls, which, not beingtransferred to the type, became hard and useless, andwas taken off in the form of a thick black crust.Another inconvenience also arose, — the quantity ofink spread on the block not being regulated by measure,and the number and direction of the transits ofthe inking-balls over each other depending on thewill of the operator, and being consequently irregular,it was impossible to place on the type a uniformlayer of ink, of the quantity exactly sufficient for theimpression. The introduction of cylindrical rollersof an elastic substance, formed by the mixture ofglue and treacle, superseded the inking-balls, andproduced considerable saving in the consumption of62 ECOxVOMY OF MATERIALS.ink : but the most perfect economy was only to beproduced by mechanism. "When printing-presses,moved by the power of steam, were introduced, theaction of these rollers was found to be well adaptedto their performance ; and a reservoir of ink wasformed, from which a roller regularly abstracted asmall quantity at each impression. From three tolive other rollers spread this portion uniformly overa slab, (by most ingenious contrivances varied inalmost each kind of press,) and another travellingroller, having fed itself on the slab, passed and repassedover the type just before it gave the impressionto the paper.In order to shew that this plan of inking puts theproper quantity of ink upon the type, we must prove,first, — that the quantity is not too little : this wouldsoon have been discovered from the complaints ofthe public and the booksellers ; and, secondly, — thatit is not too great. This latter point was satisfactorilyestablished by an experiment A few hours after oneside of a sheet of paper has been printed upon, the inkis sufficiently dry to allow it to receive the impressionupon the other ; and, as considerable pressure ismade use of, the tympan on which the side firstprinted is laid, is guarded from soiling it by a sheetof paper called the set-off sheet. This paper receives,in succession, every sheet of the work to beprinted, acquiring from them more or less of the ink,according to their dryness, or the quantity uponthem. It was necessary in the former process, afterabout one hundred impressions, to change this set-offsheet, which then became too much soiled for furtheruse. In the new method of printing by machinery,ECONOMY OF MATERIALS. 63no such sheet is used, but a blanket is employed asits substitute ; this does not require changing aboveonce in five thousand impressions, and instances haveoccurred of its remaining sufficiently clean for twentythousand. Here, then, is a proof that the quantityof superfluous ink put upon the paper in machine-printingis so small, that, if multiplied by five thousand,and in some instances even by twenty thousand,it is only sufficient to render useless a single pieceof clean cloth.*The following were the results of an accurateexperiment upon the effect of the process just described,made at one of the largest printing establishmentsin the metropolis — Two hundred reamsof paper were printed off, the old method of inkingwith balls being employed ; two hundred reams ofthe same paper, and for the same book, were thenprinted off in the presses which inked their own type.The consumption of ink hy the machine was to that hythe balls as four to nine, or rather less than one-half.In the very best kind of printing, it is necessary, in theold method, to change the set-off sheet once in twelve times.In printing the same kind of work by machinery, the blanketis changed once in 2000.f This experiment was made at the establishment of Mr.Closes, in Stamford-street.64 IDENTITY ANDCHAP. X.OF THE IDENTITY OF THE WORK WHEN IT IS OFTHE SAME KIND, AND ITS ACCURACY WHEN OFDIFFERENT KINDS.(77.) Nothing is more remarkable, and yet lessunexpected, than the perfect identity of things manufacturedby the same tool. If the top of a circularbox is to be made to fit over the lower part, it maybedone in the lathe by gradually advancing the toolof the sliding-rest ; the proper degree of tightnessbetween the box and its lid being found by trial.After this adjustment, if a thousand boxes are made,no additional care is required ; the tool is alwayscarried up to the stop, and each box will be equallyadapted to every lid. The same identity pervadesall the arts of printing ; the impressions from thesame block, or the same copper-plate, have a similaritywhich no labour could produce by hand. Theminutest traces are transferred to all the impressions,and no omission can arise from the inattention .orunskilfulness of the operator. The steel punch, withwhich the card-wadding for a fowling-piece is cut, ifit once perform its office with accuracy, constantlyreproduces the same exact circle.(78.) The accuracy with which machinery executesits work is, perhaps, one of its most importantadvantages : it may, however, be contended, that aACCURACY OF WORK. 65considerable portion of this advantage may be resolvedinto saving of time ; for it generally happens,that any improvement in tools increases the quantityof work done in a given time. Without tools, thatis, by the mere efforts of the human hand, there are,undoubtedly, multitudes of things which it would beimpossible to make. Add to the human hand therudest cutting-instrument, and its powers are enlarged: the fabrication of many things then becomeseasy, and that of others possible with great labour.Add the saw to the knife or the hatchet, and otherworks become possible, and a new course of difficultoperations is brought into view, whilst many of theformer are rendered easy. This observation is applicableeven to the most perfect tools or machines. Itwould be possible for a very skilful workman, withfiles and polishing substances, to form a cylinder outof a piece of steel ; but the time which this wouldrequire would be so considerable, and the number offailures would probably be so great, that for allpractical purposes such a mode of producing a steelcylinder might be said to be impossible. The sameprocess by the aid of the lathe and the sliding-rest isthe every-day employment of hundreds of workmen.(79.) Of all the operations of mechanical art, thatof turning is the most perfect. If two surfaces areworked against each other, whatever may have beentheir figure at the commencement, there exists atendency in them both to become portions of spheres.Either of them may become convex, and the otherconcave, with various degrees of curvature. A planesurface is the line of separation between convexityand concavity, and is most difficult to hit ; it is morep60 IDENTITY AND ACCURACY OF WORK.easy to make a good circle than to produce a straightline. A similar difficulty takes place in figuringspecula for telescopes ; the parabola is the surfacewhich separates the hyperbolic from the ellipticfigure, and is the most difficult to form. If a spindle,not cylindrical at its end, be pressed into a holenot circular, and kept constantly turning, thereis a tendency in these two bodies so situated tobecome conical, or to have circular sections. If atriangular-pointed piece of iron be worked roundin a circular hole the edges will gradually wear, andit will become conical. These facts, if they do notexplain, at least illustrate the principles on which theexcellence of work formed in the lathe depends.OF COPYING. 67CHAP. XI.OF COPYING.(80.) The two last-mentioned sources of excellencein the work produced by machinery depend on aprinciple which pervades a very large portion of allmanufactures, and is one upon which the cheapnessof the articles produced seems greatly to depend.The principle alluded to is that of copying, takenin its most extensive sense. Almost unlimited painsare, in some instances, bestowed on the original, fromwhich a series of copies is to be produced ; and thelarger the number of these copies, the more care andpains can the manufacturer afford to lavish upon theoriginal. It may thus happen, that the instrumentor tool actually producing the work, shall cost fiveor even ten thousand times the price of each individualspecimen of its power.As the system of copying is of so much importance,and of such extensive use in the arts, it will be convenientto classify a considerable number of thoseprocesses in which it is employed. The followingenumeration however is not offered as a completelist ; and the explanations are restricted to the shortestpossible detail which is consistent with a dueregard to making the subject intelligible.F 268 OF COPYING.Operations of copying are effected under thefollowing circumstances : —By printing from cavities. By stamping.By printing from surface. By punching.By casting. With elongation.By moulding. With altered dimensions.Of Printing from Cavities.(S 1 .) The art of printing, in all its numerous departments,is essentially an art of copying. Underits two great divisions, printing from hollow lines,as in copper-plate, and printing from surface, as inblock-printing, are comprised numerous arts.(82.) Copper-plate Printing. — In this instance, thecopies are made by transferring to paper, by meansof pressure, a thick ink, from the hollows and linescut in the copper. An artist will sometimes exhaustthe labour of one or two years upon engraving aplate, which will not, in some cases, furnish abovefive hundred copies in a state of perfection.(83.) Engravings on Steel. — This art is like thatof engraving on copper, except that the number ofcopies is far less limited. A bank-note engraved asacopper-plate, will not give above three thousandimpressions without a sensible deterioration. Twoimpressions of a bank-note engraved on steel wereexamined by one of our most eminent artists,* whofound it difficult to pronounce with any confidence,which was the earliest impression. One of these wasa proof from amongst the first thousand, the otherwas taken after between seventy and eighty thousandhad been printed off.» The late Mr. Lowry.OF COPYING. 69(84.) Music-Printing. — Music is usually printedfrom pewter plates, on which the characters have beenimpressed by steel punches. The metal being muchsofter than copper, is liable to scratches, which detaina small portion of the ink. This is the reason ofthe dirty appearance of printed music. A new processhas recently been invented by Mr. Cowper, bywhich this inconvenience will be avoided. The improvedmethod, which gives sharpness to the characters,is still an art of copying ; but it is effected bysurface-printing, nearly in the same manner as calico-printingfrom blocks, to be described hereafter, (92.)The method of printing music from pewter-plates,although by far the most frequently made use of, isnot the only one employed, for music is occasionallyprinted from stone. Sometimes also it is printedwith moveable type ; and occasionally the musicalcharacters are printed on the paper, and the linesprinted afterwards. Specimens of both these lattermodes of music-printing may be seen in the splendidcollection of impressions from the types of the pressof Bodoni at Parma : but notwithstanding the greatcare bestowed on the execution of that work, the perpetualinterruption of continuity in the lines, arisingfrom the use of moveable types, when the charactersand lines are printed at the same time, is apparent.(85.) Calico Printing from Cylinders. — Many ofthe patterns on printed calicoes are copies by printingfrom copper cylinders about four or five inches indiameter, on which the desired pattern has beenpreviously engraved. One portion of the cylindersis exposed to the ink, whilst an elastic scraper ofstuffed leather, by being pressed forcibly against70 OF COPYING.another part, removes all superfluous ink from thesurface previously to its reaching the cloth. A pieceof calico twenty-eight yards in length rolls throughthis press, and is printed in four or five minutes.(86.) Printing from perforated Sheets of Metal, orStencilling, — Very thin brass is sometimes perforatedin the form of letters, usually those of a name ; this isplaced on any substance which it is required to mark,and a brush dipped in some paint is passed over thebrass. Those parts which are cut away admit thepaint, and thus a copy of the name appears on thesubstance below. This method, which affords rathera coarse copy, is sometimes used for paper withwhich rooms are covered, and more especially for theborders. If a portion be required to match an oldpattern, this is, perhaps the most economical way ofproducing it.(87.) The beautiful red cotton handkerchiefs dyedat Glasgow have their pattern given to them by aprocess similar to stencilling, except that instead of'printing from a pattern, the reverse operation, — thatof discharging a part of the colour from a cloth alreadydyed, — is performed. A number of handkerchiefsare pressed with very great force between two platesof metal, which are similarly perforated with roundor lozenge-shaped holes, according to the intendedpattern. The upper plate of metal is surrounded bya rim, and a fluid which has the property of dischargingthe red dye is poured upon that plate. Thisliquid passes through the holes in the metal, and alsothrough the calico ; but, owing to the great pressureopposite all the parts of the plates not cut away, itdoes not spread itself beyond the pattern. After this,OF COPYING. 71the handkerchiefs are washed, and the pattern ofeach is a copy of the perforations in the metal-plateused in the process.(se*) Another mode by which a pattern is formedby discharging colour from a previously dyed cloth,is to print on it a pattern with paste ; then, passingit into the dying-vat, it comes out dyed of one uniformcolour. But the paste has protected the fibres ofthe cotton from the action of the dye or mordant ; andwhen the cloth so dyed is well washed, the paste isdissolved, and leaves uncoloured all those parts ofthe cloth to which it was applied.Printing from Surface.This second department of printing is of more frequentapplication in the arts than that which hasjust been considered.(89.) Printing from wooden Blocks. — A block ofbox wood is, in this instance, the substance out ofwhich the pattern is formed : the design beingsketched upon it, the workman cuts away with sharptools every part except the lines to be represented inthe impression. This is exactly the reverse of theprocess of engraving on copper, in which every line tobe represented is cut away. The ink, instead of fillingthe cavities cut in the wood, is spread upon the surfacewhich remains, and is thence transferred to the paper.(90.) Printing from moveable Types. — This is themost important in its influence of all the arts ofcopying. It possesses a singular peculiarity, in theimmense subdivision of the parts that form the pattern.After that pattern has furnished thousandsof copies, the same individual elements may beOF COPYING.arranged again and again in other forms, and thussupply multitudes of originals, from each of whichthousands of their copied impressions may flow. Italso possesses this advantage, that wood-cuts may beused along with the letter-press, and impressionstaken from both at the same operation.(91.) Printing from Stereotype. — This mode ofproducing copies is very similar to the preceding.There are two modes by which stereotype plates areproduced. In that most generally adopted a mouldis taken in plaster from the moveable types, andin this the stereotype plate is cast. Anothermethod has been employed in France : instead ofcomposing the work in moveable type, it was set upin moveable copper matrices ; each matrice being infact a piece of copper of the same size as the type,and having the impression of the letter sunk into itssurface, instead of projecting in relief. A stereotypeplate may, it is evident, be obtained at once from thisarrangement of matrices. The objection to the planis the great expense of keeping so large a collectionof matrices.As the original composition does not readily admitof change, stereotype plates can only be applied withadvantage to cases where an extraordinary number ofcopies are demanded, or where the work consists offigures, and it is of great importance to ensure accuracy.Trifling alterations may, however, be made in it fromtime to time ; and thus mathematical tables may, bythe gradual extirpation of error, at last become perfect.This mode of producing copies possesses, in commonwith that by moveable types, the advantage of admittingthe use of wood-cuts ; the copy of the wood-cutOF COPYING. 73in the stereotype plate being equally perfect withthat of the moveable type. This union is of considerableimportance, and cannot be accomplished withengravings on copper.(92.) Calico Printing from Blocks. — This is a modeof copying, by surface-printing, from the ends of smallpieces of copper wire, of various forms, fixed into ablock of wood. They are all of one uniform height,about the eighth part of an inch above the surface ofthe wood, and are arranged by the maker into anyrequired pattern. If the block be placed upon apiece of fine woollen cloth, on which ink of anycolour has been uniformly spread, the projectingcopper wires receive a portion, which they give upwhen applied to the calico to be printed. By theformer method of printing on calico, only one colourcould be used ; but by this plan, after the flowerof a rose, for example, has been printed with one setof blocks, the leaves may be printed of another colourby a different set.(93.) Printing Oil-Cloth. — After the canvass, whichforms the basis of oil-cloth, has been covered withpaint of one uniform tint, the remainder of the processeswhich it passes through, are a series of copyingby surface-printing, from patterns formed uponwooden blocks very similar to those employed by thecalico printer. Each colour requiring a distinct setof blocks, those oil-cloths with the greatest variety ofcolours are most expensive.There are several other varieties of printing whichwe shall briefly notice as arts of copying ; which,although not strictly surface-printing, yet are moreallied to it than that from copper-plates.74 OF COPYING.(94.) Letter Copying. — In one of the modes ofperforming this process, a sheet of very thin paper isdamped, and placed upon the writing to be copied.The two papers are then passed through a rollingpress, and a portion of the ink from one paper istransferred to the other. The writing is, of course,reversed by this process ; but the paper to which itis transferred being thin, the characters are seenthrough it on the other side, in their proper position.Another common mode of copying letters isby placing a sheet of paper covered on both sideswith a substance prepared from lamp-black, betweena sheet of thin paper and the paper on which theletter to be despatched is to be written. If the upperor thin sheet be written upon with any hard pointedsubstance, the words written with this style will beimpressed from the black paper upon both thoseadjoining it. The translucency of the upper sheet,which is retained by the writer, is in this instancenecessary to render legible the writing which is onthe back of the paper. Both these arts are verylimited in their extent, two or three being the utmostnumber of copies which can be made by means ofthem at the same time.(95.) Printing on China. — This is an art of copyingwhich is carried to a very great extent. As thesurfaces to which the impression is to be conveyedare often curved, and sometimes even fluted, the ink,or paint, is first transferred from the copper to someflexible substance, such as paper, or an elastic compoundof glue and treacle. It is almost immediatelyconveyed from this to the unbaked biscuit, to whichit more readily adheres.OF COPYING. 70(96.) Lithographic Printing. — This is another modeof producing copies in almost unlimited number. Theoriginal which supplies the copies is a drawing madeon a stone of a slightly porous nature ; the ink employedfor tracing it is made of such greasy materialsthat when water is poured over the stone it shall notwet the lines of the drawing. Ashen a roller coveredwith printing-ink, which is of an oily nature, is passedover the stone previously wetted, the water preventsthis ink from adhering to the uncovered portions ;whilst the ink used in the drawing is of such a naturethat the printing-ink adheres to it. In this state, ifa sheet of paper be placed upon the stone, and thenpassed under a press, the printing-ink will be transferredto the paper, leaving the ink used in the drawingstill adhering to the stone,(97.) There is one application of lithographic printingwhich does not appear to have received sufficientattention, and perhaps further experiments are necessaryto bring it to perfection. It is the reprintingof works which have just arrived from other countries.A few years ago one of the Paris newspapers wasreprinted at Brussels as soon as it arrived by meansof lithography. Whilst the ink is yet fresh, this mayeasily be accomplished : it is only necessary to placeone copy of the newspaper on a lithographic stone ;and by means of great pressure applied to it in arolling press, a sufficient quantity of the printing inkwill be transferred to the stone. By similar means,the other side of the newspaper may be copied onanother stone, and these stones will then furnishimpressions in the usual way. If printing from stonecould be reduced to the same price per thousand76 OF Cording.as that from moveable types, this process might beadopted with great advantage for the supply of worksfor the use of distant countries possessing the samelanguage. For a single copy might be printed offwith transfer ink, and thus an English work, forexample, might be published in America from stone,whilst the original, printed from moveable types,made its appearance on the same day in England.(98.) It is much to be wished that such a methodwere applicable to the reprinting of fac-similes of oldand scarce books. This, however, would require thesacrifice of two copies, since a leaf must be destroyedfor each page. Such a method of reproducing asmall impression of an old work, is peculiarly applicableto mathematical tables, the setting up ofwhich in type is always expensive and liable to error :but how long ink will continue to be transferable tostone, from paper on which it has been printed, mustbe determined by experiment. The destruction ofthe greasy or oily portion of the ink in the characterof old books, seems to present the greatest impediment; if one constituent only of the ink wereremoved by time, it might perhaps be hoped, thatchemical means would ultimately be discovered forrestoring it : but if this be unsuccessful, an attemptmight be made to discover some substance having astrong affinity for the carbon of the ink which remainson the paper, and very little for the paper itself.*(99*.) Lithographic prints have occasionally beenexecuted in colours. In such instances a separatestone seems to have been required for each colour,I possess a lithographic reprint of a page of a table, whichappears, from the form of the type, to have been several years old.OF COPYING. 77and considerable care, or very good mechanism,must have been employed to adjust the paper to eachstone. If any two kinds of ink should be discoveredmutually adhesive, one stone might be employedfor two inks ; or if the inking-roller for the secondand subsequent colours had portions cut away correspondingto those parts of the stone inked by theprevious ones, then several colours might be printedfrom the same stone : but these principles do notappear to promise much, except for coarse subjects(100.) Register-Printing. — It is sometimes thoughtnecessary to print from a wooden block, or stereotypeplate, the same pattern reversed upon the oppositeside of the paper. The effect of this, which is technicallycalled Register-Printing, is to make it appearas if the ink had penetrated through the paper,and rendered the pattern visible on the other side.If the subject chosen contains many fine lines, itseems at first sight extremely difficult to effect soexact a super-position of the two patterns, on oppositesides of the same piece of paper, that it shall beimpossible to detect the slightest deviation ; yet theprocess is extremely simple. The block which givesthe impression is always accurately brought down tothe same place by means of a hinge ; this spot iscovered by a piece of thin leather stretched over it ;the block is now inked, and being brought down toits place, gives an impression of the pattern to theleather : it is then turned back ; and being inked asecond time, the paper intended to be printed isplaced upon the leather, when the block again descending,the upper surface of the paper is printedfrom the block, and its under surface takes up the78 OF COPYING.impression from the leather. It is evident that theperfection of this mode of printing depends in a greatmeasure on finding some soft substance like leather,which will take as much ink as it ought from theblock, and which will give it up most completely topaper. Impressions thus obtained are usually fainteron the lower side ; and in order in some measure toremedy this defect, rather more ink is put on theblock at the first than at the second impression.Of Copying by Casting.(101.) The art of casting, by pouring substances inafluid state into a mould which retains them untilthey become solid, is essentially an art of copying ;the form of the thing produced depending entirelyupon that of the pattern from which it was formed.(102.) Of Casting Iron and other Metals, — Patternsof wood or metal made from drawings are the originalsfrom which the moulds for casting are made :so that, in fact, the casting itself is a copy of themould ; and the mould is a copy of the pattern.In castings of iron and metals for the coarser purposes,and, if they are afterwards to be worked, evenfor the finer machines, the exact resemblance amongstthe things produced, which takes place in many ofthe arts to which we have alluded, is not effectedin the first instance, nor is this necessary. As themetals shrink in cooling, the pattern is made largerthan the intended copy ; and in extricating it fromthe sand in which it is moulded, some little differencewill occur in the size of the cavity which itleaves. In smaller works, where accuracy is morerequisite, and where few or no after-operations are toOF COPYING. 79be performed, a mould of metal is employed whichhas been formed with considerable care. Thus, incasting bullets, which ought to be perfectly sphericaland smooth, an iron instrument is used, in whicha cavity has been cut and carefully ground ; and, inorder to obviate the contraction in cooling, a jet isleft which may supply the deficiency of metal arisingfrom that cause, and which is afterwards cut off. Theleaden toys for children are cast in brass mouldswhich open, and in which have been graved orchiselled the figures intended to be produced.(103.) Avery beautiful mode of representing smallbranches of the most delicate vegetable productionsin bronze has been employed by sir. Chantry. Asmall strip of a fir-tree, a branch of holly, a curledleaf of broccoli, or any other vegetable production, issuspended by one end in a small cylinder of paperwhich is placed for support within a similarly formedtin case. The finest river silt, carefully separatedfrom all the coarser particles, and mixed with water,so as to have the consistency of cream, is pouredinto the paper cylinder by small portions at a time,carefully shaking the plant a little after each addition,in order that its leaves may be covered, and that nobubbles of air may be left. The plant and its mouldare now allowed to dry, and the yielding nature ofthe paper allows the loamy coating to shrink fromthe outside. When this is dry it is surrounded by acoarser substance ; and, finally, we have the twigwith all its leaves imbedded in a perfect mould.This mould is carefully dried, and then graduallyheated to a red heat. At the ends of some of theleaves or shoots, wires have been left to afford airsOF COPYING.holes by their removal, and in this state of strongignition a stream of air is directed into the holeformed by the end of the branch. The consequenceis, that the wood and leaves which had been turnedinto charcoal by the fire, are now converted intocarbonic acid by the current of air ; and, after sometime,the whole of the solid matter of which the plantconsisted is completely removed, leaving a hollowmould, bearing on its interior all the minutest tracesof its late vegetable occupant. When this process iscompleted, the mould being still kept at nearly ared heat, receives the fluid metal, which, by itsweight, either drives the very small quantity of air,which at that high temperature remains behind, outthrough the air-holes, or compresses it into the poresof the very porous substance of which the mould isformed.(104*.) When the form of the object intended to becast is such that the pattern cannot be extricatedfrom its mould of sand or plaster, it becomes necessaryto make the pattern with wax, or some othereasily fusible substance. The sand or plaster ismoulded round this pattern, and, by the applicationof heat, the wax is extricated through an openingleft purposely for its escape.(105* ) It is often desirable to ascertain the form ofthe internal cavities, inhabited by molluscous animals,such as those of spiral shells, and of the variouscorals. This may be accomplished by filling themwith fusible metal, and dissolving the substance ofthe shell by muriatic acid ; thus a metallic solid willremain which exactly filled all the cavities. If suchforms are required in silver, or any other difficultlyOF COPYING. 81fusible metal, the shells may be filled with wax orresin, then dissolved away ; and the remaining waxenform may serve as the pattern from which a plastermould may be made for casting the metal. Somenicety will be required in these operations ; and perhapsthe minuter cavities can only be filled under anexhausted receiver.(lOG.) Casting in Plaster. — This is a mode ofcopying applied to a variety of purposes : — to produceaccurate representations of the human form, —of statues, — or of rare fossils, — to which latter purposeit has lately been applied with great advantage.In all casting, the first process is to make the mould ;and plaster is the substance which is almost alwaysemployed for the purpose. The property which itpossesses of remaining for a short time in a stateof fluidity, renders it admirably adapted to this object,and adhesion, even to an original of plaster, iseffectually prevented by oiling the surface on whichit is poured. The mould formed round the subjectwhich is copied, removed in separate pieces and thenreunited, is that in which the copy is cast. Thisprocess gives additional utility and value to the finestworks of art. The students of the Academy atVenice are thus enabled to admire the sculpturedfigures of Regina, preserved in the gallery at Munich ;as well as the marbles of the Parthenon, the prideof our own Museum. Casts in plaster of the Elginmarbles adorn many of the academies of the Continent; and the liberal employment of such presentsaffords us an inexpensive and permanent source ofpopularity.(107.) Casting in Wax. — This mode of copying,82 OF COPYING.aided by proper colouring, offers the most successfulimitations of many objects of natural history, andgives an air of reality to them which might deceiveeven the most instructed. Numerous figures ofremarkable persons, having the face and handsformed in wax, have been exhibited at various times ;and the resemblances have, in some instances beenmost striking. But whoever would see the art ofcopying in wax carried to the highest perfection,should examine the beautiful collection of fruit atthe house of the Horticultural Society ; the model ofthe magnificent flower of the new genus Raffles —the waxen models of the internal parts of the humanbody which adorn the anatomical gallery of the Jardindes Plantes at Paris, and the Museum at Florence —or the collection of morbid anatomy at the Universityof Bologna. The art of imitation by wax does notusually afford the multitude of copies which flowfrom many similar operations. This number ischecked by the subsequent stages of the process,which, ceasing to have the character of copying by atool or pattern, become consequently more expensive.In each individual production, form alone isgiven by casting ; the colouring must be the work ofthe pencil, guided by the skill of the artist.Of Copying hy Moulding,(108.) This method of producing multitudes ofindividuals having an exact resemblance to eachother in external shape, is adopted very widely inthe arts. The substances employed are, either naturallyor by artificial preparation, in a soft or plasticOF COPYING. 83state; they are then compressed by mechanicalforce, sometimes assisted by heat, into a mould ofthe required form.(109.) Of Bricks and Tiles. — An oblong box ofwood fitting upon a bottom fixed to the brick-maker'sbench, is the mould from which every brickis formed. A portion of the plastic mixture of whichthe bricks consist is made ready by. less skilfulhands : the workman first sprinkles a little sandinto the mould, and then throws the clay into itwith some force ; at the same time rapidly workingit with his fingers, so as to make it completelyclose up to the corners. He next scrapes off, with awetted stick, the superfluous clay, and shakes thenew-formed brick dexterously out of its mould upona piece of board, on which it is removed by anotherworkman to the place appointed for drying it. Avery skilful moulder has occasionally, in a longsummer's day, delivered from ten to eleven thousandbricks ; but a fair average day's work is from five tosix thousand. Tiles of various kinds and forms aremade of finer materials, but by the same system ofmoulding. Amongst the ruins of the city of Gour,the ancient capital of Bengal, bricks are found havingprojecting ornaments in high relief: these appear tohave been formed in a mould, and subsequentlyglazed with a coloured glaze. In Germany, also,brickwork has been executed with various ornaments.The cornice of the church of St. Stephen, at Berlin,is made of large blocks of brick moulded into theform required by the architect. At the establishmentof Messrs. Cubits, in Gray's-inn lane, vases, cornices,and highly ornamented-capitals of columns are thusG 284 OF COPYING.formed which rival stone itself in elasticity, hardness,and durability.(110.) Of embossed China. — Many of the formsgiven to those beautiful specimens of earthenwarewhich constitute the equipage of our breakfast andour dinner tables, cannot be executed in the lathe ofthe potter. The embossed ornaments on the edgesof the plates, their polygonal shape, the fluted surfaceof many of the vases, would all be difficult andcostly of execution by the hand ; but they becomeeasy and comparatively cheap, when made by pressingthe soft material out of which they are formedinto a hard mould. The care and skill bestowed onthe preparation of that mould are repaid by themultitude it produces. In many of the works of thechina manufactory, one part only of the article ismoulded ; the upper surface of the plate, for example,whilst the under side is figured by the lathe.In some instances, the handle, or only a few ornaments,are moulded, and the body of the work isturned.(111.) Glass Seals. — The process of engravingupon gems requires considerable time and skill.The seals thus produced can therefore never becomecommon. Imitations, however, have been made ofvarious degrees of resemblance. The colour whichis given to glass is, perhaps, the most successfulpart of the imitation. A small cylindrical rod ofcoloured glass is heated in the flame of a blow pipe,until the extremity becomes soft. The operator thenpinches it between the ends of a pair of nippers,which are formed of brass, and on one side of which thedevice intended for the seal has been carved in relief.OF COPYING. 80When the mould has been well finished and care istaken in heating the glass properly, the seals thus producedare not bad imitations ; and by this system ofcopying they are so multiplied, that the more ordinarykinds are sold at Birmingham for three pence a dozen.(112.) Square Glass Bottles. — The round formswhich are usually given to vessels of glass arereadily produced by the expansion of the air withwhich they are blown. It is, however, necessary inmany cases to make bottles of a square form, andeach capable of holding exactly the same quantity offluid. It is also frequently desirable to have imprintedon them the name of the maker of themedicine or other liquid they are destined to contain.A mould of iron, or of copper, is providedof the intended size, on the inside of which areengraved the names required. This mould, whichis used in a hot state, opens into two parts, toallow the insertion of the round, unfinished bottle,which is placed in it in a very soft state before itis removed from the end of the iron tube with whichit was blown. The mould is now closed, and theglass is forced against its sides, by blowing stronglyinto the bottle.(113.) Wooden Snuff-boxes. — Snuff-boxes ornamentedwith devices, in imitation of carved work orof rose engine-turning, are sold at a price whichproves that they are only imitations. The wood,or horn, out of which they are formed, is softened bylong boiling in water, and whilst in this state it isforced into moulds of iron, or steel, on which are cutthe requisite patterns, where it remains exposed togreat pressure until it is dry.86 OF COPYING.(114.) Horn Knife-Handles and Umhrella-HandJes.The property which horn possesses of becoming softby the action of water and of heat, fits it for manyuseful purposes. It is pressed into moulds, andbecomes embossed with figures in relief, adapted tothe objects to which it is to be applied. If curved, itmay be straightened ; or if straight, it may be bentinto any forms which ornament or utility may require ;and by the use of the mould these forms may bemultiplied in endless variety. The commoner sortsof knives, the crooked handles for umbrellas, and amultitude of other articles to which horn is applied,attest the cheapness which the art of copying gives tothe things formed of this material.(115.) Moulding Tortoise-shell. — The same principleis applied to things formed out of the shell ofthe turtle, or the land tortoise. From the greatlysuperior price of the raw material, this principle ofcopying is, however, more rarely employed upon it ;and the few carvings which are demanded, are usuallyperformed by hand.(116.) Tobacco Pipe-Making. — This simple art isalmost entirely one of copying. The moulds areformed of iron, in two parts, each embracing one halfof the stem ; the line of junction of these parts maygenerally be observed running lengthwise from oneend of the pipe to the other. The hole passing to thebowl is formed by thrusting a long wire through theclay before it is enclosed in the mould. Some of themoulds have figures, or names, sunk in the inside,which give a corresponding figure in relief upon thefinished pipe.(117.) Embossing upon Calico. — Calicoes of oneOF COPYING, 87colour, but embossed all over with raised patterns,though not much worn in this country, are in greatdemand in several foreign markets. This appearanceis produced by passing them between rollers, onone of which is figured in intaglio the pattern to betransferred to the calico. The substance of the clothis pressed very forcibly into the cavities thus formed,and retains its pattern after considerable use. Thewatered appearance in the cover of the volume in thereader's hands is produced in a similar manner. Acylinder of gun-metal, on which the design of thewatering is previously cut, is pressed by screws againstanother cylinder, formed out of pieces of brown paperwhich have been strongly compressed together andaccurately turned. The two cylinders are made to revolverapidly, the paper one being slightly damped,and, after a few minutes, it takes an impressionfrom the upper or metal one. The glazed calicois now passed between the rollers, its glossy surfacebeing in contact with the metal cylinder, whichis kept hot by a heated iron inclosed within it.Calicoes are sometimes watered by placing twopieces on each other in such a position that thelongitudinal threads of the one are at right anglesto those of the other, and compressing them in thisstate between flat rollers. The threads of the onepiece produce indentations in those of the other, butthey are not so deep as when produced by the formermethod.(118.) Embossing upon Leathers This art of copyingfrom patterns previously engraved on steel rollersis in most respects similar to the preceding. Theleather is forced into the cavities, and the parts which88 OF COPYING.are not opposite to any cavity are powerfully condensedbetween the rollers.(119.) Swaying. — This is an art of copying practisedby the smith. In order to fashion his ironand steel into the various forms demanded by hiscustomers, he has small blocks of steel into which aresunk cavities of different shapes ; these are calledswages and are generally in pairs. Thus if he wantsa round bolt, terminating in a cylindrical head oflarger diameter, and having one or more projectingrims, he uses a corresponding swaying-tool ; andhaving heated the end of his iron rod, and thickenedit by striking the end in the direction of the axis,(which is technically called upsetting he places itshead upon one part of the swage ; and whilst anassistant holds the other part on the top of the hotiron, he strikes it several times with his hammer,occasionally turning the head one quarter round.The heated iron is thus forced by the blows toassume the form of the mould into which it is impressed.(120.) Engraving by Pressure. — This is one of themost beautiful examples of the art of copying carriedto an almost unlimited extent ; and the delicacy withwhich it can be executed, and the precision withwhich the finest traces of the graving tool can betransferred from steel to copper, or even from hardsteel to soft steel, is most unexpected. We are indebtedto Mr. Perkins for most of the contrivanceswhich have brought this art at once almost to perfection.An engraving is first made upon soft steel,which is hardened by a peculiar process without inthe least injuring its delicacy. A cylinder of softOF COPYING. 89steel, pressed with great force against the hardenedsteel engraving, is now made to roll very slowlybackward and forward over it, thus receiving thedesign, but in relief. The cylinder is in its turnhardened without injury ; and if it be slowly rolledto and fro with strong pressure on successive platesof copper, it will imprint on a thousand of them aperfect fac simile of the original steel engraving fromwhich it was made. Thus the number of copiesproducible from the same design may be multiplied athousand-fold. But even this is very far short of thelimits to which the process may be extended. Thehardened steel roller, bearing the design upon it inrelief, may be employed to make a few of its firstimpressions upon plates of soft steely and these beinghardened become the representatives of the originalengraving, and may in their turn be made the parentsof other rollers, each generating copper-plateslike their prototype. The possible extent towhich fac-similes of one original engraving maythus be multiplied, almost confounds the imagination,and appears to be for all practical purposesunlimited.This beautiful art was first proposed by Mr. Perkinsfor the purpose of rendering the forgery of banknotesa matter of great difficulty ; and there are twoprinciples which peculiarly adapt it to that object :first, the perfect identity of all the impressions, sothat any variation in the minutest line would at oncecause detection ; secondly, that the original platesmay be formed by the united labours of severalartists most eminent in their respective departments ;for as only one original of each design is necessary,90 OF COPYING.the expense, even of the most elaborate engraving,will be trifling, compared with the multitude of copiesproduced from it.(121.) It must, however, be admitted that theprinciple of copying itself furnishes an expedient forimitating any engraving or printed pattern, howevercomplicated ; and thus presents a difficulty whichnone of the schemes devised for the prevention offorgery appear to have yet effectually obviated. Inattempting to imitate the most perfect bank note, thefirst process would be to place it with the printed sidedownwards upon a stone or other substance, on which,by passing it through a rolling-press, it might be firmlyfixed. The next object would be to discover somesolvent which should dissolve the paper, but neitheraffect the printing-ink, nor injure the stone or substanceto which it is attached. Water does not seemto do this effectually, and perhaps weak alkalineor acid solutions would be tried. If, however, thiscould be fully accomplished, and if the stone or othersubstance, used to retain the impression, had thoseproperties which enable us to print from it, innumerablefac-similes of the note might obviously bemade, and the imitation would be complete. Porcelainbiscuit, which has recently been used with ablack-lead pencil for memorandum-books, seems insome measure adapted for such trials, since its porositymay be diminished to any required extent by regulatingthe dilution of the glazing.(122.) Gold and Silver Moulding. — Many of themouldings used by jewellers consist of thin slipsof metal, which have received their form by pass-^ing between steel rollers, on which the pattern isOF COPYING. 91embossed or engraved ; thus taking a succession ofcopies of the devices intended.(123.) Ornamental Papers. — Sheets of paper colouredor covered with gold or silver leaf, and embossedwith various patterns, are used for coveringbooks, and for many ornamental purposes. The figuresupon these are produced by the same process, that ofpassing the sheets of paper between engraved rollers.Of Copying by Stamping.(124.) This mode of copying is extensively employedin the arts. It is generally executed by meansof large presses worked with a screw and heavy flywheel.The materials on which the copies are impressedare most frequently metals, and the process issometimes executed when they are hot, and in onecase when the metal is in a state between solidity andfluidity.(125.) Coins and Medals. — The whole of the coinswhich circulate as money are produced by this modeof copying. The screw-presses are either worked bymanual labour, by water, or by steam power. Themint which was sent a few years since to Calcutta wascapable of coining 200,000 pieces a day. Medals,which usually have their figures in higher relief thancoins, are produced by similar means ; but a singleblow is rarely sufficient to bring them to perfection,and the compression of the metal which arises fromthe first blow renders it too hard to receive manysubsequent blows without injury to the die. It istherefore, after being struck, removed to a furnace, inwhich it is carefully heated red-hot and annealed,after which operation it is again placed between the92 OF COPYING.dies, and receives additional blows. For medals, onwhich the figures are very prominent, these processesmust be repeated many times. One of the largestmedals hitherto struck underwent them nearly ahundred times before it was completed.(126.) Ornaments for military Accoutrements andFurniture. — These are usually of brass, and arestamped up out of solid or sheet brass by placing itbetween dies, and allowing a heavy weight to dropupon the upper die from a height of from five tofifteen feet.(127.) Buttons and Nail-heads. — Buttons embossedwith crests or other devices are produced by the samemeans ; and some of those which are plain receive theirhemispherical form from the dies in which they arestruck. The heads of several kinds of nails whichare portions of spheres, or polyhedrons, are alsoformed by these means.(128.) Of a 'process for Copying, called in FranceLichen. — This curious method of copying by stampingis applied to medals, and in some cases to formingstereotype plates. There exists a range oftemperature previous to the melting point of severalof the alloys of lead, tin, and antimony, in which thecompound is neither solid, nor yet fluid. In thiskind of pasty state it is placed in a box under a die,which descends upon it with considerable force. Theblow drives the metal into the finest lines of the die,and the coldness of the latter immediately solidifiesthe whole mass. A quantity of the half melted metalis scattered in all directions by the blow, and isretained by the sides of the box in which the processis carried on. The work thus produced is admirableOF COPYING. 93for its sharpness, but has not the finished form ofa piece just leaving the coining-press : the sides areragged, and it must be trimmed, and its thicknessequalized in the lathe.Of Copying by Punching.(129.) This mode of copying consists in drivinga steel punch through the substance to be cut, eitherby a blow or by pressure. In some cases the objectis to copy the aperture, and the substance separatedfrom the plate is rejected ; in other cases the smallpieces cut out are the objects of the workman'slabour.(130.) Punching iron Plate for Boilers. — Thesteel punch used for this purpose is from three-eightsto three-quarters of an inch in diameter, anddrives out a circular disk from a plate of iron fromone-quarter to five-eights of an inch thick.(131.) Punching tinned Iron. — The ornamentalpatterns of open work which decorate the tinned andjapanned wares in general use, are rarely punched bythe workman who makes them In London the artof punching out these patterns in screw-presses iscarried on as a separate trade ; and large quantities ofsheet tin are thus perforated for hollanders, wine-straitnessborders of waiters, and other similar purposes.The perfection and the precision to whichthe art has been carried are remarkable. Sheets ofcopper, too, are punched with small holes about thehundredth of an inch in diameter, in such multitudesthat more of the sheet metal is removed than remainsbehind ; and plates of tin have been perforated withabove three thousand holes in each square inch.94 OF COPYING.(132.) The inlaid plates of brass and rosewood,called lull work, which ornament our furniture, are,in some instances, formed by punching ; but in thiscase, both the parts cut out, and those which remain,are in many cases employed. In the remaining illustrationsof the art of copying by punching, the partmade use of is that which is punched out.(133.) Cards for Guns. — The substitution of acircular disk of thin card instead of paper, for retainingin its place the charge of a fowling-piece, isattended with considerable advantage. It would,however, be of little avail, unless an easy methodwas contrived of producing an unlimited number ofcards, each exactly fitting the bore of the barrel. Thesmall steel tool used for this purpose cuts out innumerablecircles similar to its cutting end, each ofwhich precisely fills the barrel for which it was designed.(134.) Ornaments of gilt Paper. — The goldenstars, leaves, and other devices, sold in shops for thepurpose of ornamenting articles made of paper andpasteboard, and other fancy works, are cut by punchesof various forms out of sheets of gilt paper.(135.) Steel Chains. — The chain used in connectingthe main-spring and fusee in watches and clocks,is composed of small pieces of sheet steel, and it is ofgreat importance that each of these pieces should beof exactly the same size. The links are of two sorts ;one of them consisting of a single oblong piece ofsteel with two holes in it, and the other formed byconnecting two of the same pieces of steel, placedparallel to each other, and at a small distance apart,by two rivets. The two kinds of links occur alteredCOPYING. 95lately in the chain : each end of the single piecesbeing placed between the ends of two others, andconnected with them by a rivet passing through allthree. If the rivet holes in the pieces for the doublelinks are not precisely at equal distances, the chainwill not be straight, and will, consequently, be unfitfor its purpose.Copying with Elongation.(136.) In this species of copying there exists butlittle resemblance between the copy and the original.It is the cross section only of the thing producedwhich is similar to the tool through which it passes.When the substances to be operated upon are hard,they must frequently pass in succession throughseveral holes, and it is in some cases necessary toannual them at intervals.(137.) Wire drawing. — The metal to be convertedinto wire is made of a cylindrical form, and drawnforcibly through circular holes in plates of steel : ateach passage it becomes smaller ; and, when finished,its section at any point is a precise copy of the lasthole through which it passed. Upon the larger kindsof wire, fine lines may sometimes be traced, runninglongitudinally ; these arise from slight imperfectionsin the holes of the draw-plates. For many purposesof the arts, wire, the section of which is squareor half round, is required : the same method ofmaking it is pursued, except that the holes throughwhich it is drawn are in such cases themselvessquare, or half-round, or of whatever other form thewire is required to be. A species of wire is made,the section of which resembles a star with from six to96 OF COPYING.twelve rays ; this is called pinion wire, and is usedby the clock-makers. They file away all the raysfrom a short piece, except from about half an inchnear one end : this becomes a pinion for a clock ; andthe leaves or teeth are already burnished and finished,from having passed through the draw-plate.(138.) Tube drawing. — The art of forming tubesof uniform diameter is nearly similar in its mode ofexecution to wire drawing. The sheet brass is bentround and soldered so as to form a hollow cylinder ;and if the diameter outside is that which is requiredto be uniform, it is drawn through a succession ofholes, as in wire-drawing. If the inside diameteris to be uniform, a succession of steel cylinders,called toilets, are drawn through the brass tube. Inmaking tubes for telescopes, it is necessary that boththe inside and outside should be uniform. A steeltriplet, therefore, is first passed into the tube, whichis then drawn through a succession of holes, until theoutside diameter is reduced to the required size. Themetal of which the tube is formed is condensed betweenthese holes and the steel cylinder within ; andwhen the latter is withdrawn the internal surfaceappears polished. The brass tube is considerablyextended by this process, sometimes even to doubleits first length.(139.) Leaden pipes. — Leaden pipes for the conveyanceof water were formerly made by casting;but it has been found that they can be made bothcheaper and better by drawing them through holes inthe manner last described. A cylinder of lead, offive or six inches in diameter and about two feetlong, is cast with a small hole through its axis, andOF COPYING. 97an iron triplet of about fifteen feet in length is forcedinto the hole. It is then drawn through a series ofholes, until the lead is extended upon the tripletfrom one end to the other, and is of the proper thicknessin proportion to the size of the pipe.(140.) Iron rolling. — When cylinders of iron ofgreater thickness than wire are required, they areformed by passing wrought iron between rollers, eachof which has sunk in it a semi-cylindrical groove ;and as such rollers rarely touch accurately, a longitudinalline will usually be observed in the cylindersso manufactured. Bar iron is thus shaped into all thevarious forms of round, square, half-round, oval, &c.in which it occurs in commerce. A particular speciesof moulding is thus made, which resembles, in itssection, that part of the frame of a window, whichseparates two adjacent panes of glass. Being muchstronger than wood, it can be considerably reducedin thickness, and consequently offers less obstructionto the light ; it is much used for sky-lights.(141.) It is sometimes required that the iron thusproduced should not be of uniform thickness throughout.This is the case in bars for rail-roads, wheregreater depth is required towards the middle of therail which is at the greatest distance from the supports.This form is produced by cutting the grovein the rollers deeper at those parts where additionalstrength is required, so that the hollow which surroundsthe roller would, if it could be unwound, be amould of the shape the iron is intended to fit.(142.) Vermicelli. — The various forms into whichthis paste is made are given by forcing it through holesin tin plate. It passes through them, and appearsdsOF COPYING.on the other side in long strings. The cook makesuse of the same method in preparing butter and ornamentalpastry for the table, and the confectioner informingcylindrical lozenges of various composition.Of Copying with altered Dimensions,(143.) Of the Pentagraph. — This mode of copyingis chiefly used for drawings or maps : the instrumentis simple ; and, although usually employed in reducing,is capable of enlarging the size of the copy. Anautomaton figure, exhibited in London a short timesince, which drew profiles of its visitors, was regulatedby a mechanism on this principle. A small aperturein the wall, opposite the seat in which the personis placed whose profile is taken, conceals a cameralucida, which is placed in an adjoining apartment :and an assistant, by moving a point, connected by apentagraph with the hand of the automaton, over theoutline of the head, causes the figure to trace a correspondingprofile.(144.) By turning — The art of turning might perhapsitself be classed among the arts of copying.A steel axis, called a mandril, having a puny attachedto the middle of it, is supported at one end either bya conical point, or by a cylindrical collar, and at theother end by another collar, through which it passes.The extremity which projects beyond this last collaris formed into a screw, by which various instruments,called chucks, can be attached to it. These chucksare intended to hold the various materials to be submittedto the operation of turning, and have a greatvariety of forms. The mandril with the chuck isOF COPYING. 99made to revolve by a strap which passes over thejolly that is attached to it, and likewise over a largerwheel moved either by the foot, or by its connexionwith steam or water power. All work which isexecuted on a mandril partakes in some measure ofthe irregularities in the form of that w?a»rfrz7; and theperfect circularity of section which ought to exist inevery part of the work, can only be ensured by anequal accuracy in the mandril and its collar.(145.) Rose Engine-turning. — This elegant art dependsin a great measure on copying. Circular platesof metal called rosettes having various indentationson the surfaces and edges, are fixed on the mandril,which admits of a movement either end-wise orlaterally : a fixed obstacle called the " touch'' againstwhich the rosettes are pressed by a spring, obligesthe mandril to follow their indentations, and thuscauses the cutting tool to trace out the same patternon the work. The distance of the cutting tool fromthe centre being usually less than the radius of therosette, causes the copy to be much diminished.(146.) Copying Dies. — A lathe has been longknown in France, and recently been used at theEnglish mint for copying dies. A blunt point iscarried by a very slow spiral movement successivelyover every part of the die to be copied, and is pressedby a weight into all the cavities ; while a cuttingpoint connected with it by the machine traverses theface of a piece of soft steel, in which it cuts the deviceof the original die on the same or on a diminishedscale. The degree of excellence of the copy increasesin proportion as it is smaller than the original. Thedie of a crownpiece will furnish by copy a veryh2100 OF COPYING.tolerable die for a sixpence. But the chief use to beexpected from this lathe is to prepare all the coarserparts, and leave only the finer and more expressivelines for the skill and genius of the artist.(147.) An instrument not very unlike in principlewas proposed for the purpose of making shoe-lasts.A pattern last of a shoe for the right footwas placed in one part of the apparatus, and whenthe machine was moved, two pieces of wood, placedin another part which had been previously adjustedby screws, were cut into lasts greater or less than theoriginal, as was desired ; and although the patternwas for the right foot, one of the lasts was for the left,an effect which was produced by merely interposinga wheel which reversed the motion between the twopieces of wood to be cut into lasts.(148.) Engine for copying Busts. — Many yearssince, the late Mr. Watt amused himself with constructingan engine to produce copies of busts orstatues, either of the same size as the original, orina diminished proportion. The substances onwhich he operated were various, and some of the resultswere shewn to his friends, but the mechanismby which they were made has never been described.More recently, Mr. Hawkins, who, nearly at thesame time, had also contrived a similar machine, hasplaced it in the hands of an artist, who has madecopies in ivory from a variety of busts. The artof multiplying in different sizes the figures of thesculptor, aided by that of rendering their acquisitioncheap through the art of casting, promises to give additionalvalue to his productions, and to diffuse morewidely the pleasure arising from their possession.OF COPYING. 101(149.) Screio-cutting. — When this operation is performedin the lathe by means of a screw upon themandril, it is essentially an art of copying, but it isonly the number of threads in a given length whichis copied ; the form of the thread, and length as wellas the diameter of the screw to be cut, are entirelyindependent of those from which the copy is made.There is another method of cutting screws in a latheby means of one pattern screw, which, being connectedby wheels with the mandril, guides the cutting point.In this process, unless the time of revolution of themandril is the same as that of the screw which guidesthe cutting point, the number of threads in a givenlength will be different. If the mandril move quickerthan the cutting-point, the screw which is producedwill be finer than the original ; if it move slower, thecopy will be more coarse than the original. Thescrew thus generated may be finer or coarser, — itmay be larger or smaller in diameter, — it may havethe same or a greater number of threads than thatfrom which it is copied ; yet all the defects whichexist in the original will be accurately transmitted,under the modified circumstances, to every individualgenerated from it.(150.) Printing from Copper-Plates with altereddimensions. — Some very singular specimens of an artof copying, not yet made public, were brought fromParis a few years since. A watchmaker in that city,of the name of Gonord, had contrived a method bywhich he could take from the same copper-plateimpressions of different sizes, either larger or smallerthan the original design. Having procured four impressionsof a parrot, surrounded by a circle, executed102 OF COPYING.in this manner, I shewed them to the late Mr. Lowry,an engraver equally distinguished for his skill, andfor the many mechanical contrivances with which heenriched his art. The relative dimensions of theseveral impressions were 5' 5, 6*3, 8*4, 15*0, so thatthe largest was nearly three times the linear size ofthe smallest ; and Mr. Lowry assured me, that hewas unable to detect any lines in one which had notcorresponding lines in the others. There appeared tobe a difference in the quantity of ink, but none inthe traces of the engraving ; and, from the generalappearance, it was conjectured that the largestbut one was the original impression from the copperplate.The means by which this singular operation wasexecuted have not been published ; but two conjectureswere formed at the time which merit notice.It was supposed that the artist was in possession ofsome method of transferring the ink from the linesof a copper-plate to the surface of some fluid, andof re-transferring the impression from the fluid topaper. If this could be accomplished, the printwould, in the first instance, be of exactly the samesize as the copper from which it was derived ; but ifthe fluid were contained in a vessel having the formof an inverted cone, with a small aperture at thebottom, the liquid might be lowered or raised in thevessel by gradual abstraction or addition through theapex of the cone ; in this case, the surface to whichthe printing-ink adhered would diminish or enlarge,and in this altered state the impression might bere-transferred to paper. It must be admitted, thatthis conjectural explanation is liable to very confCOPYING. 103miserable difficulties ; for, although the converseoperation of taking an impression from a liquid surfacehas a parallel in the art of marbling paper, thepossibility of transferring the ink from the copper tothe fluid requires to be proved.Another and more plausible explanation is foundedon the elastic nature of the compound of glue andtreacle, a substance already in use in transferringengravings to earthenware. It is conjectured, thatan impression from the copper-plate is taken upon alarge sheet of this composition ; that this sheet isthen stretched in both directions, and that the inkthus expanded is transferred to paper. If the copyis required to be smaller than the original, the elasticsubstance must first be stretched, and then receivethe impression from the copper-plate : on removingthe tension it will contract, and thus reduce the sizeof the design. It is possible that one transfer maynot in all cases suffice ; as the extensibility of thecomposition of glue and treacle, although considerable,is still limited. Perhaps sheets of India rubber ofuniform texture and thickness, may be found toanswer better than this composition ; or possibly theink might be transferred from the copper-plate to thesurface of a bottle of this gum, which bottle might,after being expanded by forcing air into it, give upthe enlarged impression to paper. As it would requireconsiderable time to produce impressions in thismanner, and there might arise some difficulty inmaking them all of precisely the same size, the processmight be rendered more certain and expeditiousby performing that part of the operation whichdepends on the enlargement or diminution of the104 OF COPYING.design only once ; and, instead of printing from thesoft substance, transferring the design from it tostone : thus a considerable portion of the work wouldbe reduced to an art already well known, that oflithography. This idea receives some confirmationfrom the fact, that in another set of specimens, consistingof a map of St. Petersburghh, of several sizes,a very short line, evidently an accidental defect,occurs in all the impressions of one particular size,but not in any of a different size.(151.) Machine to produce Engraving from Medals.— An instrument was contrived, a long timeago, and is described in the Manuel de Tourneurby which copper-plate engravings are produced frommedals and other objects in relief. The medal andthe copper are fixed on two sliding plates at rightangles to each other, so connected that, when theplate on which the medal is fixed is raised verticallyby a screw, the slide holding the copper-plate isadvanced by an equal quantity in the horizontaldirection. The medal is fixed on the vertical slidewith its face towards the copper-plate, and a littleabove it.A bar, terminating at one end in a tracing-point,and at the other in a short arm, at right anglesto the bar, and holding a diamond-point, is placedhorizontally above the copper ; so that the tracing-pointshall touch the medal to which the bar isperpendicular, and the diamond-point shall touch thecopper-plate to which the arm is perpendicular.Under this arrangement, the bar being supposed tomove parallel to itself, and consequently to thecopper, if the tracing-point pass over a flat part ofOF COPYING. 105the medal, the diamond-point will draw a straightline of equal length upon the copper ; but, if thetracing-point pass over any projecting part of themedal, the deviation from the straight line by thediamond-point, will be exactly equal to the elevationof the corresponding point of the medal above therest of the surface. Thus, by the transit of thistracing-point over any line upon the medal, thediamond will draw upon the copper a section of themedal through that line.A screw is attached to the apparatus, so that if themedal be raised a very small quantity by the screw,the copper-plate will be advanced by the same quantity,and thus a new line of section may be drawn :and, by continuing this process, the series of sectionallines on the copper produces the representation of themedal on a plane : the outline and the form of thefigure arising from the sinuosities of the lines, andfrom their greater or less proximity. The effect ofthis kind of engraving is very striking ; and in somespecimens gives a high degree of apparent relief.It has been practised on plate-glass, and is thenadditionally curious from the circumstance of the finelines traced by the diamond being invisible, except incertainlights.From this description, it will been seen that theengraving on copper must be distorted ; that is to say,that the projection on the copper cannot be the sameas that which arises from a perpendicular projectionof each point of the medal upon a plane parallel toitself. The position of the prominent parts will bemore altered than that of the less elevated ; and thegreater the relief of the medal the more distorted will106 OF COPYING.be its engraved representation. Mr. John Bate, sonof Mr. Bate, of the Poultry, has contrived an improvedmachine, for which he has taken a patent, inwhich this source of distortion is remedied. Thehead, in the title-page of the present volume, is copiedfrom a medal of Roger Bacon, which forms one of aseries of medals of eminent men, struck at the royalmint at Munich, and is the first of the published productionsof this new art.*The inconvenience which arises from too high arelief in the medal, or in the bust, might be remediedby some mechanical contrivance, by which the deviationof the diamond-point from the right line, (whichit would describe when the tracing-point traverses aplane), would be made proportional, — not to theelevation of the corresponding point above the planeof the medal, but to its elevation above some otherparallel plane removed to a fit distance behind it.Thus busts and statues might be reduced to anyrequired degree of relief.(152.) The machine just described naturally suggestsother views which seem to deserve some consideration,and, perhaps, some experiment. If amedal were placed under the tracing-point of a.pentagraph, an engraving tool substituted for thepencil, and a copper-plate in the place of the paper ;and if, by some mechanism, the tracing-point, whichslides in a vertical plane, could, as it is carried overthe different elevations of the medal, increase ordiminish the depth of the engraved line proportion-theconstruction of the engraving becomes evident onexamining it with a lens of sufficient power to show the continuityof the Unes.OF COPYING. 107ally to the actual height of the corresponding pointon the medal, then an engraving would be produced,free at least from any distortion, although it mightbe liable to objections of a different kind. If, byany similar contrivance, instead of lines, we couldmake on each point of the copper a dot, varying insize or depth with the altitude of the correspondingpoint of the medal above its plane, then a newspecies of engraving would be produced : and thevariety of these might again be increased, by causingthe graving point to describe very small circles, ofdiameters, varying with the height of the pointon the medal above a given plane ; or by makingthe graving tool consist of three equi-distant points,whose distance increased or diminished accordingto some determinate law, dependent on the elevationof the point represented above the plane of themedal. It would, perhaps, be difficult to imaginethe effects of some of these kinds of engraving ;but they would all possess, in common, the propertyof being projections, by parallel lines, of the objectsrepresented, and the intensity of the shade of theink would either vary according to some functionof the distance of the point represented from somegiven plane, or it would be a little modified by thedistances from the same plane of a few of the immediatelycontiguous points.(153.*) The system of shading maps by meansof lines of equal altitude above the sea bears someanalogy to this mode of representing medals, and ifapplied to them would produce a different species ofengraved resemblance. The projections on the planeof the medal, or the section of an imaginary planes.108 OF COPYING.placed at successive distances above it, with themedal itself, would produce a likeness of the figure onthe medal, in which all the inclined parts of it would bedark in proportion to their inclination. Other speciesof engraving might be conceived by substituting,instead of the imaginary plane, an imaginary sphereor other solid, intersecting the figure in the medal.(154.) Lace made hy Caterpillars, — A most extraordinaryspecies of manufacture, which is in aslight degree connected with copying, has been contrivedby an officer of engineers residing at Munich.It consists of lace, and veils, with open patterns inthem, made entirely by caterpillars. The followingis the mode of proceeding adopted : — He makes apaste of the leaves of the plant, which is the usualfood of the species of caterpillar he employs, andspreads it thinly over a stone, or other flat substance.He then, with a camel-hair pencil dipped in olive oil,draws upon the coating of paste the pattern hewishes the insects to leave open. This stone isthen placed in an inclined position, and a numberof the caterpillars are placed at the bottom.A peculiar species is chosen, which spins a strongweb ; and the animals commencing at the bottom,eat and spin their way up to the top, carefully avoidingevery part touched by the oil, but devouring allthe rest of the paste. The extreme lightness ofthese veils, combined with some strength, is trulysurprising. One of them, measuring twenty-six anda half inches by seventeen inches, weighed only 1.51grains ; a degree of lightness which will appear morestrongly by contrast with other fabrics. One squareyard of the substance of which these veils are madeOF COPYING.weighs 4i grains, whilst one square yard of silkgauze weighs 137 grains, and one square yard of thefinest patent net weighs 262 J grains. The ladies'coloured muslin dresses, mentioned in the table subjoined,cost ten shillings per dress, and each weighsix ounces ; the cotton from which they are madeweighing nearly six and two-ninth ounces avoirdupoisweight.Weight of One Square yard of each of the followingArticles*Description of Goods.Valueper YardMeasureWeightfinished ofOne SquareYard.Weight ofCotton usedin makingOne SquareYard.Caterpillar VeilsSilk Gauze 3-4 wideFinest Patent NetFine Cambric Muslin6-4ths Jaconet MuslinLadies' coloured Muslin Dresses6-4ths Cambricd.1 2Troy Grains.H262^Troy Grains.9-8th3 Calico^-yard Nankeen(155.) This enumeration, which is far from complete,of the arts in which copying is the foundation,Some of these weights and measures are calculated from astatement in the Report of the Committee of the House ofCommons on Printed Cotton Goods; and the widths of thepieces there given are presumed to be the real widths, notthose by which they are called in the retail shops.110 OF COPYING.may be terminated with an example which has longbeen under the eve of the reader ; although few,perhaps, are aware of the number of repeated copyingof which these very pages are the subject.1 . They are copies, by printing, from stereotypeplates.2. These stereotj-pe plates are copied, by the artof casting, from moulds formed of plaster of Paris.3. Those moulds are themselves copied by castingthe plaster in a liquid state upon the moveabletypes set up by the compositor.[It is here that the union of the intellectual andthe mechanical departments takes place. The mysteries,however, of an author's copying, form no partof our inquiry', although it may be fairly remarked,that, in numerous instances, the mental far eclipsesthe mechanical copyist.]4. These moveable types, the obedient messengersof the most opposite thoughts, the mostconflicting theories, are themselves copies by castingfrom moulds of copper called matrices,5. The lower part of those matrices, bearing theimpressions of the letters or characters, are copies,by punching, from steel punches on which the samecharacters exist in relief.6. These steel punches are not themselves entirelyexempted from the great principle of art.Many of the cavities which exist in them, such asthose in the middle of the punches for the lettersa, 6, d, e, g, &:c., are produced from other steelpunches in which these parts are in relief.*This is not a rigidly accurate account of the volume in thereader's hand, which has not been stereotyped. The passageOF COPYING. IllWe have thus traced through six successive stagesof copying the mechanical art of printing fromstereotyped plates : the principle of copying contributingin this, as in every other department of manufacture,to the uniformity and the cheapness of thework produced.given in the text was copied hy printing, from a printed publicationof the author, respecting which the statement wasstrictly accurate.112 ON THE METHODCHAP. XII.ON THE METHOD OF OBSERVING MANUFACTORIES.(156.) Having now reviewed the mechanical principleswhich regu1<itL the successful application ofmechanical science to great establishments for theproduction of manufactured goods, it remains for usto suggest a few inquiries, and to offer a few observations,to those whom an enlightened curiositymay lead to examine the factories of this or of othercountries.The remark, — that it is important to commit towriting all information as soon as 'possible after it isreceived especially when numbers are concerned, —applies to almost all inquiries. It is frequently impossibleto do this at the time of visiting an establishment,although not the slightest jealousy mayexist ; the mere act of writing information as it iscommunicated orally, is a great interruption to theexamination of machinery. In such cases, therefore,it is advisable to have prepared beforehand the questionsto be asked, and to leave blanks for theanswers, which may be quickly inserted, as, in amultitude of cases, they are merely numbers. Thosewho have not tried this plan will be surprised at thequantity of information which may, through its means,be acquired, even by a short examination. EachOF OBSERVING MANUFACTORIES. 113manufacture requires its own list of questions, whichwill be better drawn up after the first visit. The followingoutline, which is very generally applicable,may suffice for an illustration ; and to save time, itmay be convenient to have it printed, and to bind up,in the form of a pocket book, a hundred copies ofthe skeleton forms for processes, with about twentyof the general inquiries.GENERAL INQUIRIES.Outlines of a Description of any of the Mechanical Artsought to contain [information 07i the following points.Brief sketch of its history, particularly the date of itsinvention, and of its introduction into England.Short reference to the previous states through which thematerial employed has passed; the places whence it isprocured; the price of a given quantity.[The various processes must now be described successivelyaccording to the plan which will be given in § 157 ,after which the following information should be given.]Are various kinds of the same article made in one establishment,or at different ones, and are there differences inthe processes ?To what defects are the goods liable ?What substitutes or adulteration are used ?What waste is allowed by the master ?What tests are there of the goodness of the manufacturedarticles ?The weight of a given quantity, or number, and a comparisonwith that of the raw material 1The wholesale price at the manufactory? <£*'. s. d.perThe usual retail price ? £. s. d.Who provide tools? Master, or men? Who repairtools 1 Master, or men 1What is the expense of the machinery ?I114 ON THE METHODWhat is the annual wear and tear, and what its duration?Is there any particular trade for making it ? Where ?Is it made and repaired at the manufactoryIn any manufactory visited, state the number ( )of processes ; and of the persons employed in each process ;and the quantity of manufactured produce.What quantity is made annually in Great Britain ?Is the capital invested in manufactories large or small ?Mention the principal seats of this manufacture inEngland ; and if it flourishes abroad, the places where it isestablished.The duty, excise, or bounty, if any, should be stated,and any alterations in past years ; and also the amountexported or imported for a series of years.Whether the same article, but of superior, equal, or inferiormake, is imported ?Does the manufacturer export, or sell, to a middleman,who supplies the merchant ?To what countries is it chiefly sent? — and in what goodsare the returns made ?(157.) Each process requires a separate skeleton,and the following outline will be sufficient for manydifferent manufactories : —Process ( ) Manufacture ( )Place ( ) Name ( )date 183The mode of executing it, with sketches of the tools ormachine if necessary.The number of persons necessary to attend the machine.Are the operatives men, ( ) women, ( )or children ? ( ) If mixed, what are the proportions ?What is the pay of each ? ( s. d.) ( s. d.)s. d.) perWhat number ( ) of hours do they work perday?OF OBSERVING MANUFACTORIES. 115Is it usual, or necessary, to work night and day withoutstopping ?Is the labour performed by piece or by day-work ?Who provide tools ? Master, or men ? Who repair tools ?Master, or men?What degree of skill is required, and how many years) apprenticeship ?The number of times ( ) the operation is repeatedper day or per hour ?The number of failures ( ) in a thousand ?Whether the workmen or the master loses by the brokenor damaged articles ?What is done with them ?If the same process is repeated several times, state thediminution or increase of measure, and the loss, if any, ateach repetition.(158.) In this skeleton, the answers to the questionsare in some cases printed, as "Who repairthe tools ? — Masters, Men ;" in order that the properanswer may be underlined with a pencil. In fillingup the answers which require numbers, some careshould be taken: for instance, if the observer standswith his watch in his hand before a person heading apin, the workman will almost certainly increase hisspeed, and the estimate will be too large. A muchbetter average will result from inquiring what quantityis considered a fair day's work. When thiscannot be ascertained, the number of operations performedin a given time may frequently be countedwhen the workman is quite unconscious that anyperson is observing him. Thus the sound made bythe motion of a loom may enable the observer tocount the number of strokes per minute, even thoughhe is outside the building in which it is contained.116 THE METHOD OF OBSERVING MANUFACTORIES.M. Coulomb, who had great experience in makingsuch observations, cautions those who may repeathis experiments against being deceived by such circumstances: — " Je prie " (says he) " ceux qui voudrontles repeater, sails n'ont pas le temps de mesurer lesresults acres plusieurs jours d'un travail continu,observer les ouvriers a differences reprises dansla journey, sans qu'ils sachent qu'ils sont observes.Leon ne pent trop averted combien Ton risque de setromper en calculate, soit la vitesse, soit le tempsefFectif du travail, dares une observation de quelque*' minutes." — Memoires de Institut. Tom. II. p. 247.It frequently happens, that in a series of answers tosuch questions, there are some which, although givendirectly, may also be deduced by a short calculationfrom others that are given or known ; and advantageshould always be taken of these verifications, inorder to confirm the accuracy of the statements ; orincase they are discordant, to correct the apparentanomalies. In putting lists of questions into thehands of a person undertaking to give informationupon any subject, it is in some cases desirable tohave an estimate of the soundness of his judgment.The questions can frequently be so shaped, that someof them may indirectly depend on others ; and one ortwo may be inserted whose answers can be obtainedby other methods : nor is this process without itsadvantages in enabling us to determine the value ofour own judgment. The habit of forming an estimateof the magnitude of any object or the frequencyof any occurrence, immediately previous to our applyingto it measure or number, tends materially tofix the attention and to improve the judgment.SECTION II.ON THE DOMESTIC AND POLITICAL ECONOMY OFMANUFACTURES.CHAP. XIII.DISTINCTION BETWEEN MAKING AND Manufacturing.(159.) The economical principles which regulatethe application of machinery, and which govern theinterior of all our great factories, are quite as essentialto the prosperity of a great commercial countryas are those mechanical principles, the operation ofwhich has been illustrated in the preceding section.The first object of every person who attempts tomake any article of consumption, is, or ought to be,to produce it in a perfect form ; but in order to secureto himself the greatest and most permanent profit,he must endeavour, by every means in his power, torender the new luxury or want which he has created,cheap to those who consume it. The larger numberof purchasers thus obtained will, in some measure.118 DISTINCTION BETWEENsecure him from the caprices of fashion, whilst itfurnishes a far greater amount of profit, although thecontribution of each individual is diminished. Theimportance of collecting data, for the purpose ofenabling the manufacturer to ascertain how many-additionalcustomers he will acquire by a given reductionin the price of the article he makes, cannotbe too strongly pressed upon the attention of thosewho employ themselves in statistical inquiries. Insome ranks of society, no diminution of price canbring forward a great additional number of customers; whilst, in other classes, a very small reductionwill so enlarge the sale, as to yield a considerableincrease of profit. Materials calculated to assist informinga Table of the numbers of persons who possessincomes of different amount, occur in the 14th Reportof the Commissioners of Revenue Inquiry ; whichincludes a statement of the amount of personal propertyproved at the legacy office during one year;the number of the various classes of testators ; and anaccount of the number of persons receiving dividendsfrom funded property, distributed into classes. Sucha table, formed even approximately, and exhibitedin the form of a curve, might be of service.(160.) A considerable difference exists betweenthe terms making and manufacturing. The formerrefers to the production of a small, the latter to thatof a very large number of individuals ; and the differenceis well illustrated in the evidence, given beforethe Committee of the House of Commons, on theExport of Tools and Machinery. On that occasionMr. Maudslay stated, that he had been applied to bythe Navy Board to make iron tanks for ships, andMAKING AND MANUFACTURING. 119that he was rather unwilling to do so, as he consideredit to he out of his line of business ; however,he undertook to make one as a trial. The holesfor the rivets were punched by hand-punchingwith presses, and the 1680 holes which each tankrequired cost seven shillings. The Navy Board,who required a large number, proposed that heshould supply forty tanks a week for many months.The magnitude of the order made it worth his whileto commence manufacturer, and to make tools for theexpress business. Mr. jNIaudslay therefore offered,if the Board would give him an order for two thousandtanks, to supply them at the rate of eighty perweek. The order was given : he made tools, bywhich the expense of punching the rivet-holes ofeach tank was reduced from seven shillings to nine-pence; he supplied ninety-eight tanks a week for sixmonths, and the price charged for each was reducedfrom seventeen pounds to fifteen.(161.) If, therefore, the maker of an article wishto become a manufacturer, in the more extended senseof the term, he must attend to other principles besidesthose mechanical ones on which the successful executionof his work depends ; and he must carefullyarrange the whole system of his factory in such amanner, that the article he sells to the public may beproduced at as small a cost as possible. Should henot be actuated at first by motives so remote, hewill, in every highly civilized country, be compelled,by the powerful stimulus of competition, to attend tothe principles of the domestic economy of manufactures.At every reduction in price of the commodityhe makes, he will be driven to seek compensation120 ON MAKING AND MANUFACTURING.in a saving of expense in some of the processes ; andhis ingenuity will be sharpened in this inquiry by thehope of being able in his turn to undersell his rivals.The benefit of the improvements thus engenderedis, for a short time, confined to those from whoseingenuity they derive their origin ; but when a sufficientexperience has proved their value, they becomegenerally adopted, until in their turn they are supersededby other more economical methods.ON MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE. 121CHAP, xiy.*OF MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE.(162*.) In the earlier stages of societies the interchangeof the few commodities required was conductedby barter ; but as soon as their wants becamemore varied and extensive, the necessity of havingsome common measure of the value of all commodities— itself capable of subdivision — became apparent: thus money was introduced. In some countriesshells have been employed for this purpose ; butcivilized nations have, by common consent, adoptedthe precious metals. * The sovereign power has, inmostcountries, assumed the right of coining ; or, inother words, the right of stamping with distinguishingmarks, pieces of metal having certain forms andweights, and a certain degree of fineness : the marksbecoming a guarantee, to the people amongst whomthe money circulates, that each piece is of the requiredweight and quality.In Russia platinum has been employed for coin ; and it possessesa peculiarity which deserves notice. Platinum cannot bemelted in our furnaces, and is chiefly valuable in commercewhen in the shape of ingots, from which it may be forged intouseful forms. But when a piece of platinum is cut into two parts,it cannot easily be reunited except by means of a chemicalprocess, in which both parts are dissolved in an acid. Hencewhen platinum coin is too abundant, it cannot, like gold, be reducedinto masses by melting, but must pass through anexpensive process to render it useful.122 ON MONEY AS AThe expense of manufacturing gold into coin, andthat of the loss arising from wear, as well as intereston the capital invested in it, must either be defrayedby the state, or be compensated by a small reductionin its weight, and is a far less expense to the nationthan the loss of time and inconvenience which wouldarise from a system of exchange or barter.(163.*) These coins are liable to two inconveniences :they may be manufactured privately by individuals,of the same quality, and similarly stamped ; orimitations may be made of inferior metal, or of diminishedweight. The first of these inconvenienceswould be easily remedied by making the currentvalue of the coin nearly equal to that of the sameweight of the metal ; and the second would be obviatedby the caution of individuals in examining the externalcharacters of each coin, and partly by the punishmentinflicted by the State on the perpetrators of suchfrauds.(164*.) The subdivisions of money vary in diffand much time may be lost byan inconvenient system of division. The effect isfelt in keeping extensive accounts, and particularlyin calculating the interest on loans, or the discountupon bills of exchange. The decimal system is thebest adapted to facilitate all such calculations ; and itbecomes an interesting question to consider whetherour own currency might not be converted into onedecimally divided. The great step, that of abolishingthe guinea, has already been taken without any inconvenience,and but little is now required to renderthe change complete.(165*.) If, whenever it becomes necessary to callMEDIUM OF EXCHANGE. 123in the half-crowns, a new coin of the value of twoshillings were issued, which should be called by somename implying a unit (a Prince, for instance), weshould have the tenth part of a sovereign. A fewyears after, when the public were familiar with thiscoin, it might be divided into one hundred instead ofninety-six farthings ; and it would then consist oftwenty-five pence, each of which would be four percent,less in value than the former penny. The shillingsand sixpences being then withdrawn from circulation,their place might be supplied with silver coinseach worth five of the new pence, and by others ofsentence and of twopence halfpenny ; the latter coins,having a distinct name, would be the tenth part of aPrince.(166*.) The various manufactured commodities, andthe various property possessed by the inhabitants ofa country, all become measured by the standard thusintroduced. But it must be observed that the valueof gold is itself variable ; and that, like all othercommodities, its price depends on the extent of thedemand compared with that of the supply.(167.*) As transactions multiply, and the sumsto be paid become large, the actual transfer of theprecious metals from one individual to another isattended with inconvenience and difficulty, and itis found more convenient to substitute written promisesto pay on demand specified quantities of gold.These promises are called bank notes ; and whenthe person or body issuing them is known to beable to fulfil the pledge, the note will circulate foralong time before it gets into the hands of anyperson who may wish to make use of the gold it124 ON MONEY AS Arepresents. These paper representatives supply theplace of a certain quantity of gold ; and, being muchcheaper, a large portion of the expense of a metalliccirculation is saved by their employment.(168.*) As commercial transactions increase, thetransfer of bank notes is, to a considerable extent,superseded by shorter processes. Banks are established,into which all monies are paid, and out ofwhich all payments are made, through written orderscalled checks, drawn by those who keep accountswith them. In a large capital, each bank receives,through its numerous customers, checks payable byevery other ; and if clerks were sent round to receivethe amount in bank-notes due from each, itwould occupy much time, and be attended with somerisk and inconvenience.(169*.) Clearing House, — London this is avoided,by making all checks paid in to bankers pass throughwhat is technically called " The Clearing House'' Inalarge room in Lombard-street, about thirty clerksfrom the several London bankers take their stations,in alphabetical order, at desks placed round the room ;each having a small open box by his side, and thename of the firm to which he belongs in large characterson the wall above his head. From time to timeother clerks from every house enter the room, and,passing along, drop into the box the checks due bythat firm to the house from which this distributor issent. The clerk at the table enters the amount ofthe several checks in a book previously prepared,under the name of each bank to which it is due.Four o'clock in the afternoon is the latest hour towhich the boxes are open to receive checks ; and at aIMEDIUM OF EXCHANGE. 125few minutes before that time, some signs of increasedactivity begin to appear in this previously quiet andbusiness-like scene. Numerous clerks then arrive,anxious to distribute, up to the latest possible moment,the checks which have been paid into thehouses of their employers.At four o'clock all the boxes are removed, andeach clerk adds up the amount of the checks put intohis box and due from his own to other houses. Healso receives another book from his own house, containingthe amounts of the checks which their distributingclerk has put into the box of every otherbanker. Having compared these, he writes out thebalances due to or from his own house, opposite thename of each of the other banks ; and having verifiedthis by a comparison with the similar list made bythe clerks of those houses, he sends to his own bankthe general balance resulting from this sheet, theamount of which, if it is due from that to otherhouses, is sent back in bank notes.At five o'clock the Inspector takes his seat ; wheneach clerk, who has upon the result of all the transactionsa balance to pay to various other houses,pays it to the inspector, who gives a ticket for theamount. The clerks of those houses to whommoney is due, then receive the several sums from theinspector, who takes from them a ticket for theamount. Thus the whole of these payments aremade by a double system of balance, a very smallquantity of bank notes passing from hand to hand,and scarcely any coin.(170*.) It is difficult to form a satisfactory estimateof the sums which daily pass through this126 ON MONEY AS Aoperation : they fluctuate from two millions to perhapsfifteen. About two millions and a half maypossibly be considered as something like an average,requiring for its adjustment, perhaps, 200,000/. inbank notes and 20/. in specie. By an agreementbetween the different bankers, all checks which havethe name of any firm written across them must passthrough the clearing-house : consequently, if anysuch check should be lost, the firm on which it isdrawn would refuse to pay it at the counter ; a circumstancewhich adds greatly to the convenience ofcommerce.The advantage of this system is such, that twomeetings a day have been recently established — oneat twelve, the other at three o'clock ; but the paymentof balances takes place once only, at five o'clock.If all the private banks kept accounts with theBank of England, it would be possible to carry onthe whole of these transactions with a still smallerquantity of circulating medium.(171*.) In reflecting on the facility with whichthese immense transactions are accomplished — supposing,for the sake of argument, that they formonly the fourth part of the daily transactions of thewhole community — it is impossible not to be struck•v\ath the importance of interfering as little as possiblewith their natural adjustment. Each payment indicatesa transfer of property made for the benefit ofboth parties ; and if it were possible, which it is not,to place, by legal or other means, some impedimentin the way which only amounted to one-eighth percent.,such a species of friction would produce a uselessexpenditure of nearly four millions annually : aMEDIUM OF EXCHANGE. 127circumstance which is deserving the attention of thosewho doubt the good policy of the expense incurredby using the precious metals for one portion of thecurrency of the country.(172.) One of the most obvious differences betweena metallic and a paper circulation is, thatthe coin can never, by any panic or national danger,be reduced below the value of bullion in othercivilized countries ; whilst a paper currency may,from the action of such causes, totally lose its value.Both metallic and paper money, it is true, may bedepreciated, but with very different effects.1st. Depreciation of Coin. — The state may issuecoin of the same nominal value, but containing onlyhalf the original quantity of gold, mixed with somecheap alloy ; but every piece so issued bears aboutwith it internal evidence of the amount of the depreciation: it is not necessary that every successive proprietorshould analyse the new coin ; but a fewhaving done so, its intrinsic worth becomes publiclyknown. Of course the coin previously in circulationis now more valuable as bullion, and quickly disappears.All future purchases adjust themselves to thenew standard, and prices are quickly doubled; butall past contracts also are vitiated, and all persons towhom money is owing, if compelled to receive paymentin the new coin, are robbed of one-half oftheir debt, which is confiscated for the benefit of thedebtor.2d. Depreciation of Paper. — The depreciation ofpaper money follows a different course. If, by anyact of the government it is ordained to be a legaltender for debts, and, at the same time, ceases to be128 ON MONEY AS Aexchangeable for coin, those who have occasionto purchase of foreigners, who are not compelledto take the notes, will make some of their paymentsin gold ; and if the issue of paper, unchecked by thepower of demanding the gold it represents, be continued,the whole of the coin will soon disappear. Butthe public, who are obliged to take the notes, areunable, by any internal evidence, to detect the extentof their depreciation ; it varies with the amount incirculation, and may go on till the notes shall beworth little more than the paper on which they areprinted. During the whole of this time everycreditor is suffering to an extent which he cannotmeasure ; and every bargain is rendered uncertainin its advantage, by the continually changing valueof the medium through which it is conducted. Thiscalamitous course has actually been run in severalcountries : in France, it reached nearly its extremelimit during the existence of assignats. We haveourselves experienced some portion of the misery itcreates, but by a return to sounder principles, havehappily escaped the destruction and ruin which alwaysattends the completion of that career.(173.*) Every person in a civilized country requires,according to his station in life, the use of acertain quantity of money, to make the ordinarypurchases of the articles which he consumes. Thesame individual pieces of coin, it is true, circulateagain and again, in the same district : the identicalpiece of silver, received by the workman on Saturdaynight, passing through the hands of the butcher,the baker, and the small tradesman, is, perhaps,given by the latter to the manufacturer in exchangeMEDIUM OF EXCHANGE. 129for his check, and is again paid into the hands of theworkman at the end of the succeeding week. Anydeficiency in this supply of money is attended withconsiderable inconvenience to all parties. If itbe only in the smaller coins, the first effect is adifficulty in procuring small change ; then a dispositionin the shop-keepers to refuse change unlessa purchase to a certain amount be made ; and,finally, a premium in money will be given for changingthe larger denominations of coin.Thus money itself varies in price, when measuredby other money in larger masses : and thiseffect takes place whether the circulating medium ismetallic or of paper. These effects have constantlyoccurred, and particularly during the late war ; and,in order to relieve it, silver tokens for various sumswere issued by the Bank of England.The inconvenience and loss arising iron a deficiencyof small money fall with greatest weight on theclasses whose means are least ; for the wealthierbuyers can readily procure credit for their smallpurchases, until their bill amounts to one of the largercoins.(174.*) As money, when kept in a drawer, producesnothing, few people, in any situation of life,vnW keep, either in coin or in notes, more than isimmediately necessary for their use ; when, therefore,there are no profitable modes of employing money, asuperabundance of paper will return to the sourcefrom whence it issued, and an excess of coin willbe converted into bullion and exported.(175.) Since the worth of all property is measuredbv money, it is o''^viouslv cmvlucive to the130 ON MONEY AS Ageneral welfare of the community, that fluctuationsin its value should be rendered as small and asgradual as possible.The evils which result from sudden changes in thevalue of money will perhaps become more sensible,if we trace their effects in particular instances. Assuming,as we are quite at liberty to do, an extremecase, let us suppose three persons, each possessing ahundred pounds : one of these, a widow advanced inyears, and who, by the advice of her friends, purchaseswith that sum an annuity of twenty pounds a yearduring her life : and let the two others be workmen,who, by industry and economy, have each saved anhundred pounds out of their wages ; both these latterpersons proposing to procure machines for cantering,and to commence that business. One of these investslies money in a Savings' Bank ; intending to make hisown cantering machine, and calculating that heshall expend twenty pounds in materials, and theremaining eighty in supporting himself and in payingthe workmen who assist him in constructing it.The other workman, meeting with a machine whichhe can buy for two hundred pounds, agrees to payfor it a hundred pounds immediately, and the remainderat the end of a twelvemonth. Let usnow imagine some alteration to take place in thecurrency, by which it is depreciated one-half: pricessoon adjust themselves to the new circumstances,and the annuity of the widow, though nominally ofthe same amount, will, in reality, purchase only halfthe quantity of the necessaries of life which it didbefore. The workman who had placed his money inthe Savings' Bank, having perhaps purchased tenMEDIUM OF EXCHANGE. 131pounds' worth of materials, and expended ten poundsin labour applied to them, now finds himself, by thisalteration in the currency, possessed nominally ofeighty pounds, but in reality of a sum which willpurchase only half the labour and materials requiredto finish his machine ; and he can neither completeit, from want of capital, nor dispose of what he hasalready done in its unfinished state for the price it hascost him. In the mean time, the other workman, whohad incurred a debt of a hundred pounds in order tocomplete the purchase of his cantering machine,finds that the payments he receives for cantering,have, like all other prices, doubled, in consequence ofthe depreciation of the currency ; and he has therefore,in fact, obtained his machine for one mundi-ed and fiftypounds. Thus, without any fault or imprudence, andowing to circumstances over which they have nocontrol, the widow is reduced almost to starve ; oneworkman is obliged to renounce, for several years,his hope of becoming a master ; and another, withoutany superior industry or skill, but, in fact, fromhaving made, with reference to his circumstances,rather an imprudent bargain, finds himself unexpectedlyrelieved from half his debt, and the possessorof a valuable source of profit ; whilst the formerowner of the machine, if he also has invested themoney arising fi-om its sale in the Savings' Bank,finds his property suddenly reduced one-half.(176.*) These evils, to a greater or less extent, attendevery change in the value of the currency ; andthe importance of preserving it as far as possible unalteredin value, cannot be too strongly impressed uponall classes of the community132 ON THE INFLUENCE OFCHAP XV.ON THE INFLUENCE OF VERIFICATION ON PRICE.(177.) The money price of an article at any givenperiod is usually stated to depend upon the proportionbetween the supply and the demand. The averageprice of the same article during a long period, is saidto depend, ultimately, on the power of producing andselling it with the ordinary profits of capital. Butthese principles, although true in their general sense,are yet so often modified by the influence of others,that it becomes necessary to examine a little into thedisturbing forces.(178.) With respect to the first of these propositions,it may be observed, that the cost of any articleto the purchaser includes, besides the ratio of the supplyto the demand, another element, which, though often oflittle importance, is, in many cases, of great consequence.The cost, to the purchaser, is the price he paysfor any article, added to the cost of verifying the factof its having that degree of goodness for which he contracts.In some cases the goodness of the article isevident on mere inspection : and in those cases thereis not much difference of price at different shops.The goodness of loaf sugar, for instance, can bediscerned almost at a glance ; and the consequenceis, that the price is so uniform, and the profit uponit so small, that no grocer is at all anxious to sell it ;VERIFICATION ON PRICE. 133whilst, on the other hand, tea, of which it is exceedinglydifficult to judge, and which can be adulteratedby mixture so as to deceive the skill even of apractised eye, has a great variety of different prices,and is that article which every grocer is most anxiousto sell to his customers.The difficulty and expense of verification are, insome instances, so great, as to justify the deviationfrom well-established principles. Thus it is a generalmaxim that Government can purchase any article at acheaper rate than that at which they can manufactureit themselves. But it has nevertheless been consideredmore economical to build extensive flour-mills (suchare those at Hertford), and to grind their o^^^l corn, thanto verify each sack of purchased flour, and to employperson s in devising methods of detecting the new modesof adulteration which might be continually resorted to.(179.) Some years since, a mode of preparing oldclover and trefoil seeds by a process called " ''became so prevalent as to excite the attentionof the House of Commons. It appeared in evidencebefore a committee, that the old seed of the whiteclover was doctored by first wetting it slightly, andthen drying it with the fumes of burning sulphur ;and that the red clover seed had its colour improvedby shaking it in a sack with a small quantity of indigo; but this being detected after a time, the doctorsthen used a preparation of logwood, fined by a littlecopperas, and sometimes by verdigris ; thus at onceimproving the appearance of the old seed, and diminishing,if not destroying, its vegetative power alreadyenfeebled by age. Supposing no injury had resultedto good seed so prepared, it was proved that from the134 ON THE INFLUENCE OFimproved appearance, the market price would be enhancedby this process from five to twenty-fiveshillings a hundred-weight. But the greatest evilarose from the circumstance of these processes renderingold and worthless seed equal in appearance tothe best. One witness had tried some doctored seed,and found that not above one grain in a hundredgrew, and that those which did vegetate died awayafterwards; whilst about eighty or ninety per cent.of good seed usually grows. The seed so treatedwas sold to retail dealers in the country, who ofcourse endeavoured to purchase at the cheapest rate,and from them it got into the hands of the farmers ;neither of these classes being capable of distinguishingthe fraudulent from the genuine seed. Many cultivators,in consequence, diminished their consumptionof the article ; and others were obliged to pay ahigher price to those who had skill to distinguish themixed seed, and who had integrity and character toprevent them from dealing in it.(180.) In the Irish flax trade, a similar exampleof the high price paid for verification occurs. It isstated in the report of the committee — *' That thenatural excellent quality of Irish flax, as contrasted"with foreign or British, has been admitted." — Yetfrom the evidence before that committee it appearsthat Irish flax sells, in the market, from \d. to 2d.per pound less than other flax of equal or inferiorquality. Part of this difference of price arises fromnegligence in its preparation, but a part also from theexpense of ascertaining that each parcel is free fromuseless matter to add to its weight : this appearsfrom the evidence of Mr. J. Carry, who was, duringVERIFICATION ON PRICE. 135twenty-seven years, Secretary to the Irish Linen-board: —The owners of the flax, who are almost always peoplein the lower classes of life, believe that they can bestadvance their own interests by imposing on the buyers.Flax being sold by weight, various expedients are used toincrease it ; and every expedient is injurious, particularlythe damping of it ; a very common practice, which makesthe flax afterwards heat. The inside of every bundle (andthe bundles all vary in bulk) is often full of pebbles, or dirtof various kinds, to increase the weight. In this state itis purchased, and exported to Great Britain. The naturalquality of Irish flax is admitted to be not inferior to thatproduced by any foreign country ; and yet the flax of everyforeign country, imported into Great Britain, obtains a** preference among the purchasers, because the foreign flaxis brought to the British market in a cleaner and moreregular state. The extent and value of the sales offoreign flax in Great Britain can be seen by reference tothe public accounts; and I am induced to believe, thatIreland, by an adequate extension of her flax tillage, andhaving her flax markets brought under good regulations,could, without encroaching in the least degree upon thequantity necessary for her home consumption, supply thewhole of the demand of the British market, to the exclusionof the foreigners."(181.) The lace trade affords other examples;and, in inquiring into the complaints made to theHouse of Commons by the frame-work knitters, thecommittee observe, that, "It is singular that thegrievance most complained of one hundred andfifty years ago, should, in the present improvedstate of the trade, be the same grievance whichis now most complained of: for it appears, bythe evidence given before your committee, that all136 ON THE INFLUENCE OFthe witnesses attribute the decay of the trade moreto the making of fraudulent and had articles, than tothe war, or to any other cause." And it is shewnby the evidence, that a kind of lace called " single-press"was manufactured, which, although good tothe eye, became nearly spoiled in washing by theslipping of the threads ; that not one person in athousand could distinguish the difference between'^ single-press" and "double-press lace;" and that,even workmen and manufacturers were obliged toemploy a magnifying-glass for that purpose ; andthat, in another similar article, called " warp lace,"such aid was essential. It was also stated by onewitness, thatThe trade had not yet ceased, excepting in those placeswhere the fraud had been discovered ; and from thoseplaces no orders are now sent for any sort of Nottinghamlace, the credit being totally ruined."(182.) In the stocking trade similar frauds havebeen practised. It appeared in evidence, that stockingswere made of uniform width from the knee downto the ankle, and being wetted and stretched on framesat the calf, they retained their shape when dry ; butthat the purchaser could not discover the fraud until,after the first washing, the stockings hung like bagsabout his ankles.(183.) In the watch trade the practice of deceit, inforging the marks and names of respectable makers,has been carried to a great extent both by nativesand foreigners ; and the effect upon our export tradehas been most injurious, as the following extractfrom the evidence before a committee of the House ofCommons will prove : —VERIFICATION ON PRICE. 137Question. How long have you been in the trade ?Answer. Nearly thirty years.Quest. The trade is at present much depressed ?Ans. Yes, sadly.Quest. What is your opinion of the cause of thatdistress ?Ans. I think it is owing to a number of watches thathave been made so exceedingly bad that they will hardlylook at them in the foreign markets ; all with a handsomeoutside show, and the works hardly fit for any thing.Quest. Do you mean to say, that all the watches madein this country are of that description ?*' Ans. No ; only a number which are made up by someof the Jews, and other low manufacturers. I recollectsomething of the sort years ago, of a fall-off of the EastIndia work, owing to there being a number of handsomelooking watches sent out, for instance, with hands on andfigures, as if they shewed seconds, and had not any work•' regular to shew the seconds : the hand went round, but itwas not regular.Quest. They had no perfect movements ?Ans. No, they had not ; that was a long time since,and we had not any East India work for a long timeafterwards."In the home market, inferior but showy watches aremade at a cheap rate, which are not warranted bythe maker to go above half an hour ; about the timeoccupied by the Jew pedlar in deluding his countrycustomer.(184.) The practice, in retail linen-drapers' shops,of calling certain articles yard-wide when the realwidth is, perhaps, only seven-eighths or three-quarters,arose at first from fraud, which being detected, customwas pleaded in its defence : but the result is, thatthe vender is constantly obliged to measure the width138 ON THE INFLUENCE OFof his goods in the customer's presence. In allthese instances the object of the seller is to get ahigher price than his goods would really produce iftheir quality were known ; and the purchaser, if nothimself a skilful judge (which rarely happens to bethecase), must pay some person, in the shape of anadditional money price, who has skill to distinguish,and integrity to furnish, articles of the quality agreedon. But as the confidence of persons in their ownjudgment is usually great, large numbers will alwaysflock to the cheap dealer, who thus, attracting manycustomers from the honest tradesman, obliges him tocharge a higher price for his judgment and characterthan, without such competition, he could afford to do.(185.) There are few things which the public areless able to judge of than the quality of drugs ; andwhen these are compounded into medicines it isscarcely possible, even for medical men, to decidewhether pure or adulterated ingredients have beenemployed. This circumstance, concurring with thepresent injudicious mode of paying for medical assistance,has produced a curious effect on the price ofmedicines. Apothecaries, instead of being paid fortheir services and skill, are remunerated by beingallowed to place a high charge upon then medicines,which are confessedly of very small pecuniary value.The effect of such a system is an inducement toprescribe more medicine than is necessary ; and infact, even with the present charges, the apothecary,in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, cannot befairly remunerated unless the patient either takes, orpays for, more physic than he really requires. Theapparent extravagance of the charge of eighteen-penceVERIFICATION ON PRICE. 139for a two-ounce phial* of medicine, is obvious tomany who do not reflect on the fact that a great partof the charge is, in reality, pajTueht for the exerciseof professional skill. As the same charge is made bythe apothecary, whether he attends the patient ormerely prepares the prescription of a physician, thechemist and druggist soon offered to furnish the samecommodity at a greatly diminished price. But theeighteen-pence charged by the apothecary might havebeen fairly divided into two parts, three-pence formedicine and bottle, and fifteen-pence for attendance.The chemist, therefore, who never attends his customers,if he charges only a shilling for the samemedicine, realizes a profit of 200 or 300 per cent,upon its value. This enormous profit has called intoexistence a multitude of competitors ; and in thisinstance the impossibility of verifying has, in a greatmeasure, counteracted the beneficial effects of competition.The general adulteration of drugs, even atthe extremely high price at which they are retailed asmedicine, enables those who are supposed to sellthem in an unadulterated state to make large profits,whilst the same evil frequently disappoints the expectation,and defeats the skill, of the most eminentphysician.It is difficult to point out a remedy for this evilwithout suggesting an almost total change in thesystem of medical practice. If the apothecary wereto charge for his visits, and to reduce his medicinesApothecaries frequently purchase these phials at the oldbottle-warehouses at ten shillings per gross ; so that when theirservant has washed them, the cost of the phial is nearly onepenny.140 ON THE INFLUENCE OFto one-fourth or one-fifth of their present price, hewould still have an interest in procuring the best drugs,for the sake of his own reputation or skill. Or if themedical attendant, who is paid more highly for histime, were to have several pupils, he might himselfsupply the medicines without a specific charge, and hispupils would derive improvement from compoundingthem, as well as from examining the purity of thedrugs he would purchase. The public would gainseveral advantages by this arrangement. In thefirst place, it would be greatly for the interest of themedical practitioner to have the best drugs ; it wouldbe his interest also not to give more physic thanneedful ; and it would enable him, through some ofhis more advanced pupils, to watch more frequentlythe changes of any malady.(186*.) There are many articles of hardware whichit is impossible for the purchaser to verify at the timeof purchase, or even afterwards, without defacingthem. Plated harness and coach furniture may beadduced as examples : these are usually of wroughtiron covered with silver, owing their strength to theone and a certain degree of permanent beauty to theother metal. Both qualities are, occasionally, muchimpaired by substituting cast for wrought iron, andby plating with soft solder (tin and lead) instead ofwith hard solder (silver and brass). The loss ofstrength is the greatest evil in this case; for castiron, though made for this purpose more tough thanusual by careful annealing, is still much weaker thanwrought iron, and serious accidents often arise fromharness giving way. In plating with soft solder,a very thin plate of silver is made to cover theVERIFICATION ON PRICE. 141iron, but it is easily detached, particularly by a lowdegree of heat. Hard soldering gives a better coatof silver, which is very firmly attached, and is noteasily injured unless by a very high degree of heat.The inferior can be made to look nearly as well asthe better article, and the purchaser can scarcelydiscover the difference without cutting into it.(187.) The principle that price, at any moment,is dependent on the relation of the supply to the demand,is true to the full extent only when the wholesupply is in the hands of a very large number ofsmall holders, and the demand is caused by thewants of another set of persons, each of whom requiresonly a very small quantity. And the reasonappears to be, that it is only in such circumstancesthat a uniform average can be struck between thefeelings, the passions, the prejudices, the opinions,and the knowledge, of both parties. If the supply,or present stock in hand, be entirely in the possessionof one person, he will naturally endeavour to putsuch a price upon it as shall produce by its sale thegreatest quantity of money ; but he will be guidedin this estimate of the price at which he will sell, bothby the knowledge that increased price will cause adiminished consumption, and by the desire to realizehis profit before a new supply shall reach the marketfrom some other quarter. If, however, the samestock is in the hands of several dealers, there willbe an immediate competition between them, arisingpartly from their different views of the duration ofthe present state of supply, and partly from theirown peculiar circumstances with respect to the employmentof their capital.142 ON THE INFLUENCE OF(188.*) The expense of ascertaining that the pricecharged is that which is legally due is sometimesconsiderable. The inconvenience which this verificationproduces in the case of parcels sent bycoaches is very great. The time lost in recoveringan overcharge generally amounts to so many timesthe value of the sum recovered, that it is but rarelyresorted to. It seems worthy of consideration whetherit would not be a great convenience to the publicif Government were to undertake the general conveyanceof parcels in the same manner that the postis now conducted. The certainty of their delivery,and the absence of all attempt at overcharge, wouldrender the prohibition of rival carriers unnecessary.Perhaps an experiment might be made by enlargingthe weight allowed to be sent by the two-penny post,and by conveying works in sheets by the general post.This latter suggestion would be of great importanceto literature, and consequently to the circulationof knowledge. As the post office regulations existat present, it constantly happens that persons whohave an extensive reputation for science receive bypost, from foreign countries, works, or parts of works,for which they are obliged to pay a most extravagantrate of postage, or else refuse to take in some interestingcommunication. In France and Germany, printedsheets of paper are forwarded by post at a verymoderate expense, and it is fit that the science andliterature of England should be equally favoured.(189.*) It is important, if possible, always toconnect the name of the workman with the workhe has executed : this secures for him the credit orthe blame he may justly deserve ; and diminishes, inVERIFICATION ON PRICE. 143some cases, the necessity of verification. The extentto which this is carried in literary works, publishedin America, is remarkable. In the translationof the Technique Celeste, by Mr. "Bowditch, notmerely the name of the printer, but also those ofthe compositors, are mentioned in the work.(190.) Again, if the commodity itself is of aperishable nature, such, for example, as a cargo ofice imported into the port of London from Norway afew summers since, then time will supply the placeof competition ; and, whether the article is in thepossession of one or of many persons, it will scarcelyreach a monopoly price. The history of caput oilduring the last few months, offers a curious illustrationof the effect of opinion upon price. In Julyof last year (1831) caput oil was sold, exclusive ofduty, at 7d' per ounce. The disease which had ravagedthe East was then supposed to be approachingour shores, and its proximity created alarm.At this period, the oil in question began to be muchtalked of, as a powerful remedy in that dreadfuldisorder ; and in September it rose to the price of 35.and 45. the ounce. In October there were few orno sales : but in the early part of November, thespeculations in this substance reached their height,and between the 1st and the 15 th it realized the followingprices : 3s. 9c?., 5s., 6s. 6d., 7s. 6d., Ss., 9s.,10s., 10s. 6d., Us. After the loth of November, theholders of caput oil were anxious to sell at muchlower rates ; and in December a fresh arrival wasoffered by public sale at 5s., and withdrawn, beingsold afterwards, as it was understood, by private contract,at 45. or 45. 6d. per oz. Since that time, I5. dd.144 VERIFICATION ON PRICE.and Is. have been realized ; and a fresh arrival,which is daily expected, (March 1832) will probablyreduce it below the price of July. Now it is importantto notice, that in November, the time of greatestspeculation, the quantity in the market was held byfew persons, and that it frequently changed hands,each holder being desirous to realize his profit. Thequantity imported since that time has also been considerable.*(191.*) The effect of the equalization of price byan increased number of dealers, may be observed inthe price of the various securities sold at the StockExchange. The number of persons who deal in the3 per cent, stock being large, any one desirous ofselling can always dispose of his stock at one-eighthper cent, under the market price ; but those whowish to dispose of bank stock, or of any other securitiesof more limited circulation, are obliged to makea sacrifice of eight or ten times this amount uponeach hundred pounds value.(192.) The frequent speculations in oil, tallow, andother commodities, which must occur to the memoryof most of my readers, were always founded on theprinciple of purchasing up all the stock on hand, andagreeing for the purchase of the expected arrivals ;thus proving the opinion of capitalists to be, that alarger average price may be procured by the stockbeing held by few persons.I have understood that the price of camphor, at the sametime, suffered similar changes.INFLUENCE OF DURABILITY ON PRICE. 145CHAP. XVI.ON THE INFLUENCE OF DURABILITY ON PRICE.(193.) Having now considered the circumstancesthat modify what may be called the momentaryamount of price, we must next examine a principlewhich seems to have an effect on its permanent average.The durability of any commodity influences itscost in a permanent manner. We have already statedthat what may be called the momentary price of anycommodity depends upon the proportion existingbetween the supply and demand, and also upon thecost of verification. The average price during along period, will depend upon the labour required forproducing and bringing it to market, as well as uponthe average supply and demand ; but it will also beinfluenced by the durability of the article manufactured.Many things in common use are substantially consumedin using: a phosphorus match, articles of food,and a cigar, are examples of this description. Somethings after use become inapplicable to their formerpurposes, as paper which has been printed upon :but it is yet available for the cheesemonger or thetrunk-maker. Some articles, as pens, are quicklyworn out by use ; and some are still valuable aftera long continued wear. There are others, few perhapsin number, which never wear out ; the harderL146 ON THE INFLUENCE OFprecious stones, M'hen well cut and polished, areof this latter class : the fashion of the gold or silvermounting in which they are set may vary with thetaste of the age, and such ornaments are constantlyexposed for sale as second-hands but the gems themselves,when removed from their supports, are neverso considered. A brilliant which has successivelygraced the necks of a hundred beauties, or glitteredfor a century upon patrician brows, is weighed bythe diamond merchant in the same scale with anotherwhich has just escaped from the wheel of thelapidary, and will be purchased or sold by him atthe same price per carat. The great mass of commoditiesis intermediate in its character betweenthese two extremes, and the periods of respectiveduration are very various. It is evident that theaverage price of those things which are consumed inthe act of using them, can never be less than thatof the labour of bringing them to market. They mayfor a short time be sold for less, but under such circumstancestheir production must soon cease altogether.On the other hand, if an article never wearsout, its price may continue permanently below thecost of the labour expended in producing it; andthe only consequence will be, that no further productionwill take place : its price will continue to beregulated by the relation of the supply to the demand ;and should that at any after time rise, for a considerableperiod, above the cost of production, it willbe again produced.(194.) Articles become old from actual decay, orthe wearing out of their parts ; from improved modesof constructing them ; or from changes in their formDURABILITY ON PRICE. 147and fashion, required by the varying taste of the age.In the two latter cases, their utility is but littlediminished; and, being less sought after by thosewho have hitherto employed them, they are sold ata reduced price to a class of society rather below thatof their former possessors. ]\Iany articles of furniture,such as well-made tables and chairs, are thusfound in the rooms of those who would have beenquite unable to have purchased them when new ; andwe find constantly, even in the houses of the moreopulent, large looking-glasses which have passedsuccessively through the hands of several possessors,changing only the fashion of their frames ; and insome instances even this alteration is omitted, anadditional coat of gilding saving them from thecharacter of being second-hand. Thus a taste forluxuries is propagated downwards in society ; and,after a short period, the numbers who have acquirednew wants become sufficient to excite the ingenuityof the manufacturer to reduce the cost of supplyingthem, whilst he is himself benefited by the extendedscale of demand.(195.) There is a peculiarity in looking-glasseswith reference to the principle just mentioned. Themost frequent occasion of injury to them arises fromaccidental violence ; and the peculiarity is, that,unlike most other articles, when broken they are stillof some value. If a large mirror is accidentallycracked, it is immediately cut into two or moresmaller ones, each of which may be perfect. If thedegree of violence is so great as to break it into manyfragments, these smaller pieces may be cut intosquares for dressing-glasses ; and if the silvering is148 ON THE INFLUENCE OFinjured, it can either be re-silvered or used as plate-glassfor glazing windows. The addition from ourmanufactories to the stock of plate-glass in thecountry is annually about two hundred and fiftythousand square feet. It would be very difficult toestimate the quantity annually destroyed or exported,but it is probably small ; and the effect of thesecontinual additions is seen in the diminished priceand increased consumption of the article. Almostall the better order of shop fronts are now glazedwith it. If it were quite indestructible, the pricewould continually diminish ; and unless an increaseddemand arose from new uses, or from a greater numberof customers, a single manufactory, uncheckedby competition, would ultimately be compelled toshut up, driven out of the market by the permanenceof its own productions.(196.*) The metals are in some degree permanent,although several of them are employed in such formsthat they are ultimately lost.Copper is a metal of which a great proportion returnsto use : a portion of that employed in sheathingships and covering houses is lost from corrosion ; butthe rest is generally re-melted. Some is lost in smallbrass articles, and some is consumed in the formationof salts, Roman vitriol (sulphate of copper), verdigris(acetate of copper), and verditer.Gold is wasted in gilding and in embroidering ;but a portion of this is recovered by burning the oldarticles. Some portion is lost by the wear of gold,but, upon the whole, it possesses considerable permanence.Iron. — A proportion of this metal is wasted byDURABILITY ON PRICE. 149oxidation, in small nails, in fine wire, by the wearof tools, by the tire of wheels, and by the formationof some dyes : but much, both of cast and of wroughtIron, returns to use.Lead is wasted in great quantities. Some portionof that which is used in pipes and in sheetsfor covering roofs returns to the melting-pot ; butlarge quantities are consumed in the form of smallshot, or sometimes in that of musket-balls, litharge,and red-lead, for white and red paints, for glass-making,for glazing pottery, and for sugar of lead(acetate of lead).Silver is rather a permanent metal. Some portionis consumed in the wear of coin, in that of silverplate, and a portion in silvering and embroidering.Tin. — The chief waste of this metal arises fromtinned iron ; some is lost in solder and in solutionsfor the dyers.OF PRICECHAP. XVII.OF PRICE AS MEASURED BY MONEY.(197.) The money price at which an article sellsfurnishes us with comparatively little informationrespecting its value, if we compare distant intervalsof time and different countries ; for gold and silver,in which price is usually measured, are themselvessubject, like all other commodities, to changes invalue ; nor is there any standard to which these variationscan be referred. The average price of a certainquality of different manufactured articles, or of rawproduce, has been suggested as a standard ; but anew difficulty then presents itself; for the improvedmethods of producing such articles render theirmoney price extremely variable within very limitedperiods. The annexed table will afford a strikinginstance of this kind of change within a period ofonly twelve years.Prices of the following Articles at Birmingham, in theundei'mentioned Years.Description.Anvils cwt.Awls, polished, Liverpool grossBed-screws, 6 inches long grossBits, tinned, for bridles . doz.Bolts for doors, 6 inches doz.Braces for carpenters, )with 12 bits ] ^^^Buttons, for coats gross1818.1824.1828.1830.5. d.s. d.5.d.s. d.2 61 22 61 63 54 66 32 2AS MEASURED BY MONEY.Prices of the following Articles at Birmingham, in theundermentioned Years — continued.Description.Buttons, small, for waist >coats, &c >Candlesticks, 6 in., brassCurry-combs, six barredFrying-pansGun-locks, single roleher )Hammers, shoe. No. O .Hinges, cast-butts, 1 inchKnobs, brass, 2 inches )for commodes )Latches for doors, bright )thumb fLocks for doors, iron )rim, G inches fSad-irons & other cast >kings fShovel & tongs, fire-irons,Spoons, tinned tableStirrups, platedTrace-chainsTrays, japanned tea, 30 >inches fVices for blacksmiths, &c.Wire, brassiron, No. 6grosspairdoz.teachdoz.doz.doz.1818.s. d.2 62 112 96 91824.doz. 2 3doz.cwt.pairgrosspairteachcwt.lb.bund;J822 G17 64 G4 61 10s. d.2 G5 23 97i3 62 23 91 41828.s. d.1 21 71 51 103|1 61 619 61830.1 21 62 92|1 213 611 61 519 6(198.) I have taken some pains to assure myselfof the accuracy of the above table : at different periodsof the years quoted the prices may have varied ; butI believe it may be considered as a fair approximation.In the course of my inquiries I have beenfavoured with another list, in which many of thesame articles occur; but in this last instance theprices quoted are separated by an interval of twentyyears. It is extracted from the books of a highlyOF PRICErespectable house at Birmingham ; and the pricesconfirm the accuracy of the former table, so far asthey relate to the articles which are found in that list.Prices 0/1812 and 1832.Description.1812.1832.Reductionpercent. inprice of1812.Anvils cwt. •Awls, Liverpool blades . . . grossCandlesticks, iron, plain . .screwed . .Bed screws, 6 inch ?square head . . . . > * * °flat head . . grossCurry-combs, 6 barred . . dozen8 barred . . dozenpatent, 6) ,barred. J ' ^°^^"8 barred . . . dozenFire-irons, iron head, No. 1. . . .No. 2. . . .No. 3. . . .No.4. . . .Gun-locks, single roller . . . eachLocks, 1^ brass, port. pad. . .2^ inch 3 keyed till-locks,eachShoe tacks grossSpoons, tinned, iron table . grossStirrups, com. tinned, ) ,2 bar f • ^°^^"Trace-chains, iron cwt. .s. a.3 63 loft4^7 68 64 OA5 5i7 1^8 ^1 411 61 811 10146 n4 64 81 51 51 107fSiHlOA1 112 62 9(199.) I cannot omit availing myself of this opportunityof calling the attention of the manufacturers,merchants, and factors, in all our manufacturing andcommercial towns, to the great importance, both fortheir own interests, and for that of the populationto which their capital gives employment, of collectingAS MEASURED BY MONEY. 153with care such averages from the actual sales registeredin their books. Nor, perhaps, would it bewithout its use to suggest, that such averages wouldbe still more valuable if collected from as manydifferent quarters as possible ; that the quantityof the goods from which they are deduced, togetherwith the greatest deviations from the mean, ought tobe given ; and that if a small committee were toundertake the task, it would give great additionalweight to the information. Political economists havebeen reproached with too small a use of facts, andtoo large an employment of theory. If facts arewanting, let it be remembered that the closet-philosopheris unfortunately too little acquainted with theadmirable arrangements of the factory ; and that noclass of persons can supply so readily, and withso little sacrifice of time, the data on which all thereasonings of political economists are founded, as themerchant and manufacturer ; and, unquestionably, tono class are the deductions to which they give riseso important. Nor let it be feared that erroneousdeductions may be made from such recorded facts :the errors which arise from the absence of facts arefar more numerous and more durable than those whichresult from unsound reasoning respecting true data.(200.) The great diminution in price of the articleshere enumerated may have arisen from several causes :1. The alteration in the value of the currency. 2. Theincreased value of gold in consequence of the increaseddemand for coin. The first of these causesmay have had some influence ; and the second mayhave had a very small effect upon the two first quotationsof prices, but none at all upon the two latterOF PRICEones. 3. The diminished rate of profit produced bycapital however employed. This may be estimated bythe average price of three per cents, at the periodsstated. 4. The diminished price of the raw materialsout of which these articles were manufactured. Theraw material is principally brass and iron, and thereduction upon it may, in some measure, be estimatedby the diminished price of iron and brass wire,in the cost of which articles, the labour bears a lessproportion than it does in many of the others. 5. Thesmaller quantity of raw material employed, andperhaps^in some instances, an inferior quality of workmanship,6. The improved means hy which the same effect wasproduced hy diminished labour.(201.) In order to afford the means of estimatingthe influence of these several causes, the followingtable is subjoined :Average Price of1812.1818.1824.1828.1830.1832.Gold, per ozs.d4 15 6s. d.s. d.3 17 6is. d3 17 ;s. rt.3 17 9is. d.3 17 lOiValue of currency,)per cent i79 5 397 6 10Price of 3 per cent 7consols I78i93i39|miWheat per quarter .6 54 13 2 13 11 103 14 62 19 3English pig-iron, at >Birmingham . . \7 106 76 105 104 10• •English bar-iron, do.1 109 107 15Swedish bar-iron, in vLondon, excludesing duty of from4/. to 6L. \Qs. perton 'IG 1017 10U14 10 n13 1513 2As this table, if unaccompanied by any explanation,might possibly lead to erroneous conclusions,I subjoin the following observations, for whichAS MEASURED BY MONEY. 155I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Tooke, whomay yet, I hope, be induced to continue his valuablework on Prices, through the important period whichhas elapsed since its publication."The table commences with 1812, and exhibits agreat falling off in the price of wheat and iron coincidentlywith a fall in the price of gold, and leadingto the inference of cause and effect. Now, as regardswheat, it so happened that in 1812 it reached itshighest price in consequence of a series of badharvests, when relief by importation was difficult andenormously expensive. In December, 1813, whilstthe price of gold had risen to 5/., the price of wheathad fallen to 73^., or 50 per cent, under what it hadbeen in the spring of 1812 ; proving clearly that thetwo articles were under the influence of oppositecauses."Again, in 1812, the freight and insurance onSwedish iron were so much higher than at presentas to account for nearly the whole of the difference ofprice : and in 1818 there had been an extensivespeculation which had raised the price of all iron, sothat a part of the subsequent decline was a merereaction from a previously unfounded elevation.More recently, in 1825, there was a great speculativerise in the article, which served as a strongstimulus to increased production : this, aided byimproved power of machinery, has proceeded to suchan extent as fully to account for the fall of price."To these reflections I will only add, that the resultof my own observation leads me to believe that byfar the most influential of these causes has been theinvention of cheaper modes of manufacturing. TheOF PRICEextent to which this can be carried, while a profit canyet be realized at the reduced price, is truly astonishing,as the following fact, which rests on good authority,will prove. Twenty years since, a brass knobfor the locks of doors was made at Birmingham ; theprice, at that time, being 135. 4:d. per dozen. Thesame article is now manufactured ^ having the sameweight of metal, and an equal, or in fact a slightlysuperior finish, at I5. 9^d. per dozen. One circumstancewhich has produced this economy in themanufacture is, that the lathe on which these knobsare finished is now turned by a steam-engine ; sothat the workman, relieved from that labour, canmake them twenty times as fast as he did formerly.(202.) The difference of price of the same article,when of various dimensions — at different periods inthe same country — and in different countries — iscuriously contrasted in the annexed Table.Comparative Price of Plate Glass, at the Manufactories ofLondon, Paris, aid Berlin.2LONDON.PARISBERLIN.1771.1794.1832.1825.1828.Inches.Inchess. d.s. d.s. d.s.ds, d.10 310 117 68 111 14 62 3 22 6 101 161 10 624 2 411 56 12 109 48 1367 14 1013 9 622 721 1843 619 2 936 4^5 2 1184 834 12 971 374 5 10210 1397 15 9354 3AS MEASURED BY MONEY.15:The price of silvering these plates is twenty per centonthe cost price for English glass ; ten per cent, onthe cost price for Paris plates ; and twelve and a halfon those of Berlin.The following table shews the dimensions andprice, when silvered, of the largest plates of glassever made by the British Plate-glass Company,which are now at their warehouse in London :Height.Breadth.Price when silvered.J„cl,es.Inches.s. d.200 8220 7239 1 6239 10 7246 15 4The largest glass in the Paris list whensilvered, and its dimensions and price reducedto English measure, is,80 1 629 12(203.) If we wish to compare the value of anyarticle at different periods of time, it is clear thatneither any one substance, nor even the combinationof all manufactured goods, can furnish us with aninvariable unit by which to form our scale of estimation.Mr. Malthus has proposed for this purpose toconsider a day's labour of an agricultural labourer,as the unit to which all value should be referred.Thus, if Ave wish to compare the value of twenty yardsof broad cloth in Saxony at the present time, withthat of the same kind and quantity of cloth fabricatedin England two centuries ago, we must find the158 OF PRICEnumber of days' labour the cloth would have purchasedin England at the time mentioned, and compare itwith the number of days' labour which the samequantity of cloth will now purchase in Saxony.Agricultural labour appears to have been selected,because it exists in all countries, and employs a largenumber of persons, and also because it requires avery small degree of previous instruction. It seems,in fact, to be merely the exertion of a man's physicalforce ; and its value above that of a machine of equalpower arises from its portability, and from the facilityof directing its efforts to arbitrary and continuallyfluctuating purposes. It may perhaps be worthy ofinquiry, whether a more constant average might notbe deduced from combining with this species oflabour those trades which require but a moderateexertion of skill, and which likewise exist in allcivilized countries, such as those of the blacksmithand carpenter, &c.* In all such comparisons thereis, however, another element, which, though notessentially necessary, will yet add much to our meansof judging. It is an estimate of the quantity of thatfood on which the labourer usually subsists, which isnecessary for his daily support, compared with thequantity which his daily wages will purchase.(204.) The existence of a class of middle-men,between small producers and merchants, is frequentlyadvantageous to both parties ; and there are certainperiods in the history of several manufactures whichMuch information for such an inquiry is to be found, forthe particular period to which it refers, in the Report of theCommittee of the House of Commons 07i Manufacturers' Employment,2d July, 1830.AS MEASURED BY MONEY. 159naturally call that class of traders into existence.There are also times when the advantage ceasing, thecustom of employing them also terminates ; themiddle-men, especially when numerous, as they sometimesare in retail trades, enhancing the price withoutequivalent good. Thus, in the recent examinationby the House of Commons into the state of the CoalTrade, it appears that five-sixths of the Londonpublic is supplied by a class of middle-men who arecalled in the trade " Brass-plate Coal Merchants :"these consist principally of merchants' clerks, gentlemen'sservants, and others, who have no wharfs oftheir own, but merely give their orders to some truecoal-merchant, who sends in the coals from hiswharf : the brass-plate coal-merchant, of course, receivinga commission for his agency.(205.*) In Italy this system is carried to a greatextent amongst the voituriers, or persons who undertaketo convey travellers. There are some possessedof greater fluency and a more persuasive manner, whofrequent the inns where the English resort, and who,as soon as they have made a bargain for the conveyanceof a traveller, go out amongst their countrymenand procure some other voiturier to do the job for aconsiderably smaller sum, themselves pocketing thedifference. A few days before the time of starting,the contractor appears before his customer in great distress,regretting his inability to perform the journeyon account of the dangerous illness of a mother or somerelative, and requesting to have his cousin or brothersubstituted for him. The English traveller rarelyfails to acquiesce in this change, and often praisesthe filial piety of the rogue who has deceived him.160 OF RAW MATERIALS.CHAP. XVIII.OF RAW MATERIALS.(206.) Although the cost of any article may bereduced in its ultimate analysis to the quantity oflabour by which it was produced ; yet it is usual, in acertain state of the manufacture of most substances,to call them by the term raw material. Thus iron,when reduced from the ore and rendered malleable,is in a state fitted for application to a multitude ofuseful purposes, and is the raw material out of whichmost of our tools are made. In this stage of itsmanufacture, but a moderate quantity of labour hasbeen expended on the substance ; and it becomes aninteresting subject to trace the various proportions inwhich raw material, in this sense of the term, andlabour unite to constitute the value of many of theproductions of the arts.(207.) Gold-leaf consists of a portion of the metalbeaten out to so great a degree cf thinness, as toallow a greenish-blue light to be transmitted throughits pores. About 400 square inches of this are sold,in the form of a small book containing 25 leaves ofgold, for l5. 6d. In this case, the raw material, orgold, is worth rather less than two-thirds of themanufactured article. In the case of silver leaf, thelabour considerably exceeds the value of the material.A book of fifty leaves, which would cover above1,000 square inches, is sold for Is. 3d,OF RAW MATERIALS.(208.) We may trace the relative influence of thetwo causes above referred to, in the prices of fine goldchains made at Venice. The sizes of these chains areknown by numbers, the smallest having been (in 1828)No. 1, and the numbers 2, 3, 4, &c. progressivelyincreasing in size. The following Table shews thenumbers and the prices of those made at that time.*The first column gives the number by which thechain is known ; the second expresses the weight ingrains of one inch in length of each chain ; the thirdcolumn the number of links in the same length ; andthe last expresses the price, in francs worth sentenceeach, of a Venetian brachia, or about twoEnglish feet of each chain.VENETIANGOLD CHAINS.No. 1Weight ofOne Inch, in Grains.Number of Linksin One Inch.Price of a VenetianBrachia, etjual toTwo Feet |^ InchEnglish..4498 to 10060 francs.M1-1.77.991.4620 11.612.092.613.365G3.653.725.3-59.71IA still finer chain is now manufactured (1832).1\I162 OF RAW MATERIALS.Amongst these chains, that numbered and thatnumbered 24 are exactly of the same price, althoughthe quantity of gold in the latter is twenty-twotimes as much as in the former. The difficultyof making the smallest chain is so great, that thewomen who make it cannot work above two hoursat a time. As we advance from the smaller chain,the proportionate value of the work to the worthof the material becomes less and less, until at thenumbers 2 and 3, these two elements of cost balanceeach other : after which, the difficulty of the workdecreases, and the value of the material increases.(209.) The quantity of labour expended on thesechains is, however, incomparably less than that whichis applied in some of the manufactures of iron. Inthe case of the smallest Venetian chain the value ofthe labour is not above thirty times that of the gold.The pendulum spring of a watch, which governs thevibrations of the balance, costs at the retail pricetwo-pence, and weighs fifteen one-hundredths of agrain, whilst the retail price of a pound of the bestiron, the raw material out of which fifty thousandsuch springs are made, is exactly the same sum oftwo pence.(210.) The comparative price of labour and of rawmaterial entering into the manufactures of France,has been ascertained with so much care, in a memoirof M. A. M. Heron de Villefosse, " Recherches statistics,sur les Metaux de France'* that we shallgive an abstract of his results reduced to Englishmeasures. The facts respecting the metals relate tothe year 1825.Memoires de rinstitut,1826.OF RAW MATERIALS. 163In France the quantity of raw material which canbe purchased for 11. , when manufactured intoSilk goods is worth £2-37Broad cloth and woollens 2'15Hemp and cables ^ . . 3.94Linen comprising thread laces 5-00Cotton goods 2-44The price of Pig-Lead was 1/. Is. per cwt. ; andlead of the value of 11. sterling, became worth, whenmanufactured intoSheets or pipes of moderate dimensions £1*25White lead 2*60Ordinary printing characters 4-99The smallest type 28*30The price of Copper was 51. 2s. per cwt. Copperworth 11. became when manufactured intoCopper sheeting £1-26Household utensils 4-77Common brass pins tinned 2*34Rolled into plates covered with-^-q silver. . . . 3-56Woven into metallic cloth, each square inch ofwhich contains 10,000 meshes 52*23The price of Tin was 4/. 1 25. per cwt Tin worthIZ. when manufactured intoLeaves for silvering glass became ^1*73Household utensils 1«85Quicksilver cost 101. 16s. per cwt. Quicksilverworth IZ. when manufactured intoVermilion of average quality . . » became £l'sM 2164 OF RAW MATERIALS.Metallic Arsenic cost \l. As. per cwt. Arsenicworth 1/. when manufactured intoWhite oxide of arsenic became d^l'83Sulphuret (orpiment) 4-26The price of Cast-iron was 85. per cwt. Cast-ironworth 1/. when manufactured intoHousehold utensils became jg2-00Machinery 4-00Ornamental, as buckles, &c 45*00Bracelets, figures, buttons, &c 147*00Bar-iron cost ll. Gs. per cwt. Bar Iron worth 1/.when manufactured intoAgricultural instruments became £^.b7Barrels, musket 9*10Barrels of double-barrel guns, twisted anddamasked 238*08Blades of penknives 657*14razor, cast steel 53*57sabre, for cavalry, infantry, and artillery,&c from 9*25. to 16*07of table knives 35*70Buckles of polished steel, used as jewellery. . . 896*66Clothiers' pins 8*03Door-latches and bolts from 4*85 to 8*50Files, common 2*55flat, cast steel 20*44Horse-shoes 2*55Iron, small slit, for nails 1*10Metallic cloth, iron ware, No. 80 96*71Needles of various sizes from 17*33 to 70*85Reeds for weaving 3-4ths calico 21 *87Saws (frame) of steel 5*12for wood , 14*28OF RAW MATERIALS. 165Scissors, finest kind £446*94Steel, cast 4-28cast, in sheets G-2.5cemented 2'41natural 1'42Sword-handles, polished steel 972.82Tinned iron ,from 2*04 to 2*34Wire, iron from 2-14 to 10'71(211.) The following is stated by M. de Villefosseto be the price of bar iron at the forges of variouscountries, in January, 1825.per tons.d.France 2(3 10Belgium and Germany IG 14Sweden and Russia, at Stockholm andSt. Petersburg 13 13England, at Cardiff. 10 1The price of the article in 1832 was 5M. De Villefosse states, that in France bar iron,made as it usually is with charcoal, costs three timesthe price of the cast iron out of which it is made ;whilst in England, where it is usually made withcoke, the cost is only twice the price of cast iron.(212.) The present price (1832) of lead in Englandis ISl. per ton, and the worth of 1^. of it manufacturedintoMilled sheet lead becomes J'1-08The present price of cake copper is 84/. per ton,and the worth of 11. of it manufactured intoSheet copper becomes £1'11166 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR,CHAP. XIX.ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.(213.) Perhaps the most important principle onwhich the economy of a manufacture depends, is thedivision of labour amongst the persons who performthe work. The first application of this principlemust have been made in a very early stage of society ;for it must soon have been apparent, that a largernumber of comforts and conveniences could be acquiredby each individual, if one man restricted hisoccupation to the art of making bows, another to thatof building houses, a third boats, and so on. Thisdivision of labour into trades was not, however, theresult of an opinion that the general riches of thecommunity would be increased by such an arrangement; but it must have arisen from the circumstanceof each individual so employed discovering that shehimself could thus make a greater profit of his labourthan by pursuing more varied occupations. Societymust have made considerable advances before thisprinciple could have been carried into the workshop ;for it is only in countries which have attained a highdegree of civilization, and in articles in which thereis a great competition amongst the producers, thatthe most perfect system of the division of labour is tobe observed. The various principles on which theadvantages of this system depend, have been muchON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 167the subject of discussion amongst writers on PoliticalEconomy ; but the relative importance of their influencedoes not appear, in all cases, to have beenestimated with sufficient precision. It is my intention,in the first instance, to state shortly those principles,and then to point out what appears to me to havebeen omitted by those who have previously treatedthe subject.(214.) 1. Of the time required for learning. — Itwill readily be admitted, that the portion of timeoccupied in the acquisition of any art will depend onthe difficulty of its execution ; and that the greaterthe number of distinct processes, the longer will bethetime which the apprentice must employ in acquiringit. Five or seven years have been adopted,in a great many trades, as the time considered requisitefor a lad to acquire a sufficient knowledge of hisart, and to enable him to repay by his labour, duringthe latter portion of his time, the expense incurred byhis master at its commencement. If, however, insteadof learning all the different processes for makinga needle, for instance, his attention be confined toone operation, the portion of time consumed unprofitablyat the commencement of his apprenticeshipwill be small, and all the rest of it will be beneficialto his master : and, consequently, if there be anycompetition amongst the masters, the apprentice willbe able to make better terms, and diminish the periodof his servitude. Again, the facility of acquiring skillin a single process, and the early period of life atwhich it can be made a source of profit, will inducea greater number of parents to bring up their childrento it ; and from this circumstance also, the number168 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.of workmen being increased, the wages will soonfall.(215.) 2. Of waste of materials in learning, — certainquantity of material will, in all cases, be consumedunprofitably, or spoiled by every person wholearns an art ; and as he applies himself to each newprocess, he will waste some of the raw material, or ofthe partly manufactured commodity. But if eachman commit this waste in acquiring successivelyevery process, the quantity of waste will be muchgreater than if each person confine his attention toone process; in this view of the subject, therefore,the division of labour will diminish the price ofproduction.(216.) 3. Another advantage resulting from thedivision of labour is, the saving of that portionof time which is always lost in changing from oneoccupation to another. When the human hand, orthe human head, has been for some time occupiedin any kind of work, it cannot instantly change itsemployment with full effect. The muscles of thelimbs employed have acquired a flexibility duringtheir exertion, and those not in action a stiffnessduring rest, which renders every change slow andunequal in the commencement. Long habit alsoproduces in the muscles exercised a capacity forenduring fatigue to a much greater degree than theycould support under other circumstances. A similarresult seems to take place in any change of mentalexertion ; the attention bestowed on the new subjectnot being so perfect at first as it becomes after someexercise.(217.) 4. Change of Tools. — The employment ofON THE DIVISION OF Labour. 169different tools in the successive processes is anothercause of the loss of time in changing from one operationto another. If these tools are simple, and thechange is not frequent, the loss of time is not considerable; but in many processes of the arts the toolsare of great delicacy, requiring accurate adjustmentevery time they are used ; and in many cases thetime employed in adjusting bears a large proportionto that employed in using the tool. The sliding-rest,the dividing and the drilling-engine, are of thiskind ; and hence, in manufactories of sufficientextent, it is found to be good economy to keep onemachine constantly employed in one kind of work :one lathe, for example, having a screw motion to itssliding-rest along the whole length of its bed, is keptconstantly making cylinders ; another, having a motionfor equalizing the velocity of the work at thepoint at which it passes the tool, is kept for facingsurfaces ; whilst a third is constantly employed incutting wheels.(218.) 5. Skill acquired hy frequent repetition ofthe same processes. — The constant repetition of thesame process necessarily produces in the workmana degree of excellence and rapidity in his particulardepartment, which is never possessed by a personwho is obliged to execute many different processes.This rapidity is still further increased from the circumstancethat most of the operations in factories,where the division of labour is carried to a considerableextent, are paid for as piece-work. It isdifficult to estimate in numbers the effect of thiscause upon production. In nail-making, Adam Smithhas stated, that it is almost three to one ; for, he170 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.observes, that a smith accustomed to make nails, hutwhose whole business has not been that of a nailer,can make only from eight hundred to a thousand perday ; whilst a lad who had never exercised any othertrade, can make upwards of two thousand threehundred a day.(219.) In different trades, the economy of productionarising from the last-mentioned cause will necessarilybe different. The case of nail-making is,perhaps, rather an extreme one. It must, however,be observed, that, in one sense, this is not a permanentsource of advantage ; for, though it acts at thecommencement of an establishment, yet every monthadds to the skill of the workmen ; and at the end ofthree or four years they will not be very far behindthose who have never practised any other branch oftheir art. Upon an occasion when a large issue ofbank-notes was required, a clerk at the Bank ofEngland signed his name, consisting of seven letters,including the initial of his Christian name, five thousandthree hundred times during eleven workinghours, besides arranging the notes he had signed inparcels of fifty each.(220.) 6. The division of labour suggests the contrivanceof tools and machinery to execute its processes.— M'^hen each process, by which any article isproduced, is the sole occupation of one individual,his whole attention being devoted to a very limitedand simple operation, improvements in the form ofhis tools, or in the mode of using them, are muchmore likely to occur to his mind, than if it were distractedby a greater variety of circumstances. Suchan improvement in the tool is generally the first stepON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 17 1towards a machine. If a piece of metal is to be cutin a lathe, for example, there is one particular angleat which the cutting-tool must be held to insure thecleanest cut ; and it is quite natural that the idea offixing the tool at that angle should present itself toan intelligent workman. The necessity of movingthe tool slowly, and in a direction parallel to itself,would suggest the use of a screw, and thus arisesthe sliding-rest. It was probably the idea of mountinga chisel in a frame, to prevent its cutting toodeeply, which gave rise to the common carpenter'splane. In cases where a blow from a hammer isemployed, experience teaches the proper force required.The transition from the hammer held inthe hand to one mounted upon an axis, and liftedregularly to a certain height by some mechanicalcontrivance, requires perhaps a greater degree of inventionthan those just instanced ; yet it is notdifficult to perceive, that, if the hammer always fallsfrom the same height, its effect must be always thesame.(221.) When each process has been reduced to theuse of some simple tool, the union of all these tools,actuated by one moving power, constitutes a machine.In contriving tools and simplifying processes, theoperative workmen are, perhaps, most successful ;but it requires far other habits to combine into onemachine these scattered arts. A previous educationas a workman in the peculiar trade, is undoubtedlya valuable preliminary ; but in order to make suchcombinations with any reasonable expectation of success,an extensive knowledge of machinery, and thepower of making mechanical drawings, are essentially172 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.requisite. These accomplishments are now muchmore common than they were formerly ; and theirabsence was, perhaps, one of the causes of the multitudeof failures in the early history of many of ourmanufactures.(222.) Such are the principles usually assigned asthe causes of the advantage resulting from the divisionof labour. As in the view I have taken of thequestion, the most important and influential causehas been altogether unnoticed, I shall re-state thoseprinciples in the words of Adam Smith : " The great*' increase in the quantity of work, which, in consequenceof the division of labour, the same numberof people are capable of performing, is owing tothree different circumstances : first, to the increaseof dexterity in every particular workman ; secondly,to the saving of time, which is commonly lost inpassing from one species of work to another; and,lastly, to the invention of a great number of machineswhich facilitate and abridge labour, andenable one man to do the work of many." Now,although all these are important causes, and eachhas its influence on the result ; yet it appears tome,that any explanation of the cheapness of manufacturedarticles, as consequent upon the divisionof labour, would be incomplete if the following principlewere omitted to be stated.That the master manufacturer hy dividing the workto he executed into different processes, each requiringdifferent degrees of skill or of force , can purchaseexactly that precise quantity of both which is necessaryfor each process; whereas, if the whole work wereexecuted hy one workman, that person must possessox THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 173sufficient skill to perform the most difficult, and sufficientstrength to execute the most laborious, of theoperations into which the art is divided.*(223.) As the clear apprehension of this principle,upon Which a great part of the economy arising fromthe division of labour depends, is of considerableimportance, it may be desirable to point out itsprecise and numerical application in some specificmanufacture. The art of making needles is, perhaps,that which I should have selected for this illustration,as comprehending a very large number of processesremarkably different in their nature ; but theless difficult art of pin-making, has some claim toattention, from its having been used by Adam Smith ;and I am confirmed in the choice of it, by the circumstanceof our possessing a very accurate andminute description of that art, as practised in Franceabove half a century ago.(224.) Pin-making. — In the manufacture of pinsin England the following processes are employed : —1. Wire-drawing. — (a.) The brass wire used formaking pins is purchased by the manufacturer incoils of about twenty-two inches in diameter, eachweighing about thirty-six pounds, (h.) The coilsare wound off into smaller ones of about six inchesin diameter, and between one and two pounds' weight,(c.) The diameter of this wire is now reduced, byI have already stated that this principle presented itselfto me after a personal examination of a number or' manufactoriesand workshops devoted to different purposes; but I havesince found that it had been distinct pointed out, in the workof Gioja, Nuovo Prospect delle Science Ecojiomiche , 6 tom. to.Milan, 1815, tom, i. capo iv.174 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.drawing it repeatedly through holes in steel plates,until it becomes of the size required for the sort ofpins intended to be made. During this processthe wire is hardened, and in order to prevent itsbreaking, it must be annealed two or three times,according to the diminution of diameter required.(d.) The coils are then soaked in sulphuric acid,largely diluted with water, in order to clean them,and are then beaten on stone, for the purpose ofremoving any oxidized coating which may adhere tothem. These operations are usually performed bymen, who draw and clean from thirty to thirty-sixpounds of wire a day. They are paid at the rateof five farthings per pound, and generally earn about35. 6d. per day.M. Personne made some experiments on theextension the wire undergoes in passing througheach hole : he took a piece of thick Swedish brasswire, and foundFeet In.Its length to be before drawing 3 8After passing the first hole 5 5second hole 7 2third hole 7 8It was now annealed, and the length becameAfter passing the fourth hole 10 8fifth hole 13 1sixth hole 16 8And finally, after passing through six otherholes , 144The holes through which the wire was drawn werenot, in this experiment, of regularly decreasingdiameter: it is extremely difficult to make suchQN THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 175holes, and still more to preserve them in their originaldimensions.(225.) 2. Straightening the Wire. — The coil of %virenow passes into the hands of a woman, assisted by aboy or girl. A few nails, or iron pins, not quite in aline, are fixed into one end of a wooden table abouttwenty feet in length ; the end of the wire is passedalternately between these nails, and is then pulled tothe other end of the table. The object of this processis to straighten the wire, which had acquired aconsiderable curvature in the small coils in which ithad been wound. The length thus straightened iscut off, and the remainder of the coil is drawn intosimilar lengths. About seven nails or pins are employedin straightening the wire, and their adjustmentis a matter of some nicety. It seems, that bypassing the wire between the first three nails or pins,a bend is produced in an opposite direction to thatwhich the wire had in the coil ; this bend, by passingthe next two nails, is reduced to another less curvedin the first direction, and so on till the curve ofthe wire may at last be confounded with a straightline.(226.) 3. Pointing. — {a.) A man next takes aboutthree hundred of these straightened pieces in a parcel,and putting them into a gauge, cuts ofi* fi-om one end,by means of a pair of shears, moved by his foot, aportion equal in length to rather more than six pins.He continues this operation until the entire parcel isreduced into similar pieces, (h.) The next step isto sharpen the ends : for this purpose the operatorsits before a steel mill, which is kept rapidly revolving: it consist of a cylinder about six inches in176 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR,diameter, and two and a half inches broad, faced withsteel, which is cut in the manner of a file. Anothercylinder is fixed on the same axis at a few inchesdistant ; the file on the edge of which is of a finerkind, and is used for finishing off the points. Theworkman now takes up a parcel of the Meres betweenthe finger and thumb of each hand, and presses theends obliquely on the mill, taking care with lies fingersand thumbs to make each wire slowly revolve uponits axis. Having thus pointed all the pieces at oneend, he reverses them, and performs the same operationon the other. This process requires considerableskill, but it is not unhealthy ; whilst the similarprocess in needle-making is remarkably destructiveof health, (c.) The pieces now pointed at both ends,are next placed in gauges, and the pointed ends arecut ofi*, by means of shears, to the proper length ofwhich the pins are to be made. The remainingportions of the wire are now equal to about four pinsin length, and are again pointed at each end, andtheir lengths again cut off. This process is repeateda third time, and the small portion of wire left in themiddle is thrown amongst the waste, to be meltedalong with the dust arising from the sharpening. Itis usual for a man, his wife, and a child, to join inperforming these processes ; and they are paid at therate of five farthings per pound. They can pointfrom thirty-four to thirty-six and a half pounds perday, and gain from 6s. 6d. to 75. , which may beapportioned thus ; 55. 6d. the man, Is. the woman,6d. to the boy or girl.(227.) 4. Twisting and Cutting the Heads. — Thenext process is making the heads. For this purposeON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 1/7(a.) a boy takes a piece of wire, of the same diameteras the pin to be headed, which he fixes on an axisthat can be made to revolve rapidly by means of awheel and strap connected with it. This wire is calledthe mould. He then takes a smaller wire, whichhaving passed through an eye in a small tool held inhis left hand, he fixes close to the bottom of themould. The mould is now made to revolve rapidlyby means of the right hand, and the smaller-wire coilsround it until it has covered the whole length of themould. The boy now cuts the end of the spiral connectedwith the foot of the mould, and draws it off.(b.) Ashen a sufficient quantity of heading is thusmade, a man takes from thirteen to twenty of thesespirals in his left hand, between his thumb and threeouter fingers : these he places in such a manner thattwo turns of the spiral shall be beyond the upperedge of a pair of shears, and with the forefinger of thesame hand he feels that only two turns do so project.With his right hand he closes the shears.; and the twoturns of the spiral being cut off, drop into a basin ;the position of the forefinger preventing the headsfrom flying about when cut off. The workmen whocut the heads are usually paid at the rate of 2^d. toSd. per pound for large heads, but a higher price isgiven for the smaller heading. Out of this they paythe boy who spins the spiral ; he receives from 4d.to 6d. a day. A good workman can cut from six toabout thirty pounds of heading per day, according toits size.(228.) 5. Heading. The process of fixing thehead on the body of the pin is usually executedby women and children. Each operator sits beforeN178 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.a small steel stake, having a cavity, into which onehalf of the intended head will fit ; immediately aboveis a steel die, having a corresponding cavity for theother half of the head : this latter die can be raisedby a pedal moved by the foot. The weight of thehammer is from seven to ten pounds, and it fallsthrough a very small space, perhaps from one to twoinches. The cavities in the centre of these dies areconnected with the edge of a small grove, to admit ofthe body of the pin, which is thus prevented frombeing flattened by the blow of the die. (a.) Theoperator with his left hand dips the pointed end ofthe body of a pin into a tray of heads ; having passedthe point through one of them, he carries it along tothe other end with the fore-finger. He now takesthe pin in the right hand, and places the head in thecavity of the stake, and, lifting the die with his foot,allows it to fall on the head. This blow tightens thehead on the shank, which is then turned round, andthe head receives three or four blows on differentparts of its circumference. The women and childrenwho fix the heads are paid at the rate of Is. 6d. forevery twenty thousand. A skilful operator can withgreat exertion do twenty thousand per day ; butfrom ten to fifteen thousand is the usual quantity :children head a much smaller number ; varying, ofcourse, with the degree of their skill. About one percent,of the pins are spoiled in the process ; these arepicked out afterwards by women, and are reserved,along with the waste from other processes, for themelting-pot. The die in which the heads are struckis varied in form according to the fashion of the time ;but the repeated blows to which it is subject renderON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 179it necessary that it should be repaired after it hasbeen used for about thirty pounds of pins.(229.) 6. Tinning. The pins are now fit to betinned, a process which is usually executed by a man,assisted by his wife, or by a lad. The quantity ofpins operated upon at this stage is usually fifty-sixpounds, {a.) They are first placed in a pickle, inorder to remove any grease or dirt from their surface,and also to render them rough, which facilitates theadherence of the tin with which they are to becovered. (6.) They are then placed in a boiler fullof a solution of tartar in water, in which they aremixed with a quantity of tin in small grains. Inthis they are generally kept boiling for about twohours and a half, and are then removed into a tubof water into which some bran has been thrown, forthe purpose of washing off the acid liquor, (c.) Theyare then taken out, and, being placed in woodentrays, are well shaken in dry bran : this removesany water adhering to them ; and by giving thewooden tray a peculiar kind of motion, the pins arethrown up, and the bran gradually flies off", and leavesthem behind in the tray. The man who pickles andtins the pins usually gets one penny per pound forthe work, and employs himself, during the boiling ofone batch of pins, in drying those previously tinned.He can earn about 9s. per day ; but out of this hepays about 35. for his assistant.(230.) 7. Papering. The pins come from thetinner in wooden bowls, with the points projectingin all directions : the arranging of pins side by sidein paper is generally performed by women, (a.) Awoman takes up some, and places them on a comb,N 2180 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.and shaking them, some of the pins fall back into thebowl, and the rest, being caught by their heads, aredetained between the teeth of the comb. (6.) Havingthus arranged them in a parallel direction, she fixesthe requisite number between two pieces of iron,having twenty-five small grooves, at equal distances ;(c.) and having previously doubled the paper, shepresses it against the points of the pins until theyhave passed through the two folds which are to retainthem. The pins are then relieved from the grasp ofthe tool, and the process is repeated. A womangains about Is.dd. per day by papering; but childrenare sometimes employed, who earn from 6d.per day, and upwards.(231.) Having thus generally described the variousprocesses of pin-making, and having stated the usualcost of each, it will be convenient to present a tabularview of the time occupied by each process, and itscost, as well as the sums which can be earned by thepersons who confine themselves solely to each process.As the rate of wages is itself fluctuating, andas the prices paid and quantities executed have beengiven only between certain limits, it is not to beexpected that this table can represent the cost ofeach part of the work with the minutest accuracy,nor even that it shall accord perfectly with the pricesabove given : but it has been drawn up with somecare, and will be quite sufficient to serve as the basisof those reasonings which it is meant to illustrate.A table nearly similar will be subjoined, which hasbeen deduced from a statement of M. Perron,respecting the art of pin-making in France, aboveseventy years ago.ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.English Manufacture,(232.) Pins, " Elevens'' 5,546 weigh one pound ;** one c?02;ew" = 6,932 pins weigh twenty ounces, andrequire six ounces of paper.Time forCost ofPrice of makingNAME OF THE PROCESS.Workmen.makingI lb. ofmaking1 lb. ofWorkmanearnseach Part of a singlePin, in MiUionthsPins.Pins.perDay.of a Penny.Hours.Pence.8.d.1. Drawing Wire (§224.)Man . ..36361.25002. Straightening wire SWoman.3000.2840(§225.)^Girl . ..3000.14203. Pointing . . . (§ 226.)Man . ..30001.77504. Twisting and Cutting SBoy.0400.0147HHeads . (§ 227.) JMan . ..0400.2103H5. Heading . . . (§ 228.)Woman4.00005.00006. Tinning, or Whiten SMan . ..1071.mming (§ 229.) iWoman.1071.33337. Papering . . (§ 230.)Woman2.13143.19737.689212.8732Number of Persons employed : — Men, 4 ; Women, 4 ; Children, 2.Total, 10.French Manufacture.(233.) Cost of 12,000 pins. No. 6, each being eighteenthof an English inch in length, — as they weremanufactured in France about 1760 ; with the costof each operation : deduced from the observationsand statement of M. Perron.ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.NAME OF THE PROCESS.Time formakingTwelveThousandPins.Cost ofmakingTwelveThousandPins.Workmanusuallyearnsper Day.Expenseof ToolsandMaterials.Hours.Fence.Pence.Pence.1. Wire94 752. Straightening and Cutting1.2.54.5^ Coarse Pointing1.2.62510.0\ Turning Wheel*1.2.8757.03.< Fine Pointing.8.59.375i Turning Wheel1.2.54.75I Cutting off pointed Ends.67.5f Turning Spiral.53.04. < Cutting off Heads.85.625f Fuel to annual ditto.1255. Heading12.04 25g r Tartar for Cleaning .< Tartar for Whitening . ..5.57. Papering4.8Paper1.0Wear of Tools. .2.024.3 4.(234.) It appears from the analysis we have givenof the art of pin-making, that it occupies rather morethan seven hours and a half of time, for ten differentindividuals working in succession on the same material,to convert it into a pound of pins ; and that thetotal expense of their labour, each being paid in theThe great expense of turning the wheel appears to havearisen from the person so occupied being unemployed duringhalf his time, whilst the pointer went to another manufactory.ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 183joint ratio of his skill and of the time he is employed,amounts very nearly to I5. Id. But from an examinationof the first of these tables, it appears thatthe wages earned by the persons employed vary from4hd. per day up to (is., and consequently the skillwhich is required for their respective employmentsmay be measured by those sums. Now it is evident,that if one person were required to make the wholepound of pins, he must have skill enough to earnabout 5s. 3d. per day, whilst he is pointing the wiresor cutting off the heads from the spiral coils, — and 6s.when he is whitening the pins ; which three operationstogether would occupy little more than the seventeenthpart of his time. It is also apparent, thatduring more than one half of his time he must beearning only Is. 3d. per day, in putting on the heads;although his skill, if properly employed, would, inthe same time, produce nearly five times as much.If, therefore, we were to employ, for all the processes,the man who whitens the pins, and who earns 6s. perday, even supposing that he could make the poundof pins in an equally short time, yet we must payhim for his time 46.14 pence, or about 35. lOd.' Thepins would therefore cost, in making, three times andthree quarters as much as they now do by the applicationof the division of labour.The higher the skill required of the workman inany one process of a manufacture, and the smallerthe time during which it is employed, so much thegreater will be the advantage of separating that processfrom the rest, and devoting one person's attentionentirely to it. Had we selected the art of needlessON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.making as our illustration, the economy arising fromthe division of labour would have been still more striking; for the process of tempering the needles requiresgreat skill, attention, and experience, and althoughfrom three to four thousand are tempered at once, theworkman is paid a very high' rate of wages. Inanother process of the same manufacture, dry-pointing,which also is executed with great rapidity, thewages earned by the workman reach from 75. to 125.,155., and even, in some instances, to 205. per day ;whilst other processes are carried on by children paidat the rate of 6d. per day.(235.) Some further reflections suggested by thepreceding analysis, will be reserved until we haveplaced before the reader a brief description of amachine for making pins, invented by an American.It is highly ingenious in point of contrivance, and,in respect to its economical principles, will furnish astrong and interesting contrast ^vith the manufactureof pins by the human hand. In this machine a coilof brass wire is placed on an axis ; one end of thisAire is drawn by a pair of rollers through a smallhole in a plate of steel, and is held there by a forceps.As soon as the machine is put in action, —1. The forceps draws the wire on to a distanceequal in length to one pin : a cutting edge of steelthen descends close to the hole through which thewire entered, and severs the piece drawn out.2. The forceps holding the piece thus separatedmoves on, till it brings the wire to the centre of thechuck of a small lathe, which opens to receive it.Whilst the forceps is returning to fetch another pieceON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 185of wire, the lathe revolves rapidly, and grinds theprojecting end of the wire upon a steel mill, whichadvances towards it.3. After this first or coarse pointing, the lathestops, and another forceps takes hold of the appointedpin, (which is instantly released by theopening of the chuck,) and conveys it to a similarchuck of an adjacent lathe, which receives it, andfinishes the pointing on a finer steel mill.4. This mill again stops, and another forceps removesthe pointed pin into a pair of strong steelclams, having a small groove in them by which theyhold the pin very firmly. A part of this groove,which terminates at that edge of the steel clamswhich is intended to form the head of the pin, ismade conical. A small round steel punch is nowdriven forcibly against the end of the wire thusclamped, and the head of the pin is partially formedby compressing the wire into the conical cavity.5. Another pair of forceps now removes the pintoanother pair of clams, and the head of the pinis completed by a blow from a second punch, the endof which is slightly concave. Each pair of forcepsreturns as soon as it has delivered its burden ; andthus there are always five pieces of wire at the samemoment in different stages of advance towards afinished pin.The pins so formed are received in a tray, andwhitened and papered in the usual manner. Aboutsixty pins can thus be made by this machine in oneminute ; but each process occupies exactly the sametime.(236.) In order to judge of the value of such a186 ON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR.machine, compared with hand-labour, it would benecessary to ascertain : — 1. The defects to which pinsso made are liable. 2. Their advantages, if any,over those made in the usual way. 3. The primecost of the machine for making them. 4. The expenseof keeping it in repair. 5. The expense ofmoving the machine and of attending to it.1. Pins made by the machine are more likely tobend, because the head being punched up, the wiremust be in a soft state to admit of that operation. 2.Pins made by the machine are better than commonones, because they are not subject to losing theirheads. 3. With respect to the prime cost of a machine,it would be very much reduced if a large numbershould be required. 4. With regard to its wear andtear, experience only can decide : but it may beremarked, that the steel clams or dies in which theheads are punched up, ^vill wear quickly unless thevere has been softened by annealing ; and that ifsoftened, the bodies of the pins will bend too readily.Such an inconvenience might be remedied, either bymaking the machine spin the heads and fix them on,or by annealing only that end of the wire which is tobecome the head of the pin : but this would cause adelay between the operations, since the brass is toobrittle, while heated, to bear a blow without crumbling.5. On comparing the time occupied by the machinenth that stated in the analysis, we find that, exceptin the heading, the human hand is more rapid.Three thousand six hundred pins are pointed by themachine in one hour, whilst a man can point fifteenthousand six hundred in the same time. But in theprocess of heading, the rapidity of the machine isON THE DIVISION OF LABOUR. 187two and a half times that of the human hand. Itmust, however, be observed, that the grinding in themachine does not require the application of a forceequal to that of one man ; for all the processes areexecuted at once by the machine, and a single labourercan easily work it.188 ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.CHAP. XX.ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.(237.) We have already mentioned what may,perhaps, appear paradoxical to some of our readers,that the division of labour can be applied withequal success to mental as to mechanical operations,and that it ensures in both the same economy oftime. A short account of its practical application,in the most extensive series of calculations everexecuted, will offer an interesting illustration of thisfact, whilst at the same time it will afford an occasionfor shewing that the arrangements which ought toregulate the interior economy of a manufactory, arefounded on principles of deeper root than may havebeen supposed, and are capable of being usefullyemployed in preparing the road to some of the sublimestinvestigations of the human mind.(238.) In the midst of that excitement whichaccompanied the Revolution of France and the succeedingwars, the ambition of the nation, exhaustedby its fatal passion for military renown,was at the same time directed to some of the noblerand more permanent triumphs which mark the eraof a people's greatness, — and which receive the applauseof posterity long after their conquests havebeen wrested from them, or even when their existenceas a nation may be told only by the page of history.ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR. 189Amongst their enterprises of science, the Frenchgovernment was desirous of producing a series ofmathematical tables, to facilitate the applicationof the decimal system which they had so recentlyadopted. They directed, therefore, their mathematiciansto construct such tables, on the most extensivescale. Their most distinguished philosophers, respondingfully to the call of their country, inventednew methods for this laborious task ; and a work,completely answering the large demands of thegovernment, was produced in a remarkably shortperiod of time. M. Prony, to whom the superintendenceof this great undertaking was confided, inspeaking of its commencement, observes : " Je rri'ylivrai avec toute Warder dont fetois capable, et je*' m^occupai d'abord du plan general de Execution,Toutes les conditions que favors a remplir necessitiesEmploy d'un grand nombre de calculates ;et il me vint benton a la pense d'appliquer a laconfection de ces Tables la division du travail, dontles Arts de Commerce tirent un parti si avantageuxpour reunir a la perfection de main-d'ceuvreV economic de la defense et du temps." The circumstancewhich gave rise to this singular applicationof the principle of the division of labouris so interesting, that no apology is necessary forintroducing it from a small pamphlet printed atParis a few years since, when a proposition was madeby the English to the French government, that thetwo countries should print these tables at their jointexpense.(239.) The origin of the idea is related in the followingextract : —190 ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR."C'est a un chapitre d'un ouvrage Anglais,* justeraentc61febre, (I.) quest probablement due Existence de Ouvragedont le gouvernement Britannique veut faire jouir le mondesavant : —Void Anecdote : M. de Prony d'etat engage, avec lescomites de gouvernement, a composer pour la timon censdu cercle, des tables logarithmiqiies et trigonometryqui, non seulement ne laissassent rien a desirer quant aV exactitude, mais qui firmament le monument de calcul le plusvaste et le plus important qui cut jamais ti execute, ou mimecongo. Les logarithmes des nombre de 1 a 200,000firmament a ce travail un supplement necessary et exige.II fut aise a M. de Prony de reassure que meme en s'asso-chant trois ou quatre habiles co-operates, la plus grandedurer presumable de sa vie, ne lui suffirai pas pour remplirses engagements. II etait occupy de cette facheuse penselorsque, se trouvant devant la boutique d'un marchand delivres, il apperputla belle edition Anglaise de Smith, donnea Londres en 1776 ; il ouvrit le livre au hazard, et tombasur le premier chapitre, qui traite de la division du travail,et ou la fabrication des epistles est cited pour exemple.A peine avait-il parcouru les premieres pages, que, par uneespece inspiration, il con put Inexpedient de mettre seslogarithmes en manufacture comme les epistles. IIfaisait, en ce moment, a Ecole polytechnique, des lep onssur une partie analyse like a ce genre de travail, lamethod des differences, et ses applications a V interpolation.II alia passer quelques jours a la campagne, et revint aParis avec le plan de fabrication, qui a ete suivi dansExecution. II assembly deux ateliers, qui faisaientdepartment les menes calculs, et se servant de verificationreciproque."tAn Enquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth ojNations, by Adam Smith.f Note sur la .publication, proposed par le gouvernementON THE Division OF MENTAL LABOUR. 191(240.) The ancient methods of computing tableswere altogether inapplicable to such a proceeding.M. Prony, therefore, washing to avail himself ofall the talent of his country in devising new methods,fancied the first section of those who were to takepart in this enterprise out of five or six of the mosteminent mathematicians in France.First Section. — The duty of this first section wasto investigate, amongst the various analytical expressionswhich could be found for the same function,that which was most readily adapted to simple numericalcalculation by many individuals employed at thesame time. This section had little or nothing to dowith the actual numerical work. When its labourswere concluded, the formulae on the use of which ithad decided, were delivered to the second section.Second Section. — This section consisted of sevenor eight persons of considerable acquaintance withmathematics : and their duty was to convert intonumbers the formulae put into their hands by thefirst section, — an operation of great labour ; and thento deliver out these formulae to the members of thethird section, and receive from them the finished calculations.The members of this second section hadceram means of verifying the calculations withoutthe necessity of repeating, or even of examining, thewhole of the work done by the third section.Third Section. — The members of this section,whose number varied from sixty to eighty, receivedcertain numbers from the second section, and, usingnothing more than simple addition and subtraction,Anglais des grands tables logarithmiques et trigonometriquesde Mede Prony.— De I'imprimerie de F.Didot, Dec. 1, 1820. p.7.192 ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.they returned to that section the tables in a finishedstate. It is remarkable that nine-tenths of this classhad no knowledge of arithmetic beyond the two firstrules which they were thus called upon to exercise,and that these persons were usually found more correctin their calculations, than those who possessed amore extensive knowledge of the subject.(241.) When it is stated that the tables thus computedoccupy seventeen large folio volumes, someidea may perhaps be formed of the labour. Fromthat part executed by the third class, which mayalmost be termed mechanical, requiring the leastknowledge and by far the greatest exertions, the firstclass where entirely exempt. Such labour can alwaysbe purchased at an easy rate. The duties of thesecond class, although requiring considerable skill inarithmetical operations, were yet in some measurerelieved by the higher interest naturally felt in thosemore difficult operations. The exertions of the firstclass are not likely to require, upon another occasion,so much skill and labour as they did upon thefirst attempt to introduce such a method ; but whenthe completion of a calculating-engine shall haveproduced a substitute for the whole of the thirdsection of computers, the attention of analysts willnaturally be directed to simplifying its application,by a new discussion of the methods of convertinganalytical formulae into numbers.(242.) The proceeding of M. Prony, in this celebratedsystem of calculation, much resembles thatof a skilful person about to construct a cotton orsilk-mill, or any similar establishment. Having, byhis own genius, or through the aid of his friends,ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR. 193found that some improved machinery may be successfullyapplied to his pursuit, he makes drawingsof his plans of the machinery, and may himself beconsidered as constituting the first section. He nextrequires the assistance of operative engineers capableof executing the machinery he has designed, some ofvrhom should understand the nature of the processes tobe carried on ; and these constitute his second section.When a sufficient number of machines have been• made, a multitude of other persons, possessed of alower degree of skill, must be employed in usingthem ; these form the third section : but their work,and the just performance of the machines, must bestill superintended by the second class.(243.) As the possibility of performing arithmeticalcalculations by machinery may appear to non-mathematicalreaders to be rather too large a postulate, andas it is connected with the subject of the division oflabour, I shall here endeavour, in a few lines, to givesome slight perception of the manner in which thiscan be done, — and thus to remove a small portion ofthe veil which covers that apparent mystery.(244.) That nearly all tables of numbers whichfollow any law, however complicated, may be formed, toa greater or less extent, solely by the proper arrangementof the successive addition and subtraction ofnumbers befitting each table, is a general principlewhich can be demonstrated to those only who arewell acquainted with mathematics ; but the mind, evenof the reader who is but very slightly acquainted withthat science, will readily conceive that it is not impossible,by attending to the following example.The subjoined table is the beginning of one inoON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.very extensive use, which has been printed and reprintedvery frequently in many countries, and iscalled a Table of Square Numbers.Terms ofthe Table.A.Table.1 ^•FirstDifference.C.SecondDifference.\ 5i 7'\ 91 13Any number in the table, column A, may be obtained,by multiplying the number which expressesthe distance of that term from the commencementof the table by itself; thus, 25 is the fifth termfrom the beginning of the table, and 5 multiplied byitself, or by 5, is equal to 25. Let us now subtracteach term of this table from the next succeedingterm, and place the results in another column (B),which may be called first difference column. If weagain subtract each term of this first difference fromthe succeeding term, we find the result is always thenumber 2, (column C ;) and that the same numberwill always recur in that column, which may be calledthe second-difference, will appear to any person whoON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR. 195takes the trouble to carry on the table a few termsfurther. Now when once this is admitted, it is quiteclear that, provided the first term (1) of the Table,the first term (3) of the first differences, and thefirst term (2) of the second or constant difference,are originally given, we can continue the table ofsquare numbers to any extent, merely by simpleaddition : — for the series of first differences may beformed by repeatedly adding the constant difference(2) to (3) the first number in column B, and we thenhave the series of numbers, 3, 5, 7, &c. : and again,by successively adding each of these to the firstnumber (1) of the table, we produce the squarenumbers.(245.) Having thus, I hope, thrown some lightupon the theoretical part of the question, I shallendeavour to shew that the mechanical executionof such an engine, as would produce this series ofnumbers, is not so far removed from that of ordinarymachinery as might be conceived. Let the readerimagine three clocks, placed on a table side by side,each having only one hand, and each having a thousanddivisions instead of twelve hours marked onthe face ; and every time a string is pulled, let themstrike on a bell the numbers of the divisions to whichtheir hands point. Let him further suppose that twoof the clocks, for the sake of distinction called B andC, have some mechanism by which the clock Cadvances the hand of the clock B one division, foreach stroke it makes upon its own bell ; and letthe clock B by a similar contrivance advance thehand of the clock A one division, for each strokeit makes on its own bell. With such an arranged2196 ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.ment, having set the hand of the clock A to thedivision I., that of B to III., and that of C to II., letthe reader imagine the repeating parts of the clocksto be set in motion continually in the followingorder : viz. — pull the string of clock A ; pull thestring of clock B ; pull the string of clock C.The table on the following page will thus expressthe series of movements and their results.ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.19:Movements.Clock A.Hand set toI.Clock B.Hand set toIII.Clock C.Hand set laII.i<Pull A.B.C.tableA. strikes 1The hand is ad •)I vanced (by B.) >t 3 divisions . . )FirstdifferenceB. strikes 34 The hand is ad %J danced (byC.) [divisions . . )Seconddifference.C. Strikes 22}Pull A.B.A. strikes 4^ The hand is ad ^danced (by B.)(5 divisions . . '.B. strikes 5i The hand is ad ^I danced (by C.) }12 divisions . . )C. strikes 2\Pull A.B.C.A. strikes 9r The hand is ad -\} danced (by B.) >(7 divisions . . )B. strikes 7r The hand is ad -jJ danced (by C.) \divisions . . )C. strikes 2•1Pull A.B.A. strikes 16The hand is ad -J> danced (by B.) J(9 divisions. . )B. strikes 9t The hand is ad ^J danced (by C.) Jdivisions . . yC. strikes 2•1Pull A.B.C.A. strikes 25t The hand is ad jdanced (by B.) [f 11 divisions . 'B. strikes 11The hand is ad -jJ danced (by C.) [■2 divisions . . )C. strikes 2•1Pull A.B.C.A. strikes 36e The hand is ad aI danced (by B.) >t 13 divisions . )B. strikes 13t The hand is ad ^\ danced (by C.) >(2division8. . )C. strikes 2198 ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR.If now only those divisions struck or pointed at bythe clock A be attended to and written down, it willbe found that they produce the series of the squaresof the natural numbers. Such a series could, ofcourse, be carried by this mechanism only so far asthe numbers which can be expressed by three figures ;but this may be sufficient to give some idea of theconstruction, — and was, in fact, the point to whichthe first model of the calculating-engine, now inprogress, extended.(246.) We have seen, then, that the effect of thedivision of labour, both in mechanical and in mentaloperations, is, that it enables us to purchase and applyto each process precisely that quantity of skill andknowledge which is required for it : we avoid employingany part of the time of a man who can geteight or ten shillings a day by his skill in temperingneedles, in turning a wheel, which can be done forsixpence a day ; and we equally avoid the lossarising from the employment of an accomplishedmathematician in performing the lowest processes ofarithmetic.(247.) The division of labour cannot be successfullypractised unless there exists a great demandfor its produce ; and it requires a large capital to beemployed in those arts in which it is used. Inwatchmaking it has been carried, perhaps, to thegreatest extent. It was stated in evidence beforea committee of the House of Commons, that thereare a hundred and two distinct branches of thisart, to each of which a boy may be put apprentice ;and that he only learns his master's department,and is unable, after his apprenticeship has expired,ON THE DIVISION OF MENTAL LABOUR. 199without subsequent instruction, to work at any otherbranch. The watch-finisher, whose business is toput together the scattered parts, is the only one, outof the hundred and two persons, who can work inany other department than his own.(248*.) In one of the most difficult arts, that ofMining, great improvements have resulted from thejudicious distribution of the duties ; and under thearrangements which have gradually been introduced,the whole system of the mine and its government isnow placed under the control of the following officers.1. A Manager, who has the general knowledge ofall that is to be done, and who may be assisted byone or more skilful persons.2. Underground Captains direct the proper miningoperations and govern the working miners.3. The Purser and Book-keeper manage the accounts.4. The Engineer erects the engines, and superintendsthe men who work them.5. A chief Pitman has charge of the pumps andthe apparatus of the shafts.6. A Surface-captain, with assistants, receives theores raised, and directs the dressing department, theobject of which is to render them marketable.7. The head Carpenter superintends many constructions.8. The foreman of the Smiths regulates iron-workand tools.9. A Materials-man selects, purchases, receivesand delivers all articles required.10. The Roper has charge of ropes and cordage ofall sorts.200 COST OF EACH PROCESSCHAP. XXI.ON THE COST OF EACH SEPARATE PROCESS IN AMANUFACTURE.(249.) The great competition introduced by machinery,and the application of the principle of thesubdivision of labour, render it necessary for eachproducer to be continually on the watch, to discoverimproved methods by which the cost of the article hemanufactures may be reduced ; and, with this view,it is of great importance to know the precise expenseof every process, as well as of the wear and tear ofmachinery which is due to it. The same informationis desirable for those by whom the manufacturedgoods are distributed and sold ; because itenables them to give reasonable answers or explanationsto the objections of inquirers, and also affordsthem a better chance of suggesting to the manufacturerchanges in the fashion of his goods, whichmay be suitable either to the tastes or to the financesof his customers. To the statesman such knowledgeis still more important; for without it hemust trust entirely to others, and can form no judgmentworthy of confidence, of the effect any tax mayproduce, or of the injury the manufacturer or thecountry may suffer by its imposition.(250.) One of the first advantages which suggestsitself as likely to arise from a correct analysis of theexpense of the several processes of any manufacture,IN A MANUFACTURE. 201is the indication which it would furnish of the coursein which improvement should be directed. If amethod could be contrived of diminishing by onefourth the time required for fixing on the headsof pins, the expense of making them would bereduced about thirteen per cent. ; whilst a reductionof one half the time employed in spinning the coil ofwire out of which the heads are cut, would scarcelymake any sensible difference in the cost of manufacturingof the whole article. It is therefore obvious,that the attention would be much more advantageouslydirected to shortening the former than thelatter process.(251.) The expense of manufacturing, in a countrywhere machinery is of the rudest kind, and manuallabour is very cheap, is curiously exhibited in theprice of cotton cloth in the island of Java. Thecotton, in the seed, is sold by the Picul, which is aweight of about 1331bs. Not above one fourth or onefifth of this weight, however, is cotton : the natives,by means of rude wooden rollers, can only separateabout 1 Jib. of cotton from the seed by one day's labour.A Picul of cleansed cotton, therefore, is worthbetween four and five times the cost of the impurearticle ; and the prices of the same substance, in itsdifferent stages of manufacture, are — for one Picul :Dollars.Cotton in the seed 2 to 3Clean cotton 10 — 11Cotton thread 24Cotton thread died blue 35Good ordinary cotton cloth 50Thus it appears that the expense of spinning in Javais 117 per cent, on the value of the raw material ;202 COST OF EACH PROCESSthe expense of dying thread blue is 45 per cent, onits value ; and that of weaWng cotton thread intocloth 117 per cent, on its value. The expense ofspinning cotton into a fine thread is, in England,about 33 per cent.*(252.) As an example of the cost of the differentprocesses of a manufacture, perhaps an analyticalstatement of the expense of the volume now in thereader's hands may not be uninteresting ; more especiallyas it will afford an insight into the nature andextent of the taxes upon literature. It is found economicalto print it upon paper of a very large size, sothat although thirty-two pages, instead of sixteen,are really contained in each sheet, this work is stillcalled 8vo.[This relates to the ordinary size of the type used in the volume.]To Printer for composing small type, ^as in extracts and contents, extra ^ 2 3per sheet, 3s. lOd. yTo Printer, for composing table-work, \ 2 1^0extra per sheet, 5s. 6^^. |Average charge for corrections, per > qq n asheet, 3Z. 2s. 10^ . I '^'^ " "Press-work, 3,000 being printed off,^ ^f 15per sheet, 3/. 10sPaper for 3,000, at 1/. lis. 6d. perream, weighing 28lbs. : the duty onpaper at od. per lb. amounts to 7s.per ream, so that the 63 reams whichare required for the work will cost : —Paper 77 3 6Excise Duty 22 1Total expense of paper 99 4 6Total expense of printing and paper . . 205 18These facts are taken from Crawford's Indian Archipelago,IN A MANUFACTURE. 203s. d.Brought up 205 18Steel-plate for title-page 7 6Engraving on ditto, Head of Bacon . 2 2Ditto letters 1 1Total expense of title-page 3 10 6Printing title-page, at 6^. per 100 9Paper for ditto, at Is. 9f?. per 100 2 12 6Expenses of advertising 40Sundries 5Total expense in sheets 266 1Cost of a single copy in sheets ; 3052 beingprinted, including the overplus 1 9Extra boarding 6Cost of each copy, boarded* 2 3(253.) This analysis requires some explanation.The printer usually charges for composition by thesheet, supposing the type to be all of one kind ; andas this charge is regulated by the size of the letter,on which the quantity in a sheet depends, little disputecan arise after the price is agreed upon. If thereare but few extracts, or other parts of the work,which require to be printed in smaller type ; or ifthere are many notes, or several passages in Greek,or in other languages, requiring a different type, theseare considered in the original contract, and a smalladditional price per sheet allowed. If there is alarge portion of small type, it is better to have aspecific additional charge for it per sheet. If anywork with irregular lines and many figures, and whatThese charges refer to the edition prepared for the public,and do not relate to the large paper copies in the handsof some of the author's friends.204 COST OF EACH PROCESSthe printers call rules, occurs, it is called table-work,and is charged at an advanced price per sheet.Examples of this are frequent in the present volume.If the page consists entirely of figures, as in mathematicaltables, which require very careful correction,the charge for composition is usually doubled. Afew years ago I printed a table of logarithms, on alarge-sized page, which required great additionallabour and care from the Readers,* in rendering theproofs correct, and for which, although new puncheswere not required, several new types were prepared,and for which stereotype plates were cast, costing about21. per sheet. In this case 11/. per sheet were charged,although ordinary composition, with the same sizedletter, in demy octavo, could have been executed atthirty-eight shillings per sheet : but as the expensewas ascertained before commencing the work, it gaverise to no difficulties.(254.) The charge for corrections and alterationsis one which, from the difficulty of measuring them,gives rise to the greatest inconvenience, and is asdisagreeable to the publisher (if he be the agentbetween the author and the printer), and to themaster printer or his foreman, as it is to the authorhimself. If the author study economy, he shouldmake the whole of his corrections in the manuscript,and should copy it out fairly : it will then be printedcorrectly, and he will have little to pay for corrections.But it is scarcely possible to judge of theeffect of any passage correctly, without having it setReaders are persons employed to correct the press at theprinting-office.IN A MANUFACTURE. 205up in type ; and there are few subjects, upon which anauthor does not find he can add some details or explanation,when he sees his views in print. If, therefore,he wish to save his own labour in transcribing,and to give the last polish to the language, he mustbe content to accomplish these objects at an increasedexpense. If the printer possess a sufficient stock oftype, it will contribute still more to the convenienceof the author to have his whole work put up in whatare technically called slips,* and then to make allthe corrections, and to have as few revises as hecan. The present work was set up in slips, butthe corrections have been unusually large, and therevises frequent.(255.) The press-work, or printing off, is chargedat a price agreed upon for each two hundred and fiftysheets ; and any broken number is still considered astwo hundred and fifty, ^\^len a large edition is required,the price for two hundred and fifty is reduced ;thus, in the present volume, two hundred and fiftycopies, if printed alone, would have been chargedeleven shillings per sheet, instead of 5s. 10^., theactual charge. The principle of this mode of chargingis good, as it obviates all disputes ; but it is to beregretted that the custom of charging the same pricefor any small number as for two hundred and fiftyis so pertinaciously adhered to, that the workmenwill not agree to any other terms when only twentyor thirty copies are required, or even when only threeSlips are long pieces of paper on which sufficient matteris printed to form, when divided, from two to four pages oftext.206 COST OF EACH PROCESSor four are wanted for the sake of some experiment.Perhaps if all numbers above fifty were charged astwo hundred and fifty, and all below as for half twohundred and fifty, both parties would derive anadvantage.(256.) The effect of the excise duty is to renderthe paper thin, in order that it may weigh little ; butthis is counteracted by the desire of the author tomake his book look as thick as possible, in order thathe may charge the public as much as he decentlycan ; and so on that ground alone the duty is of noimportance. There is, however, another effect of thisduty, which both the public and the author feel ; forthey pay, not merely the duty which is charged, butalso the profit on that duty, which the paper-makerrequires for the use of additional capital ; and alsothe profit to the publisher and bookseller on theincreased price of the volume.(257.) The estimated charge for advertisements is,in the present case, about the usual allowance forsuch a volume ; and, as it is considered that advertisementsin newspapers are the most effectual, wherethe smallest pays a duty of 35. 6^., nearly one halfof the charge of advertising is a tax.(258.) It appears then, that, to an expenditureof 224/. necessary to produce the present volume,421. are added in the shape of a direct tax. Whetherthe profits arising from such a mode of manufacturingwill justify such a rate of taxation, canonly be estimated when the returns from the volumeare considered, a subject that will be discussed inasubsequent chapter.* It is at present sufficientChap. XXXI.IN A MANUFACTURE. 207to observe, that the tax on advertisements is animpolitic tax when contrasted with that upon paper,and on other materials employed. The object ofall advertisements is, by making known articlesfor sale, to procure for them a better price, if thesale is to be by auction ; or a larger extent of saleif by retail dealers. Now the more any article isknown, the more quickly it is discovered whetherit contributes to the comfort or advantage of thepublic ; and the more quickly its consumption isassured if it be found valuable. It would appear,then, that every tax on communicating informationrespecting articles which are the subjects of taxationin another shape, is one which must reduce theamount that would have been raised, had no impedimentbeen placed in the way of making knownto the public their qualities and their price.208 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCESCHAP. XXII.ON THE CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF LARGEFACTORIES.(259.) On examining the analysis which has beengiven in Chap. XIX. of the operations in the art ofpin-making, it will be observed, that ten individualsare employed in it, and also that the time occupiedin executing the several processes is very different.In order, however, to render more simple the reasoningwhich follows, it will be convenient to suppose thateach of the seven processes there described requiresan equal quantity of time. This being supposed, itis at once apparent, that, to conduct an establishmentfor pin-making most profitably, the numberof persons employed must be a multiple of ten.For if a person with small means has only sufficientcapital to enable him to employ half that number ofpersons, they cannot each of them constantly adhere tothe execution of the same process ; and if a manufactureremploys any number not a multiple of ten, a similarresult must ensue with respect to some portion ofthem. The same reflection constantly presents itselfon examining any well-arranged factory. In that ofMr. Morgan, the patentee of the ever-pointed pencils,one room is devoted to some of the processes bywhich steel pens are manufactured. Six fly presses arehere constantly at work ; — in the first a sheet of thinOF LARGE FACTORIES. 200steel is brought by the workman under the die whichat each blow cuts out a flat piece of the metal, havingthe form intended for the pen. Two other workmenare employed in placing these flat pieces under twoother presses, in which a steel chisel cuts the slit.Three other workmen occupy other presses, in whichthe pieces so prepared receive their semi-cylindricalform. The longer time required for adjusting thesmall pieces in the two latter operations renders themless rapid in execution than the first ; so that twoworkmen are fully occupied in slitting, and three inbending the flat pieces, which one man can punchout of the sheet of steel. If, therefore, it werenecessary to enlarge this factory, it is clear thattwelve or eighteen presses would be worked with moreeconomy than any number not a multiple of six.The same reasoning extends to every manufacturewhich is conducted upon the principle of the Divisionof Labour, and we arrive at this general conclusion : —When the number of processes into which it is mostadvantageous to divide it, and the number of individualsto be employed in it, are ascertained, thenall factories which do not employ a direct multipleof this latter number will produce the article at agreater cost. This principle ought always to bekept in view in great establishments, although it isquite impossible, even with the best division ofthe labour, to attend to it rigidly in practice. Theproportionate number of the persons who possessthe greatest skill, is of course to be first attendedto. That exact ratio which is most profitable forafactory employing a hundred workmen, may notbe quite the best where there are five hundred ;210 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCESand the arrangements of both may probably admitof variations, without materially increasing thecost of their produce. But it is quite certain that noindividual, nor in the case of pin-making could anyfive individuals, ever hope to compete with an extensiveestablishment. Hence arises one causeof the great size of manufacturing establishments,which have increased with the progress of civilization.Other circumstances, however, contribute to the sameend, and arise also from the same cause — the divisionof labour.(260.) The material out of which the manufacturedarticle is produced, must, in the several stages of itsprogress, be conveyed from one operator to the next insuccession : this can be done at least expense whenthey are all working in the same establishment. Ifthe weight of the material is considerable, thisreason acts with additional force ; but even whereit is light, the danger arising from frequent removalmay render it desirable to have all theprocesses carried on in the same building. In thecutting and polishing of glass this is the case ;whilst in the art of needle-making several of theprocesses are carried on in the cottages of theworkmen. It is, however, clear that the latter plan,which is attended with some advantages to thefamily of the workmen, can be adopted only wherethere exists a sure and quick method of knowingthat the work has been well done, and that the wholeof the materials given out have been really employed.(261.) The inducement to contrive machines forany process of manufacture increases with the demandfor the article ; and the introduction of machinery, onOF LARGE FACTORIES. 211the Other hand, tends to increase the quantity produced,and to lead to the establishment of largefactories. An illustration of these principles may befound in the history of the manufacture of patent net.The first machines for weaving this article werevery expensive, costing from a thousand to twelve orthirteen hundred pounds. The possessor of one ofthese, though it greatly increased the quantity hecould produce, was nevertheless unable, when workingeight hours a day, to compete with the old methods.This arose from the large capital invested in themachinery ; but he quickly perceived that saith thesame expense of fixed capital, and a small addition tohis circulating capital, he could work the machineduring the whole twenty-four hours. The profits thusrealized soon induced other persons to direct their attentionto the improvement of those machines ; andthe price was greatly reduced, at the same timethat the rapidity of production of the patent net wasincreased. But if machines be kept working throughthe twenty-four hours, it is necessary that someperson shall attend to admit the workmen at the timethey relieve each other ; and whether the porter orother servant so employed admit one person ortwenty, his rest will be equally disturbed. It willalso be necessary occasionally to adjust or repair themachine ; and this can be done much better by aworkman accustomed to machine-making, than by theperson who uses it. Now, since the good performanceand the duration of machines depend to a verygreat extent upon correcting every shake or imperfectionin their parts as soon as they appear, the promptattention of a workman resident on the spot willp 2212 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCESconsiderably reduce the expenditure arising from thewear and tear of the machinery. But in the case of asingle lace-frame, or a single loom, this would be tooexpensive a plan. Here then arises another circumstancewhich tends to enlarge the extent of a factory.It ought to consist of such a number of machines asshall occupy the whole time of one workman inkeeping them in order : if extended beyond thatnumber, the same principle of economy would pointout the necessity of doubling or tripling the numberof machines, in order to employ the whole time oftwo or three skilful workmen.(262.) There one portion of the workman's labourconsists in the exertion of mere physical force, as inweavingand in many similar arts, it will soon occurto the manufacturer, that if that part were executedby a steam-engine, the same man might, in the caseof weaving, attend to two or more looms at once ;and, since we already suppose that one or moreoperative engineers have been employed, the numberof his looms may be so arranged that their time shallbe fully occupied in keeping the steam-engine andthe looms in order. One of the first results will be,that the looms can be driven by the engine nearlytwice as fast as before : and as each man, whenrelieved from bodily labour, can attend to two looms,one workman can now make almost as much cloth asfour. This increase of producing power is, however,greater than that which really took place at first ; thevelocity of some of the parts of the loom being limitedby the strength of the thread, and the quickness withwhich it commences its motion : but an improvementwas soon made, by which the motion, com-OF LARGE FACTORIES. 213menaced slowly, and gradually, acquired greater velocitythan it was safe to give it at once ; and the speed wasthus increased from 100 to about 120 strokes perminute.(263.) Pursuing the same principles, the manufactorybecomes gradually so enlarged, that the expenseof lighting during the night amounts to a considerablesum ; and as there are already attached to the establishmentpersons who are up all night, and can thereforeconstantly attend to it, and also engineers to makeand keep in repair any machinery, the addition of anapparatus for making gas to light the factory leadsto a new extension, at the same time that it contributes,by diminishing the expense of lighting, andthe risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the cost ofmanufacturing.(264.) Long before a factory has reached thisextent, it will have been found necessary to establishan accountant's department, with clerks to pay theworkmen, and to see that they arrive at their statedtimes ; and this department must be in communicationwith the agents who purchase the raw produce, andwith those who sell the manufactured article.(265.) We have seen that the application of theDivision of Labour tends to produce cheaper articles ;that it thus increases the demand ; and gradually, bythe effect of competition, or by the hope of increasedgain, that it causes large capitals to be embarked inextensive factories. Let us now examine the influenceof this accumulation of capital directed to one object.In the first place, it enables the most important principleon which the advantages of the division of labourrests, to be carried almost to its extreme limits : not214 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCESmerely is the precise amount of skill purchased whichis necessary for the execution of each process, butthroughout every stage, — from that in which the rawmaterial is procured, to that by which the finishedproduce is conveyed into the hands of the consumer,the same economy of skill prevails. The quantityof work produced by a given number of people isgreatly augmented by such an extended arrangement; and the result is necessarily a great reductionin the cost of the article which is brought to market.(266.) Amongst the causes which tend to thecheap production of any article, and which are connectedwith the employment of additional capital, maybementioned, the care which is taken to prevent theabsolute waste of any part of the raw material. Anattention to this circumstance sometimes causes theunion of two trades in one factory, which otherwisemight have been separated.An enumeration of the arts to which the horns ofcattle are applicable, will furnish a striking exampleof this kind of economy. The tanner who has purchasedthe raw hides, separates the horns, and sellsthem to the makers of combs and lanterns. The hornconsists of two parts, an outward horny case, and aninward conical substance, somewhat intermediate betweenindurated hair and bone. The first processconsists in separating these two parts, by means ofa blow against a block of wood. The horny exterioris then cut into three portions with a frame-saw.1 . The lowest of these, next the root of the horn,after undergoing several processes, by which it isflattened, is made into combs.2. The middle of the horn, after being flattened byOF LARGE FACTORIES. 215heat, and having its transparency improved by oil, issplit into thin layers, and forms a substitute for glass,in lanterns of the commonest kind.3. The tip of the horn is used by the makers ofknife-handles, and of the tops of whips, and for othersimilar purposes.4. The interior, or core of the horn, is boiled downin water. A large quantity of fat rises to the surface ;this is put aside, and sold to the makers of yellowsoap.5. The liquid itself is used as a kind of glue, andis purchased by cloth dressers for stiffening.6. The insoluble substance, which remains behind,is then sent to the mill, and, being ground down, issold to the farmers for manure.7. Besides these various purposes to which the differentparts of the horn are applied, the clippings,which arise in comb-making, are sold to the farmerfor manure. In the first year after they are spreadover the soil they have comparatively little effect, butduring the next four or five their efficiency is considerable.The shavings which form the refuse ofthe lantern-maker, are of a much thinner texture :some of them are cut into various figures and painted,and used as toys ; for being hygrometric, they curl upwhen placed in the palm of a warm hand. But thegreater part of these shavings also are sold formanure, and from their extremely thin and dividedform, the full effect is produced upon the first crop.(267.) Another event which has arisen, in onetrade at least, from the employment of large capital,is, that a class of middle-men, formerly interposedbetween the maker and the merchant, now216 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCESno longer exist. When calico was woven in thecottages of the workmen, there existed a class ofpersons who travelled about and purchased the piecesso made, in large numbers, for the purpose of sellingthem to the exporting merchant. But these middlemenwere obliged to examine every piece, in order toknow that it was perfect, and of full measure. Thegreater number of the workmen, it is true, mightbe depended upon, but the fraud of a few wouldrender this examination indispensable : for any singlecottager, though detected by one purchaser, mightstill hope that the fact would not become known toall the rest.The value of character, though great in all circumstancesof life, can never be so fully experienced bypersons possessed of small capital, as by those employingmuch larger sums : whilst these larger sumsof money for which the merchant deals, render hischaracter for punctuality more studied and known byothers. Thus it happens that high character suppliesthe place of an additional portion of capital ; and themerchant, in dealing with the great manufacturer, issaved from the expense of verification, by knowingthat the loss, or even the impeachment, of the manufacturer'scharacter, would be attended with greaterinjury to himself than any profit upon a single transactioncould compensate.(268.) The amount of well-grounded confidence,which exists in the character of its merchants andmanufacturers, is one of the many advantages thatan old manufacturing country always possesses overits rivals. To such an extent is this confidence incharacter carried in England; that, at one of ourOF LARGE FACTORIES. 217largest towns, sales and purchases on a very extensivescale are made daily in the course of businesswithout any of the parties ever exchanging a writtendocument.(269.) A breach of confidence of this kind, whichmight have been attended with very serious embarrassment,occurred in the recent expedition to themouth of the Niger."We brought with us from England," Mr. Landerstates, "nearly a hundred thousand needles of varioussizes, and amongst them was a great quantity of* Whitechapel Sharps' warranted superfine, and notto cut in the eye.' Thus highly recommended, we*' imagined that these needles must have been excellentindeed ; but what was our surprise, some time*' ago, when a number of them which we had disposed*' of were returned to us, with a complaint that they** were all eyeless, thus redeeming with a vengeancethe pledge of the manufacturer, ' that they wouldnot cut in the eye.' On an examination afterwards,we found the same fault with the remainder of the*' ' Whitechapel sharps,' so that to save our credit wehave been obliged to throw them away"*(270.) The influence of established character inproducing confidence operated in a very remarkablemanner at the time of the exclusion of British manufacturesfrom the Continent during the last war.One of our largest establishments had been in thehabit of doing extensive business with a house inthe centre of Germany ; but, on the closing of theLander's Journal of an Expedition to the Mouth of the Niger,vol. ii. p. 42.218 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCEScontinental ports against our manufactures, heavypenalties were inflicted on all those who contravenedthe Berlin and Milan decrees. The English manufacturercontinued, nevertheless, to receive orders,with directions how to consign them, and appointmentsfor the time and mode of payment, in letters,the handwriting of which was known to him, butwhich were never signed, except by the Christianname of one of the firm, and even in some instancesthey were without any signature at all. Theseorders were executed ; and in no instance was therethe least irregularity in the payments.(271.) Another circumstance may be noticed,which to a small extent is more advantageous tolarge than to small factories. In the export ofseveral articles of manufacture, a drawback is allowedby government, of a portion of the duty paid on theimportation of the raw material. In such circumstances,certain forms must be gone through in orderto protect the revenue from fraud ; and a clerk, orone of the partners, must attend at the custom-house.The agent of the large establishment occupies nearlythe same time in receiving a drawback of severalthousands, as the smaller exporter does of a fewshillings. But if the quantity exported is inconsiderable,the small manufacturer frequently doesnot find the drawback will repay him for the loss oftime.(272.) In many of the large establishments ofour manufacturing districts, substances are employedwhich are the produce of remote countries, and whichare, in several instances, almost peculiar to a fewsituations. The discovery of any new locality,OF LARGE FACTORIES. 219where such articles exist in abundance, is a matterof great importance to any establishment which consumesthem in large quantities ; and it has beenfound, in some instances, that the expense of sendingpersons to great distances, purposely to discoverand to collect such produce, has been amply repaid.Thus it has happened, that the snowy mountains ofSweden and Norway, as well as the warmer hills ofCorsica, have been almost stripped of one of theirvegetable productions, by agents sent expressly fromone of our largest establishments for the dying ofcalicoes. Owing to the same command of capital,and to the scale upon which the operations of largefactories are carried on, their returns admit of theexpense of sending out agents to examine into thewants and tastes of distant countries, as well as oftrying experiments, which, although profitable tothem, would be ruinous to smaller establishmentspossessing more limited resources.These opinions have been so well expressed in theReport of the Committee of the House of Commonson the Woollen Trade, in 1806, that we shall closethis chapter with an extract, in which the advantagesof great factories are summed up.Your committee have the satisfaction of seeing, that theapprehensions entertained of factories are not only viciousin principle, but they are practically erroneous ; to such adegree, that even the very opposite principles might bereasonably entertained. Nor would it be difficult to prove,that the factories, to a certain extent at least, and in thepresent day, seem absolutely necessary to the well-beingof the domestic system ; supplying those very particularswherein the domestic system must be acknowledged to be220 CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCESinherently defective : for it is obvious, that the littlemaster manufacturers cannot afford, like the man whopossesses considerable capital, to try the experimentswhich are requisite, and incur the risks, and even losses,which almost always occur, in inventing and perfectingnew articles of manufacture, or in carrying to a state ofgreater perfection articles already established. He cannotlearn, by personal inspection, the wants and habits,the arts, manufactures, and improvements of foreigncountries ; diligence, economy, and prudence, are therequisites of his character, not invention, taste, and enterprise;nor would he be warranted in hazarding the lossof any part of his small capital. He walks in a sureroad as long as he treads in the beaten track ; but hemust not deviate into the paths of speculation. Theowner of a factory, on the contrary, being commonlypossessed of a large capital, and having all his workmenemployed under his own immediate superintendence,may make experiments, hazard speculation, invent shorteror better modes of performing old processes, may introducenew articles, and improve and perfect old ones,thus giving the range to his taste and fancy, and, therebyalone enabling our manufacturers to stand the competitionwith their commercial rivals in other countries.Meanwhile, as is well worthy of remark (and experience*' abundantly warrants the assertion), many of these newfabrics and inventions, when their success is once esta-wished,become general among the whole body of maemanufacturers ; the domestic manufacturers themselves thusbenefiting, in the end, from those very factories whichhad been at first the objects of their jealousy. The historyof almost all our other manufactures, in which greatimprovements have been made of late years, in somecases at an immense expense, and after numbers ofunsuccessful experiments, strikingly illustrates and enforcesthe above remarks. It is besides an acknowledgedfact, that the owners of factories are often amongst theOF LARGE FACTORIES. 221most extensive purchasers at the halls, where they buyfrom thcx domestic clothier the established articles of manufacture,or are able at once to answer a great and suddenorder ; while, at home, and under their own superintendence,they make their fancy goods, and any articles of anewer, more costly, or more delicate quality', to which theyare enabled by the domestic system to apply a much largerproportion of their capital. Thus, the two systems, in-** stead of rivalling, are mutual aids to each other ; eachsupplying the other's defects, and promoting the other'sprosperity."222 ox THE POSITIONCHAP. XXIII.ON THE POSITION OF LARGE FACTORIES.(273.) It is found in every country, that the situationof large manufacturing establishments is confinedto particular districts. In the earlier historyof a manufacturing community, before cheap modesof transport have been extensively introduced, it willalmost always be found that manufactories are placednear those spots in which nature has produced the rawmaterial : especially in the case of articles of greatweight, and in those the value of which depends moreupon the material than upon the labour expended onit. Most of the metallic ores being exceedingly heavy,and being mixed up-with large quantities of weightyand useless materials, must be smelted at no greatdistance from the spot which affords them : fuel andpower are the requisites for reducing them ; and anyconsiderable fall of water in the vicinity will naturallybe resorted to for aid in the coarser exertions ofphysical force ; for pounding the ore, for blowing thefurnaces, or for hammering and rolling out the iron.There are indeed peculiar circumstances which willmodify this. Iron, coal, and limestone, commonlyoccur in the same tracts ; but the union of the fuelin the same locality with the ore does not exist withrespect to other metals. The tracts generally themost productive of metallic ores are, geologicallyOF LARGE FACTORIES. 223speaking, different from those affording coal : thus inCornwall there are veins of copper and of tin, but nobeds of coal. The copper ore, which requires a verylarge quantity of fuel for its reduction, is sent by seatothe coal-fields of Wales, and is smelted at Swansea; whilst the vessels which convey it, take backcoals to work the steam-engines for draining themines, and to smelt the tin, which requires for thatpurpose a much smaller quantity of fuel than copper.(274 ) Rivers passing through districts rich in coaland metals, will form the first high roads for the conveyanceof weighty produce to stations in which otherconveniences present themselves for the further applicationof human skill. Canals will succeed, or lendtheir aid to these ; and the yet exhausted applicationof steam and of gas, hold out a hope of attainingalmost the same advantages for countries to whichnature seemed for ever to have denied them. Manufactures,commerce, and civilization, ever follow theline of new and cheap communications. Twentyyears ago, the Mississippi poured the vast volume ofits waters in lavish profusion through thousands ofmiles of countries, which scarcely supported a fewwandering and uncivilized tribes of Indians, Thepower of the stream seemed to set at defiance theefforts of man to ascend its course ; and, as if torender the task still more hopeless, large trees, tornfrom the surrounding forests, were planted like stakesin its bottom, forming in some places barriers, inothers the nucleus of banks, accumulating? in thesame spot, which but for accident would have beenfree from both, the difficulties and dangers of sandbanksand of rocks. Four months of incessant toil224 ON THE POSITIONcould scarcely convey a small bark with its worn-outcrew two thousand miles up this stream. The samevoyage is now performed in fifteen days by largevessels impelled by steam, carrying hundreds ofpassengers enjoying all the comforts and luxuries ofcivilized life. Instead of the hut of the Indian, —and the far more unfrequent log-house of the thinlyscattered settlers, — villages, towns, and cities, havearisen on its banks ; and the same engine whichstems the force of these powerful waters, will probablytear from their bottom the obstructions whichhave hitherto impeded and rendered dangerous theirnavigation.*(275.) The accumulation of many large manufacturingestablishments in the same district has a ten-theamount of obstructions arising from the casual fixingof trees in the bottom of the river, may be estimated from theproportion of steam-boats destroyed by running upon them.The subjoined statement is taken from the American Almanacfor 1832: —Between the years 1811 and 1831, three hundred andforty-eight steam-boats were built on the Mississippi and itstributary streams. During that period a hundred and fifty'* were lost or worn outwornout 63lost by snags 36• ^^l inn imiiureu ciiiu inly < burnt 14j lost by collision 3by accidents not ascertained. 34"Thirty-six, or nearly one fourth, being destroyed by accidentalobstructions.Snag is the name given in America to trees which standnearly upright in the stream, with their roots fixed at thebottom.It is usual to divide off at the bow of the steam-boats awater-tight chamber, in order that when a hole is made in itby running against the snags, the water may not enter the restof the vessel and sink it instantly.OF LARGE FACTORIES. 225deny to bring together purchasers or their agentsfrom great distances, and thus to cause the institutionof a public mart or exchange. This contributes todiffuse information relative to the supply of raw material,and the state of demand for their produce,with which it is necessary manufacturers should bewell acquainted. The very circumstance of collectingperiodically, at one place, a large number both ofthose who supply the market and of those who requireits produce, tends strongly to check the accidentalfluctuations to which a small market is ever subject,as well as to render the average of the prices muchmore uniform.(276.) When capital has been invested in machinery,and in buildings for its accommodation, andwhen the inhabitants of the neighbourhood haveacquired a knowledge of the modes of working atit, reasons of considerable weight are required tocause its removal. Such changes of position dohowever occur ; and they have been alluded to bythe Committee on the Fluctuation of Manufacturers'Employment, as one of the sources interfering mostmaterially with an uniform rate of wages : it is thereforeof particular importance to the workmen to beacquainted with the real causes which have drivenmanufactures from their ancient seats.The migration or change of place of any manufacturehas sometimes arisen from improvements of machinerynot applicable to the spot where such manufacture wascarried on, as appears to have been the case with thewoollen manufacture, which has in great measure migratedfrom Essex, Suffolk, and other southern counties,to the northern districts, where coal for the use of thesteam-engine is much cheaper. But this change has, inQ226 ON THE POSITIONsome instances, been caused or accelerated by the conductof the workmen, in refusing a reasonable reduction ofwages, or opposing the introduction of some kind of improvedmachinery or process ; so that, during the dispute,another spot has in great measure supplied their place inthe market. Any violence used bif the workman againstthe property of their masters, and any unreasonable com-*' libation on their part, is almost sure thus to be injurious tothe7nselves.''*(277.) These removals become of serious consequencewhen the factories have been long established,because a population commensurate with their wantsinvariably grows up around them. The combinationsin Nottinghamshire, of persons under the name ofLuddites, drove a great number of lace-frames fromthat district, and caused establishments to be formedin Devonshire. We ought also to observe, that theresult of driving any establishment into a new district,where similar works have not previously existed,is not merely to place it out of the reach of such combinations; but, after a few years, the examples of itssuccess will most probably induce other capitalists inthe new district to engage in the same manufacture :and thus, although one establishment only should bedriven away, the workmen, through whose combinationits removal is effected, will not merely suffer bythe loss of that portion of demand for their labourwhich the factory caused ; but the value of thatlabour will itself be reduced by the competition of anew field of production.This passage is not printed in Italics in the original, butit has been thus marked in the above extract, from its importance,and from the conviction that the most extended discussionwill afford additional evidence of its truth.OF LARGE FACTORIES. 22?(278.) Another circumstance which has its influenceon this question, is the nature of the machinery.Heavy machinery, such as stamping-mills, steam-engines,&c., cannot readily be moved, and mustalways be taken to pieces for that purpose ; but whenthe machinery of a factory consists of a multitudeof separate engines, each complete in itself, and allput in motion by one source of power, such as that ofsteam, then the removal is much less inconvenient.Thus, stocking-frames, lace-machines, and looms,might, with but a small separation of their parts, betransported to more favourable positions.(279.) It is of great importance that the moreintelligent amongst the class of workmen shouldexamine into the correctness of these views ; because,without having their attention directed to them, thewhole class may, in some instances, be led by designingpersons to pursue a course, which, althoughplausible in appearance, is in reality at variance withtheir own best interests. I confess I am not withouta hope that this volume may fall into the hands ofworkmen, perhaps better qualified than myself toreason upon a subject which requires only plain commonsense, and whose powers are sharpened by itsimportance to their personal happiness. In askingtheir attention to the preceding remarks, and to thosewhich I shall offer respecting combinations, I canclaim only one advantage over them ; namely, that Inever have had, and in all human probability nevershall have, the slightest pecuniary interest, to influenceeven remotely, or by anticipation, the judgments Ihave formed on the facts which have come beforeme.q2228 ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.CHAP. XXIV.ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.(280.) One of the natural and almost inevitableconsequences of competition is the production of asupply much larger than the demand requires. Thisresult usually arises periodically ; and it is equallyimportant, both to the masters and to the workmen,to prevent its occurrence, or to foresee its arrival. Insituations where a great number of very small capitalistsexist, — where each master works himself and isassisted by his own family, or by a few journeymen, —and where a variety of different articles are produced,a curious system of compensation has arisenwhich in some measure diminishes the extent towhich fluctuations of wages would otherwise reach.This is accomplished by a species of middle-men orfactors, persons possessing some capital, who, wheneverthe price of any of the articles in which theydeal is greatly reduced, purchase it on their ownaccount, in the hopes of selling at a profit when themarket is better. These persons, in ordinary times,act as salesmen or agents, and make up assortmentsof goods at the market price, for the use of the homeor foreign dealer. They possess large warehousesin which to make up their orders, or keep in storearticles purchased during periods of depression ; thusacting as a kind of fly-wheel in equalizing the marketprice.ON OVER-MANUFACTURING. 229(281.) The effect of over-manufacturing upon greatestablishments is different. When an over supplyhas reduced prices, one of two events usually occurs :the first is a diminished payment for labour ; theother is a diminution of the number of hours duringwhich the labourers work, together with a diminishedrate of wages. In the former case production continuesto go on at its ordinary rate : in the latter,the production itself being checked, the supply againadjusts itself to the demand as soon as the stock onhand is worked off, and prices then regain theirformer level. The latter course appears, in the firstinstance, to be the best both for masters and men ;but there seems to be a difficulty in accomplishingthis, except where the trade is in few hands. Infact, it is almost necessary, for its success, that thereshould be a combination amongst the masters oramongst the men ; or, what is always far preferableto either, a mutual agreement for their joint interests.A combination among the men is difficult, and isalways attended with the evils which arise from theill-will excited against any persons who, in the perfectlyjustifiable exercise of their judgment, are disposednot to act with the majority. The combinationof the masters, on the other hand, is unavailing, unlessthe whole body of them agree : for if any one mastercan procure more labour for his money than the rest,he will be able to undersell them.(282.) If we look only at the interests of theconsumer, the case is different. Wien too large asupply has produced a great reduction of price, itopens the consumption of the article to a newclass, and increases the consumption of those who230 ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.previously employed it : it is therefore against theinterest of both these parties that a return to theformer price should occur. It is also certain, thatby the diminution of profit which the manufacturersuffers from the diminished price, his ingenuitymil be additionally stimulated ; — that he will applyhimself to discover other and cheaper sourcesfor the supply of his raw material, — that he willendeavour to contrive improved machinery whichshall manufacture it at a cheaper rate, — or try tointroduce new arrangements into his factory, whichshall render the economy of it more perfect. Inthe event of his success, by any of these courses orby their joint effects, a real and substantial goodwillbe effected. A larger portion of the public willreceive advantage from the use of the article, andthey will procure it at a lower price ; and the manufacturer,though his profit on each operation isreduced, will yet, by the more frequent returns onthe larger produce of his factory, find his real gainper cent, at the end of the year, nearly the same asit was before ; whilst the wages of the workman willreturn to their level, and both the manufacturer andthe workman will find the demand less fluctuatingfrom its being dependent on a larger number ofcustomers.(283.) It would be highly interesting, if we couldtrace, even approximately, through the history ofany great manufacture, the effects of gluts in producingimprovements in machinery, or in methods ofworking ; and if we could shew what addition to theannual quantity of goods previously manufactured,was produced by each alteration. It would probablyON OVER-MANUFACTURING. 231be found, that the increased quantity manufacturedhy the same capital ivhen worked with the new improvement,would produce nearly the same rate ofprofit as other modes of investment.Perhaps the manufacture of iron * would furnishthe best illustration of this subject ; because, byhaving the actual price of pig and bar iron at thesame place and at the same time, the effect of achange in the value of currency, as well as severalother sources of irregularity, would be removed.(284.*) At the present moment, whilst the manufacturersof iron are complaining of the ruinouslylow price of their produce, a new mode of smeltingiron is coming into use, which, if it realizes the statementof the patentees, promises to reduce greatly thecost of its production. The improvement consists inheating the air previously to employing it for blowingthe furnace. One of the results is, that coalmay be used instead of coke ; and this, in its turn,diminishes the quantity of limestone which is requiredfor the fusion of the iron stone.The following statement by the proprietors of thepatent is extracted from Brewster's Journal, 1832,p. 349 :The average price per ton of pig-iron, bar-iron, and coal,together with the price paid for labour at the works, for a longseries of years, would be very valuable, and I shall feel muchindebted to any gentleman who will favour me with it for any,even short, period.ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.** Comparative view of the quantity of materials required at** the Clyde Iron Works to smelt a ton of foundry pig-iron,and of the quantity of foundry pig-iron smelted from*' each furnace weekly.1. With air not heated Jand coke . . . )2. With air heated and)coke . . . .13. With air heated and)coals not coked . >Fuel in tousof 20 teachcwt.112 lbs.Ironstone.^'o""- 1 pig-iron.Tons2i3iSibiCwt.7^Tons.60Q5^^ Notes. — \st. To the coals stated in the second andthird lines, must be added 5 cwt. of small coals, requiredto heat the air.2d. The expense of the apparatus for applying theheated air will be from 200/. to 300/. per furnace."3</. No coals are now coked at the Clyde Iron Works;at all the three furnaces the iron is smelted with coals.Hath. The three furnaces are blown by a double-poweredsteam engine, with a steam cylinder 40 inches in diameter,and a blowing cylinder 80 inches in diameter, whichcompresses the air so as to carry 2a lbs. per square inch.There are two tuyeres to each furnace. The muzzles ofthe blow-pipes are 3 inches in diameter.6th. The air heated to upwards of 600° of Fahrenheit.It will melt lead at the distance of three inches from theorifice through which it issues from the pipe."(285.*) The increased effect produced by thusheating the air is by no means an obvious result ;and an explanation of its action will lead to somecurious views respecting the future application ofmachinery for blowing furnaces.Every cubic foot of atmospheric air, driven into aON OVER-MANUFACTURING. 233furnace, consists of two gases * ; about one-fifth beingoxygen, and four fifths azote.According to the present state of chemical knowlege,the oxygen alone is effective in producing heat ;and the operation of blowing a furnace may be thusanalyzed.1 . The air is forced into the furnace in a condensedstate, and, immediately expanding, abstracts heatfrom the surrounding bodies.2. Being itself of moderate temperature, it would,even without expansion, still require heat to raise itto the temperature of the hot substances to which itis to be applied.3. On coming into contact with the ignited substancesin the furnace, the oxygen unites with them,forming compounds which have less specific heatthan their separate constituents. Some of thesepass up the chimney in a gaseous state, whilst othersremain in the form of melted slags, floating on thesurface of the iron, which is fused by the heat thusset at liberty.4. The effects of the azote are precisely similar tothe first and second of those above described ; butit seems to form no combinations, and contributesnothing, in any stage, to augment the heat.The plan, therefore, of heating the air beforedriving it into the furnace saves the whole of thatheat which the fuel must have supplied in raising itfrom the temperature of the external air up to that of600° Fahrenheit ; thus rendering the fire more intense,and the glassy slags more fusible, and perhapsThe accurate proportions are, by measure, oxygen 21,azote 79.234 ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.also more effectually decomposing the iron ore.The same quantity of fuel, applied at once to thefurnace, would only prolong the duration of its heat,not augment its intensity.(286.*) The circumstance of so large a portion ofthe air driven into fiiraaces being not merely useless,but acting really as a cooling, instead of a heating,cause, added to the great waste of mechanicalpower in condensing it, amounting, in fact, to four-fifthsof the whole, clearly shews the defects of thepresent method, and the want of some better mode ofexciting combustion on a large scale. The followingsuggestions are thrown out as likely to leadto valuable results, even though they should proveineffectual for their professed object.The great difficulty appears to be to separate theoxygen, which aids combustion, from the azote whichimpedes it. If either of those gases becomes liquidat a lower pressure than the other, and if those pressuresare within the limits of our present powers ofcompression, the object might be accomplished.Let us assume, for example, that oxygen becomesliquid under a pressure of 200 atmospheres, whilstazote requires a pressure of 250. Then if atmosphericair be condensed to the two hundredth part ofits bulk, the oxygen will be found in a liquid state atthe bottom of the vessel in which the condensationis effected, and the upper part of the vessel willcontain only azote in the state of gas. The oxygen,now liquified, may be drawn off for the supply of thefurnace ; but as it ought, when used, to have a verymoderate degree of condensation, its expansive forcemay be previously employed in working a smallON OVER-MANUFACTURING. 235engine. The compressed azote also in the upperpart of the vessel, though useless for combustion,may be employed as a source of power, and by itsexpansion, work another engine. By these meansthe mechanical force exerted in the original compressionwould all be restored, except that smallpart retained for forcing the pure oxygen into thegrimace, and the much larger part lost in the frictionof the apparatus.(287.*) The principal difficulty to be apprehendedin these operations is that of packing a workingpiston, so as to bear the pressure of 200 or 250atmospheres : this does not seem insurmountable.It is possible that the chemical combination ofthe two gases which constitute common air maybeproduced by such pressures : if this should bethecase, it might offer a new mode of manufacturingnitrous or nitric acids. The result of such experimentsmight take another direction : if the condensationwere performed over liquids, it is possible thatthey might enter into new chemical combinations.Thus, if air were highly condensed in a vessel containingwater, the latter might unite with an additionaldose of oxygen,* which might afterwards be easilydisengaged for the use of the furnace.(288.*) Another cause of the uncertainty of the resultsof such an experiment arises from the possibilitythat nitrogen may really contribute to the fusion of themixed mass in the furnace, though its mode of operatingis at present unknown. An examination ofthe nature of the gases issuing from the chimneys ofiron-foundries, might perhaps assist in clearing up thisDeutoxide of hydrogen, the oxygenated water of Heard.236 ON OVER-MANUFACTURING.point ; and, in fact, if such inquiries were also institutedupon the various products of all furnaces, wemight expect that they would elucidate many pointsin the economy of the metallurgic art.(289.*) It is possible also that the action of oxygenin a liquid state might be exceedingly corrosive, andthat the containing vessels must be lined with platinumor some other substance of very difficult oxydation ;and most probably new and unexpected compoundswould be formed at such pressures. In some experimentsmade by Count Rumford in 1797, on the forceof fired gunpowder, he noticed a solid compound,which always appeared in the gun-barrel when theignited powder had no means of escaping ; and, inthose cases, the gas which escaped on removing therestraining pressure was usually inconsiderable.(290.*) The form of the iron furnace must probablybe changed, and perhaps it may be necessaryto direct the flame from the ignited fuel upon theore to be fused instead of mixing it with the fuel :by a proper regulation of the blast, an oxygenatingor a designating flame might be procured ; andfrom the intensity of the flame, combined with itschemical agency, we might expect the most refractoryore to be smelted, and that ultimately the metals atpresent almost infusible, such as platinum, titanium,and others, might be brought into common use, andthus effect a revolution in the arts.(291.) Supposing, on the occurrence of a glut,that new and cheaper modes of producing are notdiscovered, and that the production continues to exceedthe demand, then it is apparent that too muchcapital is employed in the trade ; and after a time,ON OVER-MANUFACTURING. 237the diminished rate of profit vdW drive some of themanufacturers to other occupations. What particularindividuals will leave it must depend on a varietyof circumstances. Superior industry and attentionwill enable some factories to make a profit ratherbeyond the rest ; superior capital in others willenable them, without these advantages, to supportcompetition longer, even at a loss, with the hope ofdriving the smaller capitalists out of the market, andthen reimbursing themselves by an advanced price.It is, however, better for all parties, that this contestshould not last long ; and it is important, that noartificial restraint should interfere to prevent it. Aninstance of such restriction, and of its injuriouseffect, occurs at the port of Newcastle, where aparticular act of parliament requires that everyship shall be loaded in its turn. The Committeeof the House of Commons, in their Report on theCoal Trade, state that, " Under the regulations*' contained in this act, if more ships enter intothe trade than can be profitably employed init, the loss produced by detention in port, andwaiting for a cargo, which must consequently takeplace, instead of falling, as it naturally would,upon particular ships, and forcing them from thetrade, is now divided evenly amongst them ; andthe loss thus created is shared by the whole num-here'—Report, p. 6.(292.) It is not pretended, in this short view, totrace out all the effects or remedies of over-manufacturing; the subject is difficult, and, unlike some ofthe questions already treated, requires a combined viewof the relative influence of many concurring causes.238 INQUIRIES PREVIOUS TOCHAP. XXV.INQUIRIES PREVIOUS TO COMMENCING ANYMANUFACTORY.(293.) There are many inquiries which ought alwaysto be made previous to the commencement ofthe manufacture of any new article. These chieflyrelate to the expense of tools, machinery, raw materials,and all the outgoings necessary for its production,— to the extent of demand which is likely toarise, — to the time in which the circulating capitalv/ill be replaced, — and to the quickness or slownesswith which the new article will supersede thosealready in use.(294.) The expense of tools and of new machineswill be more difficult to ascertain, in proportion asthey differ from those already employed ; but thevariety in constant use in our various manufactories,is such, that few inventions now occur in which considerableresemblance may not be traced to othersalready constructed. The cost of the raw material isusually less difficult to determine ; but cases occasionallyarise in which it becomes important toexamine whether the supply, at the given price, canbe depended upon : for, in the case of a small consumption,the additional demand arising from afactory may produce a considerable temporary rise,though it may ultimately reduce the price.COMMENCING ANY MANUFACTORY. 239(295.) The quantity of any new article likely tobe consumed is a most important subject for theconsideration of the projector of a new manufacture.As these pages are not intended for the instruction ofthe manufacturer, but rather for the purpose of givinga general view of the subject, an illustration of theway in which such questions are regarded by practicalmen, will, perhaps, be most instructive. Thefollowing extract from the evidence given before aCommittee of the House of Commons, in the Reporton Artizans and Machinery, shews the extent towhich articles apparently the most insignificant, areconsumed, and the view which the manufacturertakes of them.The person examined on this occasion was Mr.Ostler, a manufacturer of glass beads and other toysof the same substance from Birmingham. Severalof the articles made by him were placed upon thetable, for the inspection of the Committee of theHouse of Commons, which held its meetings in oneof the committee-rooms.Question. Is there any thing else you have to stateupon this subject ?Answer. Gentlemen may consider the articles on thetable as extremely insignificant ; but perhaps I may surprisethem a little, by mentioning the following fact.Eighteen years ago, on my first journey to London, arespectable-looking man, in the city, asked me if I couldsupply him with dolls' eyes ; and I was foolish enoughto feel half offended ; I thought it derogatory to my newdignity as a manufacturer, to make dolls' eyes. He tookme into a room quite as wide, and perhaps twice thelength of this, and we had just room to walk betweenstacks, from the floor to the ceiling, of parts of dolls. He240 INQUIRIES PREVIOUS TO"said, 'These are only the legs and arms; the trunksare below.' But I saw enough to convince me, that*' he wanted a great many eyes ; and, as the article appearedquite in my own line of business, I said I wouldtake an order by way of experiment ; and he shewed meseveral specimens. I copied the order. He orderedvarious quantities, and of various sizes and qualities.On returning to the Tavistock hotel, I found that theorder amounted to upwards of 500/. I went into thecountry, and endeavoured to make them. I had someof the most ingenious glass toy-makers in the kingdomin my service ; but when I shewed it to them, theyshook their heads, and said they had often seen the*' article before, but could not make it. I engaged themby presents to use their best exertions ; but after tryingand wasting a great deal of time for three or four weeks,I was obliged to relinquish the attempt. Soon afterwardsI engaged in another branch of business (chandelierfurniture), and took no more notice of it. Abouteighteen months ago I resumed the trinket trade, andthen determined to think of the dolls' eyes ; and abouteight months since, I accidentally met with a poor fellowwho had impoverished himself by drinking, and whowas dying in a consumption, in a state of great want.I showed him ten sovereigns ; and he said he wouldinstruct me in the process. He was in such a statethat he could not bear the effluvia of his own lamp ;but though I was very conversant with the manual part ofthe business, and it related to things I was daily in thehabit of seeing, I felt I could do nothing from his description.(I mention this to show how difficult it is toconvey, by description, the mode of working.) He tookme into his garret, where the poor fellow had economizedto such a degree, that he actually used the entrails and fatof poultry from Leadenhall market to save oil (the priceof the article having been lately so much reduced bycompetition at home.) In an instant, before 1 had seenCOMMENCING ANY MANUFACTORY. 241him make three, I felt competent to make a gross ; andthe difference between his mode and that of my own workmenwas so trifling, that I felt the utmost astonishment.Quest. You can now make dolls' eyes?Ans. I can. As it was eighteen years ago that Ireceived the order I have mentioned, and feeling doubtfulof my own recollection, though very strong, and suspectingthat it could [not] have been to the amount stated, I lastnight took the present very reduced price of that article(less than half now of what it was then), and calculatingthat every child in this country not using a doll till twoyears old, and throwing it aside at seven, and having anew one annually, I satisfied myself that the eyes alonewould produce a circulation of a great many thousandpounds. I mention this merely to shew the importance"of trifles; and to assign one reason, amongst many, formy conviction, that nothing but personal communication'* can enable our manufactures to be transplanted."(296.) In many instances it is exceedingly difficultto estimate beforehand the sale of an article, or theeffects of a machine ; a case, howsoever, occurred duringa recent inquiry, which although not quite appropriateas an illustration of probable demand, is highlyinstructive as to the mode of conducting investigationsof this nature. A committee of the House ofCommons was appointed to inquire into the tolls properto be placed on steam-carriages ; a question, apparently,of difficult solution, and upon which widelydifferent opinions had been formed, if we may judge bythe very different rate of tolls imposed upon such carriagesby different " turnpike trusts." The principleson which the committee conducted the inquiry were,that " The only ground on which a fair claim totoll can be made on any public road, is to raiseR242 INQUIRIES PREVIOUS TOa fund, which, with the strictest economy, shall bejust sufficient, — first, to repay the expense of itsoriginal formation ; — secondly, to maintain it ingood and sufficient repair." They first endeavouredto ascertain, from competent persons, theeffect of the atmosphere alone in deteriorating a well-constructedroad. The next step was, to determinethe proportion in which the road was injured, by theeffect of the horses' feet compared with that of thewheels. Mr. Macneill, the superintendent, under Mr.Telford, of the Holyhead roads, was examined, andproposed to estate the relative injury, from thecomparative quantities of iron worn off from theshoes of the horses, and from the tire of the wheels.From the data he possessed, respecting the consumptionof iron for the tire of the wheels, and for theshoes of the horses, of one of the Birmingham day-coaches,he estimated the wear and tear of roads,arising from the feet of the horses, to be three times asgreat as that arising from the wheels. Supposingrepairs amounting to a hundred pounds to be requiredon a road travelled over by a fast coach at therate of ten miles an hour, and the same amount ofinjury to occur on another road, used only by waggons,moving at the rate of three miles an hour, Mr.Macneill divides the injuries in the following proportions: —COMMENCING ANY MANUFACTORY.iNJURf ARISING FROMFastCoach.HeavyWaggon.Atmospheric changesWheelsHorses' Feet drawingTotal Injury20 135.5 144.5Supposing it, therefore, to be ascertained that thewheels of steam-carriages do no more injury to roadsthan other carriages of equal weight travelling withthe same velocity, the committee now possessed themeans of approximating to a just rate of toll forsteam-carriages.*(297.) As connected with this subject, and asaffording most valuable information upon points inwhich, previous to experiment, widely differentopinions have been entertained; the following extractis inserted from Mr. Telford's Report on the Stateof the Holyhead and Liverpool Roads. The instrumentemployed for the comparison was inventedby Mr. Macneill ; and the road between Londonand Shrewsbury was selected for the place of experiment.The general results, when a waggon weighing21 cwt. was used on different sorts of roads, areasfollows : —One of the result of these inquiries is, that every coachwhich travels from London to Birmingham distributes abouteleven pounds of wrought iron, along the line of road betweenthose two places.R 2244 INQUIRIES PREVIOUS TOlbs.1. On well-made pavement, the draught is . . 332. On a broken stone surface, or old flint road . 653. On a gravel road 1474 On a broken stone road, upon a rough pavementfoundation 465, On a broken stone surface, upon a bottomingof concrete, formed of Parker's cement andgravel 46The following statement relates to the force requiredto draw a coach weighing 18 cwt., exclusive ofseven passengers, up roads of various inclinations :Force requiredForceForceINCLINATION.at Six Miles:it Eight Milesat Ten Milesper Hour.per Hour.per Hour.lbs.lbs.lbs.1 in 201 in 261 in 301 in 401 in 600(298.) In establishing a new manufactory, the timein which the goods produced can be brought to marketand the returns be realized, should be thoroughlyconsidered, as well as the time the new article will taketo supersede those already in use. If it is destroyedin using, the new produce will be much more easilyintroduced. Steel pens readily took the place ofquills ; and a new form of pen would, if it possessedany advantage, as easily supersede the present one.A new lock, however secure, and however cheap,COMMENCING ANY MANUFACTORY. 245would not so readily make its way. If less expensivethan the old, it would be employed in newwork : but old locks would rarely be removed tomake way for it ; and even if perfectly secure, itsadvance would be slow.(299.) Another element in this question whichshould not be altogether omitted, is the oppositionwhich the new manufacture may create by its realor apparent injury to other interests, and the probableeffect of that opposition. This is not always foreseen; and when anticipated is often inaccuratelyestimated. On the first establishment of steamboatsfrom London to Margate, the proprietors of thecoaches running on that line of road petitioned theHouse of Commons against them, as likely to lead tothe ruin of the coach proprietors. It was, however,found that the fear was imaginary ; and in a veryfew years, the number of coaches on that road wasconsiderably increased, apparently through the verymeans which were thought to be adverse to it. Thefear, which is now entertained, that steam-power andrail-roads may drive out of employment a large proportionof the horses at present in use, is probablynot less unfounded. On some particular lines suchan effect might be produced ; but in all probabilitythe number of horses employed in conveying goodsand passengers to the great lines of rail-road, wouldexceed that which is at present used.246 ON A NEW SystemCHAP XXVI.*ON A NEW SYSTEM OF MANUFACTURING.(300.*) A MOST erroneous and unfortunate opinionprevails amongst workmen in many manufacturingcountries, that their own interest and that of theiremployers are at variance. The consequences are, —that valuable machinery is sometimes neglected, andeven privately injured, — that new improvements, introducedby the masters, do not receive a fair trial, —and that the talents and observations of the workmenare not directed to the improvement of the processesin which they are employed. This error is, perhaps,more prevalent where the establishment of manufactorieshas been of recent origin, and where the numberof persons employed in them is not very large : thus,in some of the Prussian provinces on the Rhine itprevails to a much greater extent than in Lancashire.Perhaps its diminished prevalence in ourown manufacturing districts, arises partly from thesuperior information spread amongst the workmen ;and partly from the frequent example of persons, whoby good conduct and an attention to the interestsof their employers for a series of years, have becomeforemen, or who have ultimately been admittedinto advantageous partnerships. Convinced as I am,from my own observation, that the prosperity andOF MANUFACTURING. 247success of the master manufacturer is essential tothe welfare of the workman, I am yet compelled toadmit that this connexion is, in many cases, tooremote to be always understood by the latter :and whilst it is perfectly true that workmen, as aclass, derive advantage from the prosperity of theiremployers, I do not think that each individual partakesof that advantage exactly in proportion to theextent to which he contributes towards it ; nor do Iperceive that the resulting advantage is as immediateas it might become under a different system.(301.) It would be of great importance, if, inevery large establishment the mode of paymentcould be so arranged, that every person employedshould derive advantage from the success of thewhole ; and that the profits of each individual shouldadvance, as the factory itself produced profit, withoutthe necessity of making any change in the wages.This is by no means easy to effect, particularlyamongst that class whose daily labour procures forthem their daily food. The system which has longbeen pursued in working the Cornish mines, althoughnot exactly fulfilling these conditions, yet possessadvantages which make it worthy of attention, ashaving nearly approached towards them, and astending to render fully effective the faculties of allengaged in it. I am the more strongly induced toplace before the reader a short sketch of that system,because its similarity to the one which I shall afterwardsrecommend for trial, will perhaps remove someobjections to it, and may also furnish some valuablehints for conducting any experiment which might beundertaken.248 ON A NEW SYSTEM(302.) In the mines of Cornwall, almost the wholeof the operations, both above and below ground, arecontracted for. The manner of making the contractis nearly as follows. At the end of every two months,the work which it is proposed to carry on during thenext period is marked out. It is of three kinds.1. Outwork, which consists in sinking shafts, drivinglevels, and making excavations : this is paid for bythe fathom in depth, or in length, or by the cubicfathom. 2. Tribute, which is payment for raisingand dressing the ore, by means of a certain part of itsvalue when merchantable. It is this mode of paymentwhich produces such admirable effects. Theminers, who are to be paid in proportion to therichness of the vein, and the quantity of metalextracted from it, naturally become quick-sighted inthe discovery of ore, and in estimating its value ; andit is their interest to avail themselves of every improvementthat can bring it more cheaply to market.3. Dressing. The " Tributes," who dig and dressthe ore, can seldom afford to dress the coarser partsof what they raise, at their contract price ; thisportion, therefore, is again let out to other personswho agree to dress it at an advanced price.The lots of ore to be dressed, and the works to becarried on, having been marked out some days before,and having been examined by the men, a kind ofauction is held by the captains of the mine, in whicheach lot is put up, and bid for by different gangs ofmen. The work is then offered, at a price usuallybelow that bid at the auction, to the lowest bidder,who rarely declines it at the rate proposed. Thetribute is a certain sum out of every twenty shillings'OF MANUFACTURING. 249worth of ore raised, and may vary from threepenceto fourteen or fifteen shillings. The rateof earnings in tribute is very uncertain : if a vein,which was poor when taken, becomes rich, the menearn money rapidly ; and instances have occurredin which each miner of a gang has earned a hundredpounds in the two months. These extraordinarycases, are, perhaps, of more advantage to the ownersof the mine than even to the men ; for whilst theskill and industry of the workmen are greatly stimulated,the owner himself always derives still greateradvantage from the improvement of the vein.* Thissystem has been introduced, by Mr. Taylor into thelead mines of Flintshire, into those at Skipton, inYorkshire, and into some of the copper mines ofCumberland; and it is desirable that it should becomegeneral, because no other mode of payment affordsto the workmen a measure of success so directlyproportioned to the industry, the integrity, and thetalent, which they exert.(303.*) I shall now present the outline of a systemwhich appears to me to be pregnant with the mostimportant results, both to the class of workmen andto the country at large ; and which, if acted upon,would, in my opinion, permanently raise the workingclasses, and greatly extend the manufacturing system.The general principles on which the proposedsystem is founded, are —1st. That a considerable part of the wages receivedFor a detailed account of the method of working theCornish mines, see a paper of Mr. John Taylor's, Transactionsof the Geological Society, vol. ii. p. 309.250 ON A NEW SYSTEMhy each person employed should depend on the profitsmade by the establishment ; and,2d. That every person connected with it shouldderive more advantage from applying any improvementhe might discover to the factory in which he isemployed, than he could by any other course.(304*) It would be difficult to prevail on the largecapitalist to enter upon any system, which wouldchange the division of the profits arising from theemployment of his capital in setting skill and labourin action ; any alteration, therefore, must be expectedrather from the small capitalist, or from the higherclass of workmen, who combine the two characters ;and to these latter classes, whose welfare will be firstaffected, the change is most important. I shall thereforefirst point out the course to be pursued in makingthe experiment ; and then, taking as an illustration aparticular branch of trade, shall examine the meritsand defects of the proposed system as applied to it.(305.*) Let us suppose, in some large manufacturingtown, ten or twelve of the most intelligent andskilful workmen to unite, whose characters for sobrietyand steadiness are good, and are well known amongtheir own class. Such persons will each possess somesmall portion of capital ; and let them join with one ortwo others who have raised themselves into the classof small master manufacturers, and, therefore possessrather a larger portion of capital. Let these persons,after well considering the subject, agree to establisha manufactory of fire-irons and fenders ; andlet us suppose that each of the ten workmen can commandforty pounds, and each of the small capitalistspossesses two hundred pounds : thus they haveOF MANUFACTURING. 251a capital of 800Z. with which to commence business ;and, for the sake of simplifying, let us further supposethe labour of each of these twelve persons tobe worth two pounds a week. One portion of theircapital will be expended in procuring the toolsnecessary for their trade, which we will take at400^., and this must be considered as their fixedcapital. The remaining 400/. must be employedas circulating capital, in purchasing the iron withwhich their articles are made, in paying the rent oftheir workshops, and in supporting themselves andtheir families until some portion of it is replaced bythe sale of the goods produced.(30G*.) Now the first question to be settled is,what proportion of the profit should be allowed forthe use of capital, and what for skill and labour ? Itdoes not seem possible to decide this question byany abstract reasoning ; if the capital supplied byeach partner is equal, all difficulty will be removed ;if otherwise, the proportion must be left to find itslevel, and will be discovered by experience ; and itis probable that it will not fluctuate much. Let ussuppose it to be agreed that the capital of 800/. shallreceive the wages of one workman. At the end ofeach week every workman is to receive one pound aswages, and one pound is to be divided amongst theowners of the capital. After a few weeks thereturns will begin to come in ; and they will soon becomenearly uniform. Accurate accounts should bekept of every expense and of all the sales ; and at theend of each week the profit should be divided. Acertain portion should be laid aside as a reservedfund, another portion for repair of the tools, and the252 ON A NEW SYSTEMremainder being divided into thirteen parts, one ofthese parts would be divided amongst the capitalistsand one belong to each workman. Thus each would, inordinary circumstances, make up his usual wages oftwo pounds weekly. If the factory went on prosperously,the wages of the men would increase; if thesales fell off they would be diminished. It is importantthat every person employed in the establishment, Whatevermight be the amount paid for his services, whetherhe act as labourer or porter — as the clerk who keeps theaccounts, or as book-keeper employed for a few hoursonce a week to superintend them, should receive onehalf of what his service is worth in fixed salary, theother part varying with the success of the undertaking.(307.*) In such a factory, of course, division oflabour would be introduced ; some of the workmenwould be constantly employed in forging the fire-irons,others in polishing them, others in piercing andforming the fenders. It would be essential that thetime occupied in each process, and also its expense,should be well ascertained ; information which wouldsoon be obtained very precisely. Now, if a workmanshould find a mode of shortening any of theprocesses, he would confer a benefit on the wholeparty, even if they received but a small part of theresulting profit. For the promotion of such discoveries,it would be desirable that those who make themshould either receive some reward, to be determinedafter a sufficient trial by a committee assemblingperiodically ; or if they be of high importance, thatthe discoverer should receive one-half, or two-thirds,of the profit resulting from them during the nextOF MANUFACTURING. 253year, or some other determinate period, as might befound expedient. As the advantages of such improvementswould be clear gain to the factory, it isobvious that such a share might be allowed to theinventor, that it would be for his interest rather togive the benefit of them to his partners, than to disposeof them in any other way.(308.*) The result of such arrangements in a factorywould be,1. That every person engaged in it would have adirect interest in its prosperity ; since the effect of anysuccess, or falling off, would almost immediately producea corresponding change in his weekly receipts.2. Every person concerned in the factory wouldhave an immediate interest in preventing any wasteor mismanagement in all the others.3. The talents of all connected With it would bestrongly directed to its improvement in every department.4. None but workmen of high character and qualificationscould obtain admission into such establishments; because when any additional hands wererequired, it would be the common interest of all toadmit only the most respectable and skilful ; and itwould be far less easy to impose upon a dozen workmenthan upon the single proprietor of a factory.5. When any circumstance produced a glut in themarket, more skill would be directed to diminishingthe cost of production ; and a portion of the timeof the men might then be occupied in repairing andimproving their tools, for which a reserved findwould pay, thus checking present, and at the sametime facilitating future production.254 ON A NEW SYSTEM6. Another advantage, of no ordinary value, wouldbe the total removal of all real or imaginary causesfor combinations. The workmen and the capitalistwould so shade into each other, — would so evidentlyhave a common interest, and their difficultiesand distress would be mutually so well understood,that, instead of combining to oppress one another,the only combination which could exist would be amost powerful union between both parties to overcometheir common difficulties.(309*.) One of the difficulties attending such asystem is, that capitalists would at first fear to embarkin it, imagining that the workmen would receivetoo large a share of the profits : and it is quite truethat the workmen would have a larger share thanat present : but, at the same time, it is presumedthe effect of the whole system would be, that thetotal profits of the establishment being much increased,the smaller proportion allowed to capital under thissystem would yet be greater in actual amount thanthat which results to it from the larger share in thesystem now existing.(310.*) It is possible that the present laws relatingto partnerships might interfere with factories so conducted.If this interference could not be obviatedby confining their purchases under the proposedsystem to ready money, it would be desirable toconsider what changes in the law would be necessaryto its existence : — and this furnishes anotherreason for entering into the question of limited partnerships.(311*.) A difficulty would occur also in dischargingworkmen who behaved ill, or who were not competentOF MANUFACTURING. 255to their work ; this would arise from their having acertain interest in the reserved fund, and, perhaps,from their possessing a certain portion of the capitalemployed ; but without entering into detail, it maybeobserved, that such cases might be determined onby meetings of the whole establishment ; and that ifthe policy of the laws favoured such establishments,it would scarcely be more difficult to enforce justregulations, than it now is to enforce some which areunjust, by means of combinations either amongst themasters or the men.(312.*) Some approach to this system is alreadypractised in several trades : the mode of conductingthe Cornish mines has already been alluded to ; thepayment to the crew of whaling ships is governed bythis principle ; the profits arising from fishing withnets on the south coast of England are thus divided :one-half the produce belongs to the owner of the boatand net ; the other half is divided in equal portionsbetween the persons using it, who are also bound toassist in repairing the net when injured.236 ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY.CHAP. XXVII.ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY.(313.) The power of inventing mechanical contrivances,and of combining machinery, does notappear, if wee may judge from the frequency of itsoccurrence, to be a difficult or a rare gift. Of the vastmultitude of inventions which have been producedalmost daily for a series of years, a large part hasfailed from the imperfect nature of the first trials ;whilst a still larger portion, which had escaped themechanical difficulties, failed only because the economyof their operations was not sufficiently attendedto.The commissioners appointed to examine into themethods proposed for preventing the forgery of banknotes,state in their report, that out of one hundredand seventy-eight projects communicated to the Bankand to the commissioners, there were only twelve ofsuperior skill, and nine which it was necessary moreparticularly to examine.(314.) It is however a curious circumstance, thatalthough the power of combining machinery is socommon, yet the more beautiful combinations areexceedingly rare. Those which command our admirationequally by the perfection of their effects andthe simplicity of their means, are found only amongstthe happiest productions of genius.ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY. 257To produce movements even of a complicatedkind is not difficult. There exist a great multitudeof known contrivances for all the more usual purposes,and if the exertion of moderate power is theend of the mechanism to be contrived, it is possibleto construct the whole machine upon paper, and tojudge of the proper strength to be given to each partas well as to the frame-work which supports it, andalso of its ultimate effect, long before a single part ofit has been executed. In fact, all the contrivance,and all the improvements, ought first to be representedin the drawings.(315.) On the other hand, there are effects dependentupon physical or chemical properties for thedetermination of which no drawings will be of anyuse. These are the legitimate objects of direct trials.For example ; — if the ultimate result of an engine isto be that it shall impress letters on a copper-plateby means of steel punches forced into it, all themechanism by which the punches and the copper areto be moved at stated intervals, and brought intocontact, is within the province of drawing, and themachinery may be arranged entirely upon paper.But a doubt may reasonably spring up, whether thebur that will be raised round the letter, which hasbeen already punched upon the copper, may not interferewith the proper action of the punch for the letterwhich is to be punched next adjacent to it. It mayalso be feared that the effect of punching the secondletter, if it be sufficiently near to the first, maydistort the form of that first figure. If neither ofthese evils should arise, still the bur produced bythe punching might be expected to interfere with the258 ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY.goodness of the impression produced by the copperplate; and the plate itself, after having all but itsedge covered with figures, might change its form,from the unequal condensation which it must sufferin this process, so as to render it very difficult to takeimpressions from it at all. It is impossible by anydrawings to solve these difficulties, experiment alonecan determine their effect. Such experiments havingbeen made, it is found that if the sides of the steelpunch are nearly at right angles to the face of theletter, the bur produced is very inconsiderable ; — thatat the depth which is sufficient for copper-plateprinting, no distortion of the adjacent letters takesplace, although those letters are placed very close toeach other ; — that the small bur which arises mayeasily be scraped off ; — and that the copper-plateis not distorted by the condensation of the metal inpunching, but is perfectly fit to print from, after it hasundergone that process.(316.) The next stage in the progress of an invention,after the drawings are finished and the preliminaryexperiments have been made, if any such shouldbe requisite, is the execution of the machine itself.It can never be too strongly impressed upon theminds of those who are devising new machines, thatto make the most perfect drawings of every part tendsessentially both to the success of the trial, and toeconomy in arriving at the result. The actual executionfrom working drawings is comparatively aneasy task ; provided always that good tools are employed,and that methods of working are adopted, inwhich the perfection of the part constructed dependsOK CONTRIVING MACHINERY. 259less on the personal skill of the workman, than uponthe certainty of the method itself.The causes of failure in this stage most frequentlyderive their origin from errors in the preceding one ;and it is sufficient merely to indicate a few of theirsources. They frequently arise from having neglectedto take into consideration that metals are not perfectlyrigid but elastic. A steel cylinder of smalldiameter must not be regarded as an inflexible rod ;but in order to ensure its perfect action as an axis, itmust be supported at proper intervals. Again, thethe strength and stiffness of the framing which supportsthe mechanism must be carefully attended to.It should always be recollected, that the addition ofsuperfluous matter to the immovable parts of a machineproduces no additional momentum, and thereforeis not accompanied with the same evil that ariseswhen the moving parts are increased in weight.(317.) The stiffness of the framing in a machineproduces an important advantage. If the bearingsof the axis (those places at which they are supported)are once placed in a straight line, they willremain so, if the framing be immovable ; whereasif the framework changes its form, though ever soslightly, considerable friction is immediately produced.This effect is so well understood in thedistricts where spinning factories are numerous, that,in estimating the expense of working a new factory,it is allowed that five per cent, on the power of thesteam-engine ^^^ll be saved if the building is fireproof:for the greater strength and rigidity of a fireproofbuilding prevents the movement of the longshafts or axes which drive the machinery, from being260 ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY.impeded by the friction that would arise from theslightest deviation in any of the bearings.(318.) In conducting experiments upon machinery,it is quite a mistake to suppose that any imperfectmechanical work is good enough for such a purpose.If the experiment is worth making, it ought to betried with all the advantages of which the state ofmechanical art admits ; for an imperfect trial maycause an idea to be given up, which better workmanshipmight have proved to be practicable. On theother hand, when once the efficiency of a contrivancehas been established, with good workmanship, it willbe easy afterwards to ascertain the degree of perfectionwhich will suffice for its due action.(319.) It is partly owing to the imperfection of theoriginal trials, and partly to the gradual improvementsin the art of making machinery, that manyinventions which have been tried, and given up inone state of art, have at another period been eminentlysuccessful. The idea of printing by meansof moveable types had probably suggested itself tothe imagination of many persons conversant withimpressions taken either from blocks or seals. Wefind amongst the instruments discovered in theremains of Pompeii and Herculaneum, stamps forwords formed out of one piece of metal, and includingseveral letters. The idea of separating theseletters, and of combining them into other words,for the purpose of stamping a book, could scarcelyhave failed to occur to many : but it would almostcertainly have been rejected by those best versedin the mechanical arts of that time ; for the workmenof those days must have instantly perceived theON CONTRIVING MACHINERY. 261impossibility of producing many thousand pieces ofwood or metal, fitting so perfectly and ranging souniformly, as the types or blocks of wood used in theart of printing.The principle of the press which bears the name ofBranch, was known about a century and a halfbefore the machine, to which it gave rise, existed ;but the imperfect state of mechanical art in the timeof the discoverer, would have effectually deterredhim, if the application of it had occurred to his mind,from attempting to employ it in practice as an instrumentfor exerting force.These considerations prove the propriety of repeating,at the termination of intervals during which theart of making machinery has received any greatimprovement, the trials of methods which, althoughfounded upon just principles, had previously failed.(320.) When the drawings have been properlymade, and the machine has been well executed, andeven when the work it produces possesses all thequalities which were anticipated, still the inventionmay fail ; that is, it may fail of being brought intogeneral practice. This will most frequently arisefrom the circumstance of its producing its work at agreater expense than that at which it can be made byother methods.(321.) Whenever the new, or improved machine,is intended to become the basis of a manufacture, itis essentially requisite that the whole expense attendingits operations should be fully considered beforeits construction is undertaken. It is almost alwaysvery difficult to make this estimate of the expense :the more complicated the mechanism, the less easy is2G2 ON Contriving .Al ACIIINERY.the task ; and in cases of great complexity andextent of machinery it is almost impossible. It hasbeen estimated roughly, that the first individual ofany newly-invented machine, will cost about fivetimes as much as the construction of the second, anestimate which is, perhaps, sufficiently near the truth.If the second machine is to be precisely like thefirst, the same drawings, and the same patterns willanswer for it ; but if, as usually happens, some improvementshave been suggested by the experience ofthe first, these must be more or less altered. When,however, two or three machines have been completed,and many more are wanted, they can usuallybe produced at much less than one-fifth of the expenseof the original invention.(322.) The arts of contriving, of drawing, andof executing, do not usually reside in their greatestperfection in one individual ; and in this, as in otherarts, the division of labour must be applied. Thebest advice which can be offered to a projector ofany mechanical invention, is to employ a respectabledraughtsman ; w^io, if he has had a large experiencein his profession, will assist in finding out whetherthe contrivance is new, and can then make workingdrawings of it. The first step, however, the ascertainingwhether the contrivance has the merit ofnovelty, is most important ; for it is a maxim equallyjust in all the arts, and in every science, that the manwho aspires to fortune or to fame by new discoveries,must be content to examine with care the knowledge ofhis contemporaries, or to exhaust his efforts in inventingagain, what he will most probably find hasbeen better executed before.ON CONTRIVING MACHINERY. 263(323.) This, nevertheless, is a subject upon whicheven ingenious men are often singularly negligent.There is, perhaps, no trade or profession existing inwhich there is so much quackery, so much ignoranceof the scientific principles, and of the history of theirown art, with respect to its resources and extent, asare to be met with amongst mechanical projectors.The self-constituted engineer, dazzled with thebeauty of some, perhaps, really original contrivance,assumes his new profession with as little suspicionthat previous instruction, that thought and painfullabour, are necessary to its successful exercise, asdoes the statesman or the senator. Much of thisfalse confidence arises from the improper estimatewhich is entertained of the difficulty of inventionin mechanics. It is, therefore, of great importanceto the individuals and to the families of those whoare too often led away from more suitable pursuits,the dupes of their own ingenuity and of thepopular voice, to convince both them and the publicthat the power of making new mechanical combinationsis a possession common to a multitude of minds,and that the talents which it requires are by no meansof the highest order. It is still more important thatthey should be impressed with the conviction thatthe great merit, and the great success of those whohave attained to eminence in such matters, wasalmost entirely due to the unremitted perseverancewith which they concentrated upon their successfulinventions the skill and knowledge which years ofstudy had matured.264 PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FORCHAP. XXVIII.PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FOR THE APPLICATION OFMACHINERY.(324.) The first object of machinery, the chiefcause of its extensive utility, is the perfection andthe cheap production of the articles which it is intendedto make. Whenever it is required to produce agreat multitude of things, all of exactly the same kind,the proper time has arrived for the construction of toolsor machines by which they may be manufactured.If only a few pairs of cotton stockings should berequired, it would be an absurd waste of time, and ofcapital, to construct a stocking-frame to weave them,when, for a few pence, four steel wires can be procuredby which they may be knit. If, on the otherhand, many thousand pairs were wanted, the timeemployed, and the expense incurred in constructing astocking frame, would be more than repaid by the savingof time in making that large number of stockings.The same principle is applicable to the copying ofletters : if three or four copies only are required, thepen and the human hand furnish the cheapest meansof obtaining them ; if hundreds are called for, lithographymay be brought to our assistance ; but ifhundreds of thousands are wanted, the machinery ofa printing establishment supplies the most economicalmethod of accomplishing the object.THE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 265(325.) There are, however, many cases in whichmachines or tools must be made, in which economicalproduction is not the most important object. Wheneverit is required to produce a few articles, — partsof machinery, for instance, which must be executedwith the most rigid accuracy or be perfectly alike, —it is nearly impossible to fusil this condition, evenwith the aid of the most skilful hands : and it becomesnecessary to make tools expressly for thepurpose, although those tools should, as frequentlyhappens, cost more in constructing than the thingsthey are destined to make.(326.) Another instance of the just application ofmachinery, even at an increased expense, arises wherethe shortness of time in which the article is produced,has an important influence on its value. In the publicationof our daily newspapers, it frequently happensthat the debates in the Houses of Parliamentare carried on to three and four o'clock in themorning, that is, to within a very few hours of thetime for the publication of the paper. The speechesmust be taken down by reporters, conveyed by themto the establishment of the newspaper, perhaps at thedistance of one or two miles, transcribed by them inthe office, set up by the compositor, the press corrected,and the paper printed off and distributedbefore the public can read them. Some of theseJournals have a circulation of from five to ten thousanddaily. Supposing four thousand to be wanted,and that they could be printed only at the rate offive hundred per hour upon one side of the paper,(which was the greatest number two journeymen anda boy could take off" by the old hand-presses), sixteen266 PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FORhours would be required for printing the completeedition ; and the news conveyed to the purchasers ofthe latest portion of the impression, would be out ofdate before they could receive it. To obviate thisdifficulty, it was often necessary to set up the paperin duplicate, and sometimes, when late, in triplicate :but the improvements in the printing-machines havebeen so great, that four thousand copies are nowprinted on one side in an hour.(327.) The establishment of "The Times" newspaperis an example, on a large scale, of a manufactoryin which the division of labour, both mentaland bodily, is admirably, illustrated, and in which alsothe effect of domestic economy is well exemplified.It is scarcely imagined, by the thousands who readthat paper in various quarters of the globe, what ascene of organized activity the factory presents duringthe whole night, or what a quantity of talent andmechanical skill is put in action for their amusementand information.* Nearly a hundred persons areThe Author of these pages, with one of his friends, wasrecently induced to visit this most interesting establishment,after midnight, during the progress of a very important debate.The place was illuminated with gas, and was light as the day: —there was neither noise nor bustle ; — and the visitors were receivedwith such calm and polite attention, that they did not,until afterwards, become sensible of the inconvenience whichsuch intruders, at a moment of the greatest pressure, mustoccasion, nor reflect that the tranquillity which they admired,was the result of intense and regulated occupation. But theeffect of such checks in the current of business will appear onrecollecting that, as four thousand newspapers are printed offon one side within the hour, every minute is attended with aloss of sixty-six impressions. The quarter of an hour, therefore,THE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 267employed in this establishment ; and, during thesession of parliament, at least twelve reporters areconstantly attending the Houses of Commons andLords ; each in his turn, after about an hour's work,retiring to translate into ordinary writing, the speechhe has just heard and noted in short-hand. In themean time fifty compositors are constantly at work,some of whom have already set up the beginning,whilst others are committing to type the yet undriedmanuscript of the continuation of a speech, whosemiddle portion is travelling to the office in the pocketof the hasty reporter,' and whose eloquent conclusionis, perhaps, at that very moment, making the walls ofSt. Stephen's vibrate with the applause of its hearers.These congregated types, as fast as they are composed,are passed in portions to other hands ; tillat last the scattered fragments of the debate, forming,which the stranger may think it not unreasonable to chin forthe gratification of his curiosity (and to him this time is but amoment), may cause a failure in the delivery of a thousandcopies, and disappoint a proportionate number of expectantreaders, in some of our distant towns, to which the morningpapers are despatched by the earliest and most rapid conveyancesof each day.This note is inserted with the further and more general purposeof calling the attention of those, especially foreigners, whoare desirous of inspecting our larger manufactories, to thechief cause of the difficulty which frequently attends their introduction.When the establishment is very extensive, and itsdepartments skilfully arranged, the exclusion of visitors arises,not from any illiberal jealousy, nor, generally, from any desireof concealment, which would, in most cases, be absurd ; butfrom the substantial inconvenience and loss of time, throughoutan entire series of well-combined operations, which must beoccasioned even by short and casual interruptions.268 PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FORwhen united with the ordinary matter, eight-and-fortycolumns, re-appear in regular order on theplatform of the printing-press. The hand of man isnow too slow for the demands of his curiosity, butthe power of steam comes to his assistance. Ink israpidly supplied to the moving types, by the mostperfect mechanism ; — four attendants incessantlyintroduce the edges of large sheets of white paperto the junction of two great rollers, which seem todevour them with unsated appetite; — other rollersconvey them to the type already inked, and havingbrought them into rapid and successive contact,re-deliver them to four other assistants, completelyprinted by the almost momentary touch. Thus, inone hour, four thousand sheets of paper are printedon one side ; and an impression of twelve thousandcopies, from above three hundred thousand moveablepieces of metal, is produced for the public in sixhours.(328*.) The effect of machinery in printing otherperiodical publications, and of due economy in distributingthem, is so important for the interests ofknowledge, that it is worth examining by what meansit is possible to produce them at the small price atwhich they are sold. " Chambers' Journal," which ispublished at Edinburgh, and sold at three half-pencea number, will furnish an example. Soon after itscommencement in 1832, its sale in Scotland reached30,000, and in order to supply the demand in Londonit was reprinted ; but on account of the expense ofcomposition it was found that this plan would notproduce any profit, and the London edition wasabout to be given up, when it occurred to the pro-theAPPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 269praetor to stereotype it at Edinburgh, and cast twocopies of the plates. This is now done about threeweeks before the day of publication, — one set ofplates being sent up to London by the mail, an impressionis printed off by steam : the London agenthas then time to send packages by the cheapest conveyancesto several of the large towns, and othercopies go through the booksellers' parcels to all thesmaller towns. Thus a great saving is effected in theoutlay of capital, and 20,000 copies are conveyedfrom London, as a centre, to all parts of England,whilst there is no difficulty in completing imperfectsets, nor any waste from printing more than the publicdemand.(329.) The conveyance of letters is another case, inwhich the importance of saving time would allow ofgreat expense in any new machinery for its accomplishment.There is a natural limit to the speed ofhorses, which even the greatest improvements in thebreed, aided by an increased perfection in our roads,can never surpass ; and from which, perhaps, we areat present not very remote. When we reflect uponthe great expense of time and money which the lastrefinements of a theory or an art usually require,it is not unreasonable to suppose that the periodhas arrived in which the substitution of machineryfor such purposes ought to be tried.(330.) The Post-bag despatched every evening bythe mail to one of our largest cities, Bristol, usuallyweighs less than a hundred pounds. Xow^, the firstreflection which naturally presents itself is, that, inorder to transport these letters a hundred and twentymiles, a coach and apparatus, weighing above thirty270 PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FORhundred weight, are put in motion, and also conveyedover the same space.*It is obvious that, amongst the conditions of machineryfor accomplishing such an object, it wouldbe desirable to reduce the weight of matter to beconveyed along with the letters : it would also bedesirable to reduce the velocity of the animal poweremployed ; because the faster a horse is driven, theless weight he can draw. Amongst the variety ofcontrivances which might be imagined for this purpose,we will mention one, which, although by nomeans free from objections, fulfils some of the prescribedconditions ; and it is not a purely theoreticalspeculation, since some few experiments have beenmade upon it, though on an extremely limited scale.(331.) Let us imagine a series of high pillarserected at frequent intervals, perhaps every hundredfeet, and as nearly as possible in a straight line betweentwo post towns. An iron or steel wire mustbe stretched over proper supports, fixed on each ofthese pillars, and terminating at the end of everythree or five miles, as may be found expedient, in avery strong support, by which it may be stretched.At each of these latter points a man ought to residein a small station-house. A narrow cylindrical tincase, to contain the letters, might be suspended by twowheels rolling upon this wire ; the cases being so constructedas to enable the wheels to pass unimpededIt is true that the transport of letters is not the onlyobject which this apparatus answers ; but the transport of passengers,which is a secondary object, does in fact put a limitto the velocity of that of the letters, which is the primary one.THE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 271 •by the fixed supports of the wire. An endless wireof much smaller size must pass over two drums,one at each end of the station. This ware should besupported on rollers, fixed to the supports of thegreat wire, and at a short distance below it. Therewould thus be two branches of the smaller wirealways accompanying the larger one ; and the attendantat either station, by turning the drum, mightcause them to move with great velocity in oppositedirections. In order to convey the cylinder whichcontains the letters, it would only be necessary toattach it by a string, or by a catch, to either of thebranches of the endless wire. Thus it would be conveyedspeedily to the next station, where it would beremoved by the attendant to the commencement ofthe next wire, and thus forwarded. It is unnecessaryto enter into the details which this, or anysimilar plan, would require. The difficulties areobvious ; but if these could be overcome, it wouldpresent many advantages besides velocity ; for if anattendant resided at each station, the additional expenseof having two or three deliveries of lettersevery day, and even of sending expresses at anymoment, would be comparatively trifling ; nor is itimpossible that the stretched wire might itself beavailable for a species of telegraphic communicationyet more rapid.Perhaps if the steeples of churches, properlyselected, were made use of, connecting them by afew intermediate stations with some great centralbuilding, as, for instance, with the top of St. Paul's ;and if a similar apparatus where placed on the top ofeach steeple, with a man to work it during the day.272 PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FORit might be possible to diminish the expense of thetwo-penny post, and make deliveries every half hourover the greater part of the metropolis.(332.) The power of steam, however, bids fairalmost to rival the velocity of these contrivances ;and the fitness of its application to the purposes ofconveyance, particularly where great rapidity is required,begins now to be generally admitted. Thefollowing extract from the Report of the Committeeof the House of Commons on steam-carriages, explainsclearly its various advantages :—Perhaps one of the principal advantages resulting fromthe use of steam, will be, that it may be employed ascheaply at a quick as at a slow rate ; ' this is one of the* advantages over horse-labour, which becomes more and' more expensive as the speed is increased. There is' every reason to expect, that in the end the rate of trapveiling by steam will be much quicker than the utmost' speed of travelling by horses ; in short, the safety to' travellers will become the Hit to speed.' In horse-draughtthe opposite result takes place ; ' in all cases•' ' horses lose power of draught in a much greater proposetion than they gain speed, and hence the work they do* becomes more expensive as they go quicker.'Without increase of cost, then, we shall obtain a powerwhich will insure a rapidity of internal communicationfar beyond the utmost speed of horses in draught; andalthough the performance of these carriages may not havehitherto attained this point, when once it has been blushed, that at equal speed we can use steam more'* cheaply in draught than horses, we may fairly anticipate'' that every day's increased experience in the managementof the engines, will induce greater skill, greater confirmdeuce, and greater speed.The cheapness of the conveyance will probably be, forsome time, a secondary consideration. If, at present, itTHE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 273*' can be used as cheaply as horse-power, the competition*' with the former modes of conveyance will first take placeas to speed. When once the superiority of steam carerages shall have been fully established, competition willinduce economy in the cost of working them. The evidence,however, of Mr. Macneill, shewing the greaterefficiency, with diminished expenditure of fuel, by locomotiveengines on railways, convinces the committee,that experience will soon teach a better construction ofthe engines, and a less costly mode of generating therequisite supply of steam.Nor are the advantages of steam-power confined to thegreater velocity attained, or to its greater cheapness thanhorse-draught. In the latter, danger is increased, in aslarge a proportion as expense, by greater speed. Tnsteam-power, on the contrary, ' there is no danger of* being run away with, and that of being overturned is' greatly diminished. It is difficult to control four such* horses as can draw a heavy carriage ten miles per hour,' in case they are frightened, or choose to run away ; and* for quick travelling they must be kept in that state of' courage, that they are always inclined for running away,' particularly down hills, and at sharp turns of the road.' In steam, however, there is little corresponding danger,' * being perfectly controllable, and capable of exerting its' power in reverse in going down hills.' Every witnessexamined has given the fullest and most satisfactory evidenceof the perfect control which the conductor hasover the movement of the carriage. With the slightestexertion it can be stopped or turned, under circumstanceswhere horses would be totally unmanageable."(333.) Another instance may be mentioned inwhich the object to be obtained is so important, thatalthough it might be rarely wanted, yet machinery forthat purpose would justify considerable expense. Avessel to contain men, and to be navigated at someT274 Proper CIRCUMSTANCES FORdistance below the surface of the sea, would, in manycircumstances, be almost invaluable. Such a vessel,evidently, could not be propelled by any enginerequiring the aid of fire. If, however, by condensingair into a liquid, and carrying it in that state,a propelling power could be procured sufficient formoving the vessel through a considerable space, theexpense would scarcely render its occasional employmentimpossible.*(334.) Slide of Alpnach. — Amongst the forestswhich flank many of the lofty mountains of Switzerland,some of the finest timber is found in positionsalmost inaccessible. The expense of roads, even ifit were possible to make them in such situations,would prevent the inhabitants from deriving anyadvantages from these almost inexhaustible supplies.Placed by Nature at a considerable elevationabove the spot at which they can be made use of,they are precisely in fit circumstances for the applicationof machinery to their removal ; and the inhabitantsavail themselves of the force of gravity torelieve them from some portion of this labour. Theinclined planes which they have established in variousforests, by which the timber has been sent down to thewater-courses, have excited the admiration of everytraveller ; and in addition to the merit of simplicity,the construction of these slides requires scarcely anythingbeyond the material which grows upon the spot.Of all these specimens of carpentry, the Slide ofAlpnach was the most considerable, from its greatA proposal for such a vessel, and description of its construction,by the author of this volume, may be found in theEncyclopaedia Metropolitan, Art. Diving Bell.THE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 275length, and from the almost inaccessible position fromwhich it descended. The following account of it istaken from Gilbert's Annalen, 1819, which is translatedin the second volume of Brewster's Journal : —For many centuries, the rugged flanks and thedeep gorges of Mount Pilatus were covered with impenetrableforests ; which were permitted to growand to perish, without being of the least utility toman,till a foreigner, who had been conducted intotheir wild recesses in the pursuit of the chamois,directed the attention of several Swiss gentlemen tothe extent and superiority of the timber. The mostskilful individuals, however, considered it quite impracticableto avail themselves of such inaccessiblestores. It was not till the end of 1816, that M.Rump, and three Swiss gentlemen, entertaining moresanguine hopes, purchased a certain extent of theforests, and began the construction of the slide, whichwas completed in the spring of 1818.The Slide of Alpnach is formed entirely of about25,000 large pine trees, deprived of their bark, andunited together in a very ingenious manner, withoutthe aid of iron. It occupied about 160 workmenduring eighteen months, and cost nearly 100,000francs, or 4,250^. It is about three leagues, or44,000 English feet long, and terminates in the Lakeof Lucerne. It has the form of a trough, about sixfeet broad, and from three to six feet deep. Itsbottom is formed of three trees, the middle one ofwhich has a groove cut out in the direction of itslength, for receiving small rills of water, which areconducted into it from various places, for the purposeof diminishing the friction. The whole of theT 2276 PROPER CIRCUMSTANCES FORslide is sustained by about 2,000 supports ; and inmany places it is attached, in a very ingenious manner,to the rugged precipices of granite.The direction of the slide is sometimes straight,and sometimes zig-zag, with an inclination of from10« to 18°. It is often carried along the sides ofhills and the flanks of precipitous rocks, and sometimespasses over their summits. Occasionally itgoes under ground, and at other times it is conductedover the deep gorges by scaffoldings 120 feetin height.The boldness which characterizes this work, thesagacity and skill displayed in all its arrangements,have excited the wonder of every person who hasseen it. Before any step could be taken in itserection, it was necessary to cut several thousandtrees to obtain a passage through the impenetrablethickets. All these difficulties, however,were surmounted, and the engineer had at lastthe satisfaction of seeing the trees descend fromthe mountain with the rapidity of lightning. Thelarger pines, which were about a hundred feet long,and ten inches thick at their smaller extremity, ranthrough the space of three leagues or nearly ninemiles, in two minutes and a half, and during theirdescent, they appeared to be only a few feet inlength. The arrangements for this part of theoperation were extremely simple. From the lowerend of the slide to the upper end, where the treeswere introduced, workmen were posted at regulardistances, and as soon as every thing was ready,the workman at the lower end of the slide cried outto the one above him, " Laches'' (Let go). The cryTHE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY. 277was repeated from one to another, and reached thetop of the slide in three minutes. The workmen atthe top of the slide then cried out to the one belowhim, " // vient (It comes), and the tree was instantlylaunched down the slide, preceded by thecry which was repeated from post to post. As soonas the tree had reached the bottom, and plungedinto the lake, the cry of Laches was repeated asbefore, and a new tree was launched in a similarmanner. By these means a tree descended everyfive or six minutes, provided no accident happenedto the slide, which sometimes took place, but whichwas instantly repaired when it did.In order to shew the enormous force which thetrees acquired from the great velocity of their descent,M. Rump made arrangements for causing someof the trees to spring from the slide. They penetratedby their thickest extremities no less than fromeighteen to twenty-four feet into the earth ; and oneof the trees having by accident struck against another,it instantly cleft it through its whole length,as if it had been struck by lightning.After the trees had descended the slide, they werecollected into rafts upon the lake, and conducted toLucerne. From thence they descended the Russ,then the Ar to near Bragg, afterwards to Waldshutby the Rhine, then to Basle, and even to the seawhen it was necessary.It is to be regretted that this magnificent structureno longer exists, and that scarcely a trace of itis to be seen upon the flanks of Mount Pilatus. Politicalcircumstances having taken away the principalsource of demand for the timber, and no other278 THE APPLICATION OF MACHINERY.market having been found, the operation of cuttingand transporting the trees necessarily ceased"*Professor Mayfair, who visited this singular work,states, that six minutes was the usual time occupiedin the descent of a tree ; but that in wet weather, itreached the lake in three minutes.The mines of Romanos in Mexico are supplied with timberfrom the adjacent mountains by a slide similar to that ofAlpnach. It was constructed by M. Flores, a gentlemanwell acquainted with Switzerland.ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY. 279CHAP. XXIX.ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY.(335.) The time during which a machine will continueto perform its work effectually, will dependchiefly upon the perfection with which it was originallyconstructed, — upon the care taken to keep it inproper repair, particularly to correct every shake orlooseness in the axes, — and upon the smallness of themass and of the velocity of its moving parts. Everythingapproaching to a blow, all sudden change ofdirection, is injurious. Engines for producing power,such as wind-mills, water-mills, and steam-engines,usually last a long time.* But machinery for producingany commodity in great demand, seldom actuallywears out ; new improvements, by which the sameoperations can be executed either more quickly orbetter, generally superseding it long before thatperiod arrives : indeed, to make such an improvedmachine profitable, it is usually reckoned that in fiveyears it ought to have paid itself, and in ten to besuperseded by a better.-" A cotton manufacturer," says one of the witnessesbefore a Committee of the House of Commons, " who leftManchester seven years ago, would be driven out of the• The return which ought to be produced by a fixed steam-engineemployed as a moving power, is frequently estimated a:ten per cent, on its cost.280 ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY.market by the men who are now living in it, providedhis knowledge had not kept pace with those who havebeen, during that time, constantly profiting by the progressiveimprovements that have taken place in thatperiod."(336.) The effect of improvements in machinery,seems incidentally to increase production, through acause which may be thus explained. A manufacturermaking the usual profit upon his capital,invested in looms or other machines in perfect condition,the market price of making each of whichis a hundred pounds, invents some improvement.But this is of such a nature, that it cannot be adaptedto his present engines. He finds upon calculation,that at the rate at which he can dispose of his manufacturedproduce, each new engine would repay thecost of its making, together with the ordinary profitof capital, in three years : he also concludes from hisexperience of the trade, that the improvement he isabout to make, will not be generally adopted byother manufacturers before that time. On theseconsiderations, it is clearly his interest to sell hispresent engines, even at half-price, and constructnew ones on the improved principle. But the purchaserwho gives only fifty pounds for the oldengines, has not so large a fixed capital investedin his factory, as the person from whom he purchasedthem ; and as he produces the same quantityof the manufactured article, his profits will be larger.Hence, the price of the commodity will fall, notonly in consequence of the cheaper production bythe new machines, but also by the more profitableworking of the old, thus purchased at a reduced price.ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY. 281This change, however, can be only transient ; for a timewill arrive when the old machinery, although in goodrepair, must become worthless. The improvementwhich took place not long ago in frames for makingpatent-net was so great, that a machine, in goodrepair, which had cost 1200/., sold a few years afterfor 60/. During the great speculations in that trade,the improvements succeeded each other so rapidly,that machines which had never been finished wereabandoned in the hands of their makers, because newimprovements had superseded their utility.(337.) The durability of watches, when wellmade, is very remarkable. One was produced, ingoing order'' before a committee of the House ofCommons to inquire into the watch trade, whichwas made in the year 1660 ; and there are many ofancient date, in the possession of the Clock-maker'sCompany, which are still actually kept going. Thenumber of watches manufactured for home consumptionwas, in the year 1798, about 50,000 annually.If this supply was for Great Britain only, itwas consumed by about ten and a half millions ofpersons.(338.) Machines are, in some trades, let out to hire,and a certain sum is paid for their use, in the mannerof rent. This is the case amongst the frame-workknitters : and Mr. Benson, in speaking of the rateof payment for the use of their frames, states, thatthe proprietor receives such a rent that, besidespaying the full interest for his capital, he clearsthe value of his frame in nine years. When therapidity with which improvements succeed eachother is considered, this rent does not appear ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY.exorbitant. Some of these frames have been workedfor thirteen years with little or no repair. But circumstancesoccasionally arise which throw them outof employment, either temporarily or permanently.Some years since, an article was introduced calledcut-up work,'^ by which the price of stockingframes was greatly deteriorated. From the evidenceof Mr. J. Rawson, it appears that, in consequenceof this change in the nature of the work,each frame could do the work of two, and many stockingframes were thrown out of employment, and theirvalue reduced full three-fourths.*This information is of great importance, if thenumbers here given are nearly correct, and if noother causes intervened to diminish the price offrames ; for it shews the numerical connexion betweenthe increased production of those machinesand their diminished value.(339.) The great importance of simplifying all transactionsbetween masters and workmen, and of dispassionatelydiscussing with the latter the influenceof any proposed regulations connected with theirtrade, is well exemplified by a mistake into whichboth parties unintentionally fell, and which was productiveof very great misery in the lace trade. Itshistory is so well told by William Allen, a frameworkknitter, who was a party to it, that an extractfrom his evidence, as given before the Frame-workKnitters' Committee of 1812, will best explain it.I beg to say a few words respecting the frame-rent ;the rent paid for lace-frames, until the year 1805, wasReport from the Committee of the House of Commonson the Frame Work Knitters' Petition, April, 1819.ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY. 283Is. 6d. a frame per week ; there then was not any verygreat inducement for persons to buy frames and let thenout by the hire, who did not belong to the trade ; at thattime an attempt was made, by one or two houses, toreduce the prices paid to the workmen, in consequence ofa dispute between these two houses and another great>' house : some little difference being paid in the price•* among the respective houses, I was one chosen by theworkmen to try if we could not remedy the impendingevil : we consulted the respective parties, and found them*' inflexible ; these two houses that were about to reducethe prices, said that they would either immediately re-*' duce the price of making net, or they would increase theframe-rent : the difference to the workmen was considerable,between the one and the other; they wouldsuffer less, in the immediate operation of the thing, byhaving the rent advanced, than the price of making netreduced. They chose at that time, as they thought, thelesser evil, but it has turned out to be otherwise ; for,immediately as the rent was raised upon the per-centagelaid out in frames, it induced almost every person, whohad got a little money, to lay it out in the purchase offrames ; these frames were placed in the hands of menwho could get work for them at the warehouses ; theywere generally constrained to pay an enormous rent, and'* then they were compelled, most likely, to buy of the personsthat let them the frames, their butcher's-meat, theirgrocery, or their clothing : the encumbrance of these*' frames became entailed upon them : if any deadness tookplace in the work they must take it at a very reducedprice, for fear of the consequences that would fall uponthem from the person who bought the frame : thus the** evil has been daily increasing, till, in conjunction withthe other evils crept into the trade, they have almostcrushed it to atoms."(340.) The e\dl of not assigning fairly to each tool,284 ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY.or each article produced, its 'proportionate value oreven of not having a perfectly distinct, simple, anddefinite agreement between a master and his workmen,is very considerable. Workmen find it difficultin such cases to know the probable produce of theirlabour ; and both parties are often led to adoptarrangements, which, had they been well examined,would have been rejected as equally at variance inthe results with the true interests of both.(341.) At Birmingham, stamps and dies, andpresses for a great variety of articles, are let out :they are generally made by men possessing smallcapital, and are rented by workmen. Power alsois rented at the same place. Steam engines areerected in large buildings containing a variety ofrooms, in which each person may hire one, two,or any other amount of horse power, as his occupationmay require. If any mode could be discoveredof transmitting power, without much lossfrom friction, to considerable distances, and at thesame time of registering the quantity made use ofat any particular point, a considerable change wouldprobably take place in many parts of the presentsystem of manufacturing. A few central enginesto produce power, might then be erected in ourgreat towns, and each workman, hiring a quantityof power sufficient for his purpose, might have itconveyed into his own house ; and thus a transitionmight in some instances be effected, if it should befound more profitable, back again from the system ofgreat factories to that of domestic manufacture.(342.) The transmission of water through a seriesof pipes, might be employed for the distribution ofON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY. 285power, but the friction would consume a considerableportion. Another method has been employedin some instances, and is practised at the Mint. Itconsists in exhausting the air from a large vessel bymeans of a steam-engine. This vessel is connectedby pipes, with a small piston which drives eachcoining press ; and, on opening a valve, the pressureof the external air forces in the piston. Thisair is then admitted to the general reservoir, andpumped out by the engine. The condensation ofair might be employed for the same purpose ; butit must be admitted, that there are some unexplainedfacts relative to elastic fluids, which requirefurther observations and experiment beforeit can be used for the conveyance of power to anyconsiderable distance. It has been found, for instance,in attempting to blow a furnace by meansof a powerful water-wheel driving air through a cast-ironpipe of above a mile in length, that scarcelyany sensible effect was produced at the oppositeextremity. In one instance, some accidental obstructionbeing suspected, a cat put in at one endfound its way out without injury at the other, thusproving that the phenomenon did not depend oninterruption within the pipe.(343.) The most portable form in which power canbe condensed is, perhaps, by the liquefaction of thegases. It is known that, under considerable pressure,several of these become liquid at ordinary temperatures; carbonic acid, for example, being reduced toa liquid state by a pressure of sixty atmospheres.One of the advantages attending the use of thesefluids, would be that the pressure exerted by them286 ON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY.would remain constant until the last drop of liquidhad assumed the form of gas. If either of the elementsof common air should be found to be capableof reduction to a liquid state before it unites intoa corrosive fluid with the other ingredient, then weshall possess a ready means of conveying power inany quantity and to any distance. Hydrogen probablywill require the strongest compressing forceto render it liquid, and nay, therefore, possiblybe applied where still greater condensation of poweris wanted. In all these cases the condensed gasesmay be looked upon as springs of enormous force,which have been wound up by the exertion of power,and which will deliver the whole of it back againwhen required. These springs of nature differ insome respects from the steel springs formed by ourart ; for in the compression of the natural springsa vast quantity of latent heat is forced out, and intheir return to the state of gas an equal quantityis absorbed. May not this very property be employedwith advantage in their application ?Part of the mechanical difficulty to be overcomein constructing apparatus connected with liquefiedgases, will consist in the structure of the valvesand packing necessary to retain the fluids under thegreat pressure to which they must be submitted.The effect of heat on these gases has not yet beensufficiently tried, to lead us to any very precisenotions of the additional power which its applicationto them will supply.The elasticity of air is sometimes employed as aspring, instead of steel : in one of the large printing-pressesin London the momentum of a considerableON THE DURATION OF MACHINERY. 287mass of matter is destroyed by making it condensethe air included in a cylinder, by means of a pistonagainst which it impinges.(344.) The effect of competition in cheapeningarticles of manufacture sometimes operates in renderingthem less durable. When such articles areconveyed to a distance for consumption, if they arebroken, it often happens, from the price of labourbeing higher where they are used than where theywere made, that it is more expensive to mend theold article, than to purchase a new. Such is usuallythe case, in great cities, with some of the commonerlocks, with hinges, and with a variety of articles ofhardware.k288 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTCHAP. XXX.ON COMBINATIONS AMONGST MASTERS OR WORKMENAGAINST EACH OTHER.(345.) There exist amongst the workmen ofalmost all classes, certain rules or laws which governtheir actions towards each other, and towards theiremployers. But, besides these general principles,there are frequently others peculiar to each factory,which have derived their origin, in many instances,from the mutual convenience of the parties engagedin them. Such rules are little known except tothose actually pursuing the several trades ; and, asit is of importance that their advantages and disadvantagesshould be canvassed, we shall offer a fewremarks upon some of them.(346.) The principles by which such laws shouldbe tried are,l5^. That they conduce to the general benefit of allthe persons employed.Idly. That they prevent fraud.Sadly. That they interfere as little as possible iviththe free agency of each individual.(347.) It is usual in many workshops, that, on thefirst entrance of a new journeyman, he shall pay asmall fine to the rest of the men. It is clearly unjustto insist upon this payment ; and when it is spentMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 289in drinking, which is, unfortunately, too often thecase, it is injurious. The reason assigned for thedemand is, that the new comer will require someinstruction in the habits of the shop, and in theplaces of the different tools, and will thus waste thetime of some of his companions until he is instructed.If this fine were added to a fund, managed by theworkmen themselves, and either divided at givenperiods, or reserved for their relief in sickness, itwould be less objectionable, since its tendency wouldbe to check the too frequent change of men fromone shop to another. But it ought, at all events,not to be compulsory ; and the advantages to bederived from the fund to which the workman is invitedto subscribe, ought to be his sole inducement to contribute.(348.) In many workshops, the workmen, althoughemployed on totally different parts of the objectsmanufactured, are yet dependent, in some measure,upon each other. Thus a single smith may be able toforge, in one day, work enough to keep four or fiveturners employed during the next. If, from idlenessor intemperance, the smith neglects his work, anddoes not furnish the usual supply, the turners (supposingthem to be paid by the piece), will have theirtime partly unoccupied, and their gains consequentlydiminished. It is reasonable, in such circumstances,that a fine should be levied on the delinquent ; butit is desirable that the master should have concurredwith his workmen in establishing such a rule, andthat it should be shown to each individual previouslyto his engagement ; and it is very desirable thatsuch fine should not be spent in drinking.290 COMBINATIONS AMONGST(349.) In some establishments, it is customary forthe master to give a small gratuity whenever anyworkman has exercised a remarkable degree of skill,or has economized the material employed. Thus, insplitting horn into layers for lanterns, one hornusually furnishes from five to eight layers ; but ifa workman split the horn into ten layers or more, hereceives a pint of ale from the master. These premiumsshould not be too high, lest the material shouldbe wasted in unsuccessful attempts : but such regulations,when judiciously made, are beneficial, as theytend to produce skill amongst the workmen, profit tothe masters, and diminished cost to the consumers.(350.) In some few factories, in which the men arepaid by the piece, it is usual, when any portion ofwork, delivered in by a workman, is rejected by themaster on account of its being badly executed, to finethe delinquent. Such a practice tends to remedy oneof the evils attendant upon that mode of payment,and greatly assists the master, since his own judgmentis thus supported by competent and unprejudicedjudges.(351.) Societies exist amongst some of the largerbodies of workmen, and others have been formedby the masters engaged in the same branches of trade.These associations have different objects in view; butit is very desirable that their effects should be wellunderstood by the individuals who compose them ;and that the advantages arising from them, whichare certainly great, should be separated as much aspossible from the evils which they have, unfortunately,too frequently introduced. Associations ofworkmen and of masters may, with advantage, agreeMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 291upon rules to be observed by both parties, in estimatingthe proportionate value of different kindsof work executed in their trade, in order that timemay be saved, and disputes be prevented. Theymay also be most usefully employed in acquiringaccurate information as to the number of personsworking in the various departments of any manufacture,their rate of wages, the number of machinesin use, and other statistical details. Informationof this nature is extremely valuable, both for theguidance of the parties who are themselves mostinterested, and to enable them, upon any applicationto Government for assistance, or with a view tolegislative enactments, to supply those details, withoutwhich the propriety of any proposed measurecannot be duly estimated. Such details may be collectedby men actually engaged in any branch oftrade, at a much smaller expense of time, than bypersons less acquainted with, and less interestedin it.(352.) One of the most legitimate and most importantobjects of such associations as we have justmentioned, is to agree upon ready and certain modesof measuring the quantity of work done by the workmen.For a long time a difficulty upon this pointexisted in the lace trade, which was justly complainedof by the men as a serious grievance ; butthe introduction of the " rack'" which counts thenumber of holes in the length of the piece, has entirelyput an end to the most fertile cause of disputes.This invention was adverted to by the Committeeof 1812, and a hope was expressed, in their report,that the same contrivance would be applied tou 2292 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTstocking-frames. It would, indeed, be of greatmutual advantage to the industrious workman, andto the master-manufacturer in every trade, if themachines employed in it could register the quantityof work which they perform, in the same manneras a steam-engine does the number of strokesit makes. The introduction of such contrivancesgives a greater stimulus to honest industry than canreadily be imagined, and removes one of the sourcesof disagreement between parties, whose real interestsmust always suffer by any estrangement betweenthem.(353.) The effects arising from combinationsamongst the workmen, are almost always injuriousto the parties themselves. There are numerous instances,in which the public suffer by increased priceat the moment, but are ultimately gainers from thepermanent reduction which results ; whilst, on theeother hand, the improvements which are often madein machinery in consequence of " a strike" amongstthe workmen, most frequently do injury, of greateror less duration, to that particular class which gaverise to them. As the injury to the men and to theirfamilies is almost always more serious than that whichaffects their employers, it is of the utmost importanceto the comfort and happiness of the former class,that they should themselves entertain sound viewsupon this question. For this purpose a few illustrationsof the principle which is here maintained, willprobably have greater weight than any reasoning ofa more general nature, though drawn from admittedprinciples of political economy. Such instanceswill, moreover, present the additional advantage ofMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 293appealing to facts known to many individuals of thoseclasses for whose benefit these reflections are intended.(354.) There is a process in the manufacture ofgun-barrels for making what, in the language ofthe trade, are called scalps. The skelp is a piece orbar of iron, about three feet long, and four incheswide, but thicker and broader at one end than atthe other : and the barrel of a musket is formed byforging out such pieces to the proper dimensions, andthen folding or bending them into a cylindricalform, until the edges overlap, so that they can bewelded together.About twenty years ago, the workmen, employedat a very extensive factory in forging these skelpsout of bar-iron, " struck " for an advance of wages ;and as their demands were very exorbitant, they werenot immediately complied with. In the meantime,the superintendent of the establishment directed hisattention to the subject ; and it occurred to him,that if the circumference of the rollers, betweenwhich the bar-iron was rolled, were to be madeequal to the length of a skelp or of a musket barrel,and if also the groove in which the iron was compressed,instead of being of the same width anddepth throughout, were cut gradually deeper andwider from a point in the rollers, until it returnedto the same point, then the bar-iron passing betweensuch rollers, instead of being uniform in width andthickness, would have the form of a skelp. Onmaking the trial, it was found to succeed perfectly ;a great reduction of human labour was effected bythe process, and the workmen who had acquired204 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTpeculiar skill in performing it ceased to derive anyadvantage from their dexterity.(355.) It is somewhat singular that another anda still more remarkable instance of the effect of combinationamongst workmen, should have occurred butafew years since in the very same trade. The processof welding the "skelps," so as to convert them intogun-barrels, required much skill, and after the terminationof the war, the demand for muskets havinggreatly diminished, the number of persons employedin making them was very much reduced. This circumstancerendered combination more easy ; and uponone occasion, when a contract had been entered intofor a considerable supply to be delivered on a fixedday, the men all struck for such an advance ofwages as would have caused the completion of thecontract to be attended with a very heavy loss.In this difficulty, the contractors resorted to amode of welding the gun-barrel, for which a patenthad been taken out by one of themselves some yearsbefore this event. The plan had not then succeededso well as to come into general use, in consequenceof the cheapness of the usual mode of welding byhand-labour, combined with some other difficultieswith which the patentee had to contend. But thestimulus produced by the combination of the workmen,induced him to make new trials, and hewas enabled to introduce such a facility in weldinggun-barrels by rollers, and such perfection in thework itself, that, in all probability, very few will infuture be welded by hand-labour.The process consisted in folding a bar of iron,about a foot long, into the form of a cylinder, withMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 295the edges a little overlapping. It was then placed inafurnace, and being taken out when raised to a weldingheat, a triplet, or cylinder of iron, was placed init, and the whole was passed quickly through a pairof rollers. The effect of this was, that the weldingwas performed at a single heating, and the remainderof the elongation necessary for extending the skelpsto the length of the musket barrel, was performed inasimilar manner, but at a lower temperature. Theworkmen who had combined were, of course, nolonger wanted, and instead of benefiting themselvesby their combination, they were reduced permanently,by this improvement in the art, to a considerablylower rate of wages : for as the process of weldinggun-barrels by hand required peculiar skill andconsiderable experience, they had hitherto been inthe habit of earning; much his-her waxes than otherworkmen of their class. On the other hand, thenew method of welding was far less injurious tothe texture of the iron, which was now exposedonly once, instead of three or four times, to thewelding heat, so that the public derived advantagefrom the superiority, as well as from the economyof the process. Another advantage has also arisenfrom its introduction ; the new process being nowapplied to the manufacture of iron tubes, whichcan thus be made at a price which renders theiremployment very general. They are now to befound in the shops of all our larger ironmongers, invarious lengths, and of different diameters, withscrews cut at each end ; and are in constant use forthe conveyance of gas for lighting, or of water forwarming our houses.296 COMBINATIONS AMONGST(356.) Similar examples must have presentedthemselves to all those who are familiar with the detailsof our manufactories, but these are sufficient to illustrateone of the results of combinations. It wouldnot, however, be fair to push the conclusion deducedfrom these instances to its extreme limit. Althoughit is very apparent, that in the two cases which havebeen stated, the effects of combination were permanentlyinjurious to the workman, by almostimmediately placing him in a lower class (with respectto his wages) than he occupied before ; yet theydo not prove that all such combinations have thiseffect. It is quite evident that they have all thistendency ; it is also certain that considerable stimulusmust be applied to induce a man to contrivea new and expensive process ; and that in boththese cases, unless the fear of pecuniary loss hadacted powerfully, the improvement would not havebeen made. If, therefore, the workmen had ineither case combined for only a small advance ofwages, they would, in all probability, have beensuccessful, and the public would have been deprived,for many years, of the inventions to whichthese combinations gave rise. It must, however, beobserved, that the same skill which enabled the mento obtains after long practice, higher wages than therest of their class, would prevent many of them frombeing permanently thrown back into the class ofordinary workmen. Their diminished wages willcontinue only until they have acquired, by practice, afacility of execution in some other of the more difficultoperations : — But a diminution of wages, even for ayear or two, is still a very serious inconvenience toMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 297any person who lives by his daily exertion. The consequenceof combination has then, in these instances,been, to the workmen who combined — reduction ofwages ; to the public — reduction of price ; and tothe manufacturer — increased sale of his commodity,resulting from that reduction.(357.) It is, however, important to consider theeffects of combination in another and less obvious pointof view. The fear of combination amongst the menwhom he employs, will have a tendency to induce themanufacturer to conceal from his workmen the extentof the orders he may at any time have received ;and, consequently, they will always be less acquaintedwith the extent of the demand for their labour thanthey otherwise might be. This is injurious to theirinterests ; for instead of foreseeing, by the gradualfalling-off in the orders, the approach of a time whenthey must be unemployed, and preparing accordingly,they are liable to much more sudden changes thanthose to which they would otherwise be subject.In the evidence given by Mr. Galloway, the engineer,he remarks, that, " ^Vhen employers are competentto show their men that their business is*' steady and certain, and when men find that theyare likely to have permanent employment, theyhave always better habits, and more settled notions,which will make them better men, and better workmen,and will produce great benefits to all who areinterested in their employment."(358.) As the manufacturer, when he makes acontract, has no security that a combination maynot arise amongst the workmen, which may renderthat contract a loss instead of a benefit; besides298 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTtaking precautions to prevent them from becomingacquainted with it, he must also add to the price atwhich he could otherwise sell the article, some smallincrease to cover the risk of such an occurrence. Ifan establishment consist of several branches which canonly be carried on jointly, as, for instance, of ironmines, blast furnaces, and a colliery, in which thereare distinct classes of workmen, it becomes necessaryto keep on hand a larger stock of materials than wouldbe required, if it were certain that no combinationswould arise.Suppose, for instance, the colliers were to " strike"for an advance of wages ; — unless there was a stockof coal above-ground, the furnaces must be stopped,and the miners also would be thrown out of employ.Now the cost of keeping a stock of iron ore, or ofcoals above-ground, is just the same as that of keepingin a drawer, unemployed, its value in money,(except, indeed, that the coal suffers a small deteriorationby exposure to the elements.) The interest ofthis sum must, therefore, be considered as the price ofan insurance against the risk of combination amongstthe workmen ; and it must, so far as it goes, increasethe price of the manufactured article, and, consequently,limit the demand which would otherwiseexist for it. But every circumstance which tends tolimit the demand, is injurious to the workmen ; becausethe wider the demand, the less it is exposed tofluctuation. The effect to which we have alluded, isby no means a theoretical conclusion ; the proprietorsof one establishment in the iron trade, within theauthor's knowledge, think it expedient always to keepabove-ground a supply of coal for six months, whichMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 299is, in that instance, equal in value to about 10,000Z.When we reflect that the quantity of capital throughoutthe country thus kept unemployed merely fromthe fear of combinations amongst the workmen, might,under other circumstances, be used for keeping alarger number at work, the importance of introducinga system in which there should exist no inducementto combine becomes additionally evident.(359.) That combinations are, while they last,productive of serious inconveniences to the workmenthemselves, is admitted by all parties ; and it isequally true, that, in many cases, a successful resultdoes not leave them in so good a condition as theywere in before "the strike." The little capitalthey possessed, which ought to have been hoardedwith care for days of illness or distress, is exhausted ;and frequently, in order to gratify a pride, at theexistence of which we cannot but rejoice, even whilstwe regret its misdirected energy, they will undergothe severest privations rather than return to workat their former wages. With many of the workmen,unfortunately, during such periods, habits of idlenessare formed which it is very difficult to eradicate ;and, in all those engaged in such transactions, thekinder feelings of the heart are chilled, and passionsare called into action which are permanently injuriousto the happiness of the individual, and destructiveof those sentiments of confidence w^liich it isequally the interest of the master - manufacturerand of his workman to maintain. If any of thetrade refuse to join in the strike, the majority toofrequently forget, in the excitement of their feelings,the dictates of justice, and endeavour to exert a300 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTspecies of tyranny, which can never be permittedto exist in a free country. In conceding thereforeto the working classes, that they have a right, if theyconsider it expedient, to combine for the purpose ofprocuring higher wages (provided always, that theyhave completed all their existing contracts), it oughtever to be kept before their attention, that the samefreedom which they claim for themselves they arebound to allow to others, who may have differentviews of the advantages of combination. Everyeffort which reason and kindness can dictate, shouldbe made, not merely to remove their grievances, butto satisfy their own reason and feelings, and to showthem the consequences which will probably result fromtheir conduct : but the strong arm of the law, backed,as in such cases it will always be, by public opinion,should be instantly and unhesitatingly applied, toprevent them from violating the liberty of a portionof their own, or of any other class of society.(360.) Amongst the evils which ultimately fallheavy on the working classes themselves, when, throughmistaken views, they attempt to interfere with theiremployers in the mode of carrying on their business,may be mentioned the removal of factories to othersituations, where the proprietors may be free fromthe improper control of their men. The removalof a considerable number of lace-frames to thewestern counties, which took place, in consequenceof the combinations in Nottinghamshire, has alreadybeen mentioned. Other instances have occurred,where still greater injury has been produced by theremoval of a portion of the skill and capital of thecountry to a foreign land. Such was the case atMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 301Glasgow, as stated in the fifth Parliamentary Reportrespecting Artizans and Machinery. One of thepartners in an extensive cotton-factory, disgustedby the unprincipled conduct of the workmen, removedto the state of New York, where he reestablishedhis machinery, and thus afforded, torivals already formidable to our trade, at once apattern of our best machinery, and an example of themost economical methods of employing it.(361*.) When the nature of the work is such thatit is not possible to remove it, as happens with regardto mines, the proprietors are more exposed to injuryfrom combinations amongst the workmen : but as theowners are generally 'possessed of a larger capital,if the reduction of wages which they propose isreally founded on the necessity of the case, theygenerally succeed.An extensive combination lately existed amongstthe colliers in the north of England, which unfortunatelyled, in several instances, to acts of violence.The proprietors of the coal mines were consequentlyobliged to procure the aid of miners from other partsof England who were willing to work at the wagesthey could afford to give ; and the aid of the civil,and in some cases of the military, power, was requisitefor their protection. This course was persistedin during several months, and the question to bedecided was, which party could support itself longeston the diminished gains, and it might have readilybeen foreseen, the proprietors ultimately succeeded.(362.) One of the remedies employed by the mastersagainst the occurrence of combinations, is to makeengagements with their men for long periods, and to302 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTarrange them in such a manner, that they shall not allterminate together. This has been done in somecases at Sheffield, and in other places. It is attendedwith the inconvenience to the masters that, duringperiods when the demand for their produce is reduced,they are still obliged to employ the samenumber of workmen. This circumstance, however,frequently obliges the proprietors to direct theirattention to improvements in their works ; and inone instance, within the author's knowledge, a largereservoir was deepened, thus affording a more constantsupply to the water-wheel, whilst, at the sametime, the mud from the bottom gave permanent fertilityto a piece of land previously almost barren. Inthis instance, not merely was the supply of producechecked, when a glut existed, but the labour was, infact, applied more profitably than it would have beenin the usual course.(363.) A mode of paying the wages of workmenin articles which they consume, has been introducedinto some of our manufacturing districts, which hasbeen called the " truck system'" As in many instancesthis has nearly the effect of a combination of themasters against the men, it is a fit subject for discussionin the present chapter : but it should becarefully distinguished from another system of a verydifferent tendency, which will be first described.(364.) The principal necessaries for the support ofa workman and his family are few in number, and areusually purchased by him in small quantities weekly.Upon such quantities, sold by the retail dealer, alarge profit is generally made ; and if the article isone whose quality, like that of tea, is not readilyMASTERS OR WORKMEN. 303estimated, then a great additional gain is made bythe retail dealer selling an inferior article.Where the number of workmen living on the samespot is large, it may be thought desirable that theyshould unite together and have an agent, to purchaseby wholesale those articles which are most in demand,as tea, sugar, bacon, &c., and to retail themat prices which will just repay the wholesale cost,together with the expense of the agent who conductstheir sale. If this be managed wholly by a committeeof workmen, aided perhaps by advice from themaster, and if the agent is paid in such a manneras to have himself an interest in procuring good andreasonable articles, it may be a benefit to the workmen: and if the plan succeed in reducing the costof articles of necessity to the men, it is clearly theinterest of the master to encourage it. The mastermay indeed be enabled to afford them facilities inmaking their wholesale purchases ; but he oughtnever to have the least interest in, or any connexionwith, the profit made by the articles sold. The menonthe other hand, who subscribe to set up the shop,ought not, in the slightest degree, to be compelledto make their purchases at it : the goodness andcheapness of the article ought to be their sole inducements.It may perhaps be objected, that this plan is onlyemploying a portion of the capital belonging to theworkmen in a retail trade ; and that, without it, competitionamongst small shopkeepers will reduce thearticles to nearly the same price. This objectionwould be valid if the objects of consumption requiredno verification ; but combining what has been already304 COMBINATIONS AMONGSTStated on that subject* with the present argument,the plan seems liable to no serious objections.(365.) The Truck system is entirely different in itseffects. The master-manufacturer keeps a retail shopfor articles required by his men, and either paystheir wages in goods, or compels them by expressagreement, or less directly, by unfair means, to expendthe whole or a certain part of their wages at hisshop. If the manufacturer kept this shop merely forthe purpose of securing good articles, at fair prices,to his workmen, and if he offered no inducement tothem to purchase at his shop, except the superiorcheapness of his articles, it would certainly be advantageousto the men. But, unfortunately, thisis not always the case ; and the temptation to themaster, in times of depression, to reduce in effect thewages which he pays (by increasing the price ofarticles at his shop), without altering the nominalrate of payment, is frequently too great to be withstood.If the object be solely to procure for hisworkmen better articles, it will be more effectuallyaccomplished by the master confining himself tosupplying a small capital, at a moderate rate of interest; leaving the details to be conducted by acommittee of workmen, in conjunction with his ownagent, and the books of the shop to be auditedperiodically by the men themselves.(366.) Wherever the workmen are paid in goods,or are compelled to purchase at the master's shop,much injustice is done to them, and great miseryresults from it. Whatever may have been the intentSee Chap. XVI.MASTERS OR W;.)KK MEN. 305tons of the master in such cases, the real effect is, todeceive the workman as to the amount he receives inexchange for his labour. Now, the principles onwhich the happiness of that class of society depends,are difficult enough to be understood, even bythose who are blessed with far better opportunitiesof investigating them : and the importance of theirbeing well acquainted with those principles whichrelate to themselves, is of more vital consequenceto workmen, than to many other classes. It istherefore highly desirable to assist them in comprehendingthe position in which they are placed, by renderingall the relations in which they stand to eachother, and to their employers, as simple as possible.Workmen should be paid entirely in money ; —their work should be measured b)^ some unblessed,some unerring piece of mechanism ; — the time duringwhich they are employed should be defined, andpunctually adhered to. The payments they maketo their benefit societies should be fixed on suchjust principles, as not to require extraordinary contributions.In short, the object of all who wish topromote their happiness should be, to give them, inthe simplest form, the means of knowing beforehand,the sum they are likely to acquire by their labour, andthe money they will be obliged to expend for theirsupport : thus putting before them, in the clearestlight, the certain result of persevering industry.(367.) The cruelty which is inflicted on the workmanby the payment of his wages in goods, is oftenvery severe. The little purchases necessary for thecomfort of his wife and children, perhaps the medicineshe occasionally requires for them in illness,X306 COMBINATIONS.must all be made through the medium of barter ; andhe is obliged to waste his time in arranging an exchange,in which the goods which he has been compelledto accept for his labour are invariably takenat a lower price than that at which his master chargedthem to him. The father of a family perhaps, writhingunder the agonies of the toothache, is obliged to makehis hasty bargain with the village surgeon, beforehe will remove the cause of his pain ; or the disconsolatemother is compelled to sacrifice her depreciatedgoods in exchange for the last receptacle of her departedoffspring. The subjoined evidence from theReport of the Committee of the House of Commonson Framework-Knitters' Petitions, shows thatthese are not exaggerated statements.It has been so common in our town to pay goodsinstead of money, that a number of my neighbours have'• been obliged to pay articles for articles, to pay sugar fordrugs out of the druggist's shop ; and others have beenobliged to pay sugar for drapery goods, and such things,and exchange in that way numbers of times. I wascredibly informed, that one person paid half a pound oftenpenny sugar and a penny to have a tooth drawn;and there is a credible neighbour of mine told me, thathe had heard that the sexton had been paid for digginga grave with sugar and tea; and before I came off,knowing I had to give evidence upon these things, Iasked this friend to inquire of the sexton, whether thiswas a fact : the sexton hesitated for a little time, onaccount of bringing into discredit the person who paidthese goods ; however, he said at last, * I have received' these articles repeatedly — I know these things have'' ' been paid to a great extent in this way.' "COMBINATIONS AGAINST THE PUBLIC. 307CHAP. XXXI.ON COMBINATIONS OF MASTERS AGAINST THE Public.(368.) A SPECIES of combination occasionally takesplace amongst manufacturers against persons havingpatents: and these combinations are always injuriousto the public, as well as unjust to the inventors.Some years since, a gentleman invented a machine,by which modelling and carvings were cut in mahogany,and other fine woods. The machine resembled,in some measure, the drilling apparatus employed inornamental lathes ; it produced beautiful work at avery moderate expense : but the cabinet-makers mettogether, and combined against it, and the patent hasconsequently never been worked. A similar fateawaited a machine for cutting venders by means of aspecies of knife. In this instance, the wood couldbe cut thinner than by the circular saw, and no wasteof it was incurred ; but "the trade" set themselvesagainst it, and after a heavy expense, it was given up.The excuse alleged for this kind of combination,was the fear entertained by the cabinet-makers thatwhen the public became acquainted with the article,the patentee would raise the price.Similar examples of combination seem not to beunfrequent, as appears by the Report of the Committeeof the House of Commons on Patents forInventions, June, 1829. See the evidence of Mr.Wordsworth.(369.) There occurs another kind of combinationagainst the public, with which it is difficult to deal. It308 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSusually ends in a monopoly, and the public are thenleft to the discretion of the monopolists not to chargethem above the ^^ growling point" — that is, not tomake them pay so much as to induce them actuallyto combine against the imposition. This occurs whentwo companies supply water or gas to consumersby means of pipes laid down under the pavement inthe streets of cities : it may possibly occur also indocks, canals, rail-roads, &c., and in other caseswhere the capital required is very large, and thecompetition very limited. If water or gas companiescombine, the public immediately loses all theadvantage of competition, and it has generally happened,that at the end of a period during which theyhave undersold each other, the several companieshave agreed to divide the whole district supplied, intotwo or more parts, each company then removing itspipes from all the streets except those in its ownportion. This removal causes great injury to thepavement, and when the pressure of increased ratesinduces a new company to start, the same inconvenienceis again produced. Perhaps one remedy againstevils of this kind might be, when a charter is grantedto such companies, to restrict, to a certain amount,the rate of profit on the shares, and to direct that anyprofits beyond, shall accumulate for the repayment ofthe original capital. This has been done in severallate acts of parliament establishing companies. Themaximum rate of profit allowed ought to be liberal,to compensate for the risk ; the public ought to haveauditors on their part, and the accounts should beannually published, for the purpose of preventing thelimitations from being exceeded. It must howeverAGAINST THE PUBLIC. 309be admitted, that this would be an interference withcapital, which, if allowed, should, in the present stateof our knowledge, be examined with great circumspectionin each individual case, until some generalprinciple is established on well-admitted grounds.(370.) An instrument called a gas-meter, whichascertains the quantity of gas used by each consumer,has been introduced, and furnishes a satisfactory modeof determining the payments to be made by individualsto the Gas companies. A contrivance somewhatsimilar in its nature, might be used for the saleof water ; but in that case some public inconveniencemight be apprehended, from the diminished quantitywhich would then run to waste : the streams of waterrunning through the sewers in London, are largelysupplied from this source ; and if this supply werediminished, the drainage of the metropolis might beinjuriously affected.(371.) In the north of England a powerful combinationhas long existed among the coal-owners, bywhich the public has suffered in the payment of increasedprice. The late examination of evidencebefore a Committee of the House of Commons, hasexplained its mode of operation, and the Committeehave recommended, that for the present the sale of coalshould be left to the competition of other districts.(372.) A combination, of another kind, exists atthis moment to a great extent, and operates upon theprice of the very pages which are now communicatinginformation respecting it. A subject so interestingto every reader, and still more so to every manufacturerof the article which the reader consumes, deservesan attentive examination.COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSWe have shown in Chap. XXI. p. 202, the componentparts of the expense of each copy of thepresent work ; and we have seen that the total amountof the cost of its production, exclusive of any paymentto the author for his labour, is 2*. 3d,*Another fact, with which the reader is more practicallyfamiliar, is, that he has paid, or is to pay, tohis bookseller, six shillings for the volume. Let usnow examine into the distribution of these six shillings,and then, having the facts of the case beforeus, we shall be better able to judge of the meritsof the combination just mentioned, and to explain itseffects.Distribution of the Profits on, a Six Shilling Book.No. I. — The Publisher who accountsto the author forevery copy received . .No. II.— The Bookseller vino re- y^tails to the public . )Or,BUYSATSELLSATPROFITon Capitalexpended.S. d.S. d.3 104 210 per cent.4 244 —4 633^ -No. I. the Publisher, is a bookseller ; he is, infact, the Author's agent. His duties are, to receiveand take charge of the stock, for which he supplieswarehouse-room ; to advise the author about thetimes and methods of advertising ; and to insert theadvertisements. As he publishes other books, he♦ The whole of the subsequent details relate to the firstedition of this work.AGAINST THE PUBLIC. 311will advertise lists of those sold by himself; and thus,by combining many in one advertisement, diminishthe expense to each of his principals. He pays theauthor only for the books actually sold ; consequently,he makes no outlay of capital, except that which hepays for advertisements : but he is answerable forany bad debts he may contract in disposing of them.His charge is usually ten per cent, on the returns.No. II. is the Bookseller who retails the work tothe public. On the publication of a new book, thePublisher sends round to the trade, to receive " subscriptions" from them for any number of copies notless than two. These copies are usually charged tothe " subscribers," on an average, at about four orfive per cent, less than the wholesale price of thebook : in the present case the subscription price is45. 2d. for each copy. After the day of publication,the price charged by the publisher to the booksellersis 4*. Qd. With some works it is the custom to delivertwenty-five copies to those who order twenty-four,thus allowing a reduction of about four percent.Such was the case with the present volume.Different publishers offer different terms to the subscribers; and it is usual, after intervals of about sixmonths, for the publisher again to open a subscriptionlist, so that if the work be one for which there is asteady sale, the trade avail themselves of these opportunitiesof purchasing, at the reduced rate, enoughto supply their probable demand. *(373.) The volume thus purchased of the pub-thesedetails vary with different books and differentpublishers; those given in the text are believed to be substantiallycorrect, and are applicable to works like the present.312 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSfisher at 4^. 2d. or 4^. 6d. is retailed by the booksellerto the public at 6s. In the first case he makesa profit of forty-four, in the second of thirty-threeper cent. Even the smaller of these two rates ofprofit on the capital employed, appears to be muchtoo large. It may sometimes happen, that when abook is inquired for, the retail dealer sends across thestreet to the wholesale agent, and receives, for thistrifling service, one fourth part of the money paid bythe purchaser; and perhaps the retail dealer takesalso six months' credit for the price which the volumeactually cost him.(374.*) In section 252, the price ofeach process inmanufacturing the present volume was stated : weshall now give an analysis of the whole expense ofconveying it into the hands of the publics.d.The retail price Gs. on 3052 produces 915 121 Total expense of printing and paper . . 207 5 S^'^.2 Taxes on paper and advertisements 40 113 Commission to publisher asagent between author andprinter 18 14 4.^-^4 Commission to publisher asagent for sale of the book . 63 1 1 85 Profit on difference betweensubscription price and tradeprice, 4(/. per vol. 50 17 46 Profit on difference betweentrade price and retail price,Is. Q(}. per vol 228 18362 1Remains for authorship 30 6 4Total 915 12AGAINST THE PUBLIC. 313This account appears to disagree with that inpage 203 ; but it will be observed that the threefirst articles amount to 266/. \s., the sum therestated. The apparent difference arises from a circumstancewhich was not noticed in the first editionof this work. The bill amounting to 205/. I85., asthere given, and as reprinted in the present volume,included an additional charge of ten per cent, uponthe real charges of the printer and paper-maker.(375.*) It is usual for the publisher, when he isemployed as agent between the author and printer, tocharge a commission of ten per cent, on all paymentshe makes. If the author is informed of this custompreviously to his commencing the work, as was thecase in the present instance, he can have no justcause of complaint ; for it is optional whether hehimself employs the printer, or communicates withhim through the intervention of his publisher.The services rendered for this payment are, themaking arrangements with the printer, the woodcutter,and the engraver, if required. There is aconvenience in having some intermediate person betweenthe author and printer, in case the formershould consider any of the charges made by the latteras too high. When the author himself is quite unacquaintedwith the details of the art of printing, hemay object to charges which, on a better acquaintancewith the subject, he might be convinced werevery moderate ; and in such cases he ought to dependon the judgment of his publisher, who is generallyconversant with the art. This is particularlythe case in the charge for alterations and corrections,some of which, although apparently trivial, occupy314 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSthe compositors much time in making. It shouldalso be observed that the publisher, in this case, becomesresponsible for the payments to those persons.(376*) It is not necessary that the author shouldavail himself of this intervention, although it is the interestof the publisher that he should ; and booksellersusually maintain that the author cannot procure hispaper or printing at a cheaper rate if he go at onceto the producers. This appears from the evidencegiven before the Committee of the House of Commonsin the Copyright Acts, May 8, 1818.Mr. O. Trees, bookseller, of the house of Long-manand Co., Paternoster-row, examined: —'* Q. Suppose a gentleman to publish a work on his ownaccount, and to incur all the various expenses ; could he getthe paper at 30s. a ream?A. I presume not ; I presume a stationer would not sellthe paper at the same price to an indifferent gentleman as tothe trade.Q. The Committee asked you if a private gentleman wasto publish a work on his own account, if he would not paymore for the paper than persons in the trade ; the Committeewish to be informed whether a printer does not charge a gentlemana higher rate than to a publisher.A. I conceive they generally charge a profit on thepaper.Q. Do not the printers charge a higher price also forprinting, than they do to the trade ?A. I always understood that they do."(377.*) There appears to be little reason for this distinctionin charging for printing a larger price to theauthor than to the publisher, provided the former isable to give equal security for the payment. Withrespect to the additional charge on paper, if theAGAINST THE Public. 315author employs either publisher or printer to purchaseit, they ought to receive a moderate remunerationfor the risk, since they become responsible forshe payment ; but there is no reason why, if theauthor deals at once with the paper-maker, he shouldaot purchase on the same terms as the printer ; andif he choose, by paying ready money, not to availhimself of the long credit allowed in those trades, heought to procure his paper considerably cheaper.(378.*) It is time, however, that such conventionalcombinations between different trades should be doneaway with. In a country so eminently depending forits wealth on its manufacturing industry, it is of importancethat there should exist no abrupt distinctionof classes, and that the highest of the aristocracyshould feel proud of being connected, either personallyor through their relatives, with those pursuits on whichtheir country's greatness depends. The wealthiermanufacturers and merchants already mix with thoseclasses, and the larger and even the middling tradesmenare frequently found associating with the gentryof the land. It is good that this ambition should becultivated, not by any rivalry in expense, but by arivalry in knowledge and in liberal feelings ; andfew things would more contribute to so desirable aneffect, than the abolition of all such contracted viewsas those to which we have alluded. The advantageto the other classes, would be an increased acquaintancewith the productive arts of the country, — an increasedattention to the importance of acquiring habitsof punctuality and of business, — and, above all, ageneral feeling that it is honourable, in any rank oflife, to increase our own and our country's riches, by316 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSemploying our talents in the production or in the distributionof wealth.(379.*) Another circumstance omitted to be noticedin the first edition relates to what is technicallycalled " the overplus'* which may be now explained.When 500 copies of a work are to be printed, eachsheet of it requires one ream of paper. Now a ream,as used by printers, consists of 21 J quires, or 516sheets. This excess of sixteen sheets is necessary inorder to allow for " revises," — for preparing andadjusting the press for the due performance of itswork, and to supply the place of any which may beaccidentally dirtied or destroyed in the processes ofprinting, or injured by the binder in putting intoboards. It is found, however, that three per cent,is more than the proportion destroyed, and thatdamage is less frequent in proportion to the skill andcare of the workmen.From the evidence of several highly respectablebooksellers and printers, before the Committee of theHouse of Commons on the Copyright Act, May, 1818,it appears that the average number of surplus copies,above 500, is between two and three ; that on smallerimpressions it is less, whilst on larger editions itis greater ; that, in some instances, the complete numberof 500 is not made up, in which case the printeris obliged to pay for completing it ; and that in noinstance have the whole sixteen extra copies beencompleted. On the volume in the reader's hands,the edition of which consisted of 3000, the surplusamounted to fifty-two, — a circumstance arising fromthe improvements in printing and the increased careof the pressmen. Now this overplus ought to beAGAINST THE PUBLIC. 317accounted for to the author; — and 1 believe it usuallyis so by all respectable publishers.(380.*) In order to prevent the printer from privatelytaking off a larger number of impressions thanhe delivers to the publisher or author, various expedientshave been adopted. In some works a particularwater-mark has been used in paper made purposelyfor the work : thus the words " Technique Celeste "appear in the water-mark of the two first volumes ofthe great work of Laplace. In other cases, wherethe work is illustrated by engravings, such a fraudwould be useless without the concurrence of thecopper-plate printer. In France it is usual to printa notice on the back of the title-page, that no copiesare genuine without the subjoined signature of theauthor : and attached to this notice is the author'sname, either written, or printed by hand from awooden block. But notwithstanding this precaution,I have recently purchased a volume, printed at Paris,in which the notice existed, but no signature wasattached. In London there is not much danger ofsuch frauds, because the printers are men of capital, —to whom the profit on such a transaction would betrifling, and the risk of the detection of a fact, whichmust of necessity be known-to many of their workmen,would be so great as to render the attempt at itfolly.(38L*) Perhaps the best advice to an author, ifhe publishes on his own account, and is a reasonableperson, possessed of common sense, would be to goatonce to a respectable printer and make his arrangementswith him.(382.*) If the author do not wish to print his318 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSwork at his ovvti risk, then he should make an agreementwith a publisher for an edition of a limitednumber ; but he should by no means sell the copyright.If the work contains wood-cuts or engravings, itwould be judicious to make it part of the contractthat they shall become the author's property, withthe view to their use in a subsequent edition of theworks, if they should be required. An agreement isfrequently made by which the publisher advances themoney and incurs all the risk on condition of hissharing the profits with the author. The profitsalluded to are, for the present work, the last item ofsection 374, or, 306Z. 45.(383.*) Having now explained all the arrangementsin printing the present volume, let us returnto section 374, and examine the distribution of the915/. paid by the public. Of this sum 207/. was thecost of the book, 40/. was taxes, 362/. was thecharges of the bookseller in conveying it to the consumer,and 306/. remained for authorship.The largest portion, or 362/. goes into the pocketsof the booksellers ; and as they do not advancecapital, and incur very little risk, this certainlyappears to be an unreasonable allowance. The mostextravagant part of the charge is the thirty-threeper cent, which is allowed as profit on retailing thebook.It is stated, however, that all retail booksellersallow to their customers a discount of ten percent,upon orders above 205., and that consequentlythe nominal profit of forty-four or thirty-three percent,is very much reduced. If this is the case, itmay fairly be inquired, why the price of 21. forAGAINST THE PUBLIC. 319example, is printed upon the back of a book, whenevery bookseller is ready to sell it at 1/. \6s., andwhy those who are unacquainted with that circumstanceshould be made to pay more than others whoare better informed ?(384.*) Several reasons have been alleged as justifyingthis high rate of profit.1st. It has been alleged that the purchasers ofbooks take long credit. This, probably, is often thecase, and admitting it, no reasonable person canobject to a proportionate increase of price. But it isno less clear, that persons who do pay ready money,should not be charged the same price as those whodefer their payments to a remote period.2d. It has been urged that large profits are necessaryto ]pay for the great expenses of booksellingestablishments ; that rents are high and taxes heavy;and that it would be impossible for the great booksellersto compete with the smaller ones, unless theretail profits were great. In reply to this it may be observedthat the booksellers are subject to no peculiarpressure which does not attach to all other retailtrades. It may also be remarked that large establishmentsalways have advantages over smallerones, in the economy arising from the divisionof labour ; and it is scarcely to be presumed thatbooksellers are the only class who, in lar^re concerns,neglect to avail themselves of them.3d. It has been pretended that this high rate ofprofit is necessary to cover the risk of the bookseller'shaving some copies left on his shelves ; but he is notobliged to buy of the publisher a single copy morethan he has orders for : and if he do purchase more,320 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSat the subscription price, he proves, by the veryfact, that he himself does not estimate that risk atmore than from four to eight per cent.(385.*) It has been truly observed, on the otherhand, that many copies of books are spoiled bypersons who enter the shops of booksellers withoutintending to make any purchase. But, not to mentionthat such persons finding on the tables variousnew publications, are frequently induced, by thatopportunity of inspecting them, to become purchasers: this damage does not apply to all booksellersnor to all books ; of course it is not necessary tokeep in the shop books of small probable demandor great price. In the present case, the retailprofit on three copies only, namely, 4i. 6d., wouldpay the whole cost of the one copy soiled in theshop ; and even that copy might afterwards produce,at an auction, half or a third of its cost price.The argument, therefore, from disappointments in thesale of books, and that arising from heavy stock, aretotally groundless in the question between publisherand author. It should be remarked also, that thepublisher is generally a retail, as well as a wholesale,bookseller ; and that, besides his profit upon everycopy which he sells in his capacity of agent, he isallowed to charge the author as if every copy hadbeen subscribed for at 45. 2d., and of course he receivesthe same profit as the rest of the wholesaletraders for the books retailed in his own shop.(38G.*) In the country, there is more reason for aconsiderable allowance between the retail dealer andthe public ; because the profit of the country bookselleris diminished by the expense of the carriageAGAINST THE PUBLIC 321of the books from London. He must also pay acommission, usually five per cent., to his Londonagent, on all those books which his correspondentdoes not himself publish. If to this be added adiscount of five per cent., allowed for ready moneyto every customer, and often per cent, to book-clubs,the profit of the bookseller in a small country town isby no means too large.5th. Some of the writers, who have publishedcriticisms on the observations made in the first editionof this work, have admitted that the apparent rate ofprofit to the booksellers is too large. But they have,on the other hand, urged that too favourable a case istaken in supposing the whole 3000 copies sold. Ifthe reader will turn back to section 374, he will findthat the expense of the three first items remains thesame, whatever be the number of copies sold ; and onlooking over the remaining items he will perceive thatthe bookseller, who incurs very little risk and nooutlay, derives exactly the same profit per cent, onthe copies sold, whatever their number may be. This,however, is not the case with the unfortunate author,on whom nearly the whole of the loss falls undivided.The same writers have also maintained, that the profitis fixed at the rate mentioned, in order to enable thebookseller to sustain losses, unavoidably incurred inthe purchase and retail of other books. This is theweakest of all arguments. It would be equally justthat a merchant should charge an extravagant commissionfor an undertaking unaccompanied with anyrisk, in order to repay himself for the losses whichhis own want of skill might lead to in his othermercantile transactions.T322 ON COMBINATIONS OF MASTERS(387.) That the profit in retailing books is reallytoo large, is proved by several circumstances : — First,That the same nominal rate of profit has existedin the bookselling trade for a long series of years,notwithstanding the great fluctuations in the rate ofprofit on capital invested in every other business.Secondly, That, until very lately, a multitude ofbooksellers, in all parts of London, were content witha much smaller profit, and were willing to sell forready money, or at short credit, to persons of undoubtedcharacter, at a profit of only ten per cent.,and in some instances even at a still smaller percentage,instead of that of twenty-five per cent, onthe published prices. Thirdly, that they are unableto maintain this rate of profit except by a combination,the object of which is to put down all competition.(388.) Some time ago a small number of the largeLondon booksellers entered into such a combination.One of their objects was to prevent any bookseller fromselling books for less than ten per cent, under thepublished prices ; and in order to enforce this principle,they refuse to sell books, except at the publishingprice, to any bookseller who declines signingan agreement to that effect. By degrees, many wereprevailed upon to join this combination ; and theeffect of the exclusion it inflicted, left the smallcapitalist no option between signing or having hisbusiness destroyed. Ultimately, nearly the wholetrade, comprising about two thousand four hundredpersons, have been compelled to sign the agreement.As might be naturally expected from a compact soinjurious to many of the parties to it, disputes haveAGAINST THE PUBLIC. 323arisen ; several booksellers have been placed underthe ban of the combination, who allege that theyhave not violated its rules, and who accuse the oppositeparty of using spies, &c. to entrap them.*(389.) The origin of this combination has been explainedby Mr. Pickering, of Chancery-lane, himselfa publisher, in a printed statement, entitled, "Booksellers'Monopoly ; " and the following list of booksellers,who form the committee for conducting thiscombination, is copied from that printed at the headof each of the cases published by Mr. Pickering :Allen, J., 7, Leadenhall-street.Arch, J., 61, Cornwall.Baldwin, R., 47, Paternoster-row.Booth, J.Duncan, J., 37, Paternoster-row.Hatched, J., Piccadilly.Marshall, R., Stationers-court.Murray, J., Albemarle-street.Trees, O., 39, Paternoster-row.Richardson, J. M., 23, Cornwall.Livingston, J., St. Paul's Church-yard.Wilson, E., Royal Exchange.(390.) In whatever manner the profits are dividedbetween the publisher and the retail bookseller, thefact remains, that the reader pays for the volume inhis hands 6s., and that the author will receive only35. 10c?. ; out of which latter sum, the expense ofIt is now understood that the use of spies has been givenup; and it is also known that the system of underselling isagain privately resorted to by many ; so that the injury arisingfrom this arbitrary system, pursued by the great booksellers,affects only or most severely those whose adherence to an extortedpromise most deserves respect. — Note to the second edition.324 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSprinting the volume must be paid : so that in passingthrough two hands this book has produced a profitof forty-four per cent. This excessive rate of profithas drawn into the book-trade a larger share ofcapital than was really advantageous ; and the competitionbetween the different portions of that capitalhas naturally led to the system of underselling, towhich the committee above-mentioned are endeavouringto put a stop. *(391.) There are two parties who chiefly sufferfrom this combination, — the public and authors. Thefirst party can seldom be induced to take an activepart against any grievance ; and in fact little isrequired from it, except a cordial support of theauthors, in any attempt to destroy a combination soinjurious to the interests of both.Many an industrious bookseller would be glad tosell for 5s. the volume which the reader holds in hishand, and for which he has paid 6s. ; and, in doingso for ready money, the tradesman who paid 4s. 6d.for the book, would realise, without the least risk,a profit of eleven per cent, on the money he hadadvanced. It is one of the objects of the combinationwe are discussing, to prevent the smallcapitalist from employing his capital at that rate ofprofit which he thinks most advantageous to himself;The Monopoly Cases, Nos. 1, 2, and 3, of those publishedby Mr. Pickering, should be consulted upon this point ; and,as the public will be better able to form a judgment by hearingthe other side of the question, it is to be hoped the Chairman ofthe Committee (Mr. Richardson) will publish those Regulationsrespecting the trade, a copy of which, Mr. Pickering states, isrefused by the Committee even to those who sign them.AGAINST THE PUBLIC. 325and such a proceeding is decidedly injurious to thepublic.(392.) Having derived little pecuniary advantagefrom my own literary productions ; and being aware,that from the very nature of their subjects, they canscarcely be expected to reimburse the expense ofpreparing them, I may be permitted to offer anopinion upon the subject, which I believe to be aslittle influenced by any expectation of advantage fromthe future, as it is by any disappointment at the past.Before, however, we proceed to sketch the planof a campaign against Paternoster-row, it will belit to inform the reader of the nature of the enemies'forces, and of his means of attack and defence.Several of the great publishers find it convenient tobe the proprietors of Reviews, Magazines, Journals,and even of Newspapers. The Editors are paid, insome instances very handsomely, for their superintendence; and it is scarcely to be expected that theyshould always mete out the severest justice on worksby the sale of which their employers are enriched.The great and popular works of the day are, of course,reviewed with some care, and with deference topublic opinion. Without this, the journals would notsell ; and it is convenient to be able to quote sucharticles as instances of impartiality. Under shelterof this, a host of ephemeral productions are writteninto a transitory popularity ; and by the aid of thisprocess, the shelves of the booksellers, as well as thepockets of the public, are disencumbered. To suchan extent are these means employed, that some ofthe periodical publications of the day ought to be326 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSregarded merely as advertising machines. That thereader may be in some measure on his guard againstsuch modes of influencing his judgment, he shouldexamine whether the work reviewed is published bythe bookseller who is the proprietor of the review ; afact which can sometimes be ascertained from thetitle of the book as given at the head of the article.But this is by no means a certain criterion, becausepartnerships in various publications exist betweenhouses in the book trade, which are not generallyknown to the public ; so that, in fact, until Reviewsare established in which booksellers have no interest,they can never be safely trusted.(393.) In order to put down the combination ofbooksellers, no plan appears so likely to succeed as acounter-association of authors. If any considerableportion of the literary world were to unite and formsuch an association ; and if its affairs were directed byan active committee, much might be accomplished.The objects of such an union should be, to employsome person well skilled in the printing, and in thebookselling trade ; and to establish him in somecentral situation as their agent. Each member of theassociation to be at liberty to place any, or all of hisworks in the hands of this agent for sale ; to allowany advertisements, or list of books published bymembers of the association, to be stitched up at theend of each of his own productions ; the expenseof preparing them being defrayed by the proprietorsof the books advertised.The duties of the agent would be to retail tothe public, for ready money copies of books pub-againstTHE PUBLIC. 327wished by members of the association. To sell tothe trade, at prices agreed upon, any copies they mayrequire. To cause to be inserted in the journals, orat the end of works published by members, any advertisementswhich the committee or authors maydirect. To prepare a general catalogue of theworks of members. To be the agent for any memberof the association respecting the printing of anywork.Such a union would naturally present other advantages; and as each author would retain the liberty ofputting any price he might think fit on his productions,the public would have the advantage of reductionin price produced by competition between authorson the same subject, as well as of that arising froma cheaper mode of publishing the volumes sold tothem.(394.) Possibly, one of the consequences resultingfrom such an association, would be the establishmentof a good and an impartial Review, a work the wantof which has been felt for several years. The twolong-established and celebrated Reviews, the unbendingchampions of the most opposite political opinions,are, from widely differing causes, exhibiting unequivocalsigns of decrepitude and decay. The Quarterlyadvocate of despotic principles is fast receding fromthe advancing intelligence of the age ; the newstrength and new position which that intelligence hasacquired, demands for its expression, new organs,equally the representatives of its intellectual power,and of its moral energies : whilst, on the other hand,the sceptre of the Northern critics has passed, from328 COMBINATIONS OF MASTERSthe vigorous grasp of those who established its dominion,into feebler hands.(395.) It may be stated as a difficulty in realizingthis suggestion, that those most competent to supplyperiodical criticism, are already engaged. But it isto be observed, that there are many who now supplyliterary criticisms to journals, the political principlesof which they disapprove ; and that if once a respectableand well-supported Review* were established,capable of competing, in payment to its contributors,with the wealthiest of its rivals, it would very soonbe supplied with the best materials the country canproduce, f It may also be apprehended that such acombination of authors would be favourable to eachother. There are two temptations to which an EditorAt the moment when this opinion as to the necessity foranew Review was passing through the press, I was informedthat the elements of such an undertaking were already organized.f It has been suggested to me, that the doctrines maintainedin this chapter may subject the present volume to theopposition of that combination which it has opposed. I donot entertain that opinion ; and for this reason, that the booksellersare too shrewd a class to supply such an admirablepassport to publicity as their opposition would prove to be ifgenerally suspected.* But should my readers take a differentview of the question, they can easily assist in remedying theevil, by each mentioning the existence of this little volume totwo of his friends.♦ I was mistaken in this conjecture; all booksellers are not so shrewdas I had imagined, for some did refuse to sell this volume i consequentlyothers sold a larger number of copies.In the Preface to the second edition, at the commencement of this volume,the reader will see some further observations on the effect of theBooksellers' combination. — ?t'ote to the Second Edition.AGAINST THE PUBLIC. 329of a review is commonly exposed : the first is, a tendencyto consult too much, in the works he criticises,the interest of the proprietor of his review ; the second,a similar inclination to consult the interests ofhis friends. The plan which has been proposed removesone of these temptations, but it would be verydifficult to destroy the other.330 EFFECT OF MACHINERY IN REDUCINGCHAP. XXXII.*ON THE EFFECT OF MACHINERY IN REDUCINGTHE DEMAND FOR LABOUR.(396.*) One of the objections most frequentlyurged against machinery is, that it has a tendency tosupersede much of the hand-labour which was previouslyemployed ; and in fact unless a machine diminishedthe labour necessary to make an article, itcould never come into use. But if it have that effect,its owner, in order to extend the sale of his produce,will be obliged to undersell his competitors ; this willinduce them also to introduce the new machine, andthe effect of this competition will soon cause thearticle to fall, until the profits on capital, under thenew system, shall be reduced to the same rate asunderthe old. Although, therefore, the use of machineryhas at first a tendency to throw labour out ofemployment, yet the increased demand consequentupon the reduced price, almost immediately absorbsa considerable portion of that labour, and perhaps, insome cases, the whole of what would otherwise havebeen displaced.That the effect of a new machine is to diminishthe labour required for the production of the samequantity of manufactured commodities may beclearly perceived, by imagining a society, in whichoccupations are not divided, each man himself manufacturingall the articles he consumes. Supposing eachTHE DEMAND FOR LABOUR. 331individual to labour during ten hours daily, one ofwhich is devoted to making shoes, it is evident thatif any tool or machine be introduced, by the useof which his shoes can be made in half the usual time,then each member of the community ^^dll enjoy thesame comforts as before by only nine and one-halfhours' labour.(397.*) If, therefore, we wish to prove that thetotal quantity of labour is not diminished by the introductionof machines, we must have recourse to someother principle of our nature. But the same motivewhich sets a man in activity will become additionallypowerful, when he finds his comforts procured withdiminished labour ; and in such circumstances, it isprobable, that many would employ the time thus redeemedin contriving new tools for other branches oftheir occupations. He who has habitually workedten hours a day, will employ the half hour savedby the new machine in gratifying some other want ;and as each new machine adds to these gratifications,new luxuries will open to his view, which continuedenjoyment will as surely render necessary to hishappiness.(398.*) In countries where occupations are divided,and where the division of labour is practised,the ultimate consequence of improvements in machineryis almost invariably to cause a greater demandfor labour. Frequently the new labour requires, atits commencement, a higher degree of skill than theold; and, unfortunately, the class of persons drivenout of the old employment are not always qualifiedfor the new one ; so that a certain interval mustelapse before the whole of their labour is wanted.332 EFFECT OF MACHINERY IN REDUCINGThis, for a time, produces considerable sufferingamongst the working classes ; and it is of great importancefor their happiness that they should beaware of these effects, and be enabled to foresee themat an early period, in order to diminish, as much aspossible, the injury resulting from them.One very important inquiry which this subjectpresents is the question, — Whether it is more for theinterest of the working classes, that improved machineryshould he so perfect as to defy the competition ofhand-labour; and that they should thus be at oncedriven out of the trade by it ; or be gradually forcedto quit it by the slow and successive advances of themachine ? The suffering which arises from a quicktransition is undoubtedly more intense ; but it is alsomuch less permanent than that which results fromthe slower process : and if the competition is perceivedto be perfectly hopeless, the workman willat once set himself to learn a new department ofhis art. On the other hand, although new machinerycauses an increased demand for skill in those whomake and repair it, and in those who first superintendits use ; yet there are other cases in which it enableschildren and inferior workmen to execute work thatpreviously required greater skill. In such circumstances,even though the increased demand for thearticle, produced by its diminished price, shouldspeedily give occupation to all who were before employed,yet the very diminution of the skill required,would open a wider field of competition amongst theworking classes themselves.(399.*) That machines do not, even at their firstintroduction, invariably throw human labour out ofTHE DEMAND FOR LABOUR. 333employment, must be admitted; and it has beenmaintained, by persons very competent to form anopinion on the subject, that they never produce thateffect. The solution of this question depends onfacts, which, unfortunately, have not yet been collected; and the circumstance of our not possessingthe data necessary for the full examination of soimportant a subject, supplies an additional reasonfor impressing, upon the minds of all who are interestedin such inquiries, the importance of procuringaccurate registries, at various times, of thenumber of persons employed in particular branchesof manufacture, of the number of machines used bythem, and of the wages they receive.(400.*) In relation to the inquiry just mentioned,I shall offer some remarks upon the facts within myknowledge, and only regret that those which I cansupport by numerical statement are so few. Whenthe Crushing Mill, used in Cornwall and othermining countries, superseded the labour of a greatnumber of young women, who worked very hard inbreaking ores with flat hammers, no distress followed.The reason of this appears to have been, that theproprietors of the mines, having one portion of theircapital released by the superior cheapness of the processexecuted by the mills, found it their interest toapply more labour to other operations. The women,disengaged from mere drudgery, were thus profitablyemployed in dressing the ores, a work which requiredskill and judgment in the selection.(401.*) The increased production arising from alterationsin the machinery, or from improved modes ofusing it, appears from the following table. A machine334 EFFECT OF MACHINERY IN REDUCINGcalled in the cotton manufacture a " Stretcher,"worked by one man, produced as follows :Year.Pounds of Cottonspan.Roving Wagesper score.«. d.Rate of earningper week.8. d.1 3^25 10 *31 10^n31 3The same man working at another Stretcher, theRoving a little finer, produced,1823 900 7i 28 1^7 27 66 306 30In this instance, production has gradually increaseduntil, at the end of twenty-two years, three times asmuch work is done as at the commencement, althoughthe manual labour employed remains the same. Theweekly earnings of the workmen have not fluctuatedvery much, and appear, on the whole, to have advanced: but it would be imprudent to push too farreasonings founded upon a single instance.(402.*) The produce of 480 spindles of " muleyarn spinning," at different periods, was as follows :Year.Hanks, about40 to the pound.Wagesper thousand«. d.6,6689 28,0006 310,0003 8(403.*) The subjoined view of the state of weavingby hand and by power looms, at Stockport, in theIn 1810, the workman's wages were guaranteed not tobe less than 26s.THE DEMAND FOR LABOUR. 335years 1822 and 1832, is taken from an enumerationof the machines contained in 65 factories, and wascollected for the purpose of being given in evidencebefore a Committee of the House of Commons.In Ism.In 1832.Hand-loom weavers2,8002,000 decrease.Persons using power-looms3,0592,402 increase.Persons to dress the warp290 increase.Total persons employed3,5554,247692 increase.Power-looms1,9709,1778,207 increase.During this period, the number of hand-looms inemployment has diminished to less than one-third,whilst that of power-looms has increased to morethan five times its former amount. The total numberof workmen has increased about one-third ; butthe amount of manufactured goods (supposing eachpower-loom to do only the work of three hand-looms)is three and a half times as large as it wasbefore.(404.*) In considering this increase of employment,it must be admitted, that the two thousand personsthrown out of work are not exactly of the same classas those called into employment by the power-looms.A hand-weaver must possess bodily strength, whichis not essential for a person attending a power-loom ;consequently, women and young persons of bothsexes, from fifteen to seventeen years of age, findemployment in power-loom factories. This, however,would be a very limited view of the employmentarising from the introduction of power-looms : theskill called into action in building the new factories,in constructing the new machinery, in making the336 EFFECT OF MACHINERY IN REDUCINGSteam engines to drive it, and in devising improvementsin the structure of the looms, as well as inregulating the economy of the establishment, is of amuch higher order than that which it had assisted insuperseding ; and if we possessed any means of measuringthis, it would probably be found larger in amount.Nor, in this view of the subject, must we omit thefact, that although hand-looms would have increasedin number if those moved by steam had not beeninvented, yet it is the cheapness of the article manufacturedby power-looms which has caused this greatextension of their employment, and that by diminishingthe price of one article of commerce, we alwayscall into additional activity the energy of those whoproduce others. It appears that the number of hand-loomsin use in England and Scotland in 1830, wasabout 240,000 ; nearly the same number existedin the year 1820 : whereas the number of powerlesswhich, in 1830, was 55,000, had, in 1820,been 14,000. When it is considered that each ofthese power-looms did as much work as threeworked by hand, the increased producing powerwas equal to that of 123,000 hand-looms. Duringthe whole of this period the wages and employmentof hand-loom weavers have been very precarious.(405.) Increased intelligence amongst the workingclasses, may enable them to foresee some ofthose improvements which are likely for a time toaffect the value of their labour; and the assistanceof Savings Banks and Friendly Societies, (the advantagesof which can never be too frequently, ortoo strongly, pressed upon their attention,) may beTHE DEMAND TOR LABOUR. 337of some avail in remedying the evil : but it maybeuseful also to suggest to them, that a diversityof employments amongst the members of one family,will tend, in some measure, to mitigate the privationswhich arise from fluctuation in the value oflabour.338 EFFECTS OF TAXESCHAP. XXXIII.ON THE EFFECT OF TAXES AND OF LEGAL RestrictionsUPON MANUFACTURES.(406.) As soon as a tax is put upon any article,the ingenuity of those who make, and of those whouse it, is directed to the means of evading as large apart of the tax as they can ; and this may often beaccomplished in ways which are perfectly fair andlegal. An excise duty exists at present of 3^.* perpound upon all writing paper. The effect of thisimpost is, that much of the paper which is employed,is made extremely thin, in order that the weight of agiven number of sheets may be as small as possible.Soon after the first imposition of the tax upon windows,which depended upon their number, and notupon their size, new-built houses began to have fewerwindows and those of larger dimensions than before.Staircases were lighted by extremely long windows,illuminating three or four flights of stairs. Whenthe tax was increased, and the size of windowscharged as single was limited, then still greater carewas taken to have as few windows as possible, andinternal lights became frequent. These internallights in their turn became the subject of taxation ;but it was easy to evade the discovery of them, andTwenty-eight shillings per cwt. for the finer, twenty-oneshillings per cwt. for the coarser papers.UPON MANUFACTURES. 339in the last act of parliament reducing the assessedtaxes, they ceased to be chargeable. From thechanges thus successively introduced in the number,the forms, and the positions of the windows, a tolerableconjecture might, in some instances, be formedof the age of a house.(407.) A tax on windows is exposed to objectionon the double ground of its excluding air and Ikjht,and it is on both accounts injurious to health. Theimportance of light to the enjoyment of health is notperhaps sufficiently appreciated : in the cold andmore variable climates, it is of still greater importancethan in warmer countries.(408.) The effects of regulations of excise uponour home manufactures are often productive of greatinconvenience ; and check, materially, the naturalprogress of improvement. It is frequently necessary,for the purposes of revenue, to oblige manufacturersto take out a license, and to compel them to work accordingto certain rules, and to make certain statedquantities at each operation. When these quantitiesare large, as in general they are, they deter manufacturersfrom making experiments, and thus impedeimprovements both in the mode of conducting theprocesses and in the introduction of new materials.Difficulties of this nature have occurred in experimentingupon glass for optical purposes ; but in thiscase, permission has been obtained by fit persons tomake experiments, without the interference of theexcise. It ought, however, to be remembered, thatsuch permission, if frequently or indiscriminatelygranted, might be abused : the greatest protectionagainst such an abuse will be found, in bringing thez 2340 EFFECT OF TAXESforce of public opinion to bear upon scientific men, —and thus enabling the proper authorities, althoughthemselves but moderately conversant with science,to judge of the propriety of the permission, from thepublic character of the applicant.(409.) From the evidence given, in 1808, beforethe Committee of the House of Commons, On Distillationfrom Sugar and Molasses, it appeared that, bya different mode of working from that prescribed bythe Excise, the spirits from a given weight of com,which then produced eighteen gallons, might easilyhave been increased to twenty gallons. Nothingmore was required than to make what is called thewash weaker ; the consequence of which is, thatfermentation goes on to a greater extent. It wasstated, however, that such a deviation would renderthe collection of the duty liable to great difficulties ;and that it would not benefit the distiller much,since his price was enhanced to the customer byany increase of expense in the fabrication. Herethen is a case in which a quantity, amounting toone-ninth of the total produce, is actually lost tothe country. A similar effect arises in the coal-trade,from the effect of a duty ; for, according to theevidence before the House of Commons, it appearsthat a considerable quantity of the very best coal isactually wasted. The amount of waste is veryvarious in different mines ; but in some cases itamounts to one-third.(410.) The effects of duties upon the import offoreign manufactures are equally curious. A singularinstance occurred in the United States, where har-ironwas, on its introduction, liable to a duty ofUPON MANUFACTURES. 341140 per cent, ad valorem, whilst hardware wascharged at 25 per cent only. In consequence of thistax, large quantities of malleable iron rails for railroadswere imported into America under the denominationof hardware ; the difference of 115 per cent,in duty more than counter-balancing the expenseof fashioning the iron into rails prior to its importation.(411.) Duties, drawbacks, and bounties, when considerablein amount, are all liable to objections of avery serious nature, from the frauds to which theygive rise. It has been stated before Committees ofthe House of Commons, that calicoes made up in theform, and with the appearance of linen, have frequentlybeen exported for the purpose of obtainingthe bounty : for calico made up in this way sellsonly at \s. 4d. per yard, whereas linen of equal finenessis worth from 25. 8d. to 25. lOd. per yard. Itappeared from the evidence, that one house in sixmonths sold five hundred such pieces of calico.In almost all cases heavy duties, or prohibitions,are ineffective as well as injurious ; for unless thearticles excluded are of very large dimensions, thereconstantly arises a price at which they will be clandestinelyimported by the smuggler. The extent,therefore, to which smuggling can be carried, shouldalways be considered in the imposition of new duties,or in the alteration of old ones. Unfortunately it hasbeen pushed so far, and is so systematically conductedbetween this country and France, that theprice per cent, at which most contraband articlescan be procured is perfectly well known. From theevidence of Mr. Galloway, it appears that, from 303-12 EFFECT OF TAXESto 40 per cent, was the rate of insurance on exportingprohibited machinery from England, and thatthe larger the quantity the less was the per-centagedemanded. From evidence given in the Report ofthe Watch and Clock-makers' Committee, in 1817, itappears that persons were constantly in the habit ofreceiving in France watches, lace, silks, and otherarticles of value easily portable, and delivering themin England at ten per cent, on their estimated worth,in which sum the cost of transport and the risk ofsmuggling were included.(412.) In inquiring into the effect produced, or tobe apprehended from any particular mode of taxation,it is necessary to examine a little into the interests ofthe parties who approve of the plan in question, aswell as of those who object to it. Instances haveoccurred where the persons paying a tax into thehands of government have themselves objected to anyreduction. This happened in the case of one class ofcalico-printers, whose interest really was injured by aremoval of the tax on the printing. They receivedfrom the manufacturers, payment for the duty, abouttwo months before they were themselves called on topay it to government : the consequence was, that aconsiderable capital always remained in their hands.The evidence which states this circumstance is wellcalculated to promote a reasonable circumspectionin such inquiries.Do you happen to know any thing of an oppositionfrom calico printers to the repeal of the tax on printedcalicoes?I have certainly heard of such an opposition, and amnot surprised at it. There are a very few individualsUPON MANUFACTURES. 343who are, in fact, interested in the non-repeal of the tax :there are two classes of calico printers ; one, who printtheir own cloth, send their goods into the market, andsell them on their own account; they frequently advancethe duty to government, and pay it in cash before theirgoods are sold, hut generally before the goods are paidfor, being most commonly sold on a credit of six months:they are of course interested on that account, as well ason others that have been stated, in the repeal of the tax.The other class of calico printers print the cloth of ofrherpeople ; they print for hire, and on re-delivery of thecloth when printed, they receive the amount of the duty,which they are not called upon to pay to governmentsooner, on an average, than nine weeks from the stampingof the goods. Where the business is carried on upon alarge scale, the arrears of duty due to government oftenamount to eight, or even ten thousand pounds, and furnisha capital with which these gentlemen carry on theirbusiness ; it is not, therefore, to be wondered at that theyshould be opposed to the prayer of our petition."(413.) The policy of giving Bounties upon homeproductions, and of enforcing restrictions againstthose which can be produced more cheaply in othercountries, is of a very questionable nature : and,except for the purpose of introducing a new manufacture,in a country where there is not much commercialor manufacturing spirit, is scarcely to bedefended. All incidental modes of taxing one classof the community, (the consumers,) to an unknownextent, for the sake of supporting another class, (themanufacturers,) who would otherwise abandon thatmode of employing their capital, are highly objectionable.One part of the price of any articleproduced under such circumstances, consists of344 EFFECT OF TAXESthe expenditure, together with the ordinary profitsof capital : the other part of its price may be lookedupon as charity, given to induce the manufacturer tocontinue an unprofitable use of his capital, in orderto give employment to his workmen. If the sumof what the consumers are thus forced to pay, merelyon account of these artificial restrictions were generallyknown, its amount would astonish even thosewho advocate them ; and it would be evident to bothparties, that the employment of capital in that particulartrade ought to be abandoned.(414.) The restriction of articles produced in amanufactory to certain sizes, is attended with somegood effect in an economical view, arising chieflyfrom the smaller number of different tools requiredin making them, as well as from less frequent changein the adjustment of those tools. A similar sourceof economy is employed in the navy : by havingships divided into a certain number of classes, each ofwhich comprises vessels of the same dimensions, therigging made for one vessel will fit any other of itsclass ; a circumstance which renders the supply ofdistant stations more easy.(415.) The effects of the removal of a monopolyare often very important, and they were perhaps nevermoreremarkable than in the bobbin-net trade, in theyears 1824 and 1825. These effects were, however,considerably enhanced by the general rage for speculationswhich was so prevalent during that singularperiod. One of the patents of Mr. Heathcote for abobbin-net machine had just then expired, whilstanother, for an improvement in a particular part ofsuch machines, called a turn-again, had yet a fewUPON MANUFACTURES. 345years to run. Many licenses had been granted touse the former patent, which were charged at therate of about five pounds per annum for each quarterof a yard in width, so that what is termed a six-quarterframe (which makes bobbin-net a yard anda half wide) paid thirty pounds a year. The secondpatent was ultimately abandoned in August, 1823,infringements of it having taken place.It was not surprising that, on the removal ofthe monopoly arising from this patent, a multitudeof persons became desirous of embarking in a tradewhich had hitherto yielded a very large profit.The bobbin-net machine occupies little space ; andis, from that circumstance, well adapted for a domesticmanufacture. The machines which alreadyexisted, were principally in the hands of the manufacturers; but, a kind of mania for obtaining themseized on persons of all descriptions, who could raisea small capital ; and, under its influence, butchers,bakers, small farmers, publicans, gentlemen's servants,and, in some cases, even clergymen, becameanxious to possess bobbin-net machines.Some few machines were rented ; but, in most ofthese cases, the workman purchased the machine heemployed, by instalments of from 31. to 61. weekly,for a six-quarter machine ; and many individuals, unacquaintedwith the mode of using the machines sopurchased, paid others of more experience for instructingthem in their use ; 50Z. or 60/. being sometimesgiven for this instruction. The success of thefirst speculators induced others to follow the example; and the machine-makers were almost overwhelmedwith orders for lace-frames. Such was the346 EFFECT OF TAXESdesire to procure them, that many persons depositeda large part, or the whole, of the price, in the handsof the frame-makers, in order to insure their havingthe earliest supply. This, as might naturally be expected,raised the price of wages amongst the workmenemployed in machine-making ; and the effectwas felt at a considerable distance from Nottingham,which was the centre of this mania. Smiths not usedto ^^ fiat filing'" coming from distant parts, earnedfrom 30s. to 425. per week. Finishing smiths, accustomedto the work, gained from 3/. to 4Z. perweek. The forging smith, if accustomed to his work,gained from 51. to 6Z. per week, and some few earnedlos. per week. In making what are technicallycalled insides, those who were best paid, were generallyclock and watch makers, from all the districtsround, who received from 3/. to 4:1. per week. Thesetter s-up, — persons who put the parts of the machinetogether, charged 20l. for their assistance ; and, asix-quarter machine, could be put together in a fortnightor three weeks.(416.) Good workmen, being thus induced to desertless profitable branches of their business, in order tosupply this extraordinary demand, the masters, inother trades, soon found their men leaving them,without being aware of the immediate reason : someof the more intelligent, however, ascertained the cause.They went from Birmingham to Nottingham, inorder to examine into the circumstances which hadseduced almost all the journeymen clock makers fromtheir own workshops ; and it was soon apparent,that the men who had been making clocks in Birmingham,at the rate of 25s. a week, could earnUPON MANUFACTURES. 34721. by working at lace-frame-making in Nottingham.On examining the nature of this profitable work,the clock-makers perceived that one part of thebobbin-net machines, that which held the bobbins,could easily be made in their own workshops. Theytherefore contracted with the machine-makers, whohad already more work ordered than they could execute,to supply the " bobbin-carriers'' at a pricewhich enabled them, on their return home, to givesuch increased wages as were sufficient to retaintheir own workmen, as well as yield themselvesa good profit. Thus an additional facility wasafforded for the construction of these bobbin-netmachines : and the conclusion was not difficult to beforeseen. The immense supply of bobbin-net thuspoured into the market, speedily reduced its price ;this reduction in price, rendered the machines bywhich the net was made, less valuable ; some fewof the earliest producers, for a short time, carriedon a profitable trade ; but multitudes were disappointed,and many ruined. The low price at whichthe fabric sold, together with its lightness andbeauty, combined to extend the sale ; and ultimately,new improvements in the machines, rendered the olderones still less valuable.(417.) The bobbin-net trade is, at present, bothextensive and increasing ; and, as it may, probably,at some future time, claim a larger portion of publicattention, it will be interesting to describe briefly itsactual state.A lace-frame on the most improved principle,at the present day, manufacturing a piece of net348 EFFECT OF TAXEStwo yards wide, when worked night and day, willproduce six hundred and twenty racks per week.A rack is two hundred and forty holes ; and as in themachine to which we refer, three racks are equalin length to one yard, it will produce 21,493 squareyards of bobbin-net annually. Three men keep thismachine constantly working ; and, they were paid (bypiece-work) about 255. each per week, in 1830. Twoboys, working only in the day-time, can prepare thebobbins for this machine, and are paid from 25. to 45.per week, according to their skill. Forty-six squareyards of this net weigh two pounds three ounces ; sothat each square yard weighs a little more thanthree-quarters of an ounce.(418.) For a condensed and general view of the presentstate of this trade, we shall avail ourselves of astatement by Mr. William Welkin, of Nottingham,dated September, 1831, and entitled " Facts andCalculations illustrative of the Present State of theBobbin-net Trades It appears to have been collectedwith care, and contains, in a single sheet ofpaper, a body of facts of the greatest importance.*(419.) The total capital employed in the factories,for preparing the cotton, in those for weaving thebobbin-net, and in various processes to which it issubject, is estimated at above 2,000,000^., and thenumber of persons who receive wages, at above twohundred thousand.I cannot omit the opportunity of expressing my hope thatthis example will be followed by other trades. We shouldthus obtain a body of information equally important to theworkman, the capitalist, the philosopher, and the statesman.UPON MANUFACTURES.Comparison of the Value of the Raw Material imported ivitlithe Value of the Goods manufactured therefrom.*' Amount of Sea Island cotton annually usedl,600,000lbs., value 120,000/. ; this is manufacturedinto yarn, weighing l,000,000lbs., value500,000/.There is also used 25,000lbs. of raw silk, whichcosts 30,000/., and is doubled into 20,000lbs.thrown, worth 40,000/.RAW-material,Manufacture.SQUARE ValueYARDS perPRODUCED.! Sq.Yd.TOTALVALUE.Cotton, )1,600,000 /6«.^Silk, 25,000 lbs.Power Net .Hand ditto .Fancy dittoSilk Goods .6,750,00015,750,000150,000750,0008. d.1 31 93 61 9421,8751,378,12526,25065,62523,400,0001,891,875*' The brown nets which are sold in the Nottinghammarket, are in part disposed of by the agentsof twelve or fifteen of the larger makers, i. e, to theamount of about 250,000/. a year. The principalpart of the remainder, /. e. about 1,050,000/. ayear, is sold by about two hundred agents, whotake the goods from one warehouse to another forsale.Of this production, about half is exported inthe embroidered state, The exports of bobbin-netare in great part to Hamburgh, for sale athome and at Leipsic and Frankfort fairs, Antwerp,and the rest of Belgium ; to France, by350 EFFECT OF TAXES*' contraband ; to Italy, and North and SouthAmerica. Though a very suitable article, yet thequantity sent eastward of the Cape of Good Hope,has hitherto been too trifling for notice. Three-eighthsof the whole production are sold embroideredat home. The remaining one-eighth isembroidered in this country, and increases theultimate value as under, viz.Embroidery. Increases Value. Ultimate Worth.£. £."Onpowernet. . . . 131,840 553,715On hand net . . 1,205,860 2,583,985"On fancy net 78,750 105,000"On silk net 109,375 175,000Total embroidery j ^ 505 325 Ultimate ) 3 4^7 ^qqwages, and profit, S ' ' total value )From this it appears, that in the operations ofthis trade, which had no existence twenty yearsago, 120,000Z. original cost of cotton becomes,when manufactured, of the ultimate value of3,242,700/. sterling.*' As to weekly wages paid, I hazard the followingas the judgment of those conversant with therespective branches, viz.In fine spinning and doubling, adults 25s. ;children 7s. : work twelve hours per day.In bobbin-net making ; men working machines,I85. ; apprentices, youths of fifteen or more, 10s. ;by power, fifteen hours ; by hand, eight to twelvehours, according to width.In mending ; children 4s. : women 8s. ; worknine to fourteen hours, ad libitum.UPON MANUFACTURES. 351In winding, threading, &c., children and youngwomen, 5s. ; irregular work, according to the progressof machines.In embroidery ; children, seven years old andupwards, I5. to 3s. ; work ten to twelve hours ;women, if regularly at work, 5s. to 7s. 6d. ; twelveto fourteen hours.As an example of the effect of the wages of lace*' embroidery, &c. it may be observed, it is often thecase that a stocking weaver in a country villagewill earn only 7s. a week, and his wife and children7s. to 14s. more at the embroidery frame."(420.) The principal part of the hand-machinesemployed in the bobbin-net manufacture are workedin shops, forming part of, or attached to, privatehouses. The subjoined list will show the kinds ofmachinery employed, and classes of persons to whomit belongs.Bobbin-net Machinery now at work in the Kingdom.Hand Levers 6-quarter 500 HandCir *oran 1 > 6-quarter 100/-quarter 200 cuiars . . . f ^8-quarter 300 7-quarter 30010-quarter 300 8-quarter 40012-quarter 30 9-quarter 10016-quarter 20 10-quarter 30020-quarter 1 12-quarter 100Hand Rotary 10-quarter 50 Hand Traverse, Pusher,12-quarter 50 Straight Bolt, &'C.,averaging 5 quarters 750Total hand machines . . 3501 carried over352 EFFECT OF TAXESBrought over 3501Power 6-quarter . . . 1007-quarter. . . 408-quarter. . . 35010-quarter. . . 27012-quarter. . . 2201 6-quarter. . . 20Total power machines 1000Total number of Machines . 4501700 persons own 1 machine, 700 machines.226 2 452181 3 54396 4 38440 5 20021 6 12617 7 11919 8 152 I17 9 153 I12 10 1208 11 886 12 725 13 655 14 704 16 6425 own respectively 18, 19,20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36,37, 50, 60, 68, 70, 75, 95,105,206 1192Number of i 'jowners of[l382 Holding together 4500 machines,machines 1The hand workmen consist of the above-namedowners 1000And of journeymen and apprentices 4000UPON MANUFACTURES. 353These Machines are distributed as follows :Nottingham 1240New Bradford 140Old Bradford and Bloomsgrove 240Son Green VigoBestow and Chigwell 1>30New and Old Newton 180Derby and its vicinity 185Loughborough and its vicinity 385Leicester 95Mansfield 85Tiverton 220Barnstaple 180Chard 190Isle of Wight 80In sundry other places 990Of the above owners, one thousand work in theirown machines, and enter into the class of journeymenas well as that of masters in operating on therate of wages. If they reduce the price of theirgoods in the market, they reduce their own wagesfirst ; and, of course, eventually the rate of wagesthroughout the trade. It is a very lamentablefact, that one-half, or more, of the one thousandone hundred persons specified in the list as owningone, two, and three machines, have beencompelled to mortgage their machines for morethan their worth in the market, and are in manycases totally insolvent. Their machines are principallynarrow and making short pieces, while theabsurd system of bleaching at so much a piecegoods of all lengths and widths, and dressing at354 EFFECT OF TAXESSo much all widths, has caused the new machines"to be all wide, and capable of producing longpieces ; of course to the serious disadvantage,if not utter ruin, of the small owner of narrowmachines.It has been observed above, that wages havebeen reduced, say 2.5 per cent, in the last twoyears, or from 245. to I85. a week. Machineshave increased in the same time one-eighth innumber, or from four thousand to four thousandfive hundred, and one-sixth in capacity of production.It is deserving the serious notice of allproprietors of existing machines, that machinesare now introducing into the trade of such powerof production as must still more than ever depreciate(in the absence of an immensely increaseddemand) the value of their property."(421.) From this abstract, we may form somejudgment of the importance of the bobbin-net trade.But the extent to which it bids fair to be carried infuture, when the eastern markets shall be more opento our industry, may be conjectured from the factwhich Mr. Welkin subsequently states, — that, " Wecan export a durable and elegant article in cottonbobbin-net, at 4d. per square yard, proper for certainuseful and ornamental purposes, as curtains,&c.; and another article used for many purposesin female dress at 6d. the square yard."(422.) Of Patents. In order to encourage theinvention, the improvement, or the importation ofmachines, and of discoveries relating to manufactures,it has been the practice in many countries, to grantto the inventors or first introducers, an exclusiveIron MANUFACTURES..355privilege for a term of years. Such monopolies aretermed Patents ; and they are granted, on the paymentof certain fees, for different periods, from fiveto twenty years.The following table, compiled from the Reportof the Committee of the House of Commons " onPatents," 1829, shows the expense and duration ofpatents in various countries : —COUNTRIES.EXPENSE.TERMOFYEARS.Numbergranted in SixYears, endingin 1S26.—(iJ<rp. p. 343 )En^lcind^ s. d.6 15r 12|32(gom to ^63042 1020 9 412 5 710 4 815 >5,10,15ScotlandFranceNetherlandsSpain* — Inventor„ Improver„ Importer(423.) It is clearly of importance to preserve toeach inventor the sole use of his invention, until heThe expense of a patent in Spain is stated in the Reportto be respectively 2000, 1200, and 1000 reals. If these arereals of Vellon, in which accounts are usually kept at Madrid,the above sums are correct ; but if they are reals of Plate, theabove sums ought to be nearly doubled.A A 2356 EFFECT OF TAXESshall have been amply repaid for the risk and expenseto which he has been exposed, as well as for the talenthe has exerted in completing it. But, the degreesof merit are so various, and the difficulties of legislatingupon the subject so great, that it has beenfound almost impossible to frame a law whichshall not, practically, be open to the most seriousobjections.The difficulty of defending an English patent inany judicial trial, is very great ; and the number ofinstances on record in which the defence has succeeded,are comparatively few. This circumstancehas induced some manufacturers, no longer to regardapatent as a privilege by which a monopoly pricemay be secured ; but they sell the patent article atsuch a price, as will merely produce the ordinaryprofits of capital ; and thus secure to themselves thefabrication of it, because no competitors can derive aprofit from invading a patent so exercised.(424.) The law of Copyright, is, in some measure,allied to that of Patents ; and it is curious to observe,that those species of property which require thehighest talent, and the greatest cultivation, — whichare, more than any other, the pure creations of mind,should have been the latest to be recognized by thestate. Fortunately, the means of deciding on aninfringement of property in regard to a literary production,are not very difficult ; but the presentlaws are, in some cases, productive of considerablehardship, as well as of impediment to theadvancement of knowledge.(425.) Whilst discussing the general expediencyof limitations and restrictions, it may be desirable toUPON MANUFACTURES. 357point out one which seems to promise advantage,though by no means free from grave objections. Thequestion of permitting by law, the existence of partnershipsin which the responsibility of one or more ofthe partners is limited in amount, is peculiarly importantin a manufacturing, as well as a commercialpoint of view. In the former light, it appears calculatedto aid that division of labour, which we havealready proved to be as advantageous in mental asit is in bodily operations ; and it might possiblygive rise to a more advantageous distribution oftalent, and its combinations, than at present exists.There are in this country, many persons possessed ofmoderate capital, who do not themselves enjoy thepower of invention in the mechanical and chemicalarts, but who are tolerable judges of such inventions,and excellent judges of human character. Suchpersons might, with great success, employ themselvesin finding out inventive workmen, whose want ofcapital prevents them from realizing their projects.If they could enter into a limited partnership withpersons so circumstanced, they might restrain withinproper bounds the imagination of the inventor, andby supplying capital to judicious schemes, rendera service to the country, and secure a profit forthemselves.(426.) Amongst the restrictions intended for thegeneral benefit of our manufacturers, there existeda few years ago one by which workmen were forbiddento go out of the country. A law so completelyat variance with every principle of liberty,ought never to have been enacted. It was not,however, until experience had convinced the EFFECT OF TAXES UPON MANUFACTURES.nature of its inefficiency, that it was repealed.* When,after the last war, the renewed intercourse betweenEngland and the continent became extensive, it wassoon found that it was impossible to discover thevarious disguises which the workmen could assume ;and the effect of the law was rather, by the fear ofpunishment, to deter those v/ho had left the countryfrom returning, than to check their disposition tomigrate.In the year 1824 the law against workmen going abroad,as well as the laws preventing them from combining, wererepealed, after the fullest inquiry by a Committee of the Houseof Commons. In 1825 an attempt to re-enact some of the mostobjectionable was made, but it failed.EXPORTATION OF MACHINERY. 359CHAP. XXXIV.ON THE EXPORTATION OF MACHINERY.(427.) A FEW years only have elapsed, since ourworkmen were not merely prohibited by act of Parliamentfrom transporting themselves to countries inwhich their industry would produce for them higherwages, but were forbidden to export the greaterpart of the machinery which they were employed tomanufacture at home. The reason assigned for thisprohibition was, the apprehension that foreignersmight avail themselves of our improved machinery,and thus compete with our manufacturers. It was, infact, a sacrifice of the interests of one class of persons,the makers of machinery, for the imagined benefitof another class, those who use it. Now, independentlyof the impolicy of interfering unnecessarilybetween these two classes, it may be observed, —that the first class, or the makers of machinery, areasa body, far more intelligent than those who onlyuse it; and though, at present, they are not nearlyso numerous, yet, when the removal of the prohibitionwhich cramps their ingenuity shall have had timeto operate, there appears good reason to believe, thattheir number will be greatly increased, and may, intime,even surpass that of those who use machinery.(428.) The advocates of these prohibitions inEngland seem to rely greatly upon the possibility of3(i0 THE EXPORTATIONpreventing the knowledge of new contrivances frombeing conveyed to other countries ; and they takemuch too limited a view of tht possible, and evenprobable, improvements in mechanics.(429.) For the purpose of examining this question,let us consider the case of two manufacturers of thesame article, one situated in a country in which labour isvery cheap, the machinery bad, and the modes of transportslow and expensive ; the other engaged in manufacturingin a country in which the price of labour isvery high, the machinery excellent, and the means oftransport expeditious and economical. Let them bothsend their produce to the same market, and let eachreceive such a price as shall give to him the profitordinarily produced by capital in his own country.It is almost certain that in such circumstances thefirst improvement in machinery will occur in thecountry which is most advanced in civilization;because, even admitting that the ingenuity to contrivewere the same in the two countries, the meansof execution are very different. The effect of improvedmachinery in the rich country will be perceivedin the common market, by a small fall in theprice of the manufactured article. This will bethefirst intimation to the manufacturer of the poorcountry, who will endeavour to meet the diminutionin the selling price of his article by increased industryand economy in his factory ; but he will soon findthat this remedy is temporary, and that the market-pricecontinues to fall. He will thus be induced toexamine the rival fabric, in order to detect, from itsstructure, any improved mode of making it. If, aswould most usually happen, he should be unsuccessfulOF MACHINERY. 361in this attempt, he must endeavour to contrive improvementsin his own machinery, or to acquireinformation respecting those which have been madein the factories of the richer country. Perhaps afteran ineffectual attempt to obtain by letters the informationhe requires, he sets out to visit in person thefactories of his competitors. To a foreigner and rivalmanufacturer such establishments are not easily accessible; and the more recent the improvements, theless likely he will be to gain access to them. Hisnext step, therefore, will be to obtain the knowledgehe is in search of from the workmen employed in usingor making the machines. Without drawings, or anexamination of the machines themselves, this processwill be slow and tedious; and he will be liable, afterall, to be deceived by artful and designing workmen,and be exposed to many chances of failure. Butsuppose he returns to his own country with perfectdrawings and instructions, he must then begin toconstruct his improved machines : and these he cannotexecute either so cheaply or so well as his rivalsin the richer countries. But after the lapse of sometime,we shall suppose the machines thus laboriouslyimproved, to be at last completed, and in workingorder.(4r'50.) Let us now consider what will have occurredto the manufacturer in the rich country. He will, inthe first instance, have realized a profit by supplyingthe home market, at the usual price, with an articlewhich it costs him less to produce ; he will thenreduce the price both in the home and foreign market,in order to produce a more extended sale. It is inthis stage that the manufacturer in the poor country362 THE EXPORTATIONfirst feels the effect of the competition ; and if wesuppose only two or three years to elapse between thefirst application of the new improvement in the richcountry, and the commencement of its employmentin the poor country, yet will the manufacturer whocontrived the improvement, (even supposing thatduring the whole of this time he has made only onestep) have realized so large a portion of the outlaywhich it required, that he can afford to make a muchgreater reduction in the price of his produce, and thusto render the gains of his rivals quite inferior to hisown.(431.) It is contended that by admitting the exportationof machinery, foreign manufacturers will besupplied with machines equal to our own. Thefirst answer which presents itself to this argument issupplied by almost the whole of the present volume ;That in order to succeed in a manufacture, it isnecessary not merely to possess good machinery butthat the domestic economy of the factory should be mostcarefully regulated.The truth, as well as the importance of this principle,is so well established in the Report of a Committeeof the House of Commons " On the Export of Toolsand Machinery," that I shall avail myself of theopinions and evidence there stated, before I offer anyobservations of my own :Supposing, indeed, that the same machinerywhich is used in England could be obtained on theContinent, it is the opinion of some of the mostintelligent of the witnesses that a want of arrangementin foreign manufactories, of division of labourOF MACHINERY. 363in their work, of skill and perseverance in theirworkmen, and of enterprise in the masters, togetherwith the comparatively low estimation in which themaster-manufacturers are held on the Continent,and with the comparative want of capital, and ofmany other advantageous circumstances detailed inthe evidence, would prevent foreigners from interferingin any great degree by competition withour principal manufacturers ; on which subject theCommittee submit the following evidence as worthythe attention of the House : —I would ask whether, upon the whole, you consider anydanger likely to arise to our manufactures from competition,even if the French were supplied with machineryequally good and cheap as our own ? — They will always bebehind us until their general habits approximate to ours ;and they must be behind us for many reasons that I havebefore given.Why must they be behind us ? — One other reason is, thata cotton manufacturer who left Manchester seven years ago,would be driven out of the market by the men who are nowliving in it, provided his knowledge had not kept pace withthose who have been during that time constantly profitingby the progressive improvements that have taken place inthat period ; this progressive knowledge and experience isour great power and advantage.''* It should also be observed, that the constant,nay, almost daily, improvements which take placein our machinery' itself, as well as in the mode ofits application, require that all those means and advantagesalluded to above, should be in constantoperation ; and that, in the opinion of several ofthe witnesses, although Europe were possessed of364 THE EXPORTATIONevery tool now used in the United Kingdom, alongwith the assistance of English artisans, which she'* may have in any number, yet, from the natural andacquired advantages possessed by this country, themanufacturers of the United Kingdom would foragescontinue to retain the superiority they nowenjoy. It is indeed the opinion of many, that ifthe exportation of machinery were permitted, theexportation would often consist of those tools andmachines, which, although already superseded bynew inventions, still continue to be employed, fromwant of opportunity to get rid of them ; to thedetriment, in many instances, of the trade andmanufactures of the country : and it is matterworthy of consideration, and fully borne out by theevidence, that by such increased foreign demand formachinery, the ingenuity and skill of our workmenwould have greater scope ; and that, important asthe improvements in machinery have lately been,they might, under such circumstances, be fairlyexpected to increase to a degree beyond all precedent.The many important facilities for the constructionof machines and the manufacturing of commoditieswhich we possess, are enjoyed by no othercountry ; nor is it likely that any country canenjoy them to an equal extent for an indefiniteperiod. It is admitted by every one, that our skillis unrivalled ; the industry and power of our peopleunequalled ; their ingenuity, as displayed in the continualimprovement in machinery, and production ofcommodities, without parallel ; and apparently, withoutlimit. The freedom which, under our governorMACHINERY. 365ment, every man has, to use his capital, his labour,*' and his talents, in the manner most conducive tohis interests, is an inestimable advantage ; canalsare cut, and rail-roads constructed, by the voluntaryassociation of persons whose local knowledge enablesthem to place them in the most desirablesituations ; and these great advantages cannotexist under less free governments. These circumstances,when taken together, give such a decidedsuperiority to our people, that no injurious rivalry,either in the construction of machinery or themanufacture of commodities, can reasonably be anticipated."(432.) But, even if it were desirable to preventthe exportation of a certain class of machinery, it isabundantly evident, that, whilst the exhortation ofother classes is allowed, it is impossible to prevent theforbidden one from being smuggled out ; and that,in point of fact, the additional risk had been wellcalculated by the smuggler.(433.) It would appear, also, from various circumstances,that the immediate exportation of improvedmachinery is not quite so certain as has been assumed ;and that the powerful principle of self-interest willurge the makers of it, rather to push the sale in adifferent direction. When a great maker of machineryhas contrived a new machine for any particular process,or has made some great improvement upon those incommon use, to whom will he naturally apply for thepurpose of selling his new machines ? Undoubtedly,in by far the majority of cases, to his nearest and bestcustomers, those to whom he has immediate and306 THE EXPORTATIONpersonal access, and whose capability to fulfil anycontract is best known to him. With these, he willcommunicate and offer to take their orders for thenew machine ; nor will he think of writing toforeign customers, so long as he finds the homedemand sufficient to employ the whole force of hisestablishment. Thus, therefore, the machine-makeris himself interested in giving the first advantage ofany new improvement to his own countrymen.(434.) In point of fact, the machine-makers inLondon greatly prefer home orders, and do usuallycharge an additional price to their foreign customers.Even the measure of this preference may be found inthe evidence before the Committee on the Export ofMachinery. It is differently estimated by variousengineers ; but appears to vary from five up totwenty-five per cent, on the amount of the order.The reasons are: — 1. If the machinery be complicated,one of the best workmen, well accustomed tothe mode of work in the factory, must be sent out toput it up ; and there is always a considerable chanceof his having offers that will induce him to remainabroad. 2. If the work be of a more simple kind,and can be put up without the help of an Englishworkman, yet for the credit of the house which suppliesit, and to prevent the accidents likely to occurfrom the want of sufficient instruction in those whouse it, the parts are frequently made stronger, andexamined more attentively, than they would be foran English purchaser. Any defect or accident alsowould be attended with more expense to repair, if itoccurred abroad, than in England.(435.) The class of workmen who make machinery,OF MACHINERY. 367possess much more skill, and are paid much morehighly than that class who merely use it ; and, if afree exportation were allowed, the more valuable classwould, undoubtedly, be greatly increased; for, notwithstandingthe high rate of wages, there is no countryin which it can at this moment be made, either so wellor so cheaply as in England. We might, therefore,supply the whole world with machinery, at an evidentadvantage, both to ourselves and our customers. Inmanchester, and the surrounding district, manythousand men are wholly occupied in making themachinery, which gives employment to many hundredthousands who use it ; but the period is not veryremote, when the whole number of those who usedmachines, was not greater than the number of thosewho at present manufacture them. Hence, then,if England should ever become a great exporterof machinery, she would necessarily contain a largeclass of workmen, to whom skill would be indispensable,and, consequently, to whom high wageswould be paid ; and although her manufacturersmight probably be comparatively fewer in number, yetthey would undoubtedly have the advantage of beingthe first to derive profit from improvement. Undersuch circumstances, any diminution in the demandfor machinery, would, in the first instance, be felt bya class much better able to meet it, than thatwhich now suffers upon every check in the consumptionof manufactured goods ; and the resulting miserywould therefore assume a mitigated character.(436.) It has been feared, that when other countrieshave purchased our machines, they will cease to3G8 THE EXPORTATIONdemand new ones : but the statement which has beengiven of the usual progress in the improvement ofthe machinery employed in any manufacture, and ofthe average time which elapses before it is supersededby such improvements, is a complete reply to thisobjection. If our customers abroad did not adopt thenew machinery contrived by us as soon as they couldprocure it, then our manufacturers would extendtheir establishments, and undersell their rivals intheir own markets.(437.) It may also be urged, that in each kind ofmachinery a maximum of perfection may be imagined,beyond which it is impossible to advance ; and certainlythe last advances are usually the smallest whencompared with those which precede them : but itshould be observed, that these advances are generallymade when the number of machines in employmentis already large ; and when, consequently, their effectson the power of producing are very considerable. Butthough it should be admitted that any one speciesof machinery may, after a long period, arrive at adegree of perfection which would render furtherimprovement nearly hopeless, yet it is impossible tosuppose that this can be the case with respect to allkinds of mechanism. In fact the limit of improvementis rarely approached, except in extensive branches ofnational manufactures; and the number of suchbranches is, even at present, very small.(438.) Another argument in favour of the exportationof machinery, is, that it would facilitate thetransfer of capital to any more advantageous modeof employment which might present itself. If theexportation of machinery were permitted, there wouldOF MACHINERY. 369doubtless arise a new and increased demand ; and, supposingany particular branch of our manufactures tocease to produce the average rate of profit, the lossto the capitalist would be much less, if a market wereopen for the sale of his machinery to customersmore favourably circumstanced for its employment.If, on the other hand, new improvements in machinery'should be imagined, the manufacturer would be morereadily enabled to carry them into effect, by havingthe foreign market opened where he could sell hisold machines. The fact, that England can, notwithstandingher taxation and her high rate of wages,actually undersell other nations, seems to be wellestablished : and it appears to depend on the superiorgoodness and cheapness of those raw materials ofmachinery, the metals — on the excellence of thetools, — and on the admirable arrangements of thedomestic economy of our factories.(439.) The different degrees of facility with whichcapital can be transferred from one mode of employmentto another, has an important effect on the rateof profits in different trades and in different countries.Supposing all the other causes which influence therate of profit at any period, to act equally on capitalemployed in different occupations, yet the real ratesof profit would soon alter, on account of the differentdegrees of loss incurred by removing the capital fromone mode of investment to another, or of any variationin the action of those causes.(440.) This principle will appear more clearly bytaking an example. Let two capitalists have embarked10,000/. each, in two trades : A in supplyinga district With water, by means of a steam-engineB BTHE EXPORTATIONand iron pipes ; B in manufacturing bobbin-net. Thecapital of A will be expended in building a houseand erecting a steam-engine, which costs, we shallsuppose, Stool. ; and in laying down iron pipes tosupply his customers, costing 7000^. The greatestpart of this latter expense is payment for labour;and if the pipes were to be taken up, the damagearising from that operation would render them oflittle value, except as old metal ; whilst the expenseof their removal would be considerable. Let us, therefore,suppose, that if A were obliged to give up histrade, he could realize only 4000^. by the sale of hisstock. Let us suppose again that B, by the sale ofhis bobbin-net factory and machinery, could realize8000Z. and let the usual profit on the capital employedby each party be the same, say 20 per cent : then wehaveCapitalinvested.Money whichwould arisefrom sale ofmachinery.Annual rateof profit percent.INCOME.Water worksBobbin-net Factory£10,00010,000Jg4,0008,000£20£2,0002,000Now, if, from competition, or any other cause,the rate of profit arising from water-works shouldfall to 10 per cent., that circumstance would notcause a transfer of capital from the water-works tobobbin-net making ; because the reduced incomefrom the water works, loot. per annum, would stillbe greater than that produced by investing 4000/.,(the whole sum arising from the sale of the materialsof the water-works), in a bobbin-net factory, whichOF MACHINERY. 371sum, at 20 per cent., would yield only 800/. perannum. In fact, the rate of profit, arising from thewater works, must fall to less than 8 per cent, beforethe proprietor could increase his income by removinghis capital into the bobbin-net trade.(441.) In any inquiry into the probability of theinjury arising to our manufacturers from the competitionof foreign countries, particular regard shouldbe had to the facilities of transport, and to the existencein our own country of a mass of capital in roads,canals, machinery, &c., the greater portion of whichmay fairly be considered as having repaid the expenseof its outlay; and also to the cheap rate at which theabundance of our fuel enables us to produce iron, thebasis of almost all machinery. It has been justlyremarked by M. de Villefosse, in the memoir beforealluded to, that " Ce que Von nomme en France, laquestion du prix desert, est, a proprement parleyla question du prix des bois, et la question, des moyensde communications interferes par les routes, fieiiveSfrivers et canauxJ"On referring to section 211 of the present volume, theprice of iron in various countries in Europe has beenstated already ; and it appears, that in England it isproduced at the least expense, and in France at thegreatest. The length of the roads which cover Englandand Wales may be stated roughly at twentythousand miles of turnpike, and one hundred thousandmiles of road not turnpike. The internal watercommunication of England and France, as far as Ihave been able to collect information on the subject,may be stated as follows:B E 2THE EXPORTATIONIN FRANCE.Miles in LengthNavigable Rivers 4668Navigable Canals 9 15*5Navigable Canals in progress of execution(1824) 13886971-aBut, if we reduce these numbers in the proportion of3 '7 to 1, which is the relative area of France as comparedwith England and Wales, then we shall havethe following comparison :ENGLAND. tPortion of Franceequal in size to Englandand Wales.Navigable RiversTidal NavigationCanals, direct . . . 2023.5Miles.1275.5545.92174.1Miles.1261.6247.4375.12174.1Canals commencedTotal . .3995.51884.1Population in 1831 . . . .13,894,5008,608,500This table is extracted and reduced from one of liav'metDictionnaire Hydrographique, 2 vols. 8vo. Paris, 1824.t 1 am indebted to F. Page, Esq. of Seen, for that portion ofthis table which relates to the internal navigation of England.Those only who have themselves collected statistical details canbe aware of the expense of time and labour, of which the fewlines it contains are the result.X The tidal navigation includes— the Thames, from the mouthof the Medway, — the Severn, from the Holmes, — the Trent,from Trent-falls in the Humber,— the Mersey, from RuncornGap.OF MACHINERY. 373This comparison, between the internal communicationsof the two countries, is not offered as complete; nor is it a fair view, to contrast the wealthiestportion of one country with the whole of the other :but it is inserted with the hope of inducing thosewho possess more extensive information on thesubject, to supply the facts on Which a better comparisonmay be instituted. The information to beadded, would consist of the number of miles in eachcountry, — of sea-coast, — of public roads, — of railroads,— of rail-roads on which locomotive enginesare used.(442.) One point of view, in which rapid modesof conveyance increase the power of a country,deserves attention. On the manchester Rail-road,for example, above half a million of persons travelannually ; and supposing each person to save onlyone hour in the time of transit, between Manchesterand Liverpool, a saving of five hundred thousandhours, or of fifty thousand working days, of tenhours each, is effected. Now this is equivalent toan addition to the actual power of the country ofone hundred and sixty-seven men, without increasingthe quantity of food consumed ; and it shouldalso be remarked, that the time of the class of menthus supplied, is far more valuable than that of merelabourers.374 FUTURE PROSPECTSCHAP. XXXV.ON THE FUTURE PROSPECTS OF MANUFACTURES, ASCONNECTED WITH SCIENCE.(443.) In reviewing the various processes offeredas illustrations of those general principles which ithas been the main object of the present volume tosupport and establish, it is impossible not to perceivethat the arts and manufactures of the country areintimately connected with the progress of the severersciences ; and that, as we advance in the career ofimprovement, every step requires, for its success, thatthis connexion should be rendered more intimate.The applied sciences derive their facts from experiment; but the reasonings, on which their chiefutility depends, are the province of what is calledabstract Science. It has been shown, that thedivision of labour is no less applicable to mentalproductions than to those in which material bodiesare concerned ; and it follows, that the efforts for theimprovement of its manufactures which any countrycan make with the greatest probability of success,must arise from the combined exertions of all thosemost skilled in the theory, as well as in the practiceof the arts ; each labouring in that departmentfor which his natural capacity and acquired habitshave rendered him most fit.(444.) The profit arising from the successful applicationto practice of theoretical principles, will, inOF MANUFACTURES. 375most cases, amply reward, in a pecuniary sense, thoseby whom they are first employed ; yet even here,what has been stated with respect to Patents, willprove that there is room for considerable amendmentin our legislative enactments : but the discovery ofthe great principles of nature demands a mind almostexclusively devoted to such investigations ; and these,in the present state of science, frequently requirecostly apparatus, and exact an expense of time quiteincompatible with professional avocations. It becomes,therefore, a fit subject for consideration, whetherit would not be politic in the state to compensate forsome of those privations, to which the cultivators ofthe higher departments of science are exposed ; andthe best mode of effecting this compensation, is aquestion which interests both the philosopher and thestatesman. Such considerations appear to have hadtheir just influence in other countries, where the pursuitof Science is regarded as a profession, and wherethose who are successful in its cultivation are not shutout from almost every object of honourable ambitionto which their fellow-countrymen may aspire.Having, however, already expressed some opinionupon these subjects in another publication,* I shallhere content myself with referring to that work.(445.) There was, indeed, in our own country, onesingle position to which science, when concurring withindependent fortune, might aspire, as conferring rankand station, an office deriving, in the estimation ofthe public, more than half its value from thecommanding knowledge of its possessor; and it isReflections on the Decline of Science in England, andon some of its Causes. 8vo. 1830. Fellowes.376 FUTURE PROSPECTSextraordinary, that even that solitary dignity — thatbarony by tenure in the world of British science —the chair of the Royal Society, should have beencoveted for adventitious rank. It is more extraordinary,that a Prince, distinguished by the liberal viewshe has invariably taken of public affairs, — and eminentfor his patronage of every institution calculatedto alleviate those miseries from which, by his rank,he is himself exempted — who is stated by his friendsto be the warm admirer of knowledge, and mostanxious for its advancement, should have been soimperfectly informed by those friends, as to havewrested from the head of science, the only civic wreathwhich could adorn its brow.*In the meanwhile the President may learn, throughthe only medium by which his elevated station admitsThe Duke of Sussex was proposed as President of theRoyal Society in opposition to the wish of the Council — inopposition to the public declaration of a body of Fellows, comprisingthe largest portion of those by whose labours thecharacter of English science had been maintained. The aristocracyof rank and of power, aided by such allies as it can alwayscommand, set itself in array against the prouder aristocracy ofscience. Out of about seven hundred members, only two hundredand thirty balloted ; and the Duke of Sussex had a majorityof EIGHT. Under such circumstances, it was indeed extraordinary,that His Royal Highness should have condescendedto accept the fruits of that doubtful and inauspicious victory.The circumstances preceding and attending this singularcontest have been most ably detailed in a pamphlet, entitled"^ Statement of the Circumstances connected with the late Electionfor the Presidency of the Royal Society, 1831, printed by R.Taylor, Red-lion-court, Fleet-street." The whole tone of thetract is strikingly contrasted with that of the productions ofsome of those persons by whom it was His Royal Highness'smisfortune to be supported.JOF MANUFACTURES. 377approach, that those evils which were anticipatedfrom his election, have not proved to be imaginary,and that the advantages by some expected to resultfrom it, have not yet become apparent. It may beright also to state, that whilst many of the inconveniences,which have been experienced by the Presidentof the Royal Society, have resulted from theconduct of his own supporters, those who were compelledto differ from him, have subsequently offeredno vexatious opposition : — they wait in patience,convinced that the force of truth must ultimatelywork its certain, though silent course ; not doubtingthat when His Royal Highness is correctly informed,he will himself be amongst the first to be influencedby its power.(446.) But younger institutions have arisen tosupply the deficiencies of the old ; and very recentlya new combination, differing entirely from the oldersocieties, promises to give additional steadiness tothe future march of science. The " British Associationfor the Advancement of Science" which heldits first meeting at York* in the year 1831, wouldhave acted as a powerful ally, even if the RoyalSociety were all that it might be : but in the presentstate of that body such an association is almostnecessary for the purposes of science. The periodicalassemblage of persons, pursuing the same ordifferent branches of knowledge, always produces anexcitement which is favourable to the developmentThe second meeting took place at Oxford in June 1832,and surpassed even the sanguine anticipations of its friends.The third annual meeting will take place at Cambridge in June1833.378 FUTURE PROSPECTSof new ideas ; whilst the long period of repose whichsucceeds, is advantageous for the prosecution of thereasonings or the experiments then suggested ; andthe recurrence of the meeting in the succeeding year,will stimulate the activity of the inquirer, by the hopeof being then enabled to produce the successful resultof his labours. Another advantage is, that such meetingsbring together a much larger number of personsactively engaged in science, or placed in positions inwhich they can contribute to it, than can ever befound at the ordinary meetings of other institutions,even in the most populous capitals ; and combinedefforts towards any particular object can thus be moreeasily arranged.(447.) But perhaps the greatest benefit which willaccrue from these assemblies, is the intercourse whichthey cannot fail to promote between the differentclasses of society. The man of science will derivepractical information from the great manufacturers ;the chemist will be indebted to the same sourcefor substances which exist in such minute quantity,as only to become visible in most extensiveoperations ; — and persons of wealth and property,resident in each neighbourhood visited by thesemigratory assemblies, will derive greater advantagesthan either of those classes, from the real instructionthey may procure respecting the produce and manufacturesof their country, and the enlightened gratificationwhich is ever attendant on the acquisition ofknowledge.*• The advantages likely to arise from such an association,have been so clearly stated in the address delivered by theRev. Mr. Vernon Harcourt, at its first meeting, that I wouldOF MANUFACTURES. 379(448.) Thus it may be hoped that public opinionshall be brought to bear upon the world of science ;and that by this intercourse light will be thrown uponthe characters of men, and the pretender and thecharlatan be driven into merited obscurity. "Withoutthe action of public opinion, any administration,however anxious to countenance the pursuits ofscience, and however ready to reward, by wealth orhonours, those whom they might think most eminent,would run the risk of acting like the blind man recentlycouched, who, having no mode of estimatingdegrees of distance, mistook the nearest and mostinsignificant for the largest objects in nature : itbecomes, therefore, doubly important, that the manof science should mix with the world.(449.) It is highly probable that in the next generation,the race of scientific men in England will springfrom a class of persons altogether different from thatwhich has hitherto scantily supplied them. Requiring,for the success of their pursuits, previous education,leisure, and fortune, few are so likely to unite theseessentials as the sons of our wealthy manufacturers,who, having been enriched by their own exertions, inafield connected with science, will be ambitious ofhaving their children distinguished in its ranks. Itmust, however, be admitted, that this desire in theparents would acquire great additional intensity, ifworldly honours occasionally followed successfulefforts ; and that the country would thus gain forstrongly recommend its perusal by all those who feel interestedin the success of English science. — Vide First Reportof the British Association for the Advancement of Science. York,1832.380 FUTURE PROSPECTSscience, talents which are frequently rendered uselessby the unsuitable situations in which they are placed.(450.) The discoverers of Iodine and Brome, twosubstances hitherto unde com pounded, were bothamongst the class of manufacturers, one being amaker of saltpetre at Paris, the other a manufacturingchemist at Marseilles ; and the inventor ofballoons filled with rarefied air, was a paper manufacturernear Lyons. The descendants of Mongolian,the first aerial traveller, still carry on the establishmentof their progenitor, and combine great scientificknowledge with skill in various departments of thearts, to which the different branches of the familyhave applied themselves.(451.) Chemical science may, in many instances,be of great importance to the manufacturer, as wellas to the merchant. The quantity of Peruvianbark which is imported into Europe is very considerable; but chemistry has recently proved thata large portion of the bark itself is useless. Thealkali Q,uinia which has been extracted from it, possessesall the properties for which the bark is valuable,and only forty ounces of this substance, whenin combination with sulphuric acid, can be extractedfrom a hundred pounds of the bark. In this instancethen, with every ton of useful matter, thirty-nine tonsof rubbish are transported across the Atlantic.The greatest part of the sulphate of quinia nowused in this country is imported from France,where the low price of the alcohol, by which it isextracted from the bark, renders the process cheap ;but it cannot be doubted, that when more settledforms of government shall have given security toOF MANUFACTURES. 381capital, and when advancing civilization shall havespread itself over the States of Southern America, thealkaline medicine will be extracted from the woodymatter by which its efficacy is impaired, and that itwill be exported in its most condensed form.(452.) The aid of chemistry, in extracting and inconcentrating substances used for human food, is ofgreat use in distant voyages, where the space occupiedby the stores murat be economized with thegreatest care. Thus the essential oils supply thevoyager with flavour ; the concentrated and crystallizedvegetable acids preserve his health ; and alcohol,when sufficiently diluted, supplies the spirit necessaryfor his daily consumption.(453.) ^yhen we reflect on the very small numberof species of plants, compared with the multitudethat are known to exist, which have hitherto beencultivated, and rendered useful to man ; and whenwe apply the same observation to the animal world,and even to the mineral kingdom, the field thatnatural science opens to our view seems to be indeedunlimited. These productions of nature, varied andinnumerable as they are, may each, in some future day,become the basis of extensive manufactures, and givelife, employment, and wealth, to millions of humanbeings. But the crude treasures perpetually exposedbefore our eyes, contain within them other and morevaluable principles. All these, likewise, in their numberlesscombinations, which ages of labour and researchcan never exhaust, may be destined to furnish, in perpetualsuccession, new sources of our wealth and ofour happiness. Science and knowledge are subject, intheir extension and increase, to laws quite opposite to382 FUTURE PROSPECTSthose which regulate the material world. Unlike theforces of molecular attraction, which cease at sensibledistances ; or that of gravity, which decreases rapidlywith the increasing distance from the point of itsorigin; the further we advance from the origin ofour knowledge, the larger it becomes, and the greaterpower it bestows upon its cultivators, to add newfields to its dominions. Yet, does this continuallyand rapidly increasing power, instead of giving usany reason to anticipate the exhaustion of so fertile afield, place us at each advance, on some higher eminence,from which the mind contemplates the past,and feels irresistibly convinced, that the whole, alreadygained, bears a constantly diminishing ratio tothat which is contained within the still more rapidlyexpanding horizon of our knowledge.(454.) But, if the knowledge of the chemical andphysical properties of the bodies which surround us, aswell as our imperfect acquaintance with the less tangibleelements, light, electricity, and heat, which mysteriouslymodify or change their combinations, concur to convinceus of the same fact ; we must remember that anotherand a higher science, itself still more boundless, is alsoadvancing with a giant's stride, and having graspedthe mightier masses of the universe, and reducedtheir wanderings to laws, has given to us in its owncondensed language, expressions, which are to thepast as history, to the future as prophecy. It is thesame science which is now preparing its fetters forthe minutest atoms that nature has created : alreadyit has nearly chained the ethereal fluid, andbound in one harmonious system all the intricate andsplendid phenomena of light. It is the science ofOF MANUFACTURES. 383calculation, — which becomes continually more necessaryat each step of our progress, and which mustultimately govern the whole of the applications ofscience to the arts of life.(455.) But perhaps a doubt may arise in the mind,whilst contemplating the continually increasing fieldof human knowledge, that the weak arm of man maywant the physical force required to render that knowledgeavailable. The experience of the past, hasstamped with the indelible character of truth, themaxim, that " Knowledge is power" It not merelygives to its votaries control over the mental facultiesof their species, but is itself the generator of physicalforce. The discovery of the expansive power ofsteam, its condensation, and the doctrine of latentheat, has already added to the population of thissmall island, millions of hands. But the source ofthis power is not without limit, and the coal-mines ofthe world may ultimately be exhausted. Withoutadverting to the theory, that new deposited of thatmineral are now accumulating under the sea, at theestuaries of some of our larger rivers ; without anticipatingthe application of other fluids requiring a lesssupply of caloric than water : — we may remark thatthe sea itself offers a perennial source of powerhitherto almost unapplied. The tides, twice in eachday, raise a vast mass of water, which might be madeavailable for driving machinery. But supposing heatstill to remain necessary, when the exhausted state ofour coal-fields renders it expensive : long beforethat period arrives, other methods will probably havebeen invented for producing it. In some districts,there are springs of hot water, which have flowed for384 FUTURE PROSPECTScenturies unchanged in temperature. In many partsof the island of Ischia, by deepening the sources of thehot springs only a few feet, the water boils ; and therecan be little doubt that, by boring a short distance,steam of high pressure would issue from the orifice.*In Iceland, the sources of heat are still moreplentiful ; and their proximity to large masses of ice,seems almost to point out the future destiny of thatisland. The ice of its glaciers may enable its inhabitantsto liquefy the gases with the least expenditureof mechanical force ; and the heat of its volcanoesmay supply the power necessary for their condensation.Thus, in a future age, power may become thestaple commodity of the Icelanders, and of the inhabitantsof other volcanic districts ;f and possibly thevery process by which they will procure this articleof exchange for the luxuries of happier climates may,in some measure, tame the tremendous element whichoccasionally devastates their provinces.(456.) Perhaps to the sober eye of inductive philosophy,these anticipations of the future may appear toofaintly connected with the history of the past. Whentime shall have revealed the future progress of ourrace, those laws which are now obscurely indicated,will then become distinctly apparent ; and it mayIn 1828, the author of these pages visited Ischia, with acommittee of the Royal Academy of Naples, deputed to examinethe temperature and chemical constitution of the springs inthat island. During the few first days, several springs whichhad been represented in the instructions as under the boilingtemperature, were found, on deepening the excavations, to riseto the boiling point.t See section 343.OF MANUFACTURES. 385possibly be found that the dominion of mind overthe material world advances with an ever-acceleratingforce.Even now, the imprisoned winds which the earliestpoet made the Grecian warrior bear for the protectionof his fragile bark ; or those which, in more moderntimes, the Lapland wizards sold to the deludedsailors ; — these, the unreal creations of fancy or offraud, called, at the command of science, from theirshadowy existence, obey a holier spell : and the unrulymasters of the poet and the seer become the obedientslaves of civilized man.Nor have the wild imaginings of the satirist beenquite unrivalled by the realities of after years :as if in mockery of the College of Laputa, lightalmost solar has been extracted from the refuse offish; fire has been sifted by the lamp of Davy ; andmachinery has been taught arithmetic instead ofpoetry.(457.) In whatever light we examine the triumphsand achievements of our species over the creationsubmitted to its power, we explore new sources ofwonder. But if science has called into real existencethe visions of the poet — if the accumulating knowledgeof ages has blunted the sharpest and distancedthe loftiest of the shafts of the satirist, thephilosopher has conferred on the moralist an obligationof surpassing weight. In unveiling to him theliving miracles which teem in rich exuberance aroundthe minutest atom, as well as throughout the largestmasses of ever-active matter, he has placed beforehim resistless evidence of immeasurable design.Surrounded by every form of animate and inanimatec c386 FUTURE PROSPECTSexistence, the sun of science has yet penetrated butthrough the outer fold of Nature's majestic robe ; butif the philosopher were required to separate, fromamongst those countless evidences of creative power,one being, the masterpiece of its skill; and from thatbeing to select one gift, the choicest of all the attributesof life ; — turning within his own breast, andconscious of those powers which have subjugated tohis race the external world, and of those higherpowers by which he has subjugated to himself thatcreative faculty which aids his faltering conceptionsof a deity, — the humble worshipper at the altar oftruth would pronounce that being, — man ; that endowment,— human reason.But however large the interval that separates thelowest from the highest of those sentient beingswhich inhabit our planet, all the results of observation,enlightened by all the reasonings of the philosopher,combine to render it probable that, in the vast extentof creation, the proudest attribute of our race is but,perchance, the lowest step in the gradation of intellectualexistence. For, since every portion of ourown material globe, and every animated being it supports,afford, on more scrutinizing inquiry, more perfectevidence of design, it would indeed be mostunphilosophical to believe that those sister spheres,obedient to the same law, and glovi-ing with light andheat radiant from the same central source— and thatthe members of those kindred systems, almost lostin the remoteness of space, and perceptible onlyfrom the countless multitude of their congregatedglobes — should each be no more than a floating chaosof unformed matter ; or, being all the work ofOF MANUFACTURES. 38"the same Almighty architect, that no living eyeshould be gladdened by their forms of beauty, thatno intellectual being should expand its faculties indeciphering their laws.THE END.