REPORT ONEDUCATION IN EUROPE,TRUSTEESOF TUSLEGE FOR ORPHANS.BYALEX. DALLAS BACHE, LL.D.PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE.2^^s/ryoFi^PHILADELPHIA:PRINTED BY LYDIA R. BAILEY, 26 NORTH FIFTH STREET.1839.^,EvmLXD, according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1839, byA. D. BACHE,(ui6aai/o/fA« Trustee* of the Girard College fvr Orphans,)k It C3ark*s Office of the District Court of the United States, in and for theDistrict of Pennsylvania.PREFACE,The origin and nature of the following Report, which hasbeen ordered to be printed by the Trustees of the Girard Collegefor Orphans, will be best explained by prefixing to it theinstructions directing the tour, during which the informationembodied in it was collected. These instructions were drawnup by the Committee on Scholastic Education,* who werecharged with this duty by the Board of Trustees.Board of Trustees of the Girard College for OrphansSeptember 19, 1836.A. D. Bathe, Esq.,President of the Girard College for OrphansPhiladelphia.Dear Sir: — I enclose a copy of a resolution, passed by thisBoard on the 19th July last, authorizing you to visit Europe,under the instructions of the Committee on Scholastic Education.I also enclose, in quadruplicate, a commission from theBoard, certified by the Mayor of Philadelphia, stating theobjects of your mission, and asking the aid of all friends ofscience to facilitate your inquiries. The financial arrangementsfor your salary and expenses are, as you know, com-Consisting of Nicholas Biddle, Chairman, W. M. Meredith, J. M. Keagy,J.C. Biddle, S. V. Merrick, and W. W. Haly, Esq'rs. The Board of Trustees hassince had to regret the decease of Dr. J. M. Keagy and J. C. Biddle, Esq., twoof its most attentive and efficient numbers.IV PREFACE.plated. It remains only for the Committee to add their instructionsfor your government.Your familiarity with the subject of education, and you' personalacquaintance with the views of the Board, of which youwere a member, supersede the necessity of any detailed explanationsin regard to the purposes of your voyage, or the bestmeans of accomplishing them ; and the Committee will, therefore,confine themselves to such general instructions as mayregulate the course of your movements and inquiries.The Board of Trustees are charged by the City of Philadelphiato prepare a system of instruction for the Girard Collegefor Orphans. For this purpose they are anxious to have themost accurate information of the best means used for the samepurpose elsewhere, and you have been selected to obtain it.Your object, then, is to visit all establishments in Europe similarto the Girard College; and as these are found principally, ifnot exclusively, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Belgium,Holland, Switzerland, Italy, Austria, Prussia, and therest of the states of Germany, these countries will form thenatural limits of your tour. Accordingly, all institutions in eachof those countries resembling the Girard College, or any otherswhich promise to afford useful information in organizing it, youwill see and examine. Your own reflection will readily suggestthe points of information desired; and I will, therefore, merelyenumerate a few, which may serve as a basis for your ownextensive investigation. Of every establishment visited by you,we should wish to know —1. Its history, general administration, and the nature and extentof its funds.2. Its interior organization and government; the names, titles,and duties of all the persons employed in it.3. Who arc admitted to it, and the forms and terms of admission,and where it is professedly for the education oforphans who are considered as orphans.PREFACE. V4. The number and classification of the scholars, and theirterm of residence.5. Their course of studies, in the minutest detail, from thecommencement to the end of their residence in the institution,with the text-books and other works used.6. As a part of that course, specially important to the GirardCollege, we should desire to know the regulations or the practiceby which, among a large body of scholars, a portion, aftercontinuing for some time in the institution, are permitted to begintheir active career in life — while others, with greater aptitudeor greater willingness to learn, are carried up to the higherbranches of education. The nature and the mode of that discriminationwould be highly interesting — as would also be —7. The precise extent to which moral and religious instructionis proposed to be given, and is actually given, and also bywhom and in what form that instruction is conveyed.8. The mechanical arts taught — the mode of teaching themthe models, tools, and implements of all kinds employed —and the manner in which the practice of these arts is mingledwith the routine of studies.9. The system of rewards and punishments in regard to studiesor personal conduct.10. The general police and discipline of the school.11. The amusements — gymnastic exercises — games of allkinds, uniting instruction with agreeable relaxation — togetherwith the number and extent of the vacations, pecuniary allowance,or personal indulgences to the scholars.12. The diet and clothing of the scholars.13. The regulations in regard to health, hours of study andof rest, arrangement as to sleeping and eating, and the wholeroutine of each day's employment.14. The expenses of the school, including salaries and allincidents, with the average annual expense of each scholar.vi ^ PREFACE.15. The structure of the buildings, the arrangement of dormitories,refectories, play-grounds, and work-shops, illustratedby drawings, where they can be procured.16. As a proper foundation for similar statistical inquiries inthis country', you will collect all the information you can inrespect to the proportion of orphans to the rest of the community.These general heads of inquiry, which you can easily multiply,will indicate the wish of the Board that your examinationshould be thorough and practical. They already possess, ormay easily obtain, all that books can teach on the subject. Itis your especial duty to study the actual working of the machineryof education; to domesticate yourself, if practicable, inthese institutions, and, by your own personal observation, todistinguish what is really useful from what is merely plausiblein theory.It is this anxiety that your investigation should be complete,which induces them not to fix at present any period for yourreturn. How much time it may require cannot now be safelydetermined. They rely confidently on your diligence, and aresure that you will not prolong your absence without amplereason. While, therefore, they are very anxious to open theCollege with the least possible delay, they deem it so muchmore important to begin well than to, begin soon, that they postponenaming any limit to your stay in Europe, until you areable to apprize them of your progress.In respect to the purchase of books and apparatus, mentionedin the resolution of the Board, it is not their wish that youshould, at this time, purchase a library, or an extensive philosophicalapparatus. You will only inquire where they can beb0ft procured hereafter, and, in the mean time, limit your actualpurchases lo textbooks and other works used in schools, orwhich may assist your inquiries: to models, drawings, and suchphilosophical iiwlrumenls as may he necessary or useful inPREFACE. Looseningthe College, or which you may deem it expedient toprocure in anticipation of the larger collection.The materials and information thus acquired you will, onyour return, present to the Board of Trustees, and at the sametime, or as soon thereafter as • practicable, you will prepare afinal Report, with a plan for the government and instruction ofthe College — the result of all your examination and reflection.In the mean time, you will keep the Board constantly advisedof your movements.With my best wishes that your mission may be as pleasantas I am sure it will be useful, I remain,Your's, truly,(Signed.) N. BIDDLE, Chairman.CONTENTSPAGE.Introductory Remarks, 1PART FIRST.INSTITUTIONS FOR THE EDUCATION OF ORPHANS AND OTHER DESTITUTE CHILDREN.CHAPTER I.Eleemosynary Institutions of Great Britain, 11Education Hospitals for Boys, at Edinburgh, 12Notice of the Orphan Hospital, 13Description of Heriot's Hospital, 13Description of George Watson's Hospital, 33Description of John Watson's Institution, 38Notice of Cauvin's Hospital, - 47Eleemosynary Schools of England, 48Description of the Liverpool Blue-coat School, . 48Notice of Henshaw's Hospital, or the Oldham Blue-coat School, 56Description of the London Orphan Asylum, Clapton, - - 58Description of Christ's Hospital, or the London Blue-coat School, 65CHAPTER II.Orphan-houses of Germany, 83Introductory Observations, 83Description of the Orphan-house of Hamburgh, . g3Notice of the Orphan-house of Altona, 93Description of the France Foundations at Halle, . 94Description of the Military Orphan-house at Potsdam, . . 115Courses of Instruction in the Military Orphan-house at Annaburg, 125Notices of the Civil Orphan-houses at Potsdam and at LittleGlencoe, 129Description of the Orphan-house of Frankfort cai Maine, - 131Description of the School for Soldiers' Children at Struppen, nearDresden, 137Description of the Orphan-house of St. John at Prague, - - 140BX CONTENTS.CHAPTER III. 'AGE.Orphan-boutea and Foundations of Holland, 1^6Introductory Remark*, 146notice of the Burgher Orphan-house at Amsterdam, - - 147General Remarks on the Orphan-houses.Notice of the Renawoudc Foundations, 151PART SECOND.INSTITUTIONS FOR EDUCATION IN GENERAL.Outline ofthc Plan of this part of the Report, 153CHAPTER I.Infant Schools, - .- 157Introductory Observations.Model Infant School of the Glasgow Education Society, - - 159Model School of the Edinburgh Infant School Society, - - 1 66Gray's Inn-Road School, of the Home and Colonial Infant SchoolSociety, of London, 167CHAPTER II.Primary or Elementary Schools, 170Introductory Remarks.Elementary Instruction in Great Britain, 174General Account of the Provisions for Elementary Instruction in England,Ireland, and Scotland.Juvenile Training School of the Glasgow Education Society, - 178Sessional School of Edinburgh, 189Elementary Departments of the Madras College at St. Andrew's, 194Notice ofthc Circus-Place School of Edinburgh, - - . 196CHAPTER III.Primary Instruction in France, . ■ 199General Organization of Primary Instruction.CHAPTER IV.Primary or Elementary Instruction in Holland, 202General Organization, &c.A Primary School at the Hague, - - «}09Comparison of the Burgher Schools and French Schools with theSeboob fir the Poor, 218CHAPTER V.f rimarjf or Elementary Instruction in Prussia, 930GeMTtl Aeoottnt of the Organisation, Sec.Primary Soboola for the Poor, at Berlin, 231ObMnraiiooa on the Burgher or Middle Schools, • . . 235CONTENTS. XiPAttE.Seminary School of Weissenfels, 237Dorothea Higher City-school of Berlin, - 240Seminary School of Berlin, 247Higher Burgher School of Potsdam, 261Remarks on the Primary Instruction of Prussia, - - - - - 268CHAPTER VI.Elementary Instruction in Saxony, &c., 271General Organization, &c. Schools of Dresden and Leipsic. BurgherSchool of Leipsic, 278Notice of the Model Burgher School of Frankfort on the Maine, - - 287CHAPTER VII.Primary Schools of Baireuth in Bavaria, with Special Reference to DoctorGraser's System of Education, 291SCHOOLS OF THE ELEMENTARY CLASS INTENDED TO PREPARE FOR SOME PARTICULAROCCUPATION IN LIFE.CHAPTER VIII.Schools of Agriculture and Industry, 303Rural Schools of Switzerland, &c., 305Agricultural School of Hofwyl, 306Rural School of Carra, 310Agricultural School of Templemoyle, near Londonderry, - - 311Manual Labour School of Ealing, near London, - - - 31 SLamartinidre Industrial School of Lyons, - -^ - - - , 318CHAPTER IX.Seminaries for the Preparation of Teachers of Primary Schools, - - 323Introductory Observations.Seminaries for Primary Teachers in Prussia, 327Seminary of Weissenfels, 330Seminary of Berlin, 342Education of Teachers in Holland.Notice of the School for the Education of Teachers at Haarlem, 346Normal Schools of France.Primary Normal Schools of Versailles and Dijon, - - - 349Schools for Teachers in Switzerland.Normal School of Zurich, 355SECONDARY SCHOOLS.CHAPTER X.General Divisions of Secondary Instruction, - . , , - 362Observations on the Secondary Instruction preparatory to the University Courses.lip COIITBWTS.Page.flMoodary Schools of Great Britain. General Remarks, . 365The Academy of Edinburgh, 368Notice of the Glasgow High-school, 374Notice of the Ilcirast Academy, 379Notice of the Belfast Academical Institution, . - - - 381The Hill Street Institution of Edinburgh, and comparison withthe Academy, 382The Grammar School at Rugby, 390CJounee of Instruction at Harrow Grammar School, - - 398Comparison of Rugby and Harrow, &c., 399St Domingo-House School at Everton, near Liverpool, - - 402Brace-Castle School at Tottenham, near London, - - - 409CHAPTER XI.Secondary Instruction in France, - - - - - 417General Organization of the University of France and of Secondary In-traction.The Royal Colleges of France, 424Normal School for the Education of Teachers for the SecondarySchools, 440CHAPTER XII.Bacoodary Instruction in Prussia, 450General Division of the Schools.Organisation of Classical Secondary Schools or Gymnasia, - - - 451Frederick William Gymnasium of Berlin, 470Cologne Real Gymnasium of Berlin, 471Gymnasium at Schulpforta, 472Comparison of the Studies of the Frederick William Gymnasiumat Berlin, of the Cologne Real-Gymnasium at Berlin, and of theSchulpforta Gymnasium, . - 477General Remarks and Comparisons of the Secondary Instruction of differentCountries, 503floeondary Hchoob belonging to the Second Division, or preparatory to theMen a nie Arts and Higher Trades, 517Royal Cal-School of Berlin, 517City Trade-School of Berlin, 523Nuike of trio FilzUmm Gymnasium and Blackman Boarding School atDresden, 533HUriRlOR SCHOOLS.CHAPTER XIII.O t ner al remarks 00 Uie CbssiBcaUon of Superior Schools, - . . 536School of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce.Contents. XlllPAGE.Polytechnic School of France, 542Notice of the Schools, of Roads and Bridges, and of Mines, ofFrance, 561School of Arts and Manufactures of Paris, 563Notice of the Boarding Institute of Arts at Charonnene, - - 572Schools of Arts of Prussia, 573Institute of Arts at Berlin, 574Polytechnic Institute of Vienna, 583School of Mines of Saxony, at Frey berg, 589Institute of Agriculture and Forestry at Hohenheim, - . 595Naval School of Austria, at. Venice, 600Concluding Remarks, 602APPENDIX.No. I. List of Documents collected in Great Britain, France, Switzerland,Belgium, Holland, Germany, and Italy, • - - 609No. II. Distinctions to be drawn between Institutions for the Maintenanceand Education of Orphans, and those for otherclasses of children, 643No. III. Rules of He riot's Hospital, Edinburgh, relating to those whohave passed through the institution, and are serving an apprenticeship,644No. IV. Queries to be answered by Apprentices from Heriot Hospitalto their masters, and keepers of the houses where they board, 645No. V. List of Studies and Distribution of Time, prepared for JohnWatson's Institution, Edinburgh. Distribution of Time atHeriot's Hospital, Edinburgh. List of Text-books used atHeriot's and George Watson's Hospital, Edinburgh, at theMadras College, St Andrew's, and the High School ofEdinburgh, 646No. VI. Documents relating to the Admission of Pupils into Cauvin'sHospital, 651Tables of Diet in various Eleemosynary Institutions, - - 653Table of the Order of the Day in Eleemosynary and otherSchools, both primary and secondary, showing the amountof time occupied in study, exercise, &c., - - - - 655Example of a Bible lesson in the Glasgow Model Infant School, 656Method of teaching to read, called " Reading Disentangled," 657Remarks on Education by Mr. Emanuel de Fellenberg, - 658Remarks by the Rev. Dr. Arnold on the Study of the Classics, 661Brief Notes of Orphan Statistics, 665No. VII.No. VIII.No. IX.No.X.No. XI.No. XII.No. XIII.ERRATA.The following errata should be corrected as affecting, in general, the meaningof the text.On page 5, line 17 from top of page, /or " western" read southern.6, 13 bottom, erase one of the " its."8, 18 " before " impossible" insert sometimes.15, 17 top, /or the semicolon after "exercises" pZocca comma.18, 7 & 8, bottom, /or "require" read requires.28, 13 top, for " insures" read insure.50, 12 " insert " Intellectual Education" at beginning ofline.76, 13 bottom, /or "infraction" rcflwi infractions.112, 17 " /or " about" read amount.125, 12 " for "gospel" read gospels, and /or " works" readbooks.129, 15 top, for " introduction" read introductory.151, 10 " /or " ten" read two.305, 8 " insert after " credit of," first.386, 10 bottom, /or "composing" scarf comparing.391, 12 " for " body" read board.409, 3 top, for " recite" read have recreation.435, 11 " /or " branches" read bachelor.477, 10 bottom,/or"01to" read Otto.504, Note, /or "380,381" read 398,399.534, 15 & 16 top, erase " at a quarter to seven."540, 17 bottom, /or " Freyburgh" read Freyberg.573, 14 " erase the colon between "described" and "atPotsdam."589, 14 top, for " Freyburg" read Freyberg.593, 15 u M « «■'-/■/REPORT ON EDUCAT^^jINIj ^ y ;TO THE TRUSTEES OF THEGIRARD COLLEGE FOR ORPHANS.Gentlemen:Having completed the tour of examination into the state ofEducation in Europe, undertaken by your direction, with especialreference to the organization of the Girard College forOrphans, I beg leave to present to you a Report upon the informationcollected.The more immediate direction of my mission, as Presidentof the Girard College for Orphans, was devolved by the Trusteesupon their Committee on Scholastic Education, from whomI received detailed instructions. In these I was directed tovisit the institutions in the principal countries of "europe, whichmight be supposed to afford useful information towards organizingthe College, to procure text-books, and other works usedin the more remarkable schools, and the more important workson Education: and to collect such philosophical instruments,models, and drawings, as might be useful or necessary in openingthe College, or as might seem to me desirable to be purchasedin anticipation of the larger collections.My arrangements for leaving home were complete ' at theclose of September, 1836; and aft having visited the chiefcountries of Europe, which were the most interesting for myundertaking, I completed my tour in October, 1838. Tt isalmost needless to say, that I am now not only ready, but2 INTRODUCTION.' * 'anxious to render available, as soon as possible, in the organizationof the Girard College, the knowledge which has thusbeen acquired.It will be the design of the present Report to state in what wayI have executed the instructions of the Committee of the Boardof Trustees, and to present the result of the inquiries which theydirected. Their instructions contained, besides the generalindications of the objects of my journey, suggestions as to themode of securing these objects, which I found highly useful,and for which I feel very grateful. The most important purposeof my mission was the examination of institutions for Education,and my Report will principally consist of descriptions ofthese, and remarks upon them. The other objects were secondary,and even incidental.Whoever has even glanced at the part of the Will of Mr.Girard, which relates to the endowment of a "College for Orphans,"must have perceived that he intended no ordinaryOrphan Asylum to be created with the immense fund which hisliberality intrusted to the authorities of the city of his adoption.Mr. Girard has put himself in the place of a father to theorphan, and has determined that talent shall have all the opportunitiesfor development, by education, within the reach of childrenthe most favoured by the circumstances of their parents.This view has been prominent in all the measures taken by theCity Councils of Philadelphia, in the execution of their trust;and the Board of Trustees, to whom they have delegated thedirect control of the Institution, have, by their President, officiallyasserted this same understanding of the founder's wishes. Adue execution, therefore, of the instructions of the ScholasticCommittee, required not merely an examination of orphan-housesand elementary schools, but of the various modes ofeducation and grades of instruction. This task I undertookwith real distrust of my power to do it justice, notwithstandingthe Encouragement extended by the choice made of me, bygentlemen for whom I entertain a high respect. I must be allowedto say that, in the course of attempting its execution, I havespared no personal exertion, and that, though I may regret itINTRODUCTION. 3was not in abler hands, my conscience acquits me of havingwasted any part of the time or means so liberally placed at mydisposal by my fellow citizens.Before entering upon the descriptive portion of my Report,I propose to give a brief sketch of the views and circumstanceswhich guided me in the distribution of time in the different countriesvisited, and to present some of the general features of publiceducation peculiar to each of them.While there can be no doubt that the general principles ofeducation must be founded upon those of human action, andhence be common to all nations, it must be admitted that systemsframed from such general laws would require considerablemodification to render them applicable to different countries.Differences in political and social organization, in habits andmanners, require corresponding changes to adapt a system ofeducation to the nation; and, without such modifications, successin the institutions of one country is no guarantee for the same resultin those of another. The difficulties, however, of workingout a plan of education, from observation, appeared to me muchgreater at the outset of my undertaking than they do now, that Ihave seen how very many of the essentials are common to all wellorganized institutions having the same scope. A considerationof these difficulties induced me to make Great Britain the firstpoint of my tour, since it was reasonable to infer that the successfulmethods of education there might be more easily transplanted,being more directly applicable at home than those of othercountries. The examination of some of the more interesting institutionsthere occupied rather more than eight months ; and, lestthis portion of time should appear too great in comparison withthat devoted to the Continent, it may be well to state the circumstanceswhich absolutely required so considerable an allotment.Owing to the absence of any regular or central systemof education, and of any general responsibility in the managementof its institutions for public instruction, and to the entirefreedom of individual effort, more time is required to obtainaccess to, and examine the establishments of Great Britain, thanof any other country which I visited. A proper idea of the4 INTRODUCTION. - * •general arrangements can be obtained only by a study of particularcases, and each institution requires to be approachedindividually, and often in a different way, to secure a profitableentrance. As entirely different ideas frequently prevail in theorganization of institutions of the same class, it is not sufficient,as it usually is elsewhere, to see merely a specimen to judge ofthe whole. For the special objects of my tour, the eleemosynaryinstitutions were to be carefully inspected; and in thenumber of its Educational Charities, its Orphan Asylums, BluecoatSchools, and Education Hospitals, Great Britain exceedsevery other country in Europe. The city of Edinburgh and itsvicinity alone contain five such institutions for boys, and no twoof these are exactly alike in their regulations and administration,so that it was necessary to visit all to form preciseideas of their arrangements. If this be true of establishmentshaving similar objects, in the same city, it may be inferred ofthose in different parts of the kingdom, and facts fully sustainlie inference. It is true, to such an extent, that in preparingdescriptions of these schools to present to the Board, I havefound it difficult to classify them, so that by presenting, indetail, one institution as the type of a class, I might avoid thetoo great extension of this Report. The management of theseinstitutions, the observation of which formed an important partof my duty, may serve in many points, especially in all that relatesto tic material comforts of life, as a model to those of othercountries, in many of which I freely admit that more just ideasin regard to instruction prevail. Upon a review of the resultsof ujy visit to the institutions of Great Britain, it appears to methat Uic time was well l)estow(xl, though more profitable experiencein regard to instruction was acquired in less time in someof the countries of the Continent.After completing a tour through some of the institutions ofIreland, Scotland, and England, I crossed to the Continent, andvented, in turn, the principal schools of France, Switzerland,Holland, Belgium, and the chief States of Germany, making alsoa rapid visit to Italy. The same subjects of inquiry did not, ofcount, interest inu equally in these different countries, and ImTRODUCTION. Oproceed to pass briefly in review their respective points ofinterest.In Great Britain, the charitable institutions fox education occupiedmost of my attention. There, as in her countrieswhere similar establishments exist, and where no great or recentchange has been made in public instruction, the instructionwithin them resembles more nearly that of the schools of thesame grade in general, than in countries where such a changehas been wrought. While engaged in visiting them, I did notneglect, however, institutions which afforded a less direct prospectof advantage. To illustrate by an example; althoughHeriot's, the Watson*, and other hospitals for education atEdinburgh and Glasgow occupied a large share of my attentionwhile in Scotland, I visited, more or less in detail, atEdinburgh, the Model Infant School, the Circus-Place PreparatorySchool, the Sessional School, the High School, the Academy,the Western Academy, the Hill Street Institution, andthe University; at Glasgow, the Infant and Juvenile Schools ofthe Education Society, the different departments of the HighSchool, and the University. I also made an excursion to St.Andrew's, to visit the Madras College founded by Dr. Bell.In France, the general system of education, especially asmodified in its lower departments, and the schools for scienceand the arts, formed the special objects of examination. Theorphans are, in general, associated with the foundlings, and distributedthrough the country at the expense of the state; thesystem presenting nothing, as far as my inquiries led, either forapproval or imitation. The plan, of which I venture to speakthus freely, must not be confounded with the excellent systemin the Grand Duchy of Weimar, which, though similar in appearance,differs essentially from it. In Weimar, orphan children,deprived of both parents, are distributed among families,as nearly as possible in the same station of life as the deceasedparents, and a real superintendence, both moral and intellectual,is exercised over them by officers specially appointed for thepurpose, and by the parochial clergy and schoolmasters.In Switzerland, recent and great efforts, consequent upon theINTRODUCTION.advance of true liberty, have been made among the republics,in behalf of general education. The school of Pestalozzi, atVerdun, occupies a prominent place in the history of education; and the institutions of Fellenberg, at Hofwyl, have beenfrequently described. Others of great merit, but more recentlyestablished, are less generally known, and some of them will,as far as my limits allow, be noticed in this Report. I cannot,however, enter into the particulars requisite to present thestriking results which the last seven years have produced inmany of the cantons.The common school system, as well as the eleemosynaryinstitutions of Holland, deservedly attract much attention, andafforded interesting subjects for examination. There are peculiaritiesabout both, and experiments have been made therewhich bear upon some of the most interesting questions in education.I need only refer, here, to those of the method of mutualinstruction, and of the manner of supplying teachers; thelatter of which experiments has led to a conclusion in favourof schools for teachers, which appears to me irresistible.Among the institutions of the different states and free townsof Germany, I visited more or less in detail those of Prussia, Saxony,Austria, Bavaria, Nuremberg, Nassau, Weimar, Frankfort,Bremen, and Hamburgh. The condition of public instruction,in general, in the different states, as well as of the differentdepartments of it it in the same state, is very unequal. Prussia isat present decidedly in advance of the other larger GermanStates in the education of the people, especially in the mannerand matter of the instruction. The ease with which everypoint connected with the schools is ascertained, is remarkable;and I look back to the time spent in them, and in intercoursewith their teachers, as one of the most profitable portions of thatoccupied by my tour. As the various accounts which havebeen given of public instruction in Prussia have, in general, referredto trio system more particularly than to the schools, IHall, in this Kept, touch more briefly upon the former, andgo more into detail in regard to the latter. By reference totheir spirit and minute arrangements, it is easy to see whereINTRODUCTION. 7they would apply as perfectly in a republic as in a monarchy.The instruction in many of the charitable institutions of thatcountry has not kept pace with that in the schools in general,though there are others which have even led the way in improvement.Weimar has followed closely the Prussian modelin its system of education, and the schools of Nassau maybesaid to be derived from the same source. The schoolsof Saxony were once famous throughout Europe, but the primaryschools appear to have lost that rank; they are now,however, rapidly improving, by the same means which producedthe present advanced state of instruction in Prussia — theeducation of teachers. In Bavaria, changes of system havebeen too recent to render general remarks of any value. Ishall, however, give an account of the method of Graser, introducedinto the schools of a section of the kingdom. InAustria, public instruction remains nearly on the footing uponwhich it was placed by the reforming emperor, Joseph theSecond. There can be no doubt that it was once much inadvance of the times, though the elementary department is atpresent behind that of most of the other German States. Theystill adhere to the incomplete plan of educating teachers in ordinaryschools, and to antiquated methods of instruction. TheSchools of Arts in Austria rank, however, with the best in Europe,and receive liberal encouragement from the government.Of the many institutions which have claimed my attention,it would be entirely impossible to give even a meagre sketchwithin the limits appropriate to a Report,* and if it were practicableto go into details respecting all, many would be foundnot to repay the pains taken in reducing to paper a descriptionof them. In making the selection, which is thus necessary,I shall endeavour to bring to the notice of the Boardthe countries in which the different departments of educationare best carried on, and to give a sketch of the system of education,illustrated by the minutiae of as many individual institutewhole number of schools visited was upwards of two hundred andseventy-eight; to some of these, however, I merely made a single short visitsothers occupied me fbr several days.8 Introduction •lions as appear necessary to exemplify the system, and torender its results available for practice; endeavouring to rendereach account as complete in itself as the nature of the mainobject of my Report will permit.The manner of collecting the information which I sought requiresa passing notice. The introductions which usually flowin abundantly upon any one known to have a special object invisiting a country, opened to me the earliest and sometimes thebest sources of information as to the existence, nature, and extentof institutions, and of the books necessary to give particularsin regard to them, and which are rarely known at a distance.By consulting these and other works and documents, and bycomparison of various opinions, I was usually enabled to decidecorrectly as to the course which I ought to take, to see whatwas most deserving of attention. However, sometimes erroneousopinions deceived me, and I found that my course hadmissed some interesting point, or had brought me to one oflittle interest. Occasionally the error was irremediable, butnot often. Again, as it was necessary to employ all periodsof the year, I found it impossible to arrange my visit so as topass through a country at the period of greatest activity in theschools. Where the system of public instruction was central,like that of France, or Prussia, recourse to authority pointed outthe proper institutions to visit, and gained admission to them.The personal acquaintance which the teachers of Germany havewith each other, greatly facilitated my progress in its severalstates. Almost everywhere, indeed, I have reason to rememberwith gratitude the kind assistance rendered to me. Havingascertained the places which it would be, probably, profitable tovisit and the institutions to be examined, I regulated the timeand the attention devoted to them, by the interest which theyappeared to present, returning to the same institution frequentlyor not at all, according to circumstances. As auxiliaries to myinvestigations during these visits, I procured the printed docu-rncnU which existed relative to the institutions.I also prepared beforehand a series of questions, to which,when modified to suit the particular establishment in regard toIntroduction. 9which detailed information was desired, I obtained answersfrom the head, or from one or more intelligent persons connectedwith the establishment.The written and printed sources of information which arethus at the disposal of the Board, are 1st. A journal of my visitsto different institutions, and of verbal information received inregard to them, with my remarks. 2d. Replies to a series ofquestions in regard to particular institutions, or systems of instruction.3d. Statutes, by-laws, and regulations of different institutions.Laws and documents relating to public instruction,&c. 4th. Histories, descriptions, and text-books of differentschools. 5th. Particular works on education.These form a mass of documentary matter which, duly arrangedand digested,* will always throw the light of experimentupon doubtful points in the working of our system of organization.In many cases the documents, descriptive of the schools, givethe actual results of suggestions contained in the works on education.From this mass I propose to draw out some of the moreprominent parts, and to call the attention of the Trustees speciallyto them. The personal experience gained by my tourwill, however, as far as the Girard College is concerned, be itsmost important result. I could not expect the Trustees to followme through descriptions or even notices of all the institutionswhich I have visited during my two years' absence, or listento a record of the many failures and mistakes which I haveseen, and which, though they have formed one considerable itemin the experience gained, it would be truly an ungrateful taskto record.As best calculated to present the impressions, derived fromthis examination, of the actual results of education, I have adoptedthe descriptive form for my Report, and have purposelyavoided summing up the conclusions, or presenting a reviewThe translations from foreign languages have been made by Mr. TheodoreTrewendt, to whose indefatigable zeal and industry in this matter, I am muchindebted. The documents and books have also been systematically arranged byhim. A list of the documents is appended to this Report.10 IlTTRODUCTIOIf. * - • •-•of them separately from the facts, that the force of the opinionsmay not be weakened by appearing out of this connexion. It istrue that the remarks must be considered as general inductionsfrom numerous facts, and not inferences from single instances, butthese instances serve as their best illustration, if not sufficient,taken singly, to prove that they are just. These remarks suggestedthemselves at first as queries to be answered by furtherobservation.This Report will be divided into two parts, the first relatingto the means provided for the education of orphans, the secondto the systems of general education. Corresponding to these divisionsthere are two groups of institutions which present,in general, different objects for consideration; in the first, thegovernment, discipline, and domestic economy, as well as theinstruction are to be examined; while in the second, the instructionis the chief point of interest. Every individual institutionin the first group should furnish moral, intellectual, andphysical education; many in the second are necessarily morelimited in their design.PART IINSTITUTIONS FOR THE EDUCATION OF ORPHANS, OR OTHERDESTITUTE CHILDREN, THE ADVANTAGES OF WHICH ARESOMETIMES EXTENDED TO OTHER CLASSEDIt is not very material in what order these institutions arediscussed, and I have adopted a geographical arrangement aswell suited to their classification. The institutions selected topresent to your notice, are a part of those of Great Britain, ofthe German States, and of Holland. I shall begin with those ofScotland, presenting next those of England, then of Hamburgh,then of Prussia, Saxony, and Frankfort on the Maine, then ofBohemia, and lastly of Holland.CHAPTER I.SCHOOLS FOR ORPHANS, &c., IN GREAT BRITAIN.The greater number of well conducted and endowed institutionsof this kind are found in Edinburgh, while the oldest is thecelebrated Blue-coat School of London. The schools of this classthroughout the kingdom resemble more or less the most prominentinstitution existing at the time when they were founded. Thusthe arrangements of the Blue-coat Schools of Chester and Bristolhave, until lately, been similar, and the new Blue-coat Schoolat Oldham near manchester, has been modelled upon the excellentestablishment of the same kind at Liverpool. In someof these older schools, as at Chester, changes have been veryslowly adopted, and they are nearly as antique in their style ofeducation as in the costume of the pupils ; while in others, as atBristol, great changes have recently been made : in general,however, they are behind the more modern institutions. I proposeto present in turn descriptions of the most prominent of the12 ELEEMOSYWARY INSTITUTIONS OF GREAT BRITAIN.schools of this kind which I visited ; namely, of those at Edinburgh,called hospitals, founded by George Heriot, GeorgeWatson and John Watson, with a notice of Cauvin's Hospital,a description of the Blue-coat School at Liverpool, with a noticeof that at Oldham near Manchester, a description of theLondon Orphan Asylum at Clapton, and of Christ's Hospital orthe Blue-coat School of London.In these, and in general in other cases where a formal divisionof the subject may be necessary, it will be treated under theheads of, 1st. The history, buildings, general government, anddomestic economy of the institution. 2d. The reception anddismission of the pupils. 3d. The educational arrangements,considered under the divisions of intellectual, moral, and physicaleducation.There are in Edinburgh seven education hospitals, six of whichadmit other inmates than orphans. The effect of thus receivingchildren whose parents are alive, of maintaining, educating, andproviding situations for them, is supposed by many intelligentmen to be injurious to the tone of social morals,* and to removea stimulus to honourable exertion on the part of parents, by providingfor their children if they surrender them, or, if the parentsare disposed to struggle for their education at home, byplacing them in unfavourable competition with others so educated.Such an opinion might be brought to the test of numbers,but I was not able to find that this had been done by any whoentertained it The grounds of the argument, even if admittedto their full extent, do not, however, affect the establishment oforphan-charities, and a provision for the fatherless seems tohave been the governing motive in the original foundation ofat least three out of the five of the Edinburgh institutions forboys.Of these five houses of education, the Orphan Asylum is intendedto fit its pupils for service, Hereof s and George WattA» an illustration of this opinion, I append to my Report, Appendix No. II.,M tina (Von a history of the Orphan Hospital of Edinburgh, printed in 1833,la which the author has thought it necessary to show that this insUtuUon doesMl tli vim much objections.son's have each a provision for the higher instruction of boysof talent, and Cauvin's is intended to educate teachers.The building for the Orphan Hospital is on a fine scale, andits interior arrangements in general so good, that I herewithsubmit the plans. It is, as to economy and discipline, on a similarfooting verity John Watson's Hospital, of which I shall givea particular description, while in regard to instruction it occupiesa lower level. On these accounts I have supposed that aspecial description of the establishment is unnecessary. Thegovernment is of the paternal kind, the household forming onefamily, of which the master is the chief. The moral, physical,and intellectual education, thus depend mainly upon one person,who acts, however, under certain general regulations prescribedby the trustees of the hospital. Fatherless children are receivedin this institution as orphans.HERIOT'S HOSPITAL.History and Building. This noble institution, originally designedfor the maintenance and education of poor fatherlesssons of burgesses, or freemen,* of the city of Edinburgh, wasfounded in pursuance of the will of George Heriot, jeweller,dated 1623. By this will Doctor Robert Balcanquall, Deanof Rochester, and master of the Savoy, London was selectedto draw up the statutes for the organization and governmentof the institution, and to decide upon the plan of a building. Bythe statutes of Dr. Balcanquall, dated July, 1627, the governmentof Heriot's Hospital is vested in the provost, bailiffs, council,and ministers (of the established church) of the city of Edinburgh,and the present building was erected between 1627 and1650. The charity has been extended to destitute childrenwhose parents are living, and by a late act of Parliament thegovernors have been authorized to erect day-schools in the city" For the maintenance, release, bringing vpp and education of soe maniepoore fatherless boys, freemen sonnes of that towne of Edinburgh."t An institution intended for the relief of the poor, which was founded in 1513;suppressed on account of abuses in 1553. Restored by Queen Mary, and finallysuppressed in 1702 by Queen Anne.14 Eleemosynary IWSTiTUTKWW.with the surplus of their income, after supporting the presentnumber of one hundred and eighty pupils in the hospital itself.*This surplus is derived from the increased value of the estatesheld by the governors; and the application of it to schools insteadof to the increase of the hospital, was decided to be advisable,after much consideration and discussion. They wereinduced, no doubt, by the fact that ample provision is madefor destitute children of various classes in the city of Edinburgh,and perhaps also by the doubt, to which I have already referred,of the utility of institutions extending education and maintenanceto those whose parents are alive. My information inregard to this institution is derived from the printed documents,kindly furnished to me by the house-governors and the treasurerof the hospital ;J from an examination of the books kept atthe hospital and at the treasurer's office, which, on stating theobject of my mission, were most liberally opened to me; fromreplies to my queries by the house-governor; from repeatedvisits to the institution at various hours, and from conversationswith the governors and masters The government of theinstitution is regulated by the original statutes of Dr. Balconyof which certain parts only are deemed fundamental,and by regulations and by-laws enacted from time to time bythe trustees.The building is in the Gothic style, with the irregularities andexcess of ornament which it permits, and is beautifully situated,overlooking part of the old town of Edinburgh, and having afine view of its picturesque castle and of the new town. Thehouse is divided into many small rooms, approached by turretstairs, in the style prevailing two centuries ago, but now deemsThe prwent income of the institution is not less than from sixty-five tommtj thonwnd dollars.t The R«r. Hector Holme. j Mr. Bailey.4 Ae Ibe iooroee of information in regard to different institutions are verytod have already boon stated in a general way, and ore now repeatedI do not think it necessary to restate them at every new description.The Usiof printed document relying to public instruction is in the AppendixMe 1.Heriot HOSPITAL. 15cd inconvenient. It contains rooms for the meeting of the governors,for the lodging of the masters, a dining-half for thepupils and for the masters, dormitories and v^^ash-rooms, akitchen, various offices, and bath-rooms. The room recently fittedup for the drawling-classes, is lighted from above, whileblinds at the side windovt^s prevent cross lights. Many of therooms have the necessary arrangements for lighting them bygas, and the means of heating have been lately improved bythe introduction of warm air. The ventilation of the schoolroomsis, however, quite imperfect. Indeed, of the many buildingsI have seen, very few are even tolerably ventilated, and itshould be a matter of congratulation that our architect has devotedmuch attention to this point.*The court about which the building is erected, serves as aplace of play for the boys at certain times, and to give them fullliberty in their games of hand-ball, which seem to find more favouramong them than regular gymnastic exercises ; gratingsof wire are placed on the outside of the lower windows, whichprotect them from fracture. At first the effect of these gratingsof wire, suggesting the idea of the want of discipline, whichrendered them necessary as a protection to the windows, struckme unpleasantly, but when I saw the great freedom which itgave to the younger pupils in their games, my first impressionswere entirely removed.General Government and Domestic Economic of the Institution.The Board of Governors vest the internal managementand immediate superintendence of the hospital in a visitingcommittee, who further divide themselves into sub-committees,meeting at the hospital at least once a fortnight. The house-governormeets with these committees. It is usual also for membersof the board to attend the Sunday evening exercises at theinstitution. The board is also divided into the following commit-theconsequence of defective ventilation, on those confined in school-rooms,has been often much insisted upon, and yet proper ventilation is very imperfectlyunderstood. It is not enough to trust merely to the opening of the upper partsof windows for such a purpose. Draughts and abrupt changes of temperatureare thus produced which are injurious to health.15 Eleemosynary Institutions.tees: 1. Of auditors, who audit, yearly, the treasurer's accounts.2. Of finance, who advise with the treasurer on occasion, and examinesuch accounts as the regulations do not refer to thetreasurer and house-committee. 3. Of superintendence of thehospital property. 4. Of grounds leased. 5. Of laws. 6. Ofthe house, who attend to making contracts, passing bills forhouse expenses, ordering small repairs, &c. 7. Of education. 8.Of the superintendence of the boys after leaving the hospital. 9.Of the erection of new schools. 10. General visiting committeeof all the governors.The officers* of the institution are— 1st, a treasurer, who receivesthe moneys for the register, pays the bills of the hospital,the salaries of the teachers, the expenses of every week as certifiedby the house-governor and an accountant, and has chargeof the repairs of the building.2d. A register, or clerk, of the hospital, who is also secretaryto the governors, and has in general charge of the booksand papers of the hospital. He attends also to all law business,receives the rents of the estates, the leases of which are executedby him. The checks for the payment of the officers withinthe hospital are sent there, with one also for the amount of servantwages, which are paid by the matron.3d. The house-governor, who is the head of the institution,and also one of the teachers, and has a seat in the Board of Governors.He is responsible directly to the visiting committeeor its sub-committees, and all the inmates of the hospital directlyto him. Besides acting as the head of the family, he isrequired to teach daily, three hours, the boys of the elder classes,"such branches as shall be interesting to all these boys, whatevermay be llieir destination in after life; for example, the generaloutlines of history, particularly English history; geography;lii first principles of natural history and of mechanical philosophy;alio elements of English composition; and the higher• Th nUrtef mr jndickNuly left in blank in the original statutes. I do nothaters Ukmo which are now paid, locate the salaries of officers, taken out ofCQAoejiioo wiUi minute statistical information in regard to trio country in whichIhejr reside, are dal which can lead to no just conclusions.heriot's hospital. 17branches of religious instruction." He must also examine theclasses of the other masters, once a week, and preserve a recordof the places of the boys, &c. He keeps a book containingthe account of provisions received and issued, a record ofthings ordered for the house, which is settled weekly, a day-bookfor issues, the accounts of which are transferred to theledger and to the monthly bills, a list of admissions, &c.4th. The masters, of whom four are resident, and whoseduties will be particularly described hereafter. I remark herewhat seems to me a decided defect in the organization of theinstitution, that these masters have no meetings as a board, andhence their views of discipline and instruction are never directlyconsulted.6th. A physician and surgeon, who, besides making regularvisits, are required to attend as often as called for.6th. The mistress or matron, who has charge of all the moveablesof the house, and in general acts as mistress of the family;superintending the duties of the female servants, the issues ofclothes, of tea and sugar, the police of the house, and of the pupils,the sick-rooms, the washing, the ordinary fare, and thediet of the sick.7th. The steward, who receives the supplies of meat, bread,milk, flour, &c., contracts for coal, and candles, and verifies theweight and quality, under the direction of the matron; hascharge of the deliveries of the same, and of the order and policeof the dining-hall and of the eating utensils. His accountsare examined once a month, by the house-governor and treasurer,and paid by the latter.The servants are as follows: Nine female servants for thepolice of the house, serving the tables, washing the feet of allthe boys once a week, and the care of the junior boys in theirwards. One of them may act as nurse. One cook. Three laundresses.Two warden, one of whom sleeps in and has chargeof each senior ward. One of them must be in the play-groundwhen the boys are at play. Two porters, one of whom maybea married man, and has charge of the gates, and who arejointly responsible for the police of the grounds about the house,18 EL|£EM06Y!f Mary INSTITUTIONS.and for the preservation of the building. They receive the vrsi-lor, who are admitted by an order from the treasurer, or thehouse-governor, and show them the various parts of the hospital.Reception and Dismission of Pupils, The rules require thatapplication for admission shall be made at least three weeks beforethe periods of election in April and October. The applicantsmust be above seven years of age and below eleven. Thecases are canvassed by a committee of the governors, and selectionsare made depending upon the degree of destitution, thecharacter of the parents, the degree of instruction which theapplicant has received, and his general intelligence manifestedat an examination by the house-governor. Children who havelost both parents are in general considered as presenting thehighest claims; next those who have lost their father, and thenthose who have lost their mother, and lastly those whose parentsare alive.* It is understood that certificates of the marriageof the parents, of the baptism of the children, and of thelather's right as a freeman, must have been presented.The new comers are separated for twelve months from therest of the boys at all times, occupying separate places in churchand in chapel, and separate dormitories ; taking their meals andexercise, and visiting their relations at different times from theothers. By this regulation it seems to me that the force of goodexample is made ineffective, and that each new set of boys requirea new training. I am not aware when it was first enacted.It docs not appear in the original statutes, and was perhaps oneof the measures used to break up a most shocking abuse of the^®g6»"g system which prevailed many years ago in the schooland by which the elder boys were the complete tyrants of theyounger ones. So deeply rooted had the practice of this system,known as "Gain law,"t become, that it cost the expelsOf two hundred and three boy admitted, between October, 1830, and ,18M, eiffal had lord both parents, thirty had lost their father, fourteen their■oUmt, tod ooe bondrwl and forty .eight had boU» parents alive. Three were oa pTMMUUoiia, not requiring i statement as to whether their parentt Gw ■igniAM (bree.Heriot HOSPITAL. 19sion of some twenty pupils to eradicate it. I have every reasonto believe that the true relation of the pupils to each other andto the masters, is now much better understood. It is easy tosee that there may have been other reasons for the separationof the new comers from the other pupils, but none of thosewhich occur to me seem to make it desirable. These boys areunder female superintendence.The pupils in general leave the institution at fourteen yearsof age; if a boy is not fourteen on or before the day for regulardismission, he remains another year in the institution, and certainpupils are retained until sixteen. The statutes provide thathopeful scholars" may receive, for four years, a sum of moneyto enable them to attend the classes of the high-school as ameans of preparation for, and to continue their education at, theUniversity of Edinburgh. The institution pays the apprentice feeof such as are bound out, and gives gratuities to those whoproduce satisfactory certificates of conduct and progress. Theregulations in regard to the arrangements for leaving the institutionare highly judicious, and will be found in detail in theAppendix to this Report (No. III.) The governors require, sixmonths before the time when a boy should leave the school, areport of his conduct, acquirement, and talents, from the house-governor.One month before the same time a statement fromhis parent, or guardian, of the calling which it is wished theboy should adopt, the master who may be chosen, and the arrangementsdesired to be made for boarding. These matters arediscussed, and the disposition made of the boy depends upon theresult. The boy having been bound apprentice, the master cannotreceive the annual instalments of the apprentice fee, withoutanswering certain queries as to the conduct and proficiency ofhis apprentice. It is also provided that answers to two othersimilar series* of questions, one addressed to the apprentice, theother to the person with whom he lodges, shall be furnished annually,and the treasurer is enjoined to keep a register of them.See Appendix No. IV,90 • ELEEMOSVIfARV Institutions.On leaving the institution, each pupil receives an outfit ofclothing, &c.» The boys intended for the university are maintainedand clothed, and receive a certain sum per annum.Education, This term appears to have been considered bythe authors of the regulations as synonymous with instruction,and accordingly, they provide that "the education which theboys receive shall be, as much as possible, accommodated tothe capacity and prospects of each/'f The subjects of instruction,according to the order in which they rank in importancein the institution, are English (/. e. spelling and reading,) grammar,geography, and history, writing, Latin, mathematics, drawing,French, music, Greek, mechanical and natural philosophy,and chemistry. These are taught in seven classes, and the firsttwo are exclusively occupied with the English studies, writing,and arithmetic. The third and fourth classes have one hour ofLatin. The sixth has but one hour of the miscellaneous Englishstudies, and the seventh has none. Natural philosophy is in factnot taught, and the chemical course has been cut off. Greek istaught only in its very elements. In the attempts to improvethe courses of this school, to bring them up to the present stateof instruction, the additional branches have been loosely attached,and the course is not now one consistent whole. The onlyremedy for this, consistent with keeping up with the progressof instruction, is to revise the entire course, from time to time,maintaining due subordination of the separate branches to thegeneral plan of studies.The corps of masters is divided into resident masters andnon-resident, a good arrangement when the teachers are numerous.There are resident in the house, besides the house-governor,wholes charge of the geographical and religious in-•Iruclion, and of part of the historical course, two masters of• Om dozen aliirU, half a dozen pairs of stockings, a Bible, and other books.t The kind of instruction which api>oared necessary in the day of Dr. Balconywo Lam from the sutures: "and bccaus that the scholars sale brochtttp« io letter, their albo a iK-hoil maintop whose office sale to teach the scho-md and wfMtt ScotUs diHtincllie, to cypher and cast all maner of acM abo to tMohe yams Uio Lane rudiments, hot no further."the English branches, a mathematical, and a classical teacher.The non-resident teachers are those of music, writing, drawing,and French. The music taught is church music; and the drawing,that denominated mechanical drawing.The principal labour of teaching the various courses isdivided among five masters. Of these, the house-governorteaches three hours every day; the other masters from six toseven hours, besides superintending the studies for an hour,and, in rotation, taking charge of the boys at rising and goingto bed, at meals, and by the regulations being even responsiblefor them during play time. They are thus decidedly overburthenedwith labour, and the compensation which they receivefor this devotion is not such as to attach them permanently tothe institution.The methods of teaching the different general branches donot vary much. Lessons are given to be learned from books,either in or out of the school-room. Oral explanations are joined.The mathematical instruction is chiefly oral. In the Englishdepartment the method of the sessional-school hereafter to bedescribed, is intended to be practised.* The efficiency of thisdepartment seemed to me impaired by the distribution of theclasses, each of the two masters having one division of each ofthe two English classes, so that there were always two divisionsin the same master's room at the same time, in differentstates of advancement. As but one of these divisions could betaught at a time, the other was occupied in preparing lessonsunder monitors. The regulation which requires these mastersto teach the elements of Latin, acts injuriously upon this department,and reacts upon the classical department, by giving adifferent elementary preparation to the two divisions, which areafterwards united in the proper Latin class. The classical instructionis intended to prepare boys for the upper classes ofOne of the English masters, the Rev. Holm Oswald, has prepared a series ofetymological works, carrying out the practice of the sessional-school. His EtymologicalDictionary of the English language was republished here, with notes,by the late Dr. J. M. Keagy, one of the Trustees of the Girard College.23 Eleemosynary IJfSTITUTIONS*the high-school, and ultimately for the university. The Latincourse extends to the partial reading of Virgil and Horace —and the Greek includes merely the elements. The principle isrecognised that all the pupils are not required to pursue theclassical courses, the propriety of which will at once be admitted,when it is stated that of sixty-two boys, forty-seven becomeapprentices to trades, and a larger number leave the institutionat or before sixteen years of age. The plan of carrying outthis principle, however, strikes mc as liable to many objections.The study of Latin begins in the fourth class, or after the boyshave been three years in the school. The regulations providethat "each boy shall have a fair trial of the study of Latin. If,upon the average of the first year, he be found in the lowesttuxy-thirds of the class to which he belongs, he shall remain inthat class for a second year; and if, at the end of the secondyear, he occupy no higher place in it, he shall be withdrawnfrom the study, and shall be engaged in other employments."The execution of this rule inevitably detains a boy who has notatalent for language two years in a class for which he is utterlyunfit, injuring his habits of attention, wasting time whichhe might otherwise employ to some purpose, and reacting injuriouslyupon the class. In fact, a considerable number of theboys never, while they remain in the school, get beyond thefourth class, in which the elements of Latin are taught; and ofthose who pursue the Latin studies, very few succeed in securingthe university places. Thus, for the sake of the few who canreally benefit by the classical courses, the many are employedupon subjects which, to say the least, might better be replacedby others. I am far from being one of those who undervalueclassical culture, but I am convinced that to be at all effectiveit must be thorough, that it cannot be thorough when theinstruction is terminated at an early age, and that there arecertain minds very little or not at all improvable by language,at there arc others similarly related to mathematical studies.If the object of a school were to make professional men, I wouldhave the classical course the rule, and then, consider as cases those who, from character of mind, want ofindustry, inability from circumstances to remain sufficientlylong in the school, or other causes, were unable to benefitlargely by such a course; but if the school has a majority ofits pupils intended for trades, I would make the culture of minddepending upon classics the exception. It is easy to see howsuch a system could be contrived, and there are many institutionson the continent of Europe, which furnish examples of theplan. In regard to the instruction in French, the same seemsto me to be true, whether we consider it as a means of cultivatingthe faculties, or as useful for future application. In pointof fact, it is begun too late to acquire much knowledge of itbefore leaving the institution.With a view to inform themselves as to the results of theirsystem of instruction, the governors have lately required fromI those boys who receive pecuniary rewards during their apprenticeship,the presentation of three documents, before referred to,containing answers to certain queries. One of the sets of questionsis answered by the master, and relates to the conduct ofthe boy, as an apprentice; a second, by the person with whomthe boy lodges, and contains an account of his conduct whilein the house, of his hours, &.c. ; a third, by the boy himself —and inquires, among other points, into his hours of work, hisoccupations, and relaxation, and the utility of his studies,while in the hospital, to the business in which he is engaged.This excellent regulation has been in force only some threeyears, and hence the inferences, from the replies of the boys,are not as important as they will one day be. Even with alonger continued average, they will not be absolutely conclusivein regard to the value of the several branches of study, forit requires very good judgment to get rid of the idea that onlythe immediately useful is at all useful, and to appreciate theeffect of general mental culture. As a result, however, of thet expression of opinion of forty-seven out of sixty-four boys,nearly all had found use for their arithmetical studies, and somefor their English studies, including grammar, geography, andhistory. Of those from whom I saw no replies, seventeen innumber, four were at the university, who, from the prizes which24 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.the "Hcriol's boys" carry away in classics, no doubt found theirLatin and Greek (especially the former) studies "useful;" threewere not minors, and two deceased; leaving but eight out ofsixty-four unaccounted for.Should the results of these queries continue to be as just stated,they will one day afford the strongest argument in favour ofmy position, that the arrangement is a defective one, by which,in an institution for the purposes answered by Heriot's, theclassics are made the basis of instruction. At present, othergrounds are stronger.The mathematical instruction includes arithmetic, throughfractions, and elementary algebra and geometry, and is uponthe plan generally followed in the higher schools, and in partof the universities of Scotland. Oral explanations are givenby the teacher, and examples are worked by the pupils, in concertor individually, by the teacher performing the work, ordrawing the figures, on a black board, at the dictation of theboy. This mode is accompanied by the working of examples,by the pupil, on the slate, but so far as the mechanical operationsare executed by the teacher the pupil is deprived of themeans of acquiring dexterity in wanting or drawing figures,and of ideas of proportion, and thus loses the opportunity of theeducation of both the hand and eye. This method, further, rendersthe knowledge of the pupils somewhat uncertain, since theoperation of the master may precede the direction of the pupil ;and while it may be convenient in some cases, its general useappears to me injurious. Of this, I believe the intelligent mathematicalmaster at Heriot's is fully satisfied. There are twospecial prizes for excellence in this department, which areawarded on competition.The mode of instruction in drawing is the same as that usedin the Prussian schools, and to which attention has been calledin Scotland by the able Secretary of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,Sir John Robinson. The boys, after learning the firstcements of linear drawing, draw from models; a simple perspectivemachine being used to give them an idea of the principleswhich icy are to put in practice. At first, simple solids,rheriot's hospital. 25bounded by straight and curved lines, are set before them, anddrawn upon the slate. Then mouldings, and, gradually, morecomplex combinations of surfaces are given, and are drawnupon paper with the crayon or pencil. This method forms theeye admirably, but does little, I may say nothing, to improve thetaste. Hence, it is rejected by some. Nevertheless it appearsto me admirably adapted for the ordinary purposes of life, andespecially for the use of those engaged in mechanical pursuits,and much superior to the system of linear drawing from engravings,taught in the primary schools of France. The methodhas the further advantage, that almost every pupil is able toacquire some proficiency in mechanical drawing and sketchingby it. Every boy must attend this class for at least twelvemonthsbefore leaving the institution. When I visited the hospital,the hours interfered much with those of other departments.There is a writing lesson, of at least one hour a day, for eachclass, and two prizes for excellence have been established by alate governor.Religious and Moral Instruction, The positive religious instructionis given by the study of the Bible, the Evidences ofChristianity, and the Catechism of the Church of Scotland.Family worship also is held morning and evening. On Sunday,in addition, the pupils are occupied one hour in the morningin the study of the Church Catechism, or of a Bible lesson orhymn, which they recite in the evening, and they attendchurch twice during the day. Besides this, the discipline ofthe school, repressing what is amiss, and encouraging virtue,acts of course powerfully; the example of the elder boys, andthe good order which prevails, tend to produce regular habits.The results of this combined moral education are to be foundin the records of the character of the pupils, when they are nolonger under the fostering care of the institution; and the answersto the queries before referred to, in regard to the conductof the young men, given by the masters to whom they are apprenticed,and by those with whom they lodge, exhibit theseresults in a highly satisfactory point of view. Of forty-sevensets of answers, forty were entirely to the credit of the young28 ELEEMOSYNARY Instit-IONS. .men, on the part of the masters, and forty-six on the part of thepersons with whom they lodged. Of the seven falling undercensure, three had not made satisfactory progress in their business;two were, in addition, absent sometimes; one was complainedof as not doing his errands punctually, and only onewas of the class considered decidedly vicious.I have found no subject of discipline, in regard to which morediversity of opinion exists, than as to the appropriate amount ofintercourse with relatives to be allowed during the stay of a boyin these establishments. On the one hand, the importance ofnot breaking such natural ties as the boy may have, is obvious;and, on the other, the injury resulting from bad counsel,undue indulgence, and even, in some cases, bad example, becomesnot less so from experience. According as one or otherof these disadvantages predominates in the teacher's mind, heis favourable or not to frequent intercourse with relatives. InHeriot's Hospital, the pupils cannot leave the house for thepurpose of visiting their friends oftener than once in threeweeks, unless under special circumstances, of which the house-governoris the judge. Those who live in town are receivedat the door of the house by a relation, who is charged with theirreturn at the appointed time. Those whose relatives Hve inthe country have, if the visiting committee, or house-governor,see no objection thereto, a vacation of three weeks during themonth of August. The relatives who reside in Edinburgh, arenot allowed to visit the pupils unless when called to the houseby the governor, or when their boys are sick. Those who residein the country, must obtain permission from the house-governorto make visits. So much depends upon the characterof the relatives and connexions of the youth, that it appearsto mc no other rule, than to give to some officer a discretionarypower to permit the absence of pupils, can be adopted, until theparticular circumstances of the institution are carefully studied.To keep in remembrance the good deed of the founder ofthe school, the first Monday of June is celebrated as his birthday.Closely connected with the intellectual and moral educationHeriot HOSPITAL. 27Stand the rewards and punishments adopted in the institution.These consist of places in the class, and in the superintendenceover their fellows in the house, in indulgences of visiting or re-I ceiling friends, in prizes for proficiency or good conduct, in thegreater or less extent of their instruction while in the house, inpecuniary allowances during their apprenticeship, or to enablethem to pursue a university education, and in assistance even aftertheir apprenticeship. Those boys who are at the high-school,preparatory to entering the university, lodge in the house ; anarrangement which I saw extended with great effect at Amsterdam,and elsewhere in Holland, to all the pupils who areapprenticed in the city. The regulations require that, "theI more degrading kinds of corporal punishment shall be as seldomas possible resorted to;" and yet counteract the good effectof this provision by directing that " they shall not be inflictedin the private classes, but only in what is called 'the public« school,' in presence of the house-governor," thus rendering thedegradation most certain by the publicity of the punishment. Itis true, these chastisements are rarely inflicted, and the regulationsprovide that "they shall not be resorted to for mere literarynegligence, if unaccompanied by moral blame." Thehouse-governor has great latitude in regard to the characterof the punishments, and I am sure exercises a sound discretionin reference to them.There can be no doubt that it is more dangerous to blunt thesensibilities of a youth to moral reproof, than to harden him bycorporal chastisement. Hence such chastisements may bepreferable in certain cases, where reproof has failed, to a continuanceof the attempt to correct by admonition. This supposesit to be administered in private, without temper, and as alast resort. Some dispositions are better acted upon by the deprivationof indulgences by confinement, and similar penalties ofthis class, where remonstrances have failed; while others requiresomething more immediate in its action. In many schools inEngland, where the rod was once freely used, it has been almost,and in others entirely, laid aside. In schools like these, wherethe youth is entirely dependent upon the institution, I am fully28 ELEEMOSYNARy INSTITUTIONS.persuaded that, with proper treatment, it need be resorted to ^very seldom, if at all. Few dispositions are not open to kindness,especially under these circumstances, and no master hasthe qualities appropriate to such an institution who prefers therepulsive system to the encouraging. 1 refer to the exampleof the English schools because they have held out longestagainst the modern improvements in discipline, and their relinquishmentof such means is a stronger argument than could bederived from the more gentle discipline of the continent. Thespirit of kindness between master and pupil which exists inmany of the continental schools, the confidence that rendershim, as it were, the head of a family circle, are delightful to witness,and insures, better than stripes, the obedience of his pupils.I believe that this species of discipline, which leads the pupil #instead of driving him, may be considered as particularly congenialto the American character. The governors of Heriot'ssay that "it is earnestly recommended, that as far as possible,preventions of fault be employed; and that gentle treatment bepractised with the children." Thus, as far as their recommendationgoes, they are on the side where I should prefer to rangemyself. There is one point in which the teachers at Heriot'shave not the means of acquiring that moral control over the boyswhich would smooth many of their difficulties; the educationduring the play hours is not attended to by them. It is true thateach of the teachers, in rotation, is responsible for the order ofthe house ; but he has not the immediate superintendence of theboys. In such an institution especially, this is of importance,and the many hours of occupation in teaching, which preventsthe intimacy of the masters with the boys during periods ofrelaxation, is a serious disadvantage. That such an intimacyit extremely important to moral training, no sound educator nowdoubts; and it is certain that much teaching in school is not equivalentto moderate training out of school, to form the moral man. ♦Servants cannot supply the place of the teacher. The generalprinciple which I would here inculcate, is distinctly recognisedin lome of the best training-schools which I have seen, andheriot's hospital. 29renders the infant-school system of moral training in Scotlandso perfect.Physical Education. A due attention to this branch, thoughfully insisted upon in all modern works on education, and commandingfrom the common sense of every one a ready assentas an abstract proposition, is yet strangely neglected in manyestablishments which I have visited. The clothing and diet,at Heriot's Hospital, are good in quality, and ample in quantity,and cleanliness is sufficiently attended to. The linen is changedthrice a week, the stockings as often in summer, two suits ofover-clothes* are allowed a year, and are an adequate supply,in a climate where very slight changes are required for comfortin the different seasons. The bed linen is frequently changed.The arrangements of the lavatory for the pupils are good,each lad having the means of washing and wiping separatelyfrom the rest, and the opportunities of bathing are furnished inwarm weathers The boys are brushed and combed daily.The cleanliness in the dormitories, school-rooms, &c., appearedto me satisfactory, and the ventilation of the former is unexceptionable,and is made the subject of a distinct regulation, requiringthe bed clothes to be "drawn" from the hour of rising,(six in summer and seven in winter) until ten A. M., and thewindows to be kept open until three P. M. in winter, and sevenP. M. in summer. I have already remarked upon the imperfectventilation of the school-rooms. The pupils walk out frequentlyin summer, five or six miles, and make excursions dur-theallowance of other clothing per annum, is three day-shirts, one nightshirtof check, four pairs of stockings, two pairs of suspenders, four pairs of shoesand mending, two pocket-handkerchiefs. The latter are looped to a button inthe pocket to preserve them, and must be shown at the daily morning inspection.The making and mending of the shoes, and making of upper clothes, iscontracted for. The uniform, when I visited the school, consisted of a browncoatee, which they intended to change for a roundabout, corduroy pantaloons,and a cloth vest.t The change in these respects, within the memory of some most respectablecitizens of Edinburgh, is truly surprising. In former days, all washed from onevessel, and wiped on one long towel ! The influence upon moral training of astate of physical education which permitted such things, must have been great.The practices, of course, tended to the propagation of cutaneous diseases.30 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.iDg the three weeks' holiday of August, when about two-thirds ofthe school are still together, to Rosin and Stirling. A system ofgymnastics was adopted some years since, for affording regularand graduated muscular exercises, but it has fallen entirely intodisuse. After the novelty had worn off, the boys grew wearyof the exercises, and greatly preferred the ordinary sports ofthe schools. I have had occasion to remark, as applying tothe English schools in general, that the gymnastic exercises,so popular in some parts of Germany and Switzerland, hadnot taken root in any of them, though in many they hadbeen introduced, and well and carefully taught. At the sametime, nothing is more characteristic of the English school-boy,than his fondness for exercise in the different games of theschools. The greatest number of play hours is three per day,according to a schedule furnished me, and this seems to me,from comparison with the other schools, quite too small, especiallyfor the younger boys ; and the unbroken succession ofseveral hours in school, is also objectionable. The amountof time which these boys are employed in the class-room, frequentlyreaching for the elder ones to eight hours a day, andthe variety of subjects brought before them in their short course,at the longest but seven years, appears from observation to behighly detrimental to intellectual development. It is, indeed,said to diminish the amount of repressive discipline necessaryin tie institution, by taming the spirit by over intellectual work,but a saving of this sort is a real loss. It is probable thatthe diet, and Limited amount of exercise at Heriot's, may alsohave something to do with the absence of youthful buoyancy andactivity which I noticed among the pupils. The practice ofgiving a luncheon of bread in the interval between each of thethree regular meals will not explain, as I first supposed itwould, this observation, since it does not involve necessarilyany excess of food. And besides, I found the same practice inschools in Germany, where a like effect is not observable. Itprepares the pupils badly, however, for their diet in after life.The kind and quantity of food will be found stated in the Appendix(No. VII.) The boys do none of the menial work of thehouse, and even that relating to them personally is attended tobyservants. The dormitories are cleaned, the beds made, thearrangements for meals provided and removed, the clothes arebrushed, shoes cleaned, &c., by the servants of the institution.These boys, brought up thus to be waited upon instead ofwaiting on themselves, must, when they leave the school, findtheir position of attending to the wants of others particularly irksome.Indeed, many of those persons who receive them as apprentices,judging by the awkwardness with which these andother common affairs of life are attended to by them, underrateexceedingly the results of their education. This effect is increasedby their ignorance of ordinary life. The masters havingno families, those boys who never leave the school have noopportunity of witnessing any other than the peculiar modificationof society which the hospital affords, and even those whodo visit their friends, form only such an acquaintance with lifeas a few weeks in each year can give.In the only government school of our country, the MilitaryAcademy at West Point, where youths are received, whose parentsare in all the various circumstances of life, an oppositeplan is pursued in regard to the duties of the house and personalpolice ; and I have reason to know, from personal experienceand an extensive acquaintance with its graduates, that the independenthabits thus produced are retained by many as amongthe most convenient results of their early training.From the documents so liberally put at my disposal inHeriot's Hospital, I had an opportunity to examine aninteresting question on its tendency to remove the pupilsfrom the class, as to occupation, of their parents, and toplace them in others requiring a higher grade of mentalcultivation. The registers for the last three years containthe pursuits of the father of each pupil admitted, and theoccupation of the pupils who have left the institution. Thefathers of sixty-seven out of seventy-three boys were tradesmenor shopkeepers. Of the sons, fifty-six became tradesmen orshopkeepers, six followed other occupations, ten were not statedon the book, and two had died. Distributing this number of$^ ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.twelve, in the ratio of fifty-six to six, we have sixty-six toseven, nearly, as the ratio of those who followed the trades tothose who went into other occupations, or nearly the same asabove stated in the case of the parents of the pupils. Of theseboys, the number who have embraced the same occupation asthe father, he being alive, is eleven, and he being dead, two, inall thirteen. This tendency in the old country, for the son tofollow in his father's footsteps, is of course much greater than inours, but it amounts only to thirteen in sixty-two in the case underdiscussion. While, then, the education at Heriot's has beenfreely spoken of as reflection prompted me, I do not find anyevidence that, under the circumstances which exist in Edinburgh,it can be charged with a tendency unduly to increase theprofessional classes.Exactly an opposite objection has been urged against the institution,viz. that from its foundation to the present day it hasnot produced a single great man, in any department. That ithas furnished many useful citizens, and some, who in their placeshave been distinguished, is certain. To use the language of amost excellent divine of Edinburgh, "if it has not produceddistinguished men, it has infused into the industrious classes aconsiderable number of sober, steady citizens." Many of thesehave risen to civic honours, and become governors of the institutionwhich, in their youth, had fostered them. A desire tosubject it to the test of producing results to which education isentirely incompetent, is rather preposterous. School systemsmay aid in developing mind, but it is not their province to produceit. They address themselves to averages of intellect, allof which are below greatness.GEORGE WATSON'S HOSPITAL.This institution, which was modelled on Heriot's hospital, resemblesit in its general outline; there are, however, some differenceswhich will be worth remarking, especially as I aminclined to think that the proper relations between the pupilsand their teachers are here better understood. It is true thatHeriot's contains between two and three times as many boys asGEORGE Watson's hospital. 33the Watson', and the difficulty of treating them as individuals,increases greatly with the numbers.Histonjf Building, ^c. This institution was founded by GeorgeWatson, who, by strict economy and prudence, first in the situationof a clerk, and then trading on his own account, died anindependent and even, for the times, a wealthy man. After legaciesto his few surviving relatives, he left the bulk of his estates,12,000, to found a house of education* for the children of decayedmerchants of Edinburgh. The present plain structurewas erected about 1724, by the company of merchants andother trustees of the bequest, on a lot belonging to Heriot'sHospital, and opposite to that edifice.The organization of the Board of Governors who direct thisestablishment, is quite similar to that already described for Heriot's,being however more simple, because they have less property,and a smaller institution to manage. The office of treasureris now only an honorary appointment.General Economy, The head master performs the duties ofthe house-governor at Heriot's, and the matron that of both matronand stewardess. They each receive, in advance, a sumfor incidental expenses, of which the master renders an accountto the visiting committee, and the matron to the master. Thecontractors for supplies render their accounts quarterly to thehead master, who examines them, and if approved, hands themover to the treasurer.There are two porters, one of whom must be a tailor. He isa married man, and his wife receives an allowance for keepingthe gate. The porters in turn have charge of the boys at playhours, of their rising and going to bed, and one superintendstheir bathing while the other sends them by sections to thebath.Admission Spc. These boys are, in general, sons of personswho have had more cultivation than the parents of those whoare the objects of Heriot's bounty; more is required of themThe income is now between thirty-three and thirty-four thousand dollars.31 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS,for admission, and they are older when they enter * Thoseteachers who knew both institutions, generally thought thatthe greater docility of character observable in the pupilsof Watson's Hospital, resulted from their better parentage; butI confess that this idea made little impression on me, as thedifferent management of the boys in the two schools would belikely to produce the very results which have given rise tothe supposition. The requirements for admission are reading,and a certificate that the child has been one year at schoolif admitted at seven, two years if admitted at eight, and so on uptoeleven, the greatest age at which he can be received. Thepupils may thus remain in the school eight years or only four,being required to leave it at fifteen. The less age at enteringis in favour of Heriot's; but it must be considered that the boysat Watson's are, in general, those who have a parent, orparents, and may have been well though humbly brought upbefore entering. I am, therefore, disposed to think that wemay reason upon the results produced in the two houses asthough the circumstances, in reference to the pupils, were originallythe same.The objects to be attained are, however, very different.These boys are intended to be educated as merchants, or forprofessions. The records which I was enabled, by the kindnessof the head master,! to consult, showed that out of ninety-fourboys who were apprenticed on leaving the school, fifteenwere indentured to merchants, twenty as clerks, nine to professionalmen, six to occupations of other kinds, and forty-four, only,to tradesmen or shopkeepers. In Heriot's, the number apprenticedto tradesmen or shopkeepers was in the proportion of• The following certificates are required to be presented with the applicationfor admission. 1. That the father or grandfather of the applicant was a verdant,or broUicr of the guild, from the dean of guild. 2. Of indigence, from twora^ecUble individual, chides the minister of the parish, and the kirk-session.9. An extract from the register of birth and baptism, certifying the age. Thispffovblon excludes illegitimate children. 4. Of the time which the boy has beenin acliool.t The Rev. Mr. Munro.iGEORGE WATSON *S HOSPITAL. 35eighty-five out of ninety-four. This leads us to consider thekind of education which is given for the principal object of thisinstitution.Intellectual Education, It seems to me that the regulationsrecognise the principle that certain branches maybeless useful for particular pursuits than others; and yet,the instruction varies from Heriot's only in being ratherhigher, in carrying the pupil further in classics, both in Latinand Greek, and in geography and history. The modern languagesare not more particularly insisted on, and the courses,in general, in the English branches, arithmetic, 6z:c., are notvery different from those in the other school, though theyseem rather better digested.There is the same over-working of the pupils with a similareffect, a fact which I found admitted by all the masters, though,as they had a certain course to teach, and on the averagebut six years for its accomplishment, they saw no remedy.The same over-tasking of the masters, and low salaries, lower,indeed, except in one case, than in Heriot, on account ofwhich changes were frequent. There is, further, the same injunctionto celibacy. The teachers are here promoted in rotation;and, although the head master had been but three yearsin the institution, he had passed through the two subordinatestations. This regular promotion has several very good features,as applied to the two subordinate masters; but, in referenceto the head master, it produces unfavourable results, as heis required frequently to give instruction in branches to whichhe may not previously have attended. With one hundred andeighty boys, as at Heriot's, the discipline and superintendenceare sufficient to occupy one person exclusively: but such isnot the case with the limited number of pupils in this institution.There are, here, three resident masters for seventy-six boys,and in Heriot's, five for one hundred and eighty, the advantagebeing on the side of this school. The resident teachers instructin classics, English, and mathematics, the latter courses beingunder the charge of the head master, who also teaches theelements of chemistry. The pupils are divided into three corseELEEMOSYNARY IFfSTITUTIOlTSresponding classes. There are no formal meetings of the mastersas a board, but the three have similar duties, and taketurns each in superintending the pupils at meals, in the dormitories,and, in general, at play. Further, the head master isneither raised above the others by being a governor, nor byvarious minute regulations, as at Heriot's, and hence all workmore harmoniously together. There is a peculiarity welldeserving of notice in regard to the courses here, and I haveseen the same in several flourishing institutions of the continent.The courses and text-books are not permanently laiddown, but every year are passed upon by the education committeeof the governors, on the presentation of a list by the headmaster.The programme is, in fact, made out after consultationwith the other masters; but there is no regulation requiring thehead master to advise with them, which, as a matter of duty,and not of his own pleasure, he ought to do. That this revision isnecessary every year may be doubted, but in an old establishedinstitution, where routine is prone to take the place ofreasoning, and where it is so difficult to keep the courses up tothe actual level of education in general, it may be fairly assumedthat the error, if any, is on the proper side. The prizesfor intellectual effort and conduct are quite high in this establishment,and their effect is considered to be very great. Theyconsist in the distribution of about £20 ($100) in books, afterthe annual examination; the inscription of the name of the boy,who is distinguished in most of the classes for correctnessof conduct, on a tablet in the governor's room ; and in allowingthose who are fit to pursue the course of the university, onehundred dollars for four years, to attend there, and eighty-fivedollars for two years subsequently, their examinations and conductbeing satisfactory to the committee on education. Unmarriedpupils of the age of twenty-five years, who are notprovided with capital to commence business, may receive fromthe governors, on presenting satisfactory testimonials, two hundredand fifty dollars. Thus encouragement is held out tomerit long after the pupils have left the protection of thealma mater. Those who are apprenticed to lawyers, surgeons,&c., are enabled, by a like liberal policy, to pay the large feesrequired in such cases.Moral Education. I have already hinted that I consider therelation existing between the teachers and boys at GeorgeWatson's to be an agreeable one. The general system bywhich this result is produced depends, in part, upon the regulations,but essentially upon the personal character of the masters.Frequent walks are taken under the direction of the masters,depending upon the previous good conduct of the wholeschool. Ten or a dozen boys are invited to take tea in theteacher's room during his term of duty as house-master, the expensesbeing defrayed by the institution. Encouragement isgiven to their sports, to gardening, &c. A prize for good conductis bestowed by the boys themselves, and, in fine, there isa general endeavour to substitute the influence of the goodopinion of the instructors for artificial stimulus to intellectualexertion and good conduct. Though the punishments approvedare mainly the cutting off* of indulgences, yet floggingis allowed; the article in reference to the corporal punishmentin a "public school" at Heriot's, in regard to which I felt constrainedto remark, is here so far modified, that the head master'spresence in a private class is the necessary formality.Those pupils whose conduct has been satisfactory during theweek, are allowed, under certain regulations, to visit their parentsor relatives every Saturday. The teachers believe, fromobservation, that these frequent visits are of service ; their conclusions,however, depend much, no doubt, upon the averagecharacter of the relatives of the boys.Physical Education. Regular gymnastic exercises have neverbeen introduced here, but the boys are supplied with balls, battledores,&c., and receive lessons in dancing. Their excursionsin summer for several days, frequent walks, bathing oncea week, cultivation of gardens, and habitual cleanliness, keepthem in general good health. The arrangements for clothing*The boys wear green jackets, or roundabouts, the elder ones with a vest ofthe same, the younger with the jacket and pantaloons buttoned together. CoresELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.and diet are, in the main, the same as at Heriot's. Theyare, however, more troubled here with eruptions on the head.Some institutions are much annoyed by this scourge, whichrequires almost absolutely the separation of the infected fromhis class-mates. The cultivation of gardens is encouraged byan annual prize; the gardens are divided into four parts, andeach one given to an individual of the same class; the four thusin partnership compete with the similar divisions into whichthe school is distributed.There is a vacation of six weeks after the yearly examinationin August, during which one of the masters remains in thehouse, with such pupils as have no friends to receive them, orwho, from other causes, do not leave the establishment.The dormitories, in general, are not well arranged. Twoboys are placed in each bed, and the rooms locked up at night,the head master having the keys. If a boy is sick, there is abell to summon assistance. These arrangements appear to meto be very defective. The bedsteads are of iron, and answerextremely wellJOHN WATSON'S INSTITUTION.This is the most recent school of its kind in Edinburgh,having been organized in 1828, and thus the experience whichit furnishes on certain points must be most valuable to theboard. One of these is, the expediency, and, indeed, the necessity,of the gradual organization of an institution; and theother, the propriety of leaving the regulations relating to detailsto be tried in the actual circumstances of the establishment beforeenacting them into laws. By following out these two ideas,this institution has been organized, brought under its presentdoioy pMUlooM. Leather caps for the house, and cloth for the street. Thesehither cape, which fit closely to the head, are very injurious, tending, apparently,to produce dtiK>a«08 of trio head.Th clothe* tre marked, not only with a number, which the boy receives atMitrtnee, bot with hb name: the effect of the latter provision, in securing tothe boy hb individuality, in not to be neglected.Join Watson's institution. 30good regulation, and its numbers increased to one hundredand sixteen pupils,* with very few unpleasant circumstances.It cannot, however, be said to have yet taken its ultimate form,and I feel persuaded that many modifications will still be madein its arrangements.History, Building, Sc, This establishment, for the educationof destitute children from any part of Scotland, was foundedfrom funds left by John Watson, of Edinburgh, a writer tothe signet in the year 1763. The present capital is chieflyin bank stocks, and exceeds three hundred and fifty thousanddollars; the yearly income is about fifteen thousanddollars. The building is situated a little out of the city ofEdinburgh, towards the northwest, occupies a high and healthyposition, and is surrounded by grounds neatly laid out, havinga garden in front, and in rear play grounds for the children,and a bleaching ground. It is a neat structure, with a centreand wings, the centre having in front a Grecian Doric portico.One of the wings is appropriated to the accommodation of thegirls, and the other to that of the boys, with some few exceptions.I shall speak only of the boys' accommodations. Theinterior is commodiously arranged: the basement contains aplay-room for wet weather, a bathing-room, laundry, refectory,kitchen, pantry, masters' offices, and parlour. This playroomis almost an essential, as the school-rooms should not beused for that purpose, and, in bad weather, the children musthave cover either in or out of the building. The bath is wellarranged. Between the kitchen and dining-room is a convenientturning-box for supplying the food, transferring the plates,Of these, nineteen have lost both parents, seventy-two father, one mother,and eight have both parents alive.t The original object of the testator was a foundling hospital. Convinced ofthe evil of such institutions, a change in the objects of the bequest was petitionedfor, and made by Parliament.X Attorneys entitled to practice in the highest civil and criminal courts ofScotland, and forming the society of " Clerks or Writers to the Signet." Thetitle is derived from the fact that it is one of the privileges of these attorneys tosubscribe the writs which pass the royal signet in Scotland.40 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.&C. On the first floor are the rooms of the master and assistants,of the governors, the chapel, and three school-rooms. Anattempt has been made to heat the house by warm air throwninto the entries, but this has not been effectual; the school-roomsare cold, and the temperature cannot be kept up except at theexpense of the ventilation. The second floor contains working-roomsfor the boys, dormitories, rooms for the sick, and offices,matrons' apartments, &c. The whole house is lighted by gas,and is supplied with water from the city works, two most importantconveniences, which I found highly appreciated bythose who had previously been without them.General Government and Domestic Economy. The generalgovernment is vested in fifteen trustees, of whom three go outevery year in rotation ; they are elected by the commissionersof the writers to the signet, and meet regularly but three timesa year. They have a treasurer, a clerk, and assistant, as permanentsalaried officers, and are divided into visiting committeesof two, who are expected to visit the hospital everyfortnightThe officers recognised by the regulations are: a master andone assistant, a matron, a surgeon, and a steward. The master*is responsible for all the in-door concerns, superintendingthe boys more particularly, and having the religious instructionspecially under his charge. The matron has the care of thegirls, and attends to the housekeeping concerns. The masterkeeps a petty expense book, a waste-book, and ledger, and thematron a book of disbursements for housekeeping. The surgeonvisits the institution regularly twice a week, and comesalso whenever sent for.The servants of the house consist of a porter, two nurses,three house-maids, four chamber-maids, one cook, and an assistantThe porter has charge of the gate and grounds, calls theboys in the morning, superintends them while washing, morningand evening, at play, and wiicn they bathe, and assists at meals.The present head master in the Rev. Mr. Marshall, to whose kindness 1 amifidebled for information relating to trio institution.JOHN Watson's institution. 41One of the nurses attends specially to the cleanliness of theyounger boys, and in general to the police of the elder ones.The annual average cost of the maintenance and education ofeach child is about one hundred and nineteen dollars. Theuniting of the two sexes in one establishment for education,however favourable it may be at a very early age, is afterwardsattended with so many difficulties, some of which areinsurmountable, that the governors of this hospital have graduallydiminished the number of female pupils, and the headmasterwould gladly see the establishment divided into two,neither the instruction nor discipline which is suitable to one sexanswering for the other.Receipt of Pupils and their Discharge, The pupils must bebetween five and eight years of age at entrance ; and it is veryperceptible that the early age at which they are received is adecided advantage to this institution. Their pliability and exemptionfrom bad habits are conditions which should not belost sight of At the opening, twenty-five boys and twenty-sixgirls were admitted, and when they were trained duringa year, a further admission took place. Notwithstandingthe great care thus exercised to begin properly, and the abilitiesof the master, who excels in the kindly character most likelyto win upon a child, the training of these twenty-five boyswas not effected without much difficulty, and, in fact, threeof them were expelled during this year. The first set being welltrained, the others have fallen gradually in with the example oftheir elders, and no further expulsions have been necessary,though seventy-nine boys and sixty-six girls have been sinceadmitted, up to 1836. In fact, the institution was begun ontoo large a scale, limited as its organization may have seemed.The admissions are made on petition to the governors, settingforth the destitution of the child, to establish which it is necessaryto show that its parents or friends have not the means offurnishing a good education. The petitioners must include intheir number a commissioner or writer to the signet. Thereare no requirements of previous instruction. Illegitimate of42 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.diseased children, are not received. The pupil is first admittedon a week's probation, and if his moral and physical conditionappear suited to the institution, he is then fully admitted; if not,his friends are bound to withdraw him. The pupils leave itat fourteen years of age, and there is no provision whateverfor their subsequent superintendence or advancement;if the children have friends who can take care of them, this isno great hardship, but such children do not seem to betheproper objects of charity. That the orphan should bethrown upon the world at this age, with ten pounds, and aBible, does not seem to me judicious, and this part of theout-door establishment I should regret to see imitated. The resulthas been, I was informed, to induce the selection of childrenof persons who have occupied higher stations and arereduced, in preference to others more destitute. Thus, out ofninety-eight children, the parents of twenty-two belonged toprofessions, forty-three followed other avocations, and thirty-threewere tradesmen or shopkeepers. I am fully persuadedof the very great importance of keeping up a connexion untila later period of life, between the child and the institution, thoughit may be necessary to apprentice him to a trade at fourteen orfifteen years of age; and in a future part of this Report the practicein reference to this, of some of the orphan-houses of Holland,is fully explained.Intellectual Education. The course of instruction proposedby the head master is very comprehensive; indeed, much moreso than I believe the time will allow to be carried through,without distracting the mind of the pupil by the diversity of subjectspresented to his notice. This plan of instruction is anextension of that at Heriot's, and offers a very systematic arrangementof the branches, and a detailed distribution ofthe time. (See Appendix, No. V.) Only a portion of theplan, however, is executed, and I am satisfied that such mustcontinue to be the case, unless an arrangement is made bywhich different trains of instruction shall be pursued by differentsets of pupils, according to their mental development andJOHN Watson's institution. 48probable pursuits in after life. The course includes spelling,reading, grammar, composition, writing, plain and ornamental,arithmetic, algebra, book-keeping, geography, general andparticular, modern and ancient, history, modern and ancient,drawing in pencil, chalk, and colours, of maps, &c., theelements of natural philosophy and chemistry, and of naturalhistory, geometry and mensuration, surveying, and the elementsof the Latin and Greek languages.The statutes of the school provide for the appointment of twoteachers only, the head master and an assistant. It has beenfound necessary, however, to have, besides, two sub-assistants,one for each of the three classes into which the boys aredivided, the head master exercising a general superintendenceof the whole, and teaching only occasionally. To rendercomparison of the proficiency of different classes more easy,they all recite upon the same branches at the same time, as faras practicable; thus, for example, all the classes are engagedin arithmetic or reading, &c., at one time, and the head masterpasses from one to another to obtain an idea of their comparativeprogress. The present sub-assistants are young men, whohave been brought up in the institution, and both, I believe, areattending the lessons of the high-school, preparatory to enteringthe university; the assistant was educated at Heriot's. Eachteacher has, in general, charge of one class in several differentbranches, according to the method now practised in the bestschools of Germany. In the other schools which I have spokenof, each master has a subject, or a few subjects, which heteaches, and different classes come before him at differenttimes. This, it is objected, prevents any strong attachment fromgrowing up between the children and the master, of whom theysee but little, and who from hour to hour is changed for another.On the other hand, it is contended that a man cannotbe equally competent to teach different subjects, and thus hisinstruction in all the branches is not given to the greatest advantage.It appears to me that both the opinions are true, toa certain extent. That the first principle is entirely applicableto elementary education, and the second to a later period, when44 BLBBKOSYNARY IffSTlTUTIONS.the subjects of instruction become more difficult, and the positiveknowledge of the master of more importance; and this happensjust at the time when the influence of the instructor would,from the development of the child, necessarily become weaker,and when, if the youth has been properly trained, he is prepared,in a degree, for self-government. Thus each principleis good in its place.The three classes are subdivided each into three sections,corresponding to the different degrees of progress, and whichcontain boys, when intelligent and studious, of about the followingages: the first class of six, seven, and eight years ofage; the second of nine, ten, and eleven; and the third oftwelve, thirteen, and fourteen. The whole number of pupilsin 1837 was one hundred and sixteen, of whom sixty-six wereboys. Thirty-nine, therefore, composed an average class,which is about the same number as that of a class at Heriot'sHospital.The head master is here very far removed in duties, privileges,age, and compensation, from the under teachers, presentingthe opposite system from that adopted at Heriot's and GeorgeWatson's, of bringing together several experienced teachers ofa standing similar to that of the head master. The plan in usehere has some advantages in regard to moral education anddiscipline, where the number of the pupils is not large; but theother, I am satisfied, produces much better results as to intellectualdevelopment.Moral and Physical Education, It is exceedingly difficult toascertain what is the essence of moral discipline, for, althoughthe regulations in regard to it may be the same in two institutions,yet the practice under these may differ very widely.Kindness or severity of manner and disposition, in enforcing arule, may render it practically either gentle or severe. Theregulations here do not differ much from those of Heriot'sor George Watson's, but the air of family life pervading theestablishment cannot fail to strike every observer, while, in theothers, especially in Heriot's, there appears to be more formalityof discipline; nid yet. in all three, the rules of the institutionsare adhered to. This is one of the cases in which the teachermay make or mar a system. The means of promotinggood conduct are here as in the other schools ; for rewards,the approbation of the teachers, increased opportunities ofamusement, social parties at the master's, and prizes; for punishments,admonition, flogging, and expulsion. There areoffices of superintendents in and out of school, in the dormitories,&c., which are considered also as rewards, and whichwork well under close inspection, and by frequent change ofthe boys in authority. Small sums of pocket money are givenby the head master, at his discretion, to the boys, and thesupplies from parents or friends must be deposited with him fordistribution. Two principles are adopted by the master in administeringthe regulations, which, probably, more than the lawsthemselves, lead to the state of things I have endeavoured todescribe. First, small indulgences now and then prevent thenecessity for grave punishments often repeated; and second,punishments must be so applied as never to produce in the subjectof them the feeling that the measure of the fault has beenfully paid ; but, on the contrary, so as to satisfy him that somethinghas been forgiven.The religious instruction does not differ materially in amountand kind from that already described.There are no regular gymnastic exercises, but in the intervalsof recreation the children engage in a great variety ofgames, the implements for which are furnished by the master,and in which the teachers frequently take part with good effectThe deprivation of these sports is made a means of punishmentThe loan of materials for play, such as marbles, &c., obviatesan objection sometimes urged to certain games of skill, viz.that they produce a sordid habit and love of gaming. The pupilswalk out frequently, accompanied by a teacher, make^*pic nic" excursions, and celebrate particular days.Cleanliness is carefully attended to; the face and hands arewashed morning and evening, the feet once a week in winter,and oftener in summer, besides which the boys bathe; on theseoccasions the pupils are attended by a teacher and the porter.46 ELEEMOSYNARY mSTl-ftjTlOKB.The arrangements for washing are not good ; basins of tinnedcopper have been tried, which do not answer well, and a troughis required for the feet. Inspection is made every morning inregard to cleanliness,, and the due order of their dress. Scaldheads are frequent as at George Watson's, and the same meansof eradicating and preventing the disease from spreading,are employed. The leather caps in use fitting closely to thehead, contribute, I doubt not, to the complaint.' The diet is thesame as at Heriot's, except that here nothing is taken in theintervals of the regular meals. The two sub-assistants eat withthe boys.The pupils do no menial offices in the house, except that ofcleaning shoes, which is done for the whole family by a certainnumber of the elcfer boys in rotation, who rise earlier thanthe others for this purpose.Each boy has a separate bed, except in the dormitories forthe youngest, where there are two in a bed, and of which a T^nurse has charge. In the other dormitories, one of the sub-assistantssleeps, or one of the elder boys has charge of thedormitory, and the assistant sleeps near.The clothing is similar to that at George Watson's. Theleather caps are, however, to be laid aside, and cloth ones substituted.Order of the Day, The order by which the distribution ofduties is regulated, presents peculiarities, in the succession of ^study and play, well worthy of attention. The following is forthe winter season. The pupils rise at seven ; from seven to halfpast, washing and dressing. Half past seven to eight, haveprayers. Eight to nine, school. Nine to quarter past nine,breakfast Quarter past nine to ten, play. Ten to half pasteleven, school. Half past eleven to twelve, play. Twelve toone, school One to half past one, dinner. Half past one tothree, play. Three to five, school. Five to six, play. Six toseven, school Seven to a quarter past seven, supper. Quarterpast seven to eight, play. Eight to half past eight, prayers.Half past eight to nine, wash and go to bed.The happy effect of the judicious variety in study and exertcalvin's hospital. 47case, and of the moral discipline of this institution, are provedby the cheerful character of its pupils, and their general healthand spirits. The hours of study in this plan are six and a half,and of play four and a half, during the day of fourteen hours,while at George Watson's they study nine hours, and evensometimes more.There is a vacation for about four weeks in the month of July,and the children may be visited once in three weeks by theirparents, for two hours at a time. The master here is confidentas to the bad effects of allowing the children to leave the institution,for the purpose of visiting parents or friends; in regard towhich, however, I have nothing new to remark.Calvin's HOSPITAL.This institution was founded in 1832, pursuant to the Will ofLewis Cauvin, a teacher of French, in Edinburgh; and is intendedfor the education and maintenance of the sons of teachersand farmers. As the founder was himself a teacher, and thewant of seminaries for teachers was most deeply felt in Scotland,the trustees of Cauvin's determined that the new institutionshould contribute, as far as practicable, to the supply of thiswant.The children enter between the ages of six and eight years,and nearly all those now in the institution have been there aboutfour years; the twenty pupils required to complete the foundation*having been admitted at once. It is not possible at thisearly date to draw a positive inference as to the success of theschool, and especially of its primary object. The character ofthe trustees may, however, be considered as a guarantee forthe first, and, in reference to the second, there are already indicationsthat three or four out of the twenty boys now in theestablishment will probably have a disposition for the professiontowards which it would incline them. It may beimportant to remark, that as these boys can only be at thecharge of the school until fourteen years of age, and as this isThe income is about five thousand dollars per annum.48 ELEEMOSYWARY Institutions.loo short a time to complete their education, those who aremost promising will perform their novitiate as teachers in thehospital, thus continuing their education, while they serve asinstructors to those younger than themselves.I shall recur to this topic, of the use of orphan schools asseminaries for teachers, in speaking of the Orphan-house ofHamburgh. Our country is one that especially calls for everyeffort to interest well educated young men to adopt a profession,the proper exercise of which is of such high importance toour future prospects and the permanency of our institutions.The implements of instruction in this establishment are betterthan in any other of the same kind which I saw in Scotland ;they have obtained the most approved maps, &c.,* from abroadas well as at home, and have already the rudiments of a collectionof natural history.I have appended certain documents, relating to the form ofapplication for admission to this school, (Appendix, No. Vi,)which may be useful for reference.LIVERPOOL BLUEXIOAT SCHOOL.This institution, in point of order and regularity, is one of thebest which I have seen; and, as a study of how far an establishmentmay be carried on by the force of routine, interestedme very much. At the time of my visit the head master wasabsent, and the boys' department was entirely under the chargeof a young teacher, formerly a pupil of the school. This circumstancewas very favourable for judging of the point towhich 1 have just referred. The arrangements have a militaryprecision about them which is very striking; and if the object ofa school were to perform, as much as possible, with verylimited means the organization of this one would serve as an• Tbeie collections were made under the direction of Professor Pillars, of theUniversity of Edinburgh, one of the trustees, and to whose influence is mainlydoe the direction given to trio studios of the youth in Cauvin's institution.t Each child costs for roaintonanco and instruction less than fifty dollars periMMiin. At the Orphan Hospital at Edinburgh, each costs between sixty-five andMVWUy dollars. At John Watson's one hundred and nineteen, and at Cauvin'stwo hundred and fray dollars.LIVERPOOL BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 49excellent model. Though successful in producing a considerableeffect upon the pupils in general, the means of individualeducation are to be found in the subsidiary arrangements of theschool, and not in its general system. In regard to instruction,it affords a good example of that division of the system of mutualinstruction which originated with Dr. Bell, whose preceptsand practice, as contained in his Manual, are mainly followed.While the Scotch schools which I have described have obviouslyborrowed something from each other in their arrangements,this institution is in a totally different sphere, both intellectualand religious.In the regulations, every case which has occurred, or whichhas been foreseen, of violation of discipline, or interference byparents, and the like, has been provided for by formal rules — aplan, the expediency of which I much doubt. The punishment ofoffences against morality may be provided for by general regulations,and cases of interference on the part of parents, by vestingdiscretionary power in some of the authorities of the institution.The regulations required by a contrary course, if read to theschool, must suggest many offences otherwise not thought of.In the progress of the institution, the decisions of cases actuallyoccurring will establish precedents which supply the place of amore formal code of rules. Power must be lodged somewhereand by investing chosen agents with it, the trustees of an institutionmay be almost certain that it will be exercised withknowledge, and the power of revision, on appeal, niust of rightbe theirs.History, Buildings, ^c. This institution was founded byvoluntary subscription, in 1708, and assumed something of itspresent form in 1717. It is intended to give education andmaintenance to destitute children, who have lost their parents,or whose parents have been reduced in life — these children tobe taken from those "above the lowest class in society."It is managed by a board of trustees,* whose executiveofficer is the treasurer, who, though an honorary officer, isThree of these gentlemen were formerly pupils in the institution.50 Eleemosynary institutions .nevertheless expected to attend both to the out and m-doormanagement. The head master is the chief within doors,and is assisted by a matron and female teachers for thegirls, and by three assistant masters for the boys. A surgeonand physician* are the only other officers. The assistantstake turns in superintending the boys when not in school,and seeing that they go through the routine of the day. Allattend in the refectory for the preservation of order, and to ascertainthat the wants of each pupil are duly supplied. Theyalso, in turn, attend the boys in their walks, and sleep in roomsadjoining to and having a view of the dormitories.All the boys' classes are united for instruction in one longroom, the whole being under the charge of the head masterand senior assistant, and each class being taught by its assistantmaster, or by the pupils appointed to act as teachers.Frequently the hearing of lessons is delegated to these pupil-teachers,the master having previously prepared the class byexplanations intended to remove difficulties from the way ofprivate study. At other times, the master hears the lesson himself,or is present when the pupil-teacher hears it, or goes overthe ground with the class, after the teacher has done whig part.A class is sometimes divided, the master taking one part andintrusting the other to the pupil-teacher, and then changing thedivisions. As the higher classes have respectively seventy,ninety, and forty members, it would be impossible for the master,alone, to instruct to any advantage. The youngest class,on the contrary, is quite small, and always in the hands of ajunior master. Although the system of mutual instruction,which was first applied by Doctor Bell is, in general, followed,it is, as may be inferred from the details above presented, in amodified form, with a considerable share of the personal attentionof the masters in teaching.The place of a pupil in the class depends upon the answerswhich he gives in the recitations, and upon his conduct, a fixed• On an average, in this institution, Utero arc four sick per week, in the wholeDumber of two hundred and fifty boys and one hundred girls, and one dies in theOMUMofUifMyean.LIVERPOOL BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 51system of rules being adopted in regard to every circumstanceM^hich can cause a change of place during a lesson. In thelower class, the places are registered every day, and the averageat the end of the quarter gives the standing. There is ageneral new classification of the school every quarter, and thosewho are fit for a higher class are then promoted. When, however,a pupil is remarkably superior to the rest of his class, he ispromoted without waiting for this term. The system of emulationthus adopted, is supposed to excite considerable diligence.It appeared to me to do so really on the part of a very few nearthe head of the class, who had the competition for honours beforethem ; but below the middle it did not produce any effectuntil towards the lower end, where its results were evidently bad.I found all the intelligent persons connected with this institutionso thoroughly convinced of the efficacy of the monitorialsystem, that I paused in drawing conclusions in regard to ituntil I had compared this school with others upon the same orasimilar system; it is, however, one of the best examples whichI saw of the Bell or Madras system, or, rather, of a modifiedform of it. The gentlemen above referred to are convincedthat the pupil-teachers are not only competent to give instruction,but that they frequently communicate it in a more intelligibleform than teachers who are further removed by age andknowledge from the boys ; that the emulation among the pupil-teachersof different classes induces their pupils to exert themselvesmore than if under the charge of the master, and thatthe pupil-teachers are sufficiently exact and impartial in administeringthe rules of discipline and instruction. I state theseopinions broadly, not wishing to conceal that the views ofothers, who have experience in the matter, are adverse to myown. I observed as closely as my opportunities would permit,here and elsewhere, and came to the conclusion that, in communicatingknowledge not merely mechanical, the pupil-teachersare generally at fault, that they fail to keep up the attentionof the pupils, and to preserve order among them, except in presenceof the master, and that they do not always deal impartiallyin administering the rules. It is true, that if a class52 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTltOTIO^S.of ninety is to be confided to one master, monitors may beusefully employed to prepare the pupils for him. A similarplan is pursued at the best school on the Bell system which Ihave seen, the Madras College at St. Andrew's, Scotland.Further than this, I do not believe that monitors can be usefullyemployed, and where the means of procuring a sufficientnumber of good teachers is not wanting, I would not at allrecommend the use of the monitorial system in imparting instruction.The branches taught in this Blue-coat School are in accordancewith the destination of the boys in after life. They consistof spelling, reading, writing, mental and written arithmetic,English grammar, geography, the history of England, elementsof astronomy, the catechism and religious doctrines of theChurch of England, and the singing of church music. A fewpupils receive instruction in geometry and music, and those whoshow a disposition to become teachers have the means of additionalstudy and of preparation, by being apprenticed as mastersin the school. The opportunity of drawing front engravingsis also furnished.Much time is devoted to the mechanical branches of generalinstruction, such as writing, making printed letters, and drawingmaps, 6z:c. More than nine hours per week are given up bythe eldest class to such objects, besides those devoted to printingin the evening. The pupils are so fully imbued with thedesire to succeed in these pursuits, that as an expedient to inducea preparation of the reading lessons, those only who haveread well are allowed to attend the writing exercises.It has been found advisable to vary the subjects of their readinglessons very considerably. Formerly the Bible was theonly book used for reading, and beside that the associationswith it as a text-book appeared not to be favourable to religiousimpressions, the pupils became so used to its phraseologyas not to be able to read understandingly other works, althoughthey could read this with tolerable fluency.*• This fact coined from a source above all suspicion.ILIVERPOOL BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 58The very useful exercise in the Madras system, in v^rhich thepupils question each other, is well carried out in this school;every boy thus must ask swell as answer questions. It, howsoever,offers considerable practical difficulty. Some hold backfrom diffidence, others from fear of showing ignorance by theirquestions, and others are incompetent to it from ignorance ofthe subjects.Moral and Religious Instruction, One of the things whichstruck me most on my first visit to this school, was the extensiveacquaintance with doctrinal religion which the boys of theeldest class manifested. My surprise was removed, however,on learning the method by which this result was obtained, andwhich consisted in devoting the morning hours of winter, andat other seasons when the weather did not invite to a walk, betweenrising and breakfast, to learning commentaries on thedoctrines of the Church of England, commencing in the fourthclass with the Catechism of the Church of England,* the collects,prayers, 6z:c.; continuing in the third class with theexplanation of the catechism; in the second, with committingto memory the chief doctrines of the church; in the first,with committing the references by which the doctrines aresupported. I felt bound to examine faithfully the questionwhether this was a mere intellectual effort, or whether theChristian truths thus inculcated made an impression upon thehearts of these children; and I regret to state that I was forcedto the conclusion that, in the greater number of cases, theheart was little affected by what the tongue repeated, and theintellect assented to, and this conclusion was in accordancewith the result of my inquiries. It is true that the seed thusplanted may lie hid to germinate in after life, and this, no doubt,sometimes occurs ; but, as a general rule, the measure is foundto be unproductive, as far as its immediate effects have beenobserved.There is no qualification as to the religious sect to which the parent orpupil belongs, in regard to admission; but he is required to conform, whenadmitted, to the forms of the Church of England.54 Eleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.The religious services in this school, on Sunday afternoon,are very remarkable for their order and decorum. The pupilsare marched into the room, and receive from the leaders oftheir divisions their books as they file off to their places. Theprayers are prepared for the school, and are read by one ofthe pupils, appointed as a mark of approbation. The singing,which is respectable, is accompanied by an organ played byone of the teachers. The psalms and hymns are given outalso by one of the boys. A monitor puts part of a classthrough the catechism. The services are thus from beginningto end carried on by the pupils, with the exception of the assistancein music by the master. The treasurer, and frequentlyothers of the trustees, attend these services, and the parents orfriends of the pupils are admitted on presenting a ticket fromthe treasurer.The rev^rards for good conduct are, the approbation of theteachers, permission to read the books in the school library, ofwhich there is a very judicious selection, offices of trust in theschool, and recommendations to situations after leaving theinstitution. In regard to the use of the library, which I founda very strong incentive in this school, I would offer a remark.When a judicious selection of childrens' books has been made,and it is found that there is no desire to read them, theinstruction is radically defective. Few children care to readwhat they do not understand, and, if taught merely mechanically,the books selected for their use will be unintelligible, andhence uninteresting to them. The amount of use, therefore, ofthe lending library, is a test of the thoroughness of the instruction,and of its being of the explanatory sort. There may, ofcourse, be exceptions to this rule, arising from the over-employmentof children at other work, by which they are preventedfrom using the books, and from other causes ; but I speak nowof the general rule, which I found most fully proved by numerousobservations.There are vacations of two weeks at mid-summer, and of awork at Christmas.No punishment other than the position in the class is appliedLIVERPOOL BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 55for not being on a par in recitation with others. For a somewhatserious offence, a boy is " put into Coventry," and hisclassmates, when seeing this badge of punishment, are notallowed to speak to him.* Corporal punishment is used, butthe rod is not habitually in sight as a motive to exertion.Immorality is punished by flogging, and, if not amended, byexpulsion.Physical Education, There are no regular gymnastic exercisesor amusements, but all the pupils are taken frequently towalk for exercise, and, during the course of the morning school,which lasts from nine to twelve, each class has, separately, afew minutes of recreation, being marched into the court-yard,under the charge of the monitors. The play-ground is notvery large, and is paved with round stones, and there is acovered way on one side for wet weather, an indispensable appendageto such an establishment: under this each boy has abox in which he may keep his ball and other play-things. Themenial duties of the house, and some of them in rotation, areperformed by the pupils; they serve the table, wait upon it,clean their shoes and clothes, make their beds, &c., and arenearly independent of the use of servants: in my opinion, aQadmirable regulation. One of the boys even acts as porter,which, as it is a responsible and profitable situation, ismade a reward for character, and is attended with certainperquisites, matters of custom in those countries, but inconsistentwith the ideas entertained in ours.The allowance of clothes, linen, &c., is the same as in theScottish institutions. Three shoemakers are constantly employedin making and mending shoes for the pupils. The girlsknit the boys' stockings, and make up their linen, and the mendingof clothes, &c., is done by persons residing in the house.The diet is very plain, but wholesome-f The entire cost ofthe food for each child is about forty cents per week, or lessThe use of any badge or mark of this sort is liable to the same objection asall other public punishments, upon which I have already remarked.t The cooking operations, commonly performed by boiling, are all done bysteam.56 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.than six cents a day. A table of diet is subjoined in the Appendix.The supper, consisting of cheese and bread, is distributedin the refectory, and taken to the school-room to beeaten, the water being previously drunk at the table ; a customwhich produces several inconveniences.The arrangements for washing are by no means convenient,the boys using the wash-room for this purpose morning andevening, and the hydrant in the yard after dinner and supper.They occupy two dormitories, overlooked by windows fromthe tutor's rooms. The bedsteads are of wrought iron, the mattressesof straw. Two boys occupy the same bed, a plan upon $which I have already commented.The pupils sometimes march to and from the refectory tothe sound of music, and a very tolerable band of fifers has beenformed from among the boys.HENSHAW's HOSPITAL, OR OLDHAM BLUE-COAT SCHOOL.As this institution is modelled upon that of Liverpool,* ofwhich I have spoken somewhat in detail, I shsj.ll offer merelya few remarks upon certain topics connected with it, whichseem to me of interest. The foundation results from the will ofMr. Thomas Henshaw,f a hatter, of Oldham, a manufacturingtown near Manchester, who left, in 1810, the sum of two hundredthousand dollars to endow a "Blue-coat School." Thisendowment now amounts to nearly four hundred thousanddollars, and the school has a revenue of near eleven thousandfive hundred dollars, for its support. By the will of thefounder, no part of this money was to go to erect a building forhis school, and if the town of Oldham did not raise the fundsfor that purpose, Manchester was to have the option to do so.The sum required for the building was, however, nearly allraised in the town of Oldham, and much of it among the workmenof the different manufactories, who clubbed together when• The head nuistcr was brought ap at that school.f ThU same charitable individual has also left a fund for the education of theIHENSHAW's HOSPITAL. 67their separate donations did not seem of sufficient amount to bepresented singly. The building, in the Elizabethan Gothicstyle, is now the pride of the citizens of Oldham, who haveerected it.The interior arrangements, of which I have procured theplans, are of unequal merit. Those connected with the diet,clothing, and cleanliness, are good.* The attempt to heat thehouse by the circulation of hot water has not proved successful.The school-room is covered with an arch, and the reverberationhas been so annoying as to render it necessary to hang itwith cloth. This is done in the compartments of the Gothicvaults, two pieces of cloth being stretched across at right anglesto the axis of the arch, and others intersecting each other, soas to form a St. Andrew's cross: the appearance is not bad,and the remedy is effectual.This institution was opened in 1834, when fifty boys were admittedbetween the ages of nine and ten. There are now (1836)two hundred boys, and the funds will probably support more thanthis number. The difficulties of organization were very great,owing to the late age of the pupils, and especially to the numberintroduced at the opening of the school. Nearly the whole timeof the head master has been, heretofore, so occupied in arrangingthe details of maintenance and discipline, that he has been able togive but little attention to the instruction, which, though the institutionhad been in operation upwards of two years when I visitedit, was by no means in the condition which he desired. Thesedifficulties must have been much lessened by the fact, that themodel of the Blue-coat School of Liverpool was followed asclosely as possible in all the arrangements; that the masterwas educated there, and had to apply his knowledge undervery similar circumstances. Notwithstanding this, the task hasbeen very great, and the lesson it teaches ought not to belost upon us. It was one of the examples which induced me toexpress myself strongly in regard to this point, when describingthe organization of John Watson's Hospital; the tenor of theAH those connected with the kitchen and laundry are very good, such assteaming-kettles, washing-machine, drying-closets, mangle, &c.58 ELEEMOSyNARY INSTITUTIONS.results being the same in these two cases. It is so difficult tounmake, that a preparatory system for the trial of a plan, bywhich the development may be gradual, and mistakes avoidedat the final organization, must be very desirable. The wish tobegin an institution on a scale commensurate with its futureentire organization, is a natural one, but it should yield to thelessons of experience, which have every where shown that asmall beginning is preferable. It is easy to train a few pupils,and those who follow are influenced by their example. In anovel undertaking, the teacher, though of well tried skillin a different school, requires also training in this. Finally, theregulations which work well elsewhere, may require modificationswhich experience only can point out. If legislation andcounter legislation would be avoided, the rules should be triedupon a scale which permits close observation of their results.The application of laws deduced from practice elsewhere, undernew circumstances, can only be guided by theory, and shouldbe considered as theoretical, and, therefore, the laws themselvescautiously introduced.LONDON ORPHAN ASYLUM AT CLAPTON.The Orphan Asylum at Clapton, near London, presents a setof rules so admirably arranged for the application of an ingenioussystem of rewards and punishments, that it deserves adetailed examination, which I must, however, preface by a fewremarks on the general arrangements of the institution.This Orphan Asylum is supported by voluntary contributions,and hence derives an income of about forty thousand dollars,upon which are maintained and educated between threeand four hundred children.* The immediate control of theinstitution is vested in a board of managers, elected at the generalannual meeting of the contributors. From this board ischosen a visiting or house-committee of twelve, who meetevery week at the asylum. They superintend the education• Actually three hundred and forty-gix in 1836, of whom about two hundredwv boy. The coat of each pupil for the year, including his maintenance and•duoatkm, waa nearly one hundred and even dollars.LONDON Orphans ASYLUM AT CLAPTON. 59and household affairs, examine the bills, &c. The charge ofsuch matters as belong to the female department, it does notform part of my purpose to notice. There are two secretaries,a treasurer, who is a salaried officer, and a collector. Thebuilding erected for this institution, the plans of which are submittedwith this Report, is highly convenient and quite ornamental.It consists of two wings and a retired centre, and the interiorarrangements are particularly good. The whole building issupplied with water by a steam-engine in the cellar, and whichis used, also, for some of the laundry work. The kitchen andlaundry arrangements are, in general, similar to those at Oldham,with the advantage of the use of the steam-engine.To be admitted to this Orphan Asylum a child must be fatherless,and between the ages of seven and eleven. The applicationfor admission must be signed by a subscriber, and accompaniedby certificates of birth, 6z;c., and by a certified statementof claims to admission. The child must be sound in body andmind; and, if any imposition is discovered in regard to any ofthe statements upon which it was admitted, is required to bewithdrawn. Two respectable housekeepers must become securitiesthat the child will be withdrawn, at any time, on the requisitionof the board of managers.Children who have been in the workhouse are not taken, exceptunder very peculiar circumstances. On the payment ofone hundred guineas into the funds, the board may receive, ifthey see fit, a child not belonging to the class for which theestablishment is particularly designed. The regular admissionsare decided by ballot, a printed form containing the names ofthe children, their claims, and other particulars, and a convenientmode of voting, being furnished to the stockholders, onapplication to the secretary.All the pupils leave the school when between thirteen and fourteenyears of age; and, in case of satisfactory deportment, theboard of managers very generally procure situations for them,with the consent of their friends, though they do not enter intoany obligation to do so. They give, at leaving, a certificate ofconduct, and, on examination, one of proficiency, and the childCO Eleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.is furnished with a suit of clothes, and other articles of wearingapparel, a Bible and prayer book, and printed advice on his conduct;receives a charge from one of the members of the board,and, in addition, may have presented to him the sum of fiftydollars. To keep up the connexion of the pupils with the institution,an annual meeting is held, for attendance at which eachone receives an honorarium, increasing in amount with the timeelapsed since he left the school. From these sums contributionsto the asylum are frequently made, for special objects, by theformer pupils thus assembled.The boys are not allowed to visit their friends, except in caseof the illness of the latter. They may receive visits betweentwo and half past four, P. M., on Wednesdays, and theirfriends who wish to pay such visits must apply at the secretary'soffice for a ticket, which is given, in general, but once aquarter. The house is opened to strangers on Monday, betweeneleven, A. M., and five, P. M., on presenting a ticketfrom a manager.The officers for education and police are, a master andchaplain, the offices being, at the present time, united in thesame person;* assistant masters, a matron, and a mistress for thegirls. Besides the house-servants, who are females, there is agardener, who acts as porter.The master is principal of the establishment, of which he hasthe entire superintendence, under the house-committee. Hegives all the religious instruction, and also teaches, in part, thehigher classes in other subjects. He is responsible for the dueexecution of the plans matured by the board. The assistantsare directly under his control, and he has a vote on their appointment,to enable him to exercise which with due care, they arenot permanently attached until after a three months' probation.He reports monthly on the state of the school.The matron is a housekeeper to both departments, hires theservants deemed necessary by the committee, superintends thewhole domestic economy, receives the stores, and is responsibleThe Rev. Mr. Heath.LONDON ORPHAN ASYLUM AT CLAPTON. 61for them. A table is spread in her room, at dinner and supper,for the mistress of the girls' department and the assistants.She is the keeper of all the keys, when not required by themasters.The assistants not only give instruction, but attend the boysat rising .and washing in the morning, at prayers, meals, recreation,washing in the evening, and going to bed, performing theseduties in rotation. There is, notwithstanding, no appearanceof that family feeling which might be expected to grow out ofsuch an intercourse; probably from the tendency of the regulationspresently to be detailed to introduce different feelings.The order of the day in the institution is as follows: The pupilsrise at six in summer, and seven in winter. Bedsideprayers, washing, muster and inspection, occupy until seven insummer, (eight in winter.) At seven there is school, in summer.At eight, breakfast. Play until nine. At nine, publicprayers. From twenty minutes past nine to half past twelve,school. At one, dinner, and play until two. At two, schooluntil half past four. Prayers and play until half past six.Supper and play until half past seven. Muster, washing, bedsideprayers, and retiring at eight. In summer they may be keptup until half past eight. They have thus, during one part of theyear, six hours and a-half of school daily, and about four hoursof play. There are a few regular holidays in the year, andJuly and August may be vacations for a part of the masters.There are two excursions annually, made under the chargeof some of the trustees or masters, by those boys who havemerited indulgences.The subjects of instruction are those belonging to what isunderstood by a plain English education, entirely adapted tothe age at which the boys must leave the school, and the systemof teaching is a modified form of Dr. Bell's method.The diet is plain and wholesome. An abstract of the diet-tablesof this and other institutions will be found in the Appendix,No. VII. The clothing is good in quality, and sufficient in quantity,and is admirably preserved under the charge of the excellentmatron of the establishment. Rooms are appropriated for the62 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS*clothes in use, and they are served out by the boys who havecharge of divisions. The cleanliness is superintended by anurse, who is under the charge of the matron. The continuanceof female superintendence over the elder boys seems tomeobjectionable.Besides the ordinary sports of youth, which an ample playgroundattached to the buildings admits, the pupils have a speciesof gymnastic exercise, from half an hour to an hour daily,out of doors when the weather permits, and in doors at othertimes. The in-door exercises are calculated to give moderateplay to the different parts of the body, and in this respect arebetter adapted than more violent ones, to the true purpose ofgymnastics for ordinary life. For youth, I much prefer an extensionof their ordinary sports, when out-door exercise is possible,especially if regulated according to principle, to the violentexercises which are commonly adopted in the systems of gymnastics.I am satisfied that a skilful physician would, byobservation, produce something much more adapted to the inclinationsof our boys, than the very artificial system of gymnasticexercises ; which has, I believe, never permanently succeededin any institution either in this country or in England.This account is sufficient to give a general idea of the institution,and I now proceed to a description of its peculiar planof education, before alluded to, in reference to rewards andpunishments.There are two tables of rewards, the one for petty, the other \for great merits. These classes of merits are compensated, thefirst by rewards in money according to a system, and in aschool currency, the second by gifts made at the public examination.Among great merits are considered all cases of voluntary,patient, and persevering labour by a child, whether inthe business of the school, or in occupation of his own selection.Corresponding to these are two tables of punishments, for pettyand great offences, which are visited, the first by fines, and thesecond by flogging or solitary confinement.The ordinary rewards are bestowed, and fines levied in aschool currency of tokens, bearing the designation of one, ten,IILONDON ORPHAN ASYLUM AT CLAPTON. 63and twenty mark pieces respectively, and of which ten marksare reckoned at the value of a penny sterling, (two cents.) Anaccount of the issues and receipts of them is kept to preventbarter, and as an index of the general conduct of the school.All cases of exemplary punishment are entered into the master'sbook. When any pupil has obtained a certain number of marks,he is entitled to present himself before the house-committee, ata monthly meeting, to receive their value in money. As meansof using this money are provided — first, a library, to which thosewho subscribe a penny a month have access, a right to recommenda book for purchase to the master and secretaries of theinstitution, and a voice in the choice of a boy as treasurer andlibrarian. The school currency is not received in payment ofthis subscription. Second, a small shop kept by one of the boys,selected by his fellows for that purpose, at which are sold, atprime cost, articles of stationary, books, useful toys, and materialsfor drawing and mechanical pursuits. Third, a shop keptby the wife of the porter, where fruit, cakes, &c., are sold.Those children, on the contrary, who are fined beyond themarks which they have received as rewards, are considered asdefaulters, and must by extra work recover their solvency.While defaulters, they can neither hold office among their fellowsnor vote for officers.The boys who have been one entire school year without insolvency,or suffering any of the higher punishments, are consideredas " free bOys ;" they alone are eligible to trusts, andmay be candidates for honorary medals. They are, further, entitledto make two excursions a year, with one of the house-committeeor one of their teachers. If a boy have lost hisfreedom," he may regain it by six months of solvency and exemptionfrom high punishment.Those who for a year have been remarkable for diligenceand good conduct, receive a " student's medal," and those whohave held important offices, and discharged their duty to thesatisfaction of the masters, receive a high honorary medal,which they wear, unless degraded.The whole school is classified in the order of conduct eachfd Eleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.month, and the list presented to the house-committee. This listis suspended in the school-room, two days before its presentation,that any boy may have an opportunity to appeal to themaster, if he thinks himself improperly rated. For their government,vi^hen not in school, the boys elect half yearly a prefectand sub-prefects. These latter have charge each of nine boys,whom they select in turn, forming thus a squad of ten, or dead.The master has in this, as in all other cases of selection of officers,a veto upon the choice made by the pupils. These and otherofficers of the school are rewarded for the performance of theirduties, and punished for non-performance, the fines for neglectand rewards for the discharge of duty being in proportion tothe importance of their office. A part of the morning of everySaturday is devoted to the making up of accounts, reports, andsimilar matters.No pupil is allowed to leave the establishment without an examinationby the house-committee into his conduct and progress,which, if satisfactory, entitles him to a certificate. A monthbefore leaving the school, the claims of a pupil to have his nameinscribed on the " table of honour," are decided by his fellows,who may petition the master on the subject; and if he countersigntheir petition, it is presented to the house-committee. Theannual meeting of the children, both in and out of the house,has been already alluded to.Many of these rules may appear trivial to some persons whoare in the habit of treating as " boys' play" the occupations ofchildren, but to those who see future citizens in their pupils, Iam sure the details will not appear irrelevant. It should neverbe forgotten, that the basis of our institution is an elementaryschool, and that if this basis is unsound, we shall in vain work atthe College, which is its superstructure; we shall in vain try toproduce good citizens, intelligent tradesmen, mechanics, teachers,engineers, navigators, merchants, or scholars, unless wehave rightly trained the children, who by a wise provision inthe Will of our founder, are to bo early placed under the protectionof his institution.Of those who view the matter seriously, many object to theLONDON BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 65introduction of pecuniary rewards at all in a school. I tried, asfar as my opportunities would permit, and with the adVantageof a free communication with the amiable master, with hisfirst assistant, and others, to ascertain whether any permanentbad effects had shown themselves, but I could not learn thatsuch had been the case, or that these boys appeared more sordidor avaricious than children generally. In regard to thegeneral effect of the regulations it is certainly good, for theboys are cheerful and healthy, gay and well disposed in theplay-ground, with great docility and a reasonable degree ofquickness in the class-room. Of course much of this dependsupon the judicious manner in which the rules are executed,but if they were radically defective, the results must have indicatedthe fact I believe that the system of family discipline,duly carried out, would produce even better results, but such aplan is incompatible with a limited expenditure, from the numberand character of the agents which it requires. Upon thispoint, however, I have elsewhere already insisted, and if acomparison is to be drawn between the system pursued atLiverpool and the one just described, I should give this thepreference.CHRIST'S HOSPITAL, OR BLUE-COAT SCHOOL, LONDON.This is the oldest and most wealthy of all the institutions inGreat Britain having a similar object, and it is the one whichgives the most distinguished of its scholars, after leaving itswalls, the best opportunities of rising to the stations which theirtalents warrant. We have seen that a few of the Heriot's boyswere sent to the university, but, in Christ's Hospital there is asystematic selection of a number of pupils for the English universities,where success is sure to lay the foundation of futureprosperity. Though this school is not characterized by thepractical turn which must distinguish the Girard College, yet,from the age to which a part of its pupils are retained, and thedegree to which its studies are carried, it will afford instructivematter of examination. The great scale of the institution, somuch beyond any other in Great Britain, and, indeed, in the66 ELEEMOSYWARY INSTlTUTIQlfS.world, rendered my visits to it very interesting, and the acquaintanceformed vv^ith its intelligent masters and officers,*was a source of great personal gratification.History and Building, Christ's Hospital was founded in1552, by King Edward the Sixth, and was opened in the oldmonastery of Greyfriars, which had been given by Henry theEighth to the City of London, for the use of the poor. Itseems that from near the period of its foundation one object ofthe institution was its use as a classical or grammar school,though to what extent it served this purpose does not clearlyappear. In 1577 the Writing School, so called, was formed tosupply great defects in the English education of the pupils, andin 1673 the Mathematical School was established by Charles theSecond, for the education of officers for the naval and merchantservices, by special instruction in mathematics, navigation,and the kindred branches. In 1676 originated the PreparatoryEstablishment for young children now at Hertford; andthus were completed, within about a century from the foundationof the school, the four establishments of which it may beconsidered as at present composed. The number of governorsof Christ's Hospital now amounts to four hundred and twenty,including, as ex-officio members, the lord mayor, aldermen, andcouncil of the city of London. Of these governors a standingcommittee of forty has the general charge of the affairs,being responsible to the general board, which meets six timesyearly.-f-The capital is invested chiefly in landed or funded property,the latter being the most productive. The income for the year1836, deducting moneys paid for stocks and passed to the buildingfund, amounted to the enormous sum of three hundred and- thirty three thousand dollars, by no means all of which, however,was absorbed by the current expenses, and these are so• I WM indebted to William Vaughan, Esq., of London, for an introduction tothu institution, which opened every avenue to information in respect to it.f In lb3Q tlicre were in trio Hospital at London and the Preparatory Establishmentat Hertford. Uiirtecn hundred and thirty-seven children's 1833, thirteenbuodrod and tliirty.five.LOITDOPr BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 67various in kind, that they cannot all properly be chargedagainst the education and maintenance of the pupils. Thereare between thirteen and fourteen hundred children on thecharity, the average maintenance of each of whom costs a littleover one hundred and ten dollars, and including all expensesexcept the management of estates, &c., about one hundred andninety dollars. The buildings of the institution at London have,in later years, undergone thorough repairs ; new ones, in aGothic style, resembling the older ones, have been erected,and the assemblage is now one of the most imposing to befound connected with any similar establishment in the world.They are still constantly undergoing alterations upon a regularplan, and thus a steady improvement in this respect is secured.The large dining-hall, with the offices below, the writing-school,and the mathematical school, are beautiful specimens of architecture,and admirably suited to their uses. The cloisters,which form the sides of a part of the building, and whichconnect others, are excellent places of play for wet weather.The kitchen, large lavatory,* and other offices deserve examination.General Government. The chief executive officer is the treasurer,!who not only manages the estates, but has the controlof the institution, and is, in fact, its presiding officer. He is amember of the board of governors, is chairman of all committees,and when the committee of forty are not in session, hasdiscretionary power of action. He is allowed a deputy, calleda receiver, and a clerk.The standing committee of forty regulate all contracts, andthe bills on articles thus purchased are paid by the treasurer orreceiver. Other bills require the signature of three of a committeeof auditors consisting of twelve members, of whom sixare from the larger committee, and six from the general board.All these parts of this, and the Orphan Asylum at Clapton, were carefullyvisited in my company by our architect, T. U. Walter, Esq., which rendersfurther details from me unnecessary.t Now J. H. Pigeon, Esq., who gave me every facility for visiting the institution.68 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.The officers render accounts once a month to the committeeof forty, and the cash book is submitted to their examination.The salaries, including those of the masters, steward, beadles,&c., are paid quarterly, at the counting-house within theHospital enclosure, by the treasurer. The house-servants(females,) are paid by the matron. The out-door servantsand labourers, by the receiver, monthly. The steward receivesmonthly £100 in advance for petty expenses, for whichhe accounts. To transact the business of the counting-house,the following officers are required : — 1st. A chief clerk, whoconducts all correspondence, attends meetings of committeesand of the board, (called courts,) &c. 2d. A receiver, who isthe treasurer's deputy, and assists the clerk as secretary at themeetings of committees. 3d. A wardrobe-keeper and chief assistantclerk, who, under contracts made by the committee, inspects,receives, and delivers all apparel, and assists in thecounting-house. 4th. Two other assistant clerks, who are selectedfrom among the pupils of the school. 5th. Two messengers.All articles required for the establishment, exceptprovisions, are received at this counting-house, and drawn outon orders from those who superintend their use.Besides the officers connected with the estates, are a solicitor,and a surveyor, who is also the architect, and who has his officewithin the buildings. All the officers hold their appointmentsat the will of the governors, and the treasurer has the power ofsuspending any one of them, reporting the case to the committee.Besides the servants already mentioned, are a porter for thefront gate, a gate-keeper for the private entrance, who also attendsto the lamps in the courts, two watchmen, a cook, whois required to keep two servants to assist her, labourers to lightfires, bring water, &c. The porter is expected to attend tothe fire-engine and plugs, and to be responsible for their goodorder. To be sure that the watchmen are on the alert at everyhour of the night, the following ingenious plan is adopted. Adial-plate moved by a clock, presents a number of holes correspondingto the hours, each of which passes in turn before anLONDON BLUE-coat SCHOOL. 69opening in the clock-case ; a pin is required to be inserted intoone of these holes, which can only be done at or near the propertime; and if omitted, the want of vigilance is detected.Admission ^c. The presentations of candidates for admissionare made in the meetings of the governors, each member of theboard having a right of nomination in turn. The cases arethen discussed and Voted upon. There is no precise limit setby law to the income of a parent which would exclude hischild, but each case is separately considered.* There is alsono qualification as to previous instruction. The age of admissionis between six and ten, the same fixed upon by Mr. Girardfor the admission of orphans into his college. There is noobligation on the governors either to bind out the children whoare to enter their apprenticeship when they leave the institution,or to maintain them in any way; there are, however, variousbenefactions, which have been placed at the disposal of theboard for such purpose by different benevolent individuals.The boys of the mathematical school are appointed in thenavy, or apprenticed in the merchant service, and the most distinguishedpupils of the grammar school have various scholarshipsopen to them at the universities.Intellectual Education, Various changes have been made inthe instruction at different times since the foundation of theinstitution, to bring it more nearly in unison with the generalcondition of education of the day. It is not necessary to detailthese alterations, but merely to give some account of the presentstate of the schools The objects of the education heremay be considered as threefold. First, to fit boys for trades ormercantile pursuits; these pupils leaving the institution at aboutfourteen years of age. Second, to fit boys for the naval ormerchant service; these pupils having a special course in theI was informed that an income of fifteen hundred dollars (iJSOO) per annumhad been ruled to exclude from the school the child of a father possessing it, unlesshe had a large family.t At one period in the history of the school, the pupils studied but one branchat a time, and this depending upon their age ! showing the strange ideas of intellectualculture then prevailing.70 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.mathematical school, and leaving the institution at the age ofsixteen. Third, to fit a chosen few for the universities; thesedevote themselves to classics, mainly complete their instructionin the upper grammar school, and leave the institution at abouteighteen or nineteen. The preliminary school at Hertford isthe nursery of the establishment, and from it, as vacancies occur,the pupils are transferred to the London house. It is expectedthat previous to this transfer, the boys have acquiredsome knowledge of English, of arithmetic, and of the rudimentsof Latin. On arriving at the London school, they join one oftwo great divisions which are equal in standing, and one ofwhich attends the grammar school in the morning and the writingschool in the afternoon, the other alternating with the first,and the time of attendance being changed every alternate week.The grammar school is divided into two departments, calledthe upper and lower schools, each containing three classes,those of the lower school designated as the junior, middle, andupper classes, and of the upper school as great Erasmus,deputy Grecians, and Grecians. The head master* has thespecial charge of the upper school, giving instruction personallyto its two higher classes, and superintends the lower school,which he examines every six months. All these classes alternatein their attendance at the grammar and writing schools,except the deputy Grecians and Grecians, who attend the mathematicalschool for three hours on two afternoons of theweek. The lower school is directly under the charge of twomasters, who use the same books and pursue the same generalcourse, and who are in part assisted by monitors from the upperschool. The instruction consists of spelling, English reading,grammar, geography, Latin and Greek rudiments, and an introductionto the church catechism. The classical lessons areLatin or Greek grammar, construing and parsing, and exercises.In the writing school these same boys are taught writing,arithmetic, book-keeping, the drawing of invoices, and allmatters intended to fit them specially for the counting-house, and• At pTMont tha Rev. Mr. Rice, to whose politcneaii I was much indebted.LONDON BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 71writing from dictation is added to improve their orthography.There are two masters and two ushers for this school.Twenty of these boys may, also, attend a lesson in drawingonce a week, but as the hour fixed for the purpose is at presentduring the time of "half holiday," but little use is made of theprivilege.The pupils of the lower grammar school are carried thus asfar as the Heriot's and George Watson's boys of Edinburgh,and the greater number of them have arrived at the age whenthey leave the institution to be apprenticed to trades and similaroccupations. The courses of instruction here are more concentrated,and in those just named of Edinburgh, include moreuseful branches. Both are liable to the objection that muchtime is spent upon matters which are not pursued far enoughto secure the mental culture which would otherwise resultfrom them, and yet which have no bearing upon the futureoccupations of the pupils. In reply to this objection, it maybesaid, that it is impossible to discriminate between boysat this early age, and to discern who have the aptitude for athorough training by languages, or who will make the futureGrecians of the school. That it is difficult may be freely admitted,but that it is impossible I do not believe. With the resourcesof an institution like Christ's Hospital, the number ofteachers may be so far multiplied as to permit an accuratestudy and appreciation of the actual talents of a youth, and towatch the progress of their development; on the average, theappreciation would be just, and remedies for cases of erroror of late development are easily provided. But, if we supposethe discrimination impossible, and that all must receive, up tothirteen or fourteen years of age, an education to prepare themfor the business of life, in a lower occupation, or one introductoryto higher studies — with which individual will the case be theharder? With him who, having received the lower kind of instruction,has the talent to push himself into the higher studies,and who, besides, remains at the institution for several yearsfor this purpose, or with him who is at once to enter an apprenticeshipto a trade without having acquired the necessary in-72 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.formation introductory to his career? Obviously the latter individualwill find his position the more difficult one. But we arenot left to such a comparison in this particular instance, forthere are less than seventy cases in which the studies may beclaimed to prepare for the pursuits of the youth, to more thanthree hundred of the opposite character. Where the numbersstand thus, I do not conceive that there should be any hesitationas to the course to be pursued.My first position, that it is practicable so to arrange an institutionthat superior talent shall receive full opportunities for itscultivation, without sacrificing inferior talent by inappropriateinstruction, is fully borne out by the experience of some of theorphan schools of Germany and Holland, which I shall hereafterdescribe. My excuse for so often recurring to this subject,must be found in the fact, that this question must be decided forthe Girard College by its Trustees, and I am, therefore, mostanxious in regard to it. I return to the course of the descriptionof Christ's Hospital, thus interrupted, and resume the considerationof the arrangements of the grammar school, withthe lower class of the upper school.The boys of the great Erasmus class are pushed forward inthe classical studies, being those from among whom the deputyGrecians are selected. In Latin they read parts of Sallust,Ovid's Epistles, and Virgil, and in Greek of the Diatessaron andof Xenophon's Anabasis. During the last half year of the course,the pupils who Jive no expectation of promotion drop off, andare apprenticed by their parents or friends to surgeons, solicitors,&c. There are from twenty to thirty-five pupil usuallyin this class, and their average age is about fifteen years.The deputy Grecians are, during nearly half the time spentin the grammar school, under the charge of the head master,and study the following authors and books: — In Latin, Virgil'saeneid, Ovid's Epistles, Horace, selected orations of Cicero,Terence, Valpy's Exercises, Elegant Lat., part second. Kenrick'sAbridgment of Zumpt's Latin Grammar, Edward's LatinLyrics and Elegiac, Latin and English versification. Portionsof Horace and Ovid are learned by heart, and themes are writ-londonBLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 73ten. In Greek, Scriptures Graeca, Homer, Demosthenes, Edwards'Abridgment of Matthias's Greek Grammar, Huntingdon'sExercises. Portions of Homer are committed to memory. InHebrew, the grammar. In English, Butler's Geography, HistoricalCatechism, English Poetry. An English theme, and practicein versification, alternate with the corresponding exercisesin Latin. There are ordinarily from eighteen to twenty in thisclass, some of whom are promoted to the next higher, and othersare withdrawn by their friends to begin the study of a profession,or, having completed their preparatory studies by the sameassistance, enter the universities by successful competition forsome open scholarship, or at the expense of their friends.The Grecians pursue the studies necessary for admission tothe universities, and as one of the scholarships belonging to thehospital, or to which the Christ's Hospital boys have the preference,at either university, becomes vacant, the eldest memberof the class is promoted, his place being filled from the mostpromising of the deputy Grecians. Two vacancies at Cambridgeevery year, and one at Oxford every fourth year, are thus supplied.There are usually seven or eight members in the classof Grecians, which, by the arrangements just stated, must containpupils in various states of progress, and usually of differentages, some of them having reached eighteen and even twentyyears of age. The class is principally under the immediatecharge of the head master, and their course of classical studiesis very extensive. As already stated, they receive instruction inmathematics for three hours, on two afternoons of every week.Their studies in the grammar school are, in Latin, Livy, Horace,and Juvenal, alternately, Cicero, Tusc. Dispute., and de Nat. Decorum,Pitman's Excerpt. ex Var. Rom. Poet., Kenrick's Exerciseson Zumpt's Latin Grammar, Edward's Exercises on LatinLyrics, and translations into Latin Elegiac and Lyrics, frequentexercise in Latin and English versification and declamation,learning by heart portions of Horace, Juvenal, and Virgil's Georgic.In Greek, Dalzell's Analecta Majora, vols. 1 and 2, Herodotus,Thucydides, Barker's Selected Orations of Demosthenes,Homer's Iliad, Aristophanes, Kenrick's Greek Exercises, part ELEEMOSYNARY IlfSTlTUTIOWS.cont, Buttmann*s Grammar, Greek prosody and versificationWatson's Exercises in Greek Iambics, the translation of Greekinto Latin and vice versa, the Greek Testament. In Hebrew,the grammar and part of the Psalter.The sons of officers of the navy, and others v^^ho have beenelected to the foundation, are placed in the mathematical schoolafter they have attained the necessary knowledge of Englishand arithmetic, and have been until about fifteen years of agein the grammar and writing schools. Here the studies are entirelymathematical, embracing such applications as are essentialto navigation. Formerly, instruments were in possession ofthe institution for exercise in practical astronomy, and even anobservatory was attached to the buildings ; but I believe nothingof this kind now exists. These boys attend a drawing mastertwo afternoons in the week, and their places are occupied bythe Grecians and deputy Grecians.Twice a year the different scholastic departments are examined,viz. in May and November. The examination isnot conducted by the masters, but by gentlemen unconnectedwith the institution, appointed for that purpose, and whoreport to the governors. Prizes are given in the writingschool, to the boys most proficient in writing, arithmetic, anddrawing, and specimens of the writing of all the boys are postedfor inspection. This plan of examining by persons not connectedwith a school, prevails in many public establishments,both in England and on the continent of Europe. It is supposedto insure at once impartial dealing towards the pupils, withwhom the examiner in general has no acquaintance, and a fairreport of the character of the instruction, and was the means, atoneperiod, of rectifying very great abuses in the mathematicalschool of Christ's Hospital. Examinations are too apt to degenerateinto a show, if public, without some such precaution,especially if viva voce, and yet the method above referred tois liable to serious objections. Besides these examinations, everyboy who has attained the age of thirteen is examined in spellingand reading English.The masters of this establishment have in general a right toLondon BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 75receive each six private pupils, to be educated with the boys ofthe house; this is a privilege conferred with a view to increasetheir stipends, which are not considered adequate.The vacations are eighteen days at Easter, four weeks inAugust, and fifteen days at Christmas, Sundays inclusive. Besidethis, the afternoons of Saturdays are holidays, and Wednesdayis alternately a whole and half-holiday. Those boys whosefriends wish them to spend the August holidays out of Londonwith them, may be permitted to do so; an indulgence formerlygranted but once in three years, but now annually. On suchoccasions they are required not to appear in the city. Thosewho remain in the hospital during August, have permissionto visit their friends in London three days in every week,unless stopped for punishment's sake. On certain other holidays,all the pupils are allowed to leave the enclosure, and on thehalf-holidays those boys who have deserved reward are permittedto leave the institution, returning by an appointed hourin the evening. On these occasions they must wear the uniformof the school, a precaution adopted, partly as insuring thegood conduct of the pupil, and partly his safety, from the favourableregard of the public towards the institution. During mystay in London I frequently met these boys in the streets, andnever saw one misbehaving, and certainly believe that theirpeculiar costume insures them protection, attracting much attentionfrom its antique appearance even in that crowded metropolis.To prevent absence without leave, the gates are observedby certain elder boys, who receive tickets of leave to gobeyond the bounds as a reward for the discharge of their weeklyoffice. A bell is also rung by the steward at irregular times, tocall all together, and detect absentees.The boys receive lessons in singing, but only to prepare themto take part in church music.There are two libraries which may be consulted under properregulations; one, of English and classical works, in theupper grammar school, is intended for the boys of that school,and is placed in the Grecians' parlour. The second is of7© ELEEMOSYNARY Institutions.entertaining books, and is under the same control The booksare furnished by the governors on the requisition of the headmaster.Moral and Religious Instruction and Discipline, We haveseen that the instruction in church catechism by the mastersis one part of the school duties; the reading of the Bible, singingof psalms, graces, &c., and attendance at Sunday worshipare other means of religious instruction, and are very regularlyattended to. On Sunday a Bible lesson is learned, and the boysare questioned upon it by the monitors, and the head masterreads a lecture after supper. Every night prayers are read inthe hall by one of the Grecians, and a psalm is sung, afterwhich a monitor reads a short prayer in the wards before theboys retire to bed.The discipline in the school-room varies, of course, with theinstructor, but is in all reasonably good. Corporal punishment issparingly resorted to, and the opinion of the head master, whohas had much experience in the concerns of the institution, wasvery unfavourable to its frequent use, as tending to harden thecharacter of the boys, and to render them less tractable andwell disposed towards their masters and others. Out of doorsthe pupils* are superintended by the steward, who has under hischarge four servants, called beadles, who attend in the differentcourts, and report infraction of regulations. The older recordsshow that the boys were in former times in the habitof very rough conduct in their intercourse with each other.This is much modified at present, but struck me as still admittingof improvement. On this point I may be fastidious,but 1 believe that the Christian law of love is not to be lostsight of in school, if we would have it practised in society,and that independence of character is by no means inconsistentwith kindness in intercourse. The system of fagging whichprevails at one of the principal English grammar schools whichI visited, and exists in many others, is not allowed here, andthe younger boys are not subjected thus to the tyranny of theelder ones. Those boys who are selected for trusts in the dor-londonBLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 77miseries and in school, are chosen for good character, their selectionbeing entirely at the master's option, and when they offendthey may be displaced by the same authority. In the schoolthe eye of the teacher is upon the monitors, and in the dormitoriesthe authority of the nurse is at hand to control them, sothat abuse of their delegated power is difficult. At meals,the boys are superintended by the steward and matron, andcertain Grecians.The monitors are selected by the steward, with the adviceof the teachers, from among the boys who are highest in theclasses of the grammar and writing schools. Besides thisclass, whose duties in and out of school hours have been stated,there is another class of boys, called " markers," selected bythe head master of the grammar school, and solely in referenceto their rank in that school, to hear the lessons of catechismand Sunday reading. These wear a badge, which they areallowed to preserve on leaving the school. The two situationsare not incompatible.The nurse and ward monitors are responsible for proper conductduring washing in the morning and evening. Each hasaward in charge, containing from fifty to sixty boys, and hascontrol over the servants of the ward. There are two specialnurses for the infirmary. The apartments of the nurse* are atthe end of the ward, and look into it. She is responsible for thegeneral order of the ward, has charge of the mending, of distributingclean clothes, &c., which she does through the wardmonitor. When any of the pupils are unwell, she takes them tothe infirmary, or reports them to the physician. She reports thenumber who are well each day to the steward for meals. Thissuperintendence by females struck me as strange, since some ofthe boys are quite well grown, and the Grecians, who occupya part of the ward, are young men, frequently nearly nineteenyears of age. The singularity of the arrangement, however,disappears, in great part, when it is considered that the sameThe rules prescribe that the nurses shall be widows, and above forty yearsof age.78 Eleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.nurse always has charge of a boy, from his early entrance intothe institution until he leaves it, and hence becomes as a motherto him; and, in fact, some have actually their ovi^n childrenamong the pupils of the ward. Admitting that care is requiredin the selection of the nurses, I must say that neither from observationnor inquiry could I learn that in this institution thearrangement was productive of difficulties. This was not, however,the case in another school which I visited, where the selectionhad been less judicious, and where the discipline wasrather relaxed. The nurses are assisted in their wards by theward monitors, and superintended by the matron and steward.They are present at the prayers said on rising and going tobed. The servants of the wards are named, paid, and may bedischarged by them.Corporal punishment is discouraged out of school as well asin it. A few boys may be indulged by sitting up after theothers, as a reward for good conduct, but none can be up laterthan a quarter before ten o'clock. The Grecians have the privilegeof sitting up until ten o'clock.It might naturally be supposed that, in so large an institutionas this, having within its enclosure between seven and eight hundredyouths, one would find an exact code of rules and regulationsfor discipline. But such is not the case, nor do they seem tofeel the want of it. The discretionary power vested in the differentofficers works without rules. General verbal instructionsare given to the inferior officers by their superiors, butthe usages of the school have passed into a common law, wellunderstood by both the pupils and officers.A well regulated gradation of privileges, constituting a gradualassumption of the entire responsibility of his conduct bythe pupil is, in my opinion, essential to the success of an institutionwhich aims at preparing youth for the business of life.The want of it is the cause, no doubt, why so many fall awayfrom rectitude on issuing from these recluse establishments, andfinding themselves in entirely novel circumstances. Partial attemptshave been made, in some schools, to remedy this difficulty; for example, at the Orphan-house of Halle, the pupil has anLONDON BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 79allowance in money for the purchase of his breakfast, that hemay learn to dispose of money on his own account. At Hamburgh,the pupils are sent of errands into the city, to becomefamiliar with its localities and the manners of the people. Inone of the grammar schools of Holland, a similar idea is appliedto a gradation of instruction between the hourly responsibilityof the pupil of an ordinary school, and the entire freedomof the member of a university; and a plan in part resemblingthis has been adopted at Geneva, in their more recentarrangements for higher education. In this institution themonitors and markers have privileges, but the Grecians arethose who are pre-eminently favoured. They receive each fiftydollars a year to dispose of, and each one has a study, and abed separated by a curtain from others in the dormitories.They have a parlour in common, a superior table, and a dressdiffering somewhat from that of the other pupils; retire at differenthours from the others, are allowed to leave the premisesduring the day, except in school hours ; assist in keeping orderwithin doors, being superior to the monitors, and aid the mastersin school. These arrangements, as far as they extend,are highly judicious, and productive of good results.Physical Education. The health of these boys appears, ingeneral, remarkably good, and their physical developmenteven above the average. They are not overburthened with indoorwork, and are kept as much as possible in the open air.Their play-ground, however, is rather limited in extent, and theirsports are, in consequence, not of the most athletic kind. Thefrequent opportunities of leaving the enclosure remedy this defectin part, and their cloisters give them great advantagesover boys who have no covered play-ground, especially in sohumid a climate as that of England. While at play, they aresuperintended by beadles, of whom there are four, one havingcharge of each court. The beadles also superintend the boysat rising and washing, and one of them has charge of the smallgate, which is commonly open, and prevents any pupil fromegress without a pass. This only applies to the younger pupils,the Grecians, as already stated, having free egress except durstEleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.ing school hours and after night The steward, besides his dutiesalready generally mentioned, is responsible for the conduct ofthe boys while at play and at meals; no boy can be absentfrom meals without his authority, and he may punish by confinementto bounds or to the room any infringements of goodorder. He regulates not only the receipts, but the delivery ofprovisions, in which offices he is assisted by boys detailed forthe purpose. The pupils, under his direction, receive the provisions,and serve and clear the tables. Some of these officesare rewards, and carry with them small gratifications in theway of leaves to be absent from bounds, &c., others are punishmentsfor faults committed. The diet is plain, but wholesome;the mode of serving the table, the utensils, &c., are, however,antique in the extreme. The matron sends the portions for theirtables to the nurses, who distribute to the boys and one of theGrecians, or deputy Grecians, the nurse superintending, carves,while the boys who are appointed for the purpose act as waiters.A portion of Scripture and a prayer are read, and grace said orsung, before beginning the meal; thanks are returned at theclose, and the dining-hall is vacated at signals from the steward,who presides. Besides the regular meals three times a day,bread is distributed once, one of the boys carrying a basket,and another serving. Of the various offices filled by the boys,I found it impossible to discriminate those considered marks ofdishonour from the others, but usage has rendered the artificialdistinctions perfectly familiar to the pupils. What remains ofthe provisions after meals is distributed to the poor.Clothing, The supply of clothing consists of two suits everyyear, and is ample to keep the boys' looking neat. Their costumeis surprisingly antique, being, in fact, the same which wasadopted at or near the period of the foundation, and from whichthe popular name of the Blue-coat School is derived. As it isentirely inapplicable to the use of a modern school, I may passoverthe subject with one remark, however, bearing upon thehealth. The cap is so small as to afford a very inconsiderableprotection to the head, and being inconvenient is, in fact, notused at all, so that both out and in doors, these boys appearLONDON BLUE-COAT SCHOOL. 81with bare heads. That this has an effect in preventing complaintsof the head, such as ring-worms and scald-heads, Imake no doubt from observation, and in some climates, orwhen weather permits, the practice is, I believe, beneficial. Itprevails even more extensively on the continent than in England,and I was quite surprised to see the pupils of Mr. Fellingschool, at Hofwyl, in Switzerland, going bare headed,without inconvenience, out of doors, when I required a firewithin.The mending is done on the premises, the clothes being repairedby the nurses, and the shoes by a workman constantlyemployed for the purpose. The regulation requiring the pupilsto wear the uniform of the school when absent on leave fromits bounds, acts as a great stimulus to neatness and the care ofclothing.Cleanliness. This subject has attracted much attention here,and great improvements have been made in the arrangementsfor promoting cleanliness. Formerly, the boys of one dormitorywashed in common in a trough, and wiped upon onetowel. Thus any disease of the head or eyes was propagatedrapidly and certainly, and the want of cleanliness tended.to encouragethe production of such diseases. Besides a large lavatory,capable of accommodating one hundred boys, and furnishedwith a supply of hot and cold water, each dormitoryhas now an adjacent smaller lavatory, well supplied with water;the boys enter by squads, and each has a stream of runningwater in which to wash, a towel, soap, tooth-brush, &c. Besideswashing twice a day, their feet are washed once a weekin winter, and oftener in summer. These precautions shouldbe multiplied during summer with us, to suit the requirementsof our climate.The boys sleep on iron bedsteads, one in each bed, the beddingbeing supplied at the discretion of the matron. They maketheir own beds, clean their shoes, and do other offices of policeand domestic economy, as already stated. The sweeping ofthe dormitories is a punishment inflicted for offences in theward, for laziness, or slovenliness.83 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS,Sickness. The sick are taken care of by the nurses, at theinfirmary, a building apart from the schools and dormitories,and cases which may be infectious or contagious are treatedin separate wards. An apothecary, who prescribes in commoncases, resides upon the premises, and the consulting physicianattends at the hospital once a week regularly, and wheneversent for. There is a small dispensary attached to the infirmary.The diet of the boys in the infirmary is under the control ofthe physicians, and, of course, differs in general from that ofthe pupils in health. It is prepared by one of the infirmarynurses, who has a small fund advanced, for the disbursementsof which she is responsible : the nurse has an assistant, whannecessary. The friends of the sick boys, who visit them, arenot allowed to bring in any article of food or medicine, unlessby permission of the apothecary.XELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS OF GERMANY. 83CHAPTER II.ORPHAN-HOUSES OF GERMANY.Having completed an account of the most interesting of theeleemosynary institutions of Great Britain which I visited, Iproceed next, according to the plan already sketched, to thoseof Germany. I have found it impossible, without describing institutionsof inferior note, to give the South of Germany its proportionof notice, and, after much reflection, have concludedto confine myself, in reference to it, to an account of theOrphan-house of Prague. I might, indeed, have added thatof Stuttgart, in Nuremberg; but having been there during atime of vacation, I have collected only printed results in relationto it, and nothing from personal observation. The institutionof Frankfort on Maine, belongs, geographically, to those of themiddle of Germany, though I am aware that the city is consideredby its people to lean in feelings and manners to thesouth.This chapter will include a description of the Orphan-house ofHamburgh, a notice of that of Altona, a description of theFrance Foundations at Halle, of the Military Orphan-house atPotsdam, a statement of the courses of instruction at the MilitaryOrphan-house at Annaburg, in Prussia, a notice of the CivilOrphan-houses at and near Potsdam, a description of the Or-playhouseof Frankfort on Maine, and of the School for Soldiers'Children at Struppen, near Dresden, and of the Orphan-houseof St. John, at Prague.Orphan-house AT HAMBURGH.The Orphan-house at Hamburgh was considered, not manyyears since, as one of the most remarkable in Germany. Ithad attached to it, or rather growing out of it, a seminary forteachers, the benefits of which were felt not only within, butg4 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS*without the establishment, and the arrangements for educationwere considered to be well matured and administered.I propose first to give a brief account of what the institutionwas, and then to notice its present condition; both the past andpresent state of the establishment appearing to me fraught withinstruction. In general, if an institution fails, it is more fromthe inefficiency of its teachers than from defects in its arrangements.An efficient teacher may supply many deficiencies in aplan, but there are some cases, of which this is one, in which adefective organization places the remedy beyond the teacher'sreach.History, Buildings, <^c. The establishment was founded bythe exertions of two refugee noblemen from Holland, De Graveand Van Petkum, in 1597. It was commenced in an oldchurch granted to the trustees, among whom were its founders,and the present buildings were not erected until 1782-5. Thepecuniary resources, the number and kind of pupils, and thegeneral arrangements, have varied frequently. The revenues,which depended in part on payments to be made from churchfunds, were often inadequate to support the number of pupils,which at one time rose as high as eight hundred. Meanswere provided for introducing foundlings into the house withoutexposure, which, after trial, were abandoned, though thehouse is still a foundling hospital.* Among the arrangements forteaching deserving of notice, the rudiments of a mutual instructionsystem were introduced early in the seventeenth century, anda method of teaching reading and writing together, which hasbeen since, in an improved form, introduced with good effect,was adopted about the same time. Both resulted from a desirefor undue economy; the first, to economise teachers, the secondbooks, and neither appear, in the form in which they weretried, to have had any success. The spirit which promptedthese experiments was not of the kind to render them elective,• To the credit of the morals of Hamburgh I ought to mention that, at prc-I tent, not more Tian one foundling a year, on the average, is received at thishoucc. The manu of introducing tliom referred to in the text, was by a ,similar to that still used at the Foundling Hospital of Paris.Orphan-house OF HAMBURGH. 85if the ideas had been ever so good. The mortality in thishouse during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was frequentlyas high as from sixteen to eighteen per cent It hasbeen in this century reduced as low as three.The present buildings are in general commodious, wanting,however, the requisite accommodations for the families of themasters, who, when married, must live off the premises, an evil,the effects of which will be noticed hereafter. There are twodivisions of the house, one for boys, the other for girls, and achapel common to both sexes. On the boys' side there are threeclass-rooms, a large room for singing and writing lessons, aroom for tailor's work, in which the boys make and mendtheir own clothes, an extensive lavatory, and a bath-house; adining-hall below stairs, and dormitories above. The sickwards are in the upper stories, in a building joining the twowings. The trustees have a meeting-room in the house, andthe economist (steward), rooms for his family.*The institution is governed by thirteen trustees, consisting ofthe first burgomaster of the city as president, of two senators,two aldermen, and eight other members, usually merchants,who are elected by the city councils, and one of whom goesout every year.Admission, Sc Fatherless children below eight years ofage may be admitted at any time. If healthy, the childrenare boarded out until they reach eight years, if not healthy,they are placed in the sick wards. Every three months, childrenof eight years old or over, who are living out, becomemembers of the family within the house. At fourteen thechild is apprenticed and leaves the institution. Formerly,as already stated, those who were fit for the occupation, wereinstructed as teachers in the school itself. Not less than fiveper cent, of the pupils were found thus qualified, and willingto devote themselves to the laborious occupation of schoolmasters.The teacher's class contained usually from eight toThe small size of the kitchen required among these people to supply fourhundred children with food, would appear incredible to those used to the arrangementsof England and the United States.86 fiLEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.twelve individuals. The plan of education which follows existedat that time.Intellectual and Moral Education. This was declared to beof a kind adapted to fit a child for some *^ useful callings andexcluding the higher branches of education.The pupils were divided into five classes. First, the elementtry class, subdivided according to its numbers into four orfive sections, and instructed by pupils of the house who werepreparing as teachers. On entering this class the children wereusually between eight and nine years of age, and they remainedin it two years, passing, every six months, into a higher division.The studies in this class were — first, exercises of speechand thought, orally, the teachers following Von Turk's Perceptionsby the Senses, or Portman's Book of Nature.* Second,reading by the phonic method, which will be described in asubsequent part of this Report. Third, arithmetic, especiallymental arithmetic, according to Pestalozzi's method. The fourground rules were taught in the higher division.Fourth, elementary geometry, notions of form, measure, andconstruction. Fifth, writing, according to the method used byPestalozzi.Neither of the books used for the exercises of induction have,I believe, been translated into English, nor have equivalent onesbeen published in our language. The admirable Lessons on Objects,by Miss Mayo, are designed for children more advancedin attainments and culture than these, though not in age. Theinfant-school lessons on objects practised in many of the Englishschools, would come nearer to the requirements of this class,but are still of a different kind from those adopted by Von Tiirkand Portman. Indeed, as the locality of a school, the school-roomitself, and the implements for teaching afford the most instructiveobjects for beginning with these lessons, they must vary inagreat degree with the school itself, and none other than ageneral guide can be given to a teacher, which, however, would• I insert the names of trio text-books, because they give an idea in their titlesof the nature of the exercises. The names of the others are suppressed. Theyare to be found in the coUego library.Orphan-house OF HAMBURGH. 87be amply sufficient for one fully imbued with the spirit of themethod. It contains within itself the elements of all instruction,preparing a basis for elementary arithmetic, natural philosophy,natural history, grammar, geography, geometry, and morals. Itsimportance can only be fully realized by seeing it well practised.Mental arithmetic having been long used in our schools andin those of England, we have many excellent works on thesubject. It serves admirably to strengthen the memory for abstractions,to give the concentration of mind required to drawconclusions rapidly, when surrounded by persons and thingstending to interfere with close thought. As it comes to its resultsrather by ingenious processes than by rule, it gives great readinessin inventing methods in cases having reference to quantity.For the elementary notions of form, our books are againmuch behind the German school-books, though lately Mr. Reinerhas supplied in part this deficiency.* As a basis for geometry,for the useful exercises of geometrical analysis, and asgiving to the young mind clear ideas of the connexion betweenarithmetic and geometry, I have seen no exercises equal to them.Pestalozzi's writing method is too well known to need remark;in general it applies better to the formation of the Germanwritten letters than to ours.In 1826-7, from one hundred and seventy-four to one hundredand thirty-eight pupils were instructed in this class by thepupils who were serving their novitiate as teachers.After passing through the elementary class, the pupils enteredone of the three parallel classes, so called because they pursuedthe same studies and consisted of individuals of nearlythe same age. They remained in one of these classes generallytwo years, or until nearly thirteen years of age. Each parallelclass was composed of two divisions, and had one teacher. Thesubjects of instruction were as follows: — First, Religious instruction,Bible history, and the Lutheran Catechism, Refert'sBible stories. Second, German grammar. Third, arithmetic,Lessons on Number; The Master's Manual, by C. Reiner, London, 1835;Lessons on Form, by Charles Reiner, London, 1837.88 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.and geometry, according to Von Turk's method. Fourth, usefulknowledge, the teacher using Hoffman's Instructor in NaturalObjects, and Zechariah's Geography. Fifth, rhetorical reading.The subjects of study and works used, probably require somecomment. The religious instruction was given in the lowerclasses orally, by the relation of some of the principal Biblestories, with an exposition of their moral ; in the higher classesby the selection of the historical portion from the Old and NewTestament, to be read by the pupils, and then by drawing theirattention, in a familiar lecture, to the moral of the history, andby unfolding also its application. Frequent explanations of thepeculiar manners and customs of the nations treated of in thesacred volume, and of the natural history of the East, throw agreat charm about this kind of instruction. The feelings anddispositions of the children are ascertained by their answers tothe questions put by the teachers, and thus the lesson is made apowerful means of moral training.The Manual of Magnitude and Form by Von Tiirk, is anotherone of his useful productions, which has not, I believe, beentranslated; it is the result of his practice in teaching, and containsmuch that is good in regard to the connexion of the twosciences of number and extension.The term "useful knowledge," by its limitation to certainsubjects, being calculated to throw other important ones intothe shade, is certainly objectionable. By it, however, is understooda combination of the study of the natural productions ofthe earth with its natural and artificial divisions, and the historyof its inhabitants, or a combination of geography, history, andnatural history, admirably calculated to interest the pupil deeplyin the elements of these branches.The parallel classes were united for instruction in arithmeticand writing, the lower divisions of the former having their lessonsin the morning, the higher in the afternoon. All the pupilshaving a taste for drawing attended the drawing class, andthe elder boys received lessons in vocal music.There were half yearly examinations in presence of thetrustees on these subjects.Orphan-house OF HAMBURGH. 0»This instruction completed the intellectual course of the pupilsin general, who were bound to trades en leaving the institution.Those who displayed the necessary intelligence andother qualities which promised that they would make instructors,after passing through the studies of this class, enteredthe Select Class, which was under the direction of the headteacher, the catechist of the house, and pursued the followingcourse :First. Religious instruction, Bible explanations, and the largerLutheran Catechism. Second. Mathematics. Third. German.Exercises of style. Fourth. Physics, by familiar lectures.Fifth. Technology and natural history, by familiar lecturesand the examination of specimens. Sixth. Geography.Seventh. History, particularly of Germany.To render the instruction in "useful knowledge," physics, andtechnology efficient, a small collection of models, apparatus,and products of nature, art, and manufactures; a solar microscope,planetarium, &c., were provided; this collection stillremains, but is by no means extended enough to meet theteacher's wishes. Nothing can contribute so much to the dueeffect of such studies as collections, the specimens of whichthe pupil can handle himself. From them he can learn by hisown observation, and may be led to further observation by hisown reflection and awakened curiosity. Such a collection asthis must be expensive, and hence it is seldom seen. In the LaMartiniere school of Lyons, such collections and methods formthe characteristic features of the establishment, of which I shallspeak more particularly hereafter. We are most favourablysituated for carrying out this principle, and, if it be once practicallydemonstrated, even partially, the board will, I am sure,encounter the expense of its complete development, in view ofthe importance of the results.The subjects of instruction heretofore mentioned are still requiredto be taught, but the plan of classification is entirelychanged. The boys are now divided into three classes, one ofwhich contains children of the ages of fourteen, eleven, andeight years; another of thirteen, ten, and seven; a third of90 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.twelve, nine, and six; the same individuals remaining with thesame teacher throughout their course. The least reflectionwill render it obvious that the instruction of three divisions ofa class in such very different stages of progress, by one teacher,is impossible. If the instruction is addressed to the highest division,it is too high for the lowest, and if to the lowest, it doesnot employ the highest. The active mind of the catechist,whose recitations I attended, had adopted various devices toobviate this difficulty, but in vain. Even in the religious instruction,which may be considered as more appropriately addressedthan any other branch, to various intelligences, it wasobvious that a part of the class answered too readily, and theinstruction was lost to another part, who did not even understandthe answers of their comrades. In the lectures on physicsand on technology, the case was, of course, much worse.Indeed, I do not believe the difficulties inherent in such a planremediable. It thus happens that an arrangement which, topersons not conversant practically^wilh instruction, may seem torealize some leading ideas of equality or emulation among teachers,or the like, may bring destruction upon an entire system.In the school for teachers attached to the Orphan-house, ashas been stated, there were always from eight to twelve pupils,who remained four years preparing for their duties. The finesttwo years were devoted to theoretical studies; the second embraced,also, the practice of teaching. In the former yearsthey extended their knowledge of the Bible, of the German andFrench languages, of mathematics and physics, of drawingand gymnastics, and were taught the theory of music, practisingon the piano. The last years they studied anthropology,the art of teaching, the history of the science of teaching, andof its methods. During the latter period they were engaged inteaching under the eye of the catechist, or of the other masters.They were required to pass a satisfactory examination at enteringUie class, in the middle of their course, and also at itsclose. This experiment is, in all respects, an encouraging one.The number of pupils having capacity and willingness to devotethemselves to the occupation of teaching was nearly five per cent.Orphan-HOUSE OF HAMBURGH. 91of the whole school. While receiving their special education,they were conferring a benefit on the institution by acting asteachers, and, subsequently, diffused the excellent methods inwhich they had been trained through their own and neighbouringcommunities.I pass now to the moral education, which, except in thewithdrawing of the influence of the select class and other details,remains nearly as heretofore. The moral education ispromoted, first, by the attendance in the chapel, by prayers,morning and evening, and by religious instruction in the school.Second, by the superintendence of the teachers, in turns, duringthe hours of play. At present, the married teachers not beingin the house, this superintendence is confided to the porters,which thus changes its character. I have had many opportunitiesof observation in reference to this point, and feel thata proper method of providing for superintendence out of schoolhours, is difficult to devise. If the teacher is thus employed,he is worn out by the additional labour; and if the pupils areconfided to an inferior person, he has neither the influence northe qualities of observation of a teacher, and thus a very importantpart of education is lost, namely, that of the playground.The ample endowment of the Girard College requiresthat the interests of our pupils should always prevail over pecuniaryconsiderations, and in this view we should prefer increasingthe corps of teachers beyond what is absolutely necessaryfor the duties of instruction, that one or more of them inthe several departments may be on duty as superintendents,especially in the lower schools. Well trained pupils of the elderclasses will make their best assistants.The superintendence in the dormitories and in the lavatoryof this institution rests always with the porter, who is assistedby the chiefs of divisions, selected for this purpose from amongthe boys.Third. Moral training is effected by varied occupation of thehours not devoted to school, particularly by handicrafts andexercise. At present, the only mechanical employment is onewhich is ill suited to the pupils, because entirely sedentary, that03 ELEEMOSYNARY Institutions.of tailoring. It is true that general manual dexterity is acquiredby this trade, and that it may, in some circumstances,be of utility in after life; but to keep the pupils at work merelyon account of the saving to be effected in making their clothes,is carrying it to an extent which interferes with their properphysical education. Fourth. Moral education is promoted byrewards and punishments, the former consisting in presents ofbooks and money, in permission to walk at hours not allowedto others, in doing the errands of the house in town : the latterin private admonitions, exclusion from the play-ground andfrom the walking-parties, confinement, reports to the trustees,and, if necessary, flogging. In order to prevent the improperuse of money given to the children, the larger sums are depositedwith the steward, and they receive parts of these depositsin coin of the house. This money the porter is allowed to expendfor them for its full value, and at the discretion of the pupils.As a reward for diligence and good conduct, the childrenare allowed to visit their relations four times a year, andtheir relations may visit them once a month. During the generalholidays, the principal ones being before Easter, leaves ofabsence may be granted to pupils whose relations wish to receivethem.Physical Education. The diet is plain and would be consideredwith us scanty; the breakfast is of bread and milk, thedinner of soup and vegetables, with boiled meat, and rarelyroasted meat, fruit being occasionally given in addition in thesummer; in the afternoon, rye bread and water; in the evening,wheat bread and milk.The pupils wash their faces and hands three times a day intold water. The lavatory is at present a separate building, inthe yard of the orphan-house. Each boy has his basin of porcelainplaced in a trough, and a whole series of basins may befilled and emptied at once, so that the monitor in charge of thedivision is enabled to regulate the time of washing. In summerthey bathe at least once a week.The clothing is simple but sufficient, consisting of a roundabout,vest, and pantaloons of blue cloth for the in-door winterOrphan-house AT ALTONA. * 93dress. Besides walking occasionally, the pupils formerly hadregular lessons in gymnastics ; the exercises are still kept up,but are voluntary. Military exercises are sometimes practised.In winter, the yard, which may be in part covered with waterfor the purpose, affords a place for skating. Formerly the pupilswere taught turner's work, and the making of pasteboardboxes, &c., but these employments have been discontinued.The tailor's work can hardly be considered as promoting thephysical education.The provision for the sick has already been alluded to. Aphysician and surgeon visit the house daily, and the sick areunder the charge of a nurse and assistant.The order of the day is as follows:The pupils rise at half past five in summer, and six in winter,wash and dress, at seven o'clock breakfast, from eight to halfpast eleven are in school, at twelve dine, play from one to two,are in school from two to four, receive a luncheon of bread, andare permitted to exercise from four to half past four, are in schoolfrom half past four to six, are occupied with military exercisesand walking, or walking and play, from six to eight, at eightsup and have prayers, and retire at nine o'clock. Thus sevenhours are occupied in school and study, five are allotted to bothexercise and recreation, three hours to three hours and a-halfto domestic matters, and eight and a-half to nine hours to sleep.Domestic Economy, The five hundred and thirty-seven pupilsof this institution cost, in 1836, one hundred and five thousandand eighty marcs banco, or about thirty thousand dollars ;the cost of each was therefore about fifty-six dollars. Ofthese five hundred and thirty-seven pupils, the four hundredwhich are in the house require for attendance, &c., threenurses, two cooks, three female servants, and three male servants,of whom one is the porter; the female pupils, however,do much of the work of the entire house.Orphan-house AT ALTONA.While at Hamburgh, I visited the Orphan-house and schoolsattached to it, in Altona in Denmark. The number of orphans04 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.here educated is sixty-two. The system of instruction is thatadopted generally in the public schools of Denmark, and is amodified Lancastrian method, the lower classes being taughtbv monitors under the direction of a teacher, and the upperclasses being taught by the teacher himself. It does not appearto me necessary to enter into the details of this method, butrather briefly to state my conclusions. The instruction of theelementary classes, it is assumed, may be left in a degreeto monitors, the lessons being revised by the teachers. Themonitors, however, did not succeed as far as I could discernin communicating true instruction, and in their hands the methodof Pestalozzi degenerated into a mechanical and lifelessroutine.Upon such a basis I believe that no teacher can possiblysucceed in raising a proper intellectual superstructure. I didnot pass sufficient time here to enable me to give a proper practicaljudgment of all the results of this system, yet I may be allowedto support the opinion just advanced by the negativeevidence, that, as far as I saw the upper classes, there wasnothing which contradicted it.While visiting the lower classes of one of the public schoolsnear the orphan-house, with an intelligent teacher, the inefficientinstruction in arithmetic by the monitors particularly struck me,and the fact that the spiritless repetition of a string of sentencesfrom the Pestalozzianan course of addition, and a merely mechanicaluse of the illustrations by blocks by the monitors, failedentirely to convey a proper idea of the subject to the class,who in general appeared listless and inattentive. The teacherlook up the instruction, and immediately the whole scene appearedchanged, and it was soon evident that he had interestedand attentive hearers, who, under similar instruction, would haveproved learners.FRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE.The Orphan-house of Halle has clustered around it the variousfoundations known by the name of its founder, ProfessorFRANKE rOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 95France,* of the University of Halle. This institution has probablybeen more influential than any other in promoting thecause of the fatherless, having led to similar establishments, notonly in Germany, but also in Great Britain. It is an exampleof what may be done with very small means, tracing its originto the education of four fatherless children in the house ofFrance, then settled as a clergyman at Halle. This orphan-housewas established in 1695, and successively the variousfoundations now connected with it have been added, all ofwhich are made to minister to the maintenance or educationof the orphans. They may be thus dividedFirst. Those exclusively devoted to purposes of revenue, andwhich include establishments for the sale of books, drugs, andmedicines. Second. The schools, six in number, viz. an elementaryfree school for boys and girls, a "higher" school forboys and girls, a superior school for girls, a "real school" forboys, a Latin school, and a " paedagogium."} Third. Theeducational institutions These comprise the orphan-house,the boarding institution, and the paidagogium.These establishments not only provide the public instructionof different grades, required by the citizens of Halle, but collectpupils from other parts of Prussia. As we are especiallyconcerned with the orphan-house, I shall only briefly give anaccount of the intention of the other educational institutions,make some general remarks on the schools, and, omitting thefirst division, which sufficiently explains itself, pass on at onceto an account of the orphan-house.The educational institutions serve as the homes of the childrenwho are collected here, and who use the schools in com-France was Professor of Greek and Oriental Literature, and pastor of achurch at Glauca, a suburb of Halle, where he resided.t This division is by Dr. H. A. Niemeyer, the director of these foundations,,to whose kindness I owe the particulars which I give in respect to them, and anopportunity of visiting those parts of the establishment more immediately bearingupon the objects of my mission.t These names will be found explained subsequently.§ This term is used here in contradistinction to instruction, by education beingintended training when the pupil is not in school.90 . ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.mon with the day scholars from the town. All the buildingscontaining these various establishments are arranged aboutcourts, which communicate with each other, so that the wholeseries is closely connected. They are very plain, having beenerected with a view to furnish the necessary accommodationswith the smallest possible expenditure.The Boarding Institution is a large establishment, intendedto provide for the education of pupils when not occupied inschool. The boys residing in it are under the direction oftutors, each of whom has a division to superintend, and in relationto which he is to supply the place of the parent. Asmany as eight pupils occupy a room, thus making the expenses oflodging but trifling, and rendering the institution entirely accessibleto the middle ranks of society.* The schools which theboys attend are selected in reference to their destination inlife. They dine in common, having two tables at differentrates, a plan which, however, is not approved of by thedirector. ^The Pedagogue, This is a boarding-school, but is entirelydistinct from all the other establishments, providing educationand maintenance within itself. It is intended to prepareyoung men for the universities, and, in its educational arrangements,to afford an effectual substitute for judicious parentalcontrol. There is a small parlour and sitting-room for everytwo young men, and four such suites of rooms are upon onefloor, three of them occupied by the pupils, and a fourth by atutor, who is expected to be their friend and director as wellas instructor. The execution of this plan depending upon thepersonal character of these tutors, has various degrees of success,but in general it works well. The instruction is of thesame grade as that of the gymnasia, or grammar schools ofPrussia.The series of schools embraces the whole range of public instruction.It begins with the common or elementary schools,• They pay but from eighty to one hundred rix thalers, fifty-six to seventyhobart, jjcr annum, for maintenance and education, every tiling except clothesand books being provided.FRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 9?.in which the instruction terminates at the age of twelve or fourteenyears; contains a "higher" or middle school, called, also,a "burgher school," the courses of which end at fourteen orsixteen years, and where the pupil is prepared to enter Hfe as atradesman. Also, a "real school," its courses ending at sixteenor eighteen, and intended to prepare for the higher mechanicaloccupations; and a classical school, or "gymnasium," retainingits pupils until eighteen or nineteen years of age, and fittingthem for admission to the university.As the elementary school does not prepare for the middleschool, the latter has its own elementary classes, and afterpassing through them, the student enters the real school, or thegymnasium, according to his destination in after life. Eachschool has its inspector or head master, appointed by the director,and responsible to him. And the head of the whole isthe provincial school-board of the Province of Magdeburg,who cannot, however, change the system without the consentof the director. This collection of schools furnishes an epitomeof the grades of public instruction in Prussia, exclusive of theschools for teachers and industrial schools; and had I not becomeacquainted with them by careful study in the capital, stprolonged visit to Halle would have afforded a compendiousway of acquiring a knowledge of them. In the schools of thecapital there are, however, advantages in regard to the meansof procuring teachers which cannot be expected here. As theschools of Prussia will be described particularly in the secondpart of my Report, I shall confine my remarks at present principallyto the middle and classical schools, which are attendedby the pupils of the orphan-house.*The number of pupils in the different schools, in 1837, was as follows :Free School for boys350,in four classes.« girls350,(( t(Burgher School for boys600,twelve "girls400,eight "Superior " " ♦*100,sixReal " " boys150,five "Carried forward,1950,M ELEEMOSYNARY Institutions.General Administration. The director of the France Foundationsis appointed by his predecessor, and the office has remained,generally, up to this time, in the family of the founder.He has the chief control of the administration, being responsible,however, in regard to the schools, as already stated, toIhe provincial school-board, and making a report of his expendituresto the Minister of Public Instruction. He is assistedby a council composed of a co-director, as an " economy inspector,"of a syndic, who is the law-officer of the institution,and of a treasurer. These, as well as all other officers, areappointed by him. He has, also, a secretary, and there isan accountant, who assists the treasurer. All benefices, stipends,places of orphans, &c., are granted by the director; allregulations also are made by him, and he is thus supreme within <,the institution. The immediate administration of the orphan-house,however, is under an inspector.Admission Discharge, ^c. To be qualified for admission tothe orphan-house, a child must be poor, fatherless, legitimate,healthy, of good morals, and between ten and fourteen yearsof age. It is preferred that his parents should have belongedto the middle classes of society; and if he have property, orreceive property during his stay in the house, the income ofit must go to the foundation during his residence there.Applications for admission are addressed to the Director ofFrance's Foundations, and must be accompanied by certificatesof the birth of the* child in wedlock, the death of thefather, of vaccination and general good health, of previousattendance at school ; and, from the child's guardian, and theBrought forward, 1950,CJyranasium or grammar school 300, in six classes.Pedagogue 80, five "Total, 2330.In the establishments for education there were at the same time, in the 114 boys and 16 girls, in the boarding-school 230 boys, and in thepedagogue 80, total 436. These pupils attended the schools, and are countedin the numbers above stated.FRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 99chief magistrate of his dwelling-place, of the pecuniary andfamily circumstances of the applicant, and of his survivingparent. These are sent to the inspector of the orphan-house,who reports thereon, and if the report is satisfactory to thedirector, the child's name is inscribed on the list of candidates.Admissions take place according to the order of application,and when there is a vacancy, due notice is given of it to thefriends of the child whose name heads the list of candidates.If the child is not presented, and his friends are not heard fromat the appointed time, his application is considered to be withdrawn.Cases of withdrawal of the application, or of the deathof the child are, however, expected to be reported to the director.On the arrival of the child at the institution, he is reported tothe inspector of the orphan-house, by whom he is assigned aplace. All control over him is understood to have been relinquishedby his relations, who are enjoined not to interfere withhim in any way, always excepting the right of complaint to thedirector. Any pocket-money intended for the child must behanded to the inspector, under penalty of his dismission.Those pupils who are found worthy, are sent to the university,but, in general, they all leave the institution at about fourteenyears of age to go to a trade. In cases of misconduct, thefriends are bound to receive them back. The institution doesnot undertake to find situations for them on leaving it, but endeavoursso to do, advising with their friends on the subject.Those who leave the institution with credit, are entitled to certainsmall gratuities.As the parts of the establishment intended for the residence,instruction, performance of religious exercises, and taking ofmeals, of the orphan pupils, are distinct in their administration, Ishall consider the occupations of the pupils under the divisionsof the house, the schools, the refectory, and the chapel, to thediscipline of which the orphans are subjected in turn, duringthe day or week.The House. The orphan-house is superintended by an inspector,who is responsible to the director of the France Foundations.This latter directs the disbursement of moneys for the100 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS,school, and all its officers are paid directly from the treasury.The inspector must be consulted before any change is made inany of the rules regarding either economy or instruction. Hehas a certain sum of money put at his disposal for contingentexpenses.Under this inspector are four tutors, who live in the house,sleeping in the same dormitories with the boys. Two of theseat a time, and in rotation, have the superintendence of the boysout of school, in their walks and play, one having charge ofthe boys who are attending the gymnasium, the other of thosewho are sent to the burgher school. They are also presentduring the study hours, when they are expected to assist thepupils in their lessons. To aid in maintaining order, and tohelp the pupils forward in their studies, there are two monitorsplaced at each study-table, who are selected from among theelder boys, and have charge of the younger ones. They reportweekly to the tutors, and then, in a meeting at which theinspector presides, make reports him, and act as a council inadvising in regard to measures of discipline. This arrangement,by which each study-table has its chief under the supervisionof a tutor, is common in the boarding gymnasia of Germany,and is productive of excellent results. It is said that, inold times, it had degenerated into a system of fagging, and,indeed, one of the rules of this orphan-house was obviouslyadopted in reference to such a case ; but the superintendence bythe tutors, the careful selection of the monitors, and the improvedstate of general feeling in these schools, have entirelydone away with the abuse.The rewards for conduct and scholarship consist of books,of permissions of absence, walks, (fee; the punishments are, thesuppression of indulgences, excluding from table, admonition,confinement, corporal punishment, and dismission. Offencesagainst morality arc severely punished, and, unless a reform isproduced, the offender is dismissed. Scrupulous modesty of ^deportment is every where enjoined and exacted, as a necessarysafeguard from the approaches of vice.Though it is expected that the religious instruction providedFRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 101in the house and school, will produce and foster moral and religiousdispositions, great reliance is placed upon the moraltraining, by the good example of the tutors and of the elderboys. Experience proves that the orphan-house gives moresatisfaction in regard to discipline, than either of the other establishments,and that of the orphans who leave it, those whoenter into trades, and similar occupations, less frequently fallaway from rectitude than those who go to a higher career.The inmates of the orphan-house have the usual Christmas,Easter, and summer vacations, and those who have friends areallowed to go home at these times : for those who remain in theinstitution, a temporary order of the day is adopted.The health of the pupils is reasonably good, but their physicaldevelopment not remarkable. The number of sick is usuallyabout two out of the one hundred and fourteen inmates of theboys' orphan-house. The boys have a play-ground and gardenin which to exercise. Wednesdays and Saturdays are half-holidays.The physician in chief visits this as well as the otherhouses of the foundations daily, and may be called on whenrequired.Voluntary manual labour in the field or garden, is the principalmeans of the physical education of the elder boys, andcertainly contributes very materially to their health. The boyshave no mechanical occupations, which, considering the futuredestination of most of them, may be regarded a defect, in asmuch as general manual dexterity is easily acquired at an earlyage, and almost as a play.The pupils clean their shoes, sweep their rooms, &c., forthemselves, and make and attend to the fires in weekly turns.They thus early acquire habits of waiting upon themselves, whichwill be advantageous whatever maybe their success in after life.The outer clothing is renewed yearly, and they have on handalways two suits for winter wear, and three changes of linen.A frock-coat for the street, of dark cloth (iron-grey), and ajacket for study and play. The clothes are marked with a number.The linen is changed but once a week. The washing inthe morning is done in basins, and each boy carries his own102 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.to the lavator)\ Two boys use the same towel, which ischanged but once a week. All these arrangements are far inferiorin character to those of the schools of England which I havedescribed, and, with a few other details of police which I neednot mention, struck me as particularly defective.For both departments, male and female, of the school, thereare two superintendents of clothing and quarters, and five servants,three male and two female.When a bill is presented, it is handed for examination andapproval to the officer who has received the article, then to theaccountant, who examines and certifies as to the calculation,and then to the director, who orders payment, and finally to thetreasurer, who pays the amount. The cost of the institution in1837, was ten thousand nine hundred and fifty dollars, for onehundred and fourteen boys and sixteen girls, or eighty-fourdollars for each pupil. Of the total sum contributed to all thefoundations, the state gives about ten thousand five hundreddollars, which is nearly half the whole revenue.There is no matron in the establishment for boys, and indeedthroughout Germany, there is a great tendency to place all policeand instruction in the hands of men. This probably arisesfrom the circumstances of the country, where competitionfor all situations which yield a support is very great, and from jthe respect in which teachers and those having the superintendenceof youth are held, which induces a considerable numberof men to prepare themselves specially for these offices. Theexemption from military service, which these situations procure,is an additional cause no doubt of the abundance of candidatesfor them. The Prussian system of education has, indeed, addresseditself too exclusively to the male sex, a defect, however,which measures have already been taken to remedy.The arrangement in regard to breakfast in this and in theother educational institutions of the France Foundations, is peculiar,and intended to habituate the boys to dispose properlyof money. They receive each a certain sum weekly; justenough to buy the portion of bread and milk absolutely necessaryfor breakfast for each day. and lay this out as they pleaseFRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 103A want of due regularity brings its own punishment, in the lossof the meal. Combinations of several might enable them, perhaps,to evade this regulation, but such are happily contrary tothe spirit of the school. In a modified form, such a regulationwould fall-in very well with the ideas which I have heretoforeexpressed as to the importance of gradually increasing the responsibilitiesof a boy, to fit him for his entrance into life.There are two dormitories, in each of which two tutors sleep,the youngest boys go to bed under the charge of the olderones, and of a tutor, and the others follow. Each boy has aseparate bed.The Refectory, This is under the charge of a steward, whoprovides the boys of the boarding-school and of the orphan-house.There are three different qualities of diet, that of the orphansoccupying the middle place, which are furnished by contract,at a certain rate for each pupil. The quality of the provision isinsured by the attendance in the hall, in rotation, of the teachers,and the daily attendance of the economy-inspector of thefoundations, and further, by sending at each meal a specimenof the dishes from the middle table, in a vessel with a lockedcover, to the director, or his deputy.The pupils repair to meals under the charge of their tutors,a grace is said, and after dinner thanks returned. No loudtalking is allowed. The knife, fork, and spoon of each is broughtby him to the refectory and taken away again.The School The school which the boys of the orphan-housein general attend, is that called the " burgher" or citizens' school,sometimes also called middle school. Its objects are thus defined— first, "so to train the sons of citizens by instruction inuseful science, that, at the age of fourteen years, they may bein a condition to begin a handicraft, or other trade;" second,"to prepare the pupils for the lower classes of a gymnasium,or for the classes of a real school, to accomplish which latterpurposes Latin and French are taught."The lower classes are in fact those of an elementary school,and the boys who leave the orphan-house at fourteen, are instructedexclusively in this establishment. The few who are104 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.selected to remain after fourteen go to the Latin school; Latinand French both are, however, studied in the upper classesof the burgher school, and the aptitude of the orphan pupilsfor language, is thus put to the test. The school is dividedinto four classes in reference to the progress of the pupils, andeach is subdivided for convenience, with a teacher to every subdivision.Thus the same teacher gives instruction in all the subjectsof study, to a class of boys numbering on the average about fifty.The branches taught are :Exercises of speech and thought. Bible history.Religious instruction. Mental and written arithmetic.Elements of geography. (Knowledge of home.)Reading and writing taught together. Reading. Calligraphy.Stories from history.German grammar. Composition. Geography of Germany.German history.French grammar. General history. Higher arithmetic.Elements of geometry.Rible lessons. Christian morals. Christian doctrines. Elementsof Latin.There are teachers of singing and drawing, besides the regularclass teachers. The pupils are examined privately onceevery six months, and publicly at Easter, when the change ofclasses takes place.The exercises of speech and thought, the first subject onthe above list, constitute the breaking-in, as it were, of thechild, and being at the very threshold of instruction, try theteacher's skill more than many a learned branch. He mustteach the pupil to think, taking care that his thoughts are expressedin appropriate words. Pestalozzi, who first practisedupon this idea, drew the child's attention to the human frame,as the subject of contemplation; others have preferred to bringhim in contact with nature, in general, by making simple naturalphenomena the basis of the inductive lessons; others, not surroundedby nature, make man and his dwelling their theme;others introduce simple lessons on objects of nature and art,which can readily be presented to the child for his examination,FRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 105and on which as a basis to rear the superstructure of naturalhistory, physics, and technology, in his advanced course. Allthese are good in their way, but such as I saw tried seemed todepend for their efficacy upon the circumstances of the school,and to be better or worse as the child found means to apply hisnewly acquired powers of perception, to observe for himself.Of all the plans, when the school is rightly situated for it, a referenceto nature produces the best training of the heart, as wellas the mind of the child. It would be impossible to present,here, even extracts from the numerous works which containthe methods employed in these exercises. I trust, however,that the board will have an opportunity of witnessing similarones in our own institution, and that they will consider thepower to carry them out an important qualification for ateacher in the elementary department of the Girard College.The Bible history and religious instruction next referred to, areprincipally given orally, the morals of the Bible and the eventswhich it describes, being put into such a form that when thesacred book itself, at a later day, comes into the child's hands,he is prepared to read it with proper interest This plan is diametricallyopposed to that which employs it as the beginner'shorn-book, and from which, I feel bound to say, I have neverseen any good result.I cannot enter into details in regard to all the branches, butmust be satisfied with noticing two which are here taught particularlywell, namely, reading and writing, and geography.The reading and writing are taught at the same time, accordingto the method of Harnisch, developed by Scholar. Thechild makes a letter on his slate, after a copy upon the blackboard,and is taught to name it. The German language havinga fixed sound for each letter, when the sound of the letterhas been learned, not its common arbitrary name, but thesound which it has in composition, the pupil has made someprogress towards knowing how to form combinations, whichis the next step, the vowels being placed alternately before andafter the consonant. These combinations are first written onthe slate, and then pronounced. The next exercise consists in106 " ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.placing a vowel between two consonants, which is followedby other simple combinations. These being classified by carefulstudy, the child is soon able to compose simple sentences,in which his ideas are developed, so that the mechanical operationof writing and of reading is interspersed with intellectualexercise. In this the talent of the teacher is strikingly exhibited,and a prescribed routine of instruction would fail in its object.The written letters being once learned, the next step is withthe printed, and a reading book is not introduced until the childhas felt the necessity of it in his further progress. It is then arelief, and not a task.I saw, here, a class which had been under instruction foronly nine months, the pupils of which wrote short sentencesvery legibly in a hand of medium size, spelled them correctly,and read them distinctly.This method of learning to read is, in a great degree, inapplicableto our language, in which the vowel sounds are sonumerous ; but the union of reading and writing may have itsadvantages. The characters of the ordinary German writingare composed of very different forms from those of our roundhand, and which are more simple, and, in general, angular;hence no considerable dexterity of hand is required to tracethe letters, and only a brief practice in elementary forms is required.I saw classes of children of ten and eleven years old, atZurich, who, by being constantly practised in this method fromtheir earliest instruction, had acquired a very striking facilityof expressing their ideas clearly and correctly in writing. Themethod produces a facility of composition, in writing, as that ofJacotot does a fluency in speaking. The orphans entering atten years of age, do not, in general, pass through this class.The geographical instruction, founded upon the method ofPestalozzi, proceeds on strictly inductive principles, and is anexample of how much may be done by making the pupil proceedfrom the known to the unknown. The following was thecourse of a recitation which I attended on the subject. Theteacher drew, first, from the knowledge of the pupils of differentobjects or bodies, a definition of the term body, then led themFRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 107to define extension, dimensions, &c., and thus furnished themideas of space. Sunrise and sunset were used for establishingthe position of the cardinal points, and that of the class-roomwas determined in reference to these. Then commencing withhome, with a map of the city of Halle, they gave an accountof its localities, and the history connected with them. Wideninghence in circles, the natural and political features of the surroundingdistrict were described, always indicating the realdirections of places, &c. The pupil thus grasps every step ofgeographical knowledge ; begins with his own house, ramblesthrough his own town, makes excursions in its neighbourhood,sets out on his travels through his fatherland, visits foreignparts, sees what is worth seeing in the natural and artificialstate of the country, finally learns the relation of its parts andof the whole to other worlds, and thus the interest is kept upfrom the first to the last. The reverse method I comparedwith this over and over again; some teachers have found thistedious, others have mixed the two systems, but, judging bythe comparative results, I give this method greatly the preferenceover others, as not only teaching geography, and connectinghistory with it, but enlarging the general intelligence, while itimproves the memory. In the upper classes, the pupils use mapswithout names, and draw maps on the board, marking localities,&c. At other times, the places are indicated by one pupil, andnamed by another, with other variations of exercise. In thelower classes, the responses were frequently repeated by thewhole class, and in the upper classes the instruction was moreaddressed to individuals. With all the inherent merits of thismethod, I have seen it wholly marred by a dull teacher.The inductive method applied to any branch of knowledgerequires time, patience, and some skill on the part of the teacher.The routine method, or positive teaching, is much easier to theinstructor. The former at every step unfolds the mind, the latterfrequently over burt hens it. If the positive knowledge acquired bythe first is entirely lost, the habit of thinking remains, while, if acquiredby the second there is nothing left unless some improvementof memory, and general development of the reasoning powers.108 Eleemosynary INSTlfUTIONS.A pupil who has properly improved the advantages of thisschool, will have acquired a reasonable knowledge of the Germanlanguage, of reading, writing, and arithmetic, of geographyand general history, will be familiar with the history,morals, and doctrines of the Bible, and his general mental andmoral development will be such as befits his age. If especiallyindustrious or apt, he will have had an opportunity ofbeginning Latin and French, and if he prove to have a facilityin language, will be transferred to the Latin school. It wouldseem that, if he have a peculiar disposition for mathematicalstudies, he should be sent to the real school* to prepare himfor one of the higher mechanical callings ; but no arrangementof this kind yet exists. There are, indeed, some obstacles to it,as for example the difficulty he' will find of a support before hereceives employment in one of these higher callings, the necessityfor patronage, capital, &c. None, however, I believe areinsurmountable. If he should have had this advantage, on reachingseventeen years of age he would have added to his stockof knowledge —Further acquaintance with German and French. Latin andEnglish if required, though not regularly taught.History and geography.Natural history. Mathematics.Practical arithmetic. Physics and chemistry.ReligionsImproved writing, and drawing.The Latin school, into which the more intelligent pupil nowactually enters, conforms to the general plan of the Prussiangymnasia or grammar schools, which will be more fully desThis school is designed to complete the education of those intended for"shopkeepers, higher trades, economists, military men, architects, or foresters,and especially for those callings for which a learned course is not necessary."This real school has only been added to the other institutions since 1835. It hasfive classes.t The eight branches just named, beginning with history and ending withreligion, are classed in the programme as "sciences." The school-money for theywu* is twelve thalers, equal to about nine dollars!FRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 109cried hereafter. This gymnasium has six classes, dividedeach into two parts, and forming a connected series of instruction,one part being six months behind the other, except thatthe pupils of the two parts are sometimes assembled to listento the same lecture.The branches studied are: Religious instruction, Latin,Greek, French, mathematics, elements of physics, history, psychology,and logic. Poetry and rhetoric, and Hebrew or English,as the student may desire.The degrees to which they are carried, the preparation beingfor the university, may be known from the studies of the firstdivision of the highest or first class.1. Religion, Christian morals from Niemeyer's Manual, forthe upper classes of the higher schools. Explanation (by lecture)of the references to the New Testament in Greek, &c.2. Latin. (By lecture.) Introduction to the development of rhetoricamong the Greeks. Cic. de. Orate. Extempore exercisesfrom translations of prose and poetry, &c. Lecture on Horace'sEpistles, two books. Satires, one book. History of poetryamong the Romans. Life of Horace. Review of odes. 3. Greek,(Lectures.) Life of Demosthenes, and selected orations. Philippics,for peace, &c. Written exercises from Euripides. Sophocles.(Antigone, CEdip. Colon.) Introduction (by lecture) to therise of the Greek tragedy, the arrangements of the stage, &c.Extempore reading of selections from the Iliad. (All these lecturesin Latin.) 4. Heroic. Joshua. Psalms, 69 to 72. Jonas. Joel,1st and 2d, with analysis. Written exercises. Lectures on Psalms1 to 18, analytically. Hebrew syntax. Selections from translationsof the New Testament into Hebrew. 5. German, Poetryand rhetoric, by examples. Prose and poetical exercises.Directions for private reading. 6. French. Voltaire's Brutus andZaire. Exercises in style. 7. English, (a choice of this languageor Hebrew) Vicar of Wakefield. 8. Mathematics, Progressions.Combinations. Logarithms. Binomial theorem. Plane trigonometry.Elements of physics. 9. History of the middle ages,from Schmidt's Iconography of the history of the middle ages,and later times. 10. Psychology and logic.noEleemosynary Institutions.The lectures alluded to, throughout, are rather informal explanations,generally extempore, by the professors, and of whichthe students usually take notes. They are, in the case of theclassics, mostly analytical, critical, and historical. The elementsof physics are such a general view of the subject as can be hadby the aid of a few simple mathematical principles. The psychologyis that of observation (empirical so called) now so popularin the German and French schools. It must be evidentthat if the pupil arrive at a proficiency in such courses, he cannotbe said to have commenced the study of the learned languagestoo late in life, and yet his first lesson of Latin grammarhas been begun at nearly thirteen years of age.The following is the order of the day, by which these variousarrangements are carried out, divided into two columns, oneshowing the occupations of the older, the other those of theyounger boys.The Elder Boys, ^Rise at half past four insummer, half past five in winter,wash and go to study untilseven o'clock.Breakfast at seven, and haverecreation until eight.Are in school from eight toeleven.Have an hour of drawing,or mutual instruction, on twodays in the week.Dine at twelve.Are at liberty to occupythemselves on the farm or inthe garden until two, P. M.,or are free until one, and havea drawing lesson of an hour,according to the season. OnSaturday change their linen.The Younger Boys,Rise at five in summer, andquarter past five in winter.Brush their shoes and wash.Breakfast at seven, andstudy until eight.Are in school from eight toeleven.Study until twelve, exceptthose intended for the classicalschool, who take a Latinlesson.Dine at twelve.Brush their clothes, and, onSaturday, change their linen.In general, are free four days,and take a drawing lesson twodays, from one to two. A fewlearn French two days in theweek.FRANKE FOUNDATIONS AT HALLE.IllAre in school four days andat study two days in the week,until four, P. M.Receive, at four, a piece ofbread, and may engage inwork in the garden or farm untilfive, and on Wednesdays andSaturdays, in winter, study.Study from five to seventwo days, from five to sixtwo other days, and occupythe remaining time with asinging lesson. Walk on twoother days in summer.In winter study, except twicea week a singing lesson of anhour.Supper at seven.Are allowed to work in thefield from seven to nine insummer, and play in the housefrom seven to eight, and areoccupied in mutual instructionfrom eight to nine in winter.Study from nine to ten.Are in school four days inthe week, or walking with thetutors two days until four,P.M.Receive a luncheon of breadat four, and play in the yard ;on Saturday walk until five.Study two days, and receivesinging lessons four days inthe week from five to seven.Supper at seven.Play in summer out of doors,in winter, in-doors, until eight.Voluntary occupation andprayers.The fourth class goes to bedat nine.The third class studies untilten.As all the particulars of this distribution of time have beencarefully studied by the directors of this institution, and in thetrue spirit, it merits especial attention. In passing it brieflyin review, I would call attention, first, to the portions of theday devoted to occupation, recreation, and domestic duties.These are, in. summer, about seventeen and a-half hours, andin winter sixteen and a-half for the upper classes, leaving butsix and a-half in the former, and seven and a-half in the latterto sleep. I confess that both allotments seem to meentirely too small for boys about twelve years of age; and, indeed,such as would scarcely be adapted to the average of full112 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.grown men. The allowance is so small, compared with thatof every other institution, that, had I not derived the informationfrom the director himself, I should conclude there was somemistake in the matter. The younger boys have an additionaltime for sleep, the youngest having an hour and a-half, nearly,more than the eldest, and the other three classes about half anhour more. The general arrangement is highly judicious, butit seems to me doubtful whether so great a difference is necessarybetween boys often and fourteen. For the purpose of comparisonof this and the other heads of my remarks with otherschools, I have placed in the Appendix, No. Vii, a table containingan abstract of the orders of the day of some of the principalschools which are described in this Report.Next, in regard to the distribution of the day into time forstudy, for regular school duties, for the extra school duties, forplay, and for domestic concerns, the amount of time devotedto each for the elder boys stands thus, on the general average.For study and school in winter nearly eleven hours, in summernearly ten and a-half; for play and domestic occupations, inwinter, about five and a-half hours, and in summer, aboutseven hours, the about of hours employed in study and schoolexercises being nearly equal in winter, and about in the proportionof four to five in summer. With the German plan, inwhich so much of the instruction is communicated orally, andat this age of the pupils, these proportions are, probably, quitejust and consistent with a high intellectual development. Thatthe development should be of the higher order, will appear bycomparing the number of hours occupied in intellectual exercisesin this school, with the allotment in the others, as shownin the table already referred to.In relation to the succession of work and play, there arethe following arrangements. In summer, in the evening, thereare three hours of study, and in winter four; in the former case,two hours of recreation out of doors, and in the latter, onewithin doors. There is, further, time for preparation for theday's lessons, in the morning, of which an hour is set apart for thispurpose. Two hours are passed, also, before school, in domes-franceFOUNDATIONS AT HALLE. 113tic duties, some of which give bodily exercise. The schoolthen continues for three hours, in summer, with an extra hourdevoted to drawing or mutual instruction, and four hours inwinter. There are two hours of recreation, then two hoursof school, and again an hour of recreation, before the eveningstudy. This succession is, it must be admitted, very judicious.An improvement, however, suggests itself, that there should bebrief intervals of out of door relaxation between the schoolhours. It is true that this would be difficult, though not impossible,at Halle, where several schools open upon the same court.On Wednesday and Saturday there is no school in the afternoon,and the pupils walk out under the charge of their tutors.In regard to the younger boys, the arrangement, except inthe time of rising, is not materially different, until after themorning school at eleven, when, only a selected number ofthem, have one hour of instruction until twelve. From twelveuntil two, on two days of the week, some of the boys learnFrench, and all of them drawing, and on two other days theyare free. This may be considered as an additional school hourto those of the elder boys, but it is to be remarked that the instructionis communicated, in great part, orally to the youngerboys, and hence they require fewer hours of preparation andmore of recitation. On Wednesdays and Saturdays, they walkfrom two to four, instead of studying as the elder boys do inthe half-holiday, and study from five to seven, while the othersare out. They have four hours more of lessons in vocal musicthan the elder boys. For all but the lowest class there is anhour of study, from nine to ten. The attention which has beenpaid to the minutia of these arrangements, shows itself everywhere.The director has the power to carry into execution assoon as he is satisfied of the propriety of a measure, and changesand modifications may be made immediately, whenever circumstancesindicate their necessity.The Sunday order of the day is the following: From risinguntil seven o'clock household duties, from seven to eight study,from eight to nine voluntary occupation, from nine to tenprayers in the common hall, from ten to twelve voluntary ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.creation, from twelve to two liberty to go into the garden,from two to four study, from four to seven voluntary occupations,and visits in the town, from seven to nine in the garden.It would seem that there is a very scanty supply of religiousinstruction, but the school plan shows that this forms a part ofthe every day duty of the school, and that thus it is mingledwith all the other exercises. The Sunday occupations, howeverinappropriate they would be deemed in an institution of GreatBritain or the United States, conform to the tone of religioussentiment of the country, and hence I do not consider them aproper subject for comment or objection, in connexion with asingle institution. The whole subject must excite much reflection.MILITARY ORPHAN-HOUSES AT POTSDAM AND ANNABURG.These are both establishments for soldiers' children, and intendedto train them for the service as non-commissioned officers.I present the first to the notice of the board on accountof its well arranged system of physical education, discipline, andpolice, from which, though its object is different from ours,some useful hints may be drawn, especially in regard to thestrict conformity of means to ends. I am induced to lay beforethe board the plan of instruction pursued in the second,because, the school has recently been re-organized under thedirection of one of the most able and experienced teachers ofPrussia; from a visit to whose school for teachers, and the establishmentsconnected with it, I derived much instruction, andfrom whose experience and judgment this sketch of the organizationof an elementary and middle school results.* I did notvisit the school, which was out of my general route, because,having been but recently re-organized on that plan, there wasno new experience to be gathered in regard to its working.• I am indebted, for a manuscript copy of the excellent regulations of thisschool, to the kindness of its author, Dr. Harnisch, director of the seminary forteachers at Weisscnfels, in Prussia.MILITARY Orphan-house AT POTSDAM. 115MILITARY Orphan-house AT POTSDAM.History, Buildings, and General Government. This institutionwas founded in 1724, by Frederick William the First of Prussia.The reputation of France's Foundations induced this monarchto rival the benevolence of the clergyman, and to establish ona scale proportioned to his greater means, a house for the educationof the orphans of his soldiers. While, however, the recipientsof France's bounty are free to choose their career inafter ife, and only so far bound to the institution, as a sense ofgratitude may prompt, the youth who passes through the MilitaryOrphan-house of Potsdam, must enter the military servicefor twelve years. Three of these, indeed, are the term of serviceof every citizen, and I believe the three years in the non-commissionedofficers' school are now counted as part of thetwelve, and thus the actual number of extra years of service isreduced to six. The institution began with one hundred andseventy-nine children, both girls and boys being received; thisarrangement continued until a few years since, when the girls'school was removed from Potsdam, and the establishment at presentis for male pupils only. There are between three and fourhundred in the elementary or boys' department. In the earlyhistory of the orphan-house two attempts are recorded to introducemanual labour, as a profitable speculation; neither ofwhich appears, however, to have succeeded. The first of these,the manufacture of Brabant lace, was introduced in 1743, andafter various modifications of the mode of applying the labourof the children, it was finally abandoned in 1795. In 1744, theculture of silk was introduced extensively throughout the kingdom,and especially enjoined at the orphan-houses ; but this attemptwas not more successful in the end than the other, andthe culture is not kept up in this institution.The present spacious buildings were chiefly constructed underthe reign of the founder and of Frederick the Great. Additionshave, however, been made from time to time since, andthe whole plan is hardly yet completed. The institution maybeconsidered as divided into three departments or schools; an116 ELEEMOSYNARY mSTlTUTTQIfS.elementary school,* a trade school, and a music school. Thebuildings for the elementary school are erected about a spaciouscourt, which serves as an exercising and play-ground. On theground floor are the refectory, in which all the youth from thedifferent schools composing the institution, meet three times aday, and the study and play-rooms, lavatory, &c. The study-roomsform a long range, and when the doors of communicationare opened, one teacher can superintend the whole of theclasses. The arrangement of the lavatory is defective, the boyswashing together in a large stone trough. The school-roomsare on the first and second floors, and are calculated for divisionsof forty boys each. There are six dormitories, furnishedwith wooden or iron bedsteads, the latter having been morerecently introduced, and found to answer well. The beddingconsists of a straw bed beneath and a mattress of hair above.Each dormitory is superintended by a teacher, who sleeps atoneend of it. There are also dwelling rooms for the teachers,officers, &c., and in the court very large wash-house, with adrying-room above it.The buildings occupied by the trade and music schools areseparated by a street from the others, and with the dwellings ofthe officers, a room for gymnastic exercises, and musical practice,and the workshops, form a second immense series of structures.The infirmary is near to them, and is under a separatedirection; subordinate, however, to the general executive body.It is divided into rooms assigned to patients suffering from differentcomplaints. A schoolmaster gives instruction to the convalescent.The arrangements in the dormitories of the trades'school, are similar to those used in the army, and the superintendenceand discipline are strictly military.The part of the building occupied by the music-school, containsseparate rooms for practising by individuals, class-rooms,and dormitories. There are rooms in the main pile for themeetings of teachers, for a small library, &c.• The literal translation of the title of this school is the boys' house, (das KnagMILITARY Orphan-house AT POTSDAM. 117The executive board of this school depends partly on theministry of war, and partly on that of public instruction; theformer, however, is the controlling authority. Under thisboard is the military superintendent, or director, to whom thechaplain, the secretaries, the economist, the military superintendentof the day, the teachers, commandants of companies,the inspectors of the trades' and music school, and otherofficers, are directly responsible. The clergyman is the superintendentof the elementary school, and has a general chargeof all the intellectual and religious instruction.Admission, The orphan children of soldiers are received formaintenance, at any age, by the authorities of the establishment,but if under six years, are boarded with their friends or othersuntil six, and then admitted into the house at Potsdam; theyremain there until fourteen or fifteen years of age, and, if ofsound constitution, are transferred to the trade, or to the musicschool, where they remain four years, and whence they pass,if their conduct has been good, to the school for non-commissionedofficers. I have never seen a body of young men all sowell physically developed as the pupils of the trade school, aresult produced by constant attention to their education on thispoint. Children who are not healthy, or who have failed in theelementary school, are apprenticed at fourteen, and the institutionceases to have the charge of them.Education, In the Elementary School, the usual branchestaught in the common schools of Prussia are pursued, includingreading, writing, arithmetic, the German language, geography,drawing, religious instruction, and a little natural history. Theboys are divided into four classes, according to their proficiency,and all the classes below the first are subdivided intotwo sections, each being under the charge of a teacher, andhaving a separate recitation room. These sections containabout forty pupils each. A monitor of order from among thepupils, has charge of a section on entering and leaving theschool-room, and renders such service as the master requiresduring the lesson; he is assisted by one of the class in the distributionof the books, slates, and other implements of instructsELEEMOSYNARY mSTlTUTKMTS.tion. The teachers keep each a roll, upon which the characterof the recitation and conduct of the pupils is entered, andwhich is examined weekly by the chaplain, and submitted tothe board of teachers at their meetings. No youth, who is belowa certain grade upon this roll, is permitted to enter thetrades' school. There are about five hours of instruction onfour days of the week, and about twenty-three in the wholeweek. The holidays are, a week at Easter, four days atMichaelmas, a fortnight in the latter half of July, and from thetwenty-third of December to the second of January. Forthose who have no friends to go to, the Christmas festivitiesare kept up in the school, as in the private families of thecountry.The board of teachers meet once every fortnight, and thedirector, or his substitute, or the chaplain, presides. At theirmeetings, all matters relating to instruction and discipline arediscussed.The form of the discipline of the school is military, but aspirit of mildness tempers it, suiting it to the age of the pupils.The boys, in general, are divided into four companies, each ofwhich has a commandant,* who has charge of the instructionin military exercises, and ranks with the teachers of the school.These companies form a battalion, and are drilled without arms,and inspected by the director, or an officer appointed by him.In turn the commandants of companies, acting as officers ofthe day, have general charge of the military and police duties.Two of the teachers, also, in turn, act as inspectors of theday, and have the general superintendence of the pupils in studyand recreation hours, in the duties of personal police, at meals,and in the dormitories, relieving each other at different parts ofthe day. They are co-ordinate in authority with the officerof the day, and he is expected to relieve and aid them in themaintenance of order. These officers report immediately tothe director.The four companies are subdivided into sections of eleven,• A non-commissioned officer of the highest grade.MILITARY Orphan-house AT POTSDAM. 119over each of which one of the boys is placed, with the title ofoverseer, or corporal, and he is responsible for the good order ofhis section, and may be assisted in his duties by one chosen fromit. From among these corporals one is selected for the generalcontrol and superintendence of the others, and marches thecompany to the lavatory, to meals, to the dormitory, &c., beingresponsible for them whenever they are collected as a company.The boys composing a section are placed at meals uponthe same side of the table with the corporal who has charge ofthem. The younger pupils do not join these companies atonce, but are kept together in a division which is under femalesuperintendence, has a separate overseer, and is under differentregulations as to rising, going to bed, and other particularsof discipline and police from the elder pupils.All the duties of domestic and personal police, and some ofthose of domestic economy, are performed by the boys enrolledin the four companies. They clean their own shoes, brush theirown clothes, attend to the police of the different parts of thebuilding, serve the meals, and make their beds. That the variousduties may be attended to in an orderly way, there are, besidesthose already spoken of, special overseers appointed amongthe pupils, who have general charge of them while engagedin certain duties, and of particular localities. Thus there is anoverseer of the room where the clothes and shoes are kept,who has charge of the exchange of the Sunday for week-daydress, and vice versa ; an overseer of the room where the shoesare brushed and blacked; an overseer of the lavatory; foursuperintendents of cleanliness, who direct the pupils while washingand combing their hair; one of hair cutting; two of servingthe table, who have charge of a detail of thirty pupils, whoserve and clear the tables and clean the knives and forks; one,of the manual labour classes; one, of the sick in the hospital;one, of those who are unwell, and must report to the physician;one, of the lights; one, to prevent the passing of bounds; one ofthe pupils who sing the liturgy in the church; one to conductthe pupils, whose shoes require repairs, to the shoemaker; besides,those for the classes and the younger boys, already ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.tinned, and a few others. I make this enumeration in order toshow the minuteness of the arrangements for police and discipline,and the extent to which they are conducted by the pupilsthemselves. The selections for appointments are made by theteachers and officers, and submitted to the chaplain and directorfor their approbation. A part of the pupils employed assuperintendents receive small pecuniary allowances, and allenjoy many privileges.Some of the pupils, who are found to have a taste for music,receive special lessons, and are employed, when sufficiently proficient,to give the signals for the different duties of the day.Eight pupils are thus selected to be taught the bugle and fife,and twelve the drum.In regard to conduct, the pupils are divided into four grades,according to the reports of the teachers and officers, a revisionof the classification taking place every quarter, and the directorhaving, in the mean time, the power to displace a pupil in acase of emergency. The first class grade is composed of pupilsdistinguished for unvarying good conduct, and on holidaysits members are allowed to leave the orphan-house alone tomake small purchases at discretion, and are neither subject tocorporal punishment nor to the stoppage of their meals. Thesecond class is composed also of meritorious pupils, but of alower grade of conduct than the first; they are permitted toleave the school sometimes, but not so often as the others, andare generally under supervision. , From these two grades only,the superintendents or overseers are taken. Pupils of the thirdgrade stand between those who are decidedly good or bad, andare treated accordingly. They are the last who are permittedto pass from the elementary to the trades' school, on completingtheir course in the former. Those of the fourth, or lowest grade,are kept constantly under supervision, have no allowances, noleaves of absence, are separated, when possible, from the restof the pupils, and are even punished by an inferior diet. Therewere very few pupils in this grade when I visited the institution,in 1837-8, which was justly considered as an indicationof its good condition.MILITARY Orphan-house AT POTSDAM. 121The health of the pupils is promoted by frequent bodily exercise,and, when the weather permits, in the open air. Thusthey have regular gymnastic exercises four times a week, aredrilled by companies four times, and by battalion twice a week,take frequent walks, and, in summer, bathe every day. Theregular manual labour in this department of the school is confinedto knitting and tailoring. The gymnastic exercises areconducted by two teachers, each taking charge of one of thecompanies, of which two attend the lesson at the same time,and assisted by pupils selected from among the most proficientin the exercises. There are two swimming lessons given toeach company, in summer, every week. In the ordinary divisionof the day, in summer, between two and three hours areallowed for manual labour, the same for recreation, two hoursfor exercise, and nearly eight for sleep.Their clothing is a neat uniform jacket of blue cloth, of amilitary fashion, gray or white pantaloons for the winter, anda brown linen jacket and white linen pantaloons for the summer,and their officers are distinguished by badges similar tothose worn in service. The diet is rather generous, (see thetable. Appendix, No. Vii,) and, besides the three regular meals,bread is served to them as a luncheon in the morning and afternoonintervals. The mortality was, in 1831, but one in twohundred and twenty-three in the whole institution.An opportunity is given to those who are to pass into thetrades' school, to ascertain the trade which they may wish tofollow, by a trial during the last year of the elementary course.The order of the day, with merely slight variations duringfour days of the week, in summer, is as follows : The pupilsrise at a quarter before five o'clock, and proceed by companiesto the lavatory, two companies occupying it at once and alternating,the other two being, meanwhile, engaged in cleaningtheir shoes. Wash and comb their hair. At half past five theboys detailed to serve the meals proceed to the refectory undertheir two superintendents. At a quarter before six the buglesounds, and the companies assemble, by sections, in the courtyard.Morning prayers and breakfast. Those who are slightly122 Eleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.sick report to the physician. At a quarter before seven, theboys assemble according to classes, and at seven are marchedto the school-rooms. At a quarter before nine a luncheon ofbread is served out to them. School closes at eleven, and thepupils are free for three quarters of an hour. Dinner at abouta quarter before twelve. The pupils brush their clothes, and areinspected by the officer of the day. From a quarter past oneto half past two, review the morning lessons in school. Froma quarter to three until five, are occupied with manual labourin the work-rooms. Part of the pupils receive instruction inmusic, and the first and second classes in drawing; a statednumber take a swimming lesson; the drummers, fifers, andbuglers also have a lesson. A luncheon of bread is distributed.One of the companies is at drill, one at gymnastics, and theother pupils bathing or walking until seven. Evening prayersin the refectory, and supper. Wash, and have recreation untilnine, when they retire. The younger pupils retire at half pasteight.In winter, the different occupations of the day are eachone hour later than in summer, until half past two, when thehour of review of the lessons is omitted, and the exercises, asfar as appropriate to the season, follow in the same order asin summer, until half past five, at which hour the pupils go tothe school-room, and remain until a quarter before seven.On Wednesday and Saturday, an hour in the morning is devotedto religious instruction, the other lessons being omitted,except the physical exercises on Wednesday. Stated days andperiods of the day are assigned for the exchange of the week-dayclothes for those of Sunday, for taking clothes or shoes requiringrepairs to the tailor or shoemaker of the establishment, forhair-cutting and combing, for washing the neck and shoulders,the feet, and for other minute matters not necessary to be herepresented, since a sufficiently correct idea of the order andexactness of the arrangements may be formed from the specimenof the order of the day already given.Trade School. The object of this school is, in part, to economisethe funds of the institution, by making within its wallsMILITARY Orphan-HOUSE AT POTSDAM. 123articles of clothing required for the pupils, but more to securethe acquisition, not only of general mechanical dexterity, butof a trade, which may serve to increase their emoluments whenthey enter the military service. There are, at present, one hundredand four pupils in the Class.In order to pass into the trades' school from the elementarydivision, the pupil must have reached at least the second class,have been above the fourth grade in conduct, be between fourteenand fifteen years of age, and of a bodily constitution fittinghim for the military service. The course lasts three years.The school has a special inspector, or superintendent, who isresponsible to the director of the whole institution, or, in fact,to his substitute, who has special charge of this and of the musicschool.The different trades now taught here are those of blacksmiths,saddlers, tailors,* shoemakers, and biographers. The lastnamed has but seven pupils admissible to its school, and the nextto the last forty-four. These numbers depend upon the demandfor the occupation subsequent to leaving the establishment, thespace required for the operations of the trade, the difficulty ofteaching, &c. As each pupil i^ in general permitted, on advisingwith the inspector, to choose his employment, it sometimeshappens that boys are sent into the town to learn a tradenot taught in the school. Changes of occupation are very rare,but are sometimes permitted. The blacksmiths are principallyengaged in the repairs of arms, the saddlers make the caps andaccoutrements, 6z:c. used in the house, the tailors all the uniforms,the shoemakers supply not only this orphan-house, but that ofthe girls with shoes, and the biographers are occupied in copyingforms for the school or war department, manuals, &c.They work about seven hours a day, under the superintendenceof master workmen from the town.An hour of each day is spent in gymnastic or military exercisesin the open air in summer, and in winter in the large roomAt this trade the pupils were seated upon a form, or bench, around a circulartable, and not, as with us, in a constrained position upon a table.124 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTlTUTIOiN'^;before spoken of. The military exercises, besides the ordinaryones, comprise some which are peculiar to the Prussian service.The usual exercises of gymnastics are introduced, omitting anywhich seem to have a tendency towards the tricks of themountebank. A manual, compiled from John and Eiselin,* isthe guide of the teachers. For instruction in these exercises,the whole school is divided into two parts, and each again intosquads, so that the teacher need have but twelve to fourteenunder his charge. Non-commissioned officers are the underteachers, and in turn are superintended by higher teachers, andby an inspector.There can be no doubt that to these well regulated and perseveringlycontinued exercises it is, in great part, due that thephysical development of these youths is, on the average, so perfect.Judicious recreation, a proper diet and clothing, greatcleanliness, a proper number of hours of work, of instructionand sleep, no doubt, are necessary, each and all in their degree,but great influence must be Besides allowed to the gymnasticexercises.The pupils have two hours of instruction during the day, intendedto keep up their knowledge of the branches taught inthe elementary school, rather than to teach new ones. Militarydrawing is, however, added to their former acquisitions.When not in the shops, nor in school, nor at exercise, theyare superintended by non-commissioned officers. The disciplinein this school is military in spirit, as well as in details, andaltogether adapted as a preparation to the life which they areto lead after leaving it.Music School. Those pupils who have manifested a decidedmusical talent in the lower school, are here instructed thoroughlyin the theory and practice of music. The object is to supplymusicians to the regimental bands. These pupils have a separatesuperintendence from those of the other schools, and different• Mr. Kiel, the superintendent of this department, has not only adopted thenew excrciscN of Eiaelin, of Berlin, but has made some very judicious improvement*upon them.MILITARY Orphans-HOUSE AT ANNABURG. 125hours of exercise and duty. They keep up the knowledge acquiredin the elementary school, as is done in the trades' school.There are about forty pupils in the classes.MILITARY Orphan-HOUSE AT ANNABURG.The course of instruction is divided into two parts, one anelementary course, consisting of religious instruction, arithmetic,the mother tongue, singing, writing, and exercises of induction,taught in four classes, between the ages of ten and fourteen.The other, a higher course, taught in three classes, and betweenthe fifteenth and eighteenth years of age of the pupils. In orderto rise to the place of a non-commissioned officer, the pupilmust have gone through at least the lowest of the classes of thehigher school. The subjects of instruction in this school are :religious instruction, arithmetic, singing, the German language,calligraphy, geography and history, algebra, geometry, trigonometry,and drawing.The courses in the different branches are arranged as follows:First. Religious Instruction.LOWER School,VII Class. Bible stories, psalms and hymns, appropriate to the season. Fourhours per week.VI Class. Histories from the Old and New Testament, portions of the historyof the Christian church, catechism. Four hours per week.V Class. Reading and explanation of the Bible, and of its arrangement. Thogospel and historical works are selected, and the history is connected with thegeography of the Holy Land. Catechism. Five hours.IV Class. Doctrines of the Lutheran church, taught by Luther's CatechismFive hours.UPPER SCHOOL.Ill Class. Moral instruction, duties to God and man. Three hours.II Class. Reading the Bible with comments, the pupils making abstracts.Three hours.I Class. (Two years.) The first year a repetition of Luther's Catechism.The second, a history of the Christian dispensation. Three hours.Every class commits verses from the Bible to memory.Second. Arithmetic. Mental and written arithmetic are taught together, that1126 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.the readiness afforded by the one, and the accuracy of the other, may both becultivated.LOWER SCHOOL.VII Class. The four ground-rules, with three places of figures mentally. Applicationto questions in weights and measures. Three hours.VI Class. The same rules extended. Three hours.V Class. Fractions, with applications to weights and measures. Three hours.IV Class. Proportions. Three hours.UPPER SCHOOL.III Class. The applications of proportions to questions of weight, strength,value, time, and general quantity. Two hours.II Class. Exercises in practical algebra. Two hours.I Class. Review of the course. First year, practical operations. Second,theory of arithmetical processes. Two hours.Third. Vocal Music,LOWER SCHOOL.VII & VI Classes. Practice of songs, adapted to youth of a cheerful, serious,military, or religious cast, with one part. Two hours.V & IV Classes. Choral and other songs, with the different parts. Elementsof music. Two hours. .^UPPER SCHOOL.Ill, II, & I Classes. More difficult choral pieces. Theoretical instructioncontinued. One hour. There is, besides, instruction given to a select choir, intendedto conduct the vocal exercises of the church.Fourth. Reading. In the lower classes, a readiness in reading, and in thehigher, the style of reading, is attended to especially. Pieces learned previously,by heart, are recited.LOWER SCHOOL.VII Class. A good pronunciation, and some facility in reading. Six hours.VI Class. Readiness in reading, and repeating the substance of what has beenread. Familiar illustrations. Five hours.V Class. Reading some work in reference to knowledge useful in commonlife. Four hours.IV Class. Reading, with attention to emphasis. Four hours.upper school.III Class. Reading the Bible and Sacred Melodies, with the view to correctreading in this kind of composition. Two hours.II Class. Reading various selected works, in and out of the class.I Class. Reading continued, and recitations from works previously read.Firth. Orthography and Writing. These may be taught together in the sameway as mental and written arithmetic ; the teacher is, however, at liberty to followhit own method.MILITARY Orphan-house AT ANNABURG. 127LOWER SCHOOL.VII Class. Copying on slates from the black-board. Four hours.VI Class. Copying on paper, from the board, and from books. Four hours.V Class. Writing from copy-slips, from books, or from dictation. (Practicein spelling and writing). Four hours.IV Class. Similar exercises continued. Four hours.UPPER SCHOOL.Ill Class. Copying useful papers, such as registers, accounts, contracts, &c.Two hours.II Class. Calligraphy, with Roman as well as German letters, practice in orthography,reading of letters and documents in various handwritings. Twohours.I Class. Copying papers relating to the management of the institution, as apractical introduction to business. One hour.Sixth. Useful Knowledge taught by induction.LOWER SCHOOL.VII Class. The pupils give their ideas, verbally, of surrounding objects of themost simple kind, of the commonest productions of nature and art. Conversationsrelating to them. Drawing the most simple mathematical figures on theslate. Three hours.VI Class. Descriptions of animals and plants, the former in the winter, thelatter in the summer term. Written remarks on these, serving to afibrd exercisein the formation of phrases and in orthography. Four hours.V Class. The most essential parts of physics and natural history, the pupilstaking notes of the lessons. Four hours.IV Class. Compositions on various subjects. Letters relating to civil andmilitary affairs. Four hours,UPPER SCHOOL. ^III Class. History of Prussia and drawing of maps. Four hours.II Class. General geography, particularly that of Europe. Passing fromphysical to political geography. Civil geography in connexion with the former.Five hours.I Class. Universal history. One year is devoted to ancient and one to modernhistory. Selections are made of the more important parts of history. Fivehours.The remaining studies only belong to the higher school.Seventh. German Grammar and Style.UPPER SCHOOL.III Class. Logical and grammatical construction of the German languagetaught.II Class. Idiom of the language. Compositions on military subjects, withespecial reference to correctness of grammar.128 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.I Class. Acquaintance with the best writers. Exercises of composition onsubjects taken from history.Eighth. Geometry.UPPER SCHOOL.Ill Class. Teaching the names and properties of mathematical figures by induction,in connexion with drawing.II Class. Equations, with application to problems of common life.I Class. Elements of trigonometry.Ninth. Drawing,UPPER SCHOOL.III Class. Drawings from common objects, varying the positions, &c.II Class. Copying flowers, or drawings of implements.I Class. Architectural drawing with instruments, drawings of furniture, &c.I have allowed myself to present this extended programme,because it conveys, in as brief a compass as possible, excellentideas of the succession of courses in an elementary school, andin a technical or trade school, for such the higher school mustbe considered. It should be remembered that the main purposeis the preparation of youth for the military service, and hencethat the wants of the service are especially consulted. Anotherfact must be remembered, namely, that this is a Lutheran school,and therefore the religious instruction is adapted to the particularviews of that church. The course of morals of the thirdclass, I must say, however, seems to me out of its place, foralthough sur duties to God and our neighbour are of coursebest learned from his Word, yet their inculcation by preceptand example cannot commence too early.In the arithmetical course, the union of mental and writtenarithmetic is absolutely essential. The gradation appears to megood, and the application to questions of common life gives azest to such studies, attainable in no other way. The theory ofarithmetical processes, however, should accompany or followmore nearly their practical acquisition. Indeed, if they aretaught as they ought to be, by induction, the theory goes withthe practice.If the youth at Annaburg take the same pleasure in theexercises of song, from the elements to the completion of theORPHAN-HOUSES OF POTSDAM AND LITTLE OLIENCKE. 129musical course, as those of the school actually superintendedby the author of this project, the success will be complete.The connexion of orthography and writing, especially ifcombined with early reading, is natural.The exercises of induction, which in the lower classes are welldrawn out, deviate from the appropriate track in the fourth class,and in the geographical and historical courses do not return toit.The system in both these branches is rather synthetical thaninductive. There is a great temptation to break away from thismethod, into that of giving positive instruction, from the apparentlygreater rapidity of progress of the pupil; some teachershave abandoned it altogether, as too slow, though ultimatelyto their cost, as appeared to me in cases where I had an opportunityof comparing the results.The writing is preceded by an introduction course of drawing,which might with excellent effect be so extended as tobranch out into complete courses of drawing and writing.As this plan results from an extended experience, the numberof hours of instruction, per week, necessary to secure the results,is an important datum, and as such I have retained it, wheneverit was inserted in the original programme.CIVIL Orphan-house AT POTSDAM, AND Orphan-house ATLITTLE Glencoe.Besides the Military Orphan-house at Potsdam, there are twoother orphan-houses at and near the city, the general arrangementsof which I propose here to describe. From their limitednumber of pupils, and other peculiarities, they will not requirea full discussion.The founder of both these interesting establishments is counsellorVon Tiirk, whose enlightened benevolence, aided by themeans of his friends, has furnished homes and education, in oneof these establishments, for the sons of deceased physicians,clergymen, &c., and in the other, for the orphans of countryschoolmasters, and of the inferior officers of government. Thefirst, called the Civil Orphan-house of Potsdam, has twenty-four130 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.pupils under its charge, of whom sixteen reside in the house, theotiicrs being assisted at the dwellings of their mothers. Thepupils first enter the excellent burgher school of Potsdam, andwhen they have reached its first class, (or at between thirteenand fourteen years of age,) choose, according to their dispositionand talent, their future course. According to this, they passto the trade school, the school for teachers, or the gymnasium.Those of ordinary parts are apprenticed at fourteen. A teacherlives with them and superintends their studies.Those who have passed through the gymnasium, are supportedat the universities by foundations. The road is thusopened to merit in any direction in which it may exhibit itself.The institution is merely the home, and the public schools affordto it, at a very cheap rate, precisely the kind of instructionwhich is required. The advantages here given to particularorphans are, doubtless, those which our founder intended to beextended to all, and that within the institution itself; an idearequiring means no less ample than those which he has devotedto it, to secure its successful execution.In the Orphan-house of Little Glencoe, the pupils receivesuch an education as may fit them for mechanical pursuits, oras introductory to the profession of a teacher in the elementaryschools of Prussia. Provision to receive a higher educationis made for those who distinguish themselves. The pupils areengaged a portion of each day in manual labour: in summer,in agriculture, the rearing of mulberry trees, and in gardening,having also an opportunity to learn the management of bees andsilk-worms. In the winter, with manufactures of straw andmaking nets, and some of the elder boys in joinery work, mo -telling, and smiting. The number of boys is only thirteen,so that but one teacher is needed, who lives with them constantly,giving, himself, nearly all the instruction. CounsellorVon Tiirk takes a share in some departments, to which hehas especially devoted himself, as for example the connexionof arithmetic and geometry. The discipline is of the familykind. The boys are divided into classes of two, three, or four,according to their progress. The teacher now in this school.Orphan-house OF FRANKFORT ON MAINE. 131is one of those instances of ardent attachment and devotion tohis profession, such as are more frequently seen in Prussiathan in any other country to which my researches extended.ORPIIAN-TIOUSE OF FRANKFORT ON MAINE.This establishment males no pretensions to giving an educationabove that intended to fit its pupils for trades, but in themeans taken to give them a general mechanical dexterity, applicableto their future pursuits, as well as in the paternalcharacter of its discipline,* it is not surpassed by any of the institutionswhich I have visited. I am satisfied that this idea ofthe object of manual labour may be carried out to great advantagein our college, and indulge a confident expectationthat, by a judicious selection of masters, the discipline of the institution,notwithstanding its enlarged scale, may be as mild asthat of the school now under discussion.The present buildings of the orphan-house are well situated,and commodiously arranged, with a neat garden in front, apretty chapel at one end of the garden, and the other buildingson a long line at right angles to the front of the chapel. Abouta century ago the rights of orphans to education from the publicwere so little acknowledged, that they were ranked withoffenders, or when better off than this, with adult paupers.There are many examples of both those connexions in the historyof European orphan-houses, and the former existed in thecase of the Frankfort establishment, until towards the close ofthe last century, the orphan-house being, up to that time, abranch of the correction-house. The present establishmentshows what a great change in public sentiment has takenplace since that period. The buildings date from 1829-32.The income is derived in part from landed and in part fromfunded property. It is managed by twelve trustees, usually selectedfrom among the elder senators of the city. Under theseis the head master, who controls all the in-door affairs of the• This and the present improved general condition of the institution, are tuato the enlightened efforts of the head master, the Rev. Mr. Schaeffer.132 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.institution, and is responsible for its efficiency. He is re-eligibleevery four years, a tenure quite unusual in similar schools,but attended with advantages in some points of view. Thoeconomist or steward, who is the only officer allowed to be amarried man, has charge, under the head master, of providingfor the household. There are two assistant teachers, re-eligibleevery year.The pupils are fatherless children, or, in certain cases, otherdestitute children and foundlings, the latter being paid for bythe city. There are in all one hundred and ninety-five childrenat the charge of the institution, of whom ninety-five are boys,and thirteen very young children, who are boarded out of thehouse. The age of admission is six, and that of leaving theschool between fourteen and fifteen, or after the celebrationof their first communion. Places as apprentices are securedfor those who are to leave the house, and they remain underits superintendence until the term of apprenticeship has expired.They are then presented with a suit of clothes and asum of money, and their connexion with the orphan-houseceases.The intellectual education is of the same grade, and embracesnearly the same subjects, as at Hamburgh; the divisionis here, however, into three classes, each of which has itsmaster, the head master passing from class to class, and havingspecial charge of the religious instruction, and of the exercisesof induction, arithmetic, and the elements of geometry.I had occasion to hear, a recitation of the youngest class withhim in the inductive exercises, and to remark how much moredifficult his task was than that of a teacher in the neighbouringschool, who had a class of the same age in the same subject; infact it required considerable exertion on his part to induce themto exercise their reflective powers at all. As a general rule inGermany, where the temperament is less lively than in England,youths in this situation, many of them, before entering these institutions,friendless, neglected, or ill used, require very peculiarmanagement to elicit their mental powers, and in all the countrieswhich I visited, I observed that boys thus situated are, inOrphan-house OP Frankfort ON MAINE. 133general, below the average in animal spirits, and frequently inmental activity.The assistant teachers superintend the boys by turns duringthe hours when they are not in school, an arrangement, of theadvantages of which I have often spoken. These teachers arere-appointed every year, the trustees judging this method moreadvisable than any stipulations as to removal. In point of fact,they have generally, after a number of years' service, I believe,the offer of more important situations, and their places are suppliedfrom the qualified pupils of the institution.The discipline, in general, is addressed to the moral sentimentsand affections. No prizes are given to stimulate to study.Keeping the boys from play or work, requiring them to workalone, admonition, solitary confinement, and, as a last resort,corporeal chastisement, are the punishments. The characterof each pupil is studied, as far as possible, and the means ofrepression or encouragement are applied accordingly.A diary is kept by each assistant-teacher, in which he entersnot only the progress of every pupil, and of all the classes,but such remarks on the conduct as he may find necessary;the head master examines this diary, and confers with the undermasters from time to time. There are, besides, regularmeetings of the teachers held every week, as is usual in theGerman schools, and which serve not only to inform the severalmasters of the character and standing of each pupil, but asopportunities for giving and receiving advice in relation to methodsof instruction or discipline.There is one vacation in the year, new year's day, on whichthe pupils are allowed to visit their friends. During two hourson every Sunday afternoon they receive their friends, whoare provided with tickets for that purpose. There are occasions,however, of breaking through this strict seclusion, bythe occupation of the boys in services connected with thetown, which take them out of the walls of the institution.*It is an evidence of the differences which prevail in regard to views of morals,that, while with us lotteries are abolished, these youths actually receive apecuniary reward for drawing the lotteries of the city of Frankfort.134 Eleemosynary Institutions.Besides the religious instruction in the school-room, the childrenattend chapel once on Sunday, and, as the services are Lutheran,the Roman Catholic children are sent to a chapel in the city.The diet is more generous than that at Hamburgh, as theyhave moat for dinner three times a week. In regard to thekind of food necessary for nourishment, the practice of the continent,while it is no example for England, seems much moreapplicable to our country, as far as the similarity of climate isconcerned. Though our winters are generally longer, they arenot more severe than those of the middle of Germany,* whileour summers exceed theirs in heat. The supply of clothing isnearly the same as at Hamburgh.The discipline of the dormitories, wash-house, during thewalks, &c., is rendered easier by the division of the pupils intosquads of twelve, each having a monitor at its head. I am notaware that in any of these institutions the plan adopted at theLondon Orphan-house Lias been tried, of allowing the monitorsto choose their own divisions; believing it to be attendedwith good results, I was anxious to see it further put to thetest of use under different circumstances. It is under thecharge of these monitors that the clothes are served out, andthe usual duties of police executed. The dormitories are providedwith iron bedsteads, each pupil sleeping separately. Theassistant masters occupy beds in the two end dormitories, havingthus a general superintendence of the pupils at night, as wellas at rising and retiring.The principal house-work being performed by the pupils, onemale and one female servant only are required.Besides the employment in handicraft work, two hours everyday,the pupils have an hour of regular gymnastic exercises,and on Wednesday they walk, or bathe in the Maine, accordingto the season. They also do much of the household workwhich is not appropriate to girls, split and pile the wood, &c.The pupils, though in general healthy in appearance, were per-• During my journey in the winter of 1837-8, the thermometer was reportedonce M low aa — 6Jo Fahr., at Gotha, near the centre of Germany.Orphan-house or FRANKFORT ON MAINE. 135ceptibly less robust than those of some neighbouring schools.I do not, however, lay much stress on the comparison, as itleaves out of view many elements, as, for example, the importantones of the health of the parents, and the physical developmentof the children before entering, and I was satisfied thatneglect of physical education could not justly be imputed tothe institution. In sickness, a physician is called in, and theboys are transferred to the infirmary.The handicraft employments are well arranged, so as toavoid two difficulties — on the one hand, that of forcing the inclinationof a pupil to work which does not suit him; and onthe other, allowing him to acquire habits of unsteadiness by goingfrom one occupation to another. Each pupil is at libertyto choose which of the handicrafts he will engage in at the beginningof any quarter, but when his choice is made, he mustremain in this division for three months at least, unless specialreasons determine the master to permit a change. The manualoccupations are making baskets, mats, cord, turning, bookbinding,working in iron and brass wire, speaking, and tailoring.In summer, gardening is added to the list. Some boyswho have a taste for music, are afforded means of improvingit. The little boys are occupied in knitting, a very general occupationin the German schools for young children of bothsexes. Each trade has its own room, and its superintendent.There are regular instructors in those branches in which theteachers cannot give instruction. The articles made are noneof them sold, but generally used in the institution.The order of the day is as follows:The elder boys rise at five in summer, wash and dress, andgo to morning prayers. The younger boys rise at six. Allbreakfast between six and seven. The elder boys are occupiedin tailoring, or cleaning the hall, or carrying wood to the kitchen,and other household duties, until seven. All have instructionfrom seven until ten. Are occupied at handicrafts from tenuntil twelve. Dine at twelve. Are occupied in personal policeand play from one to two. In school from two until four, excepton Wednesdays and Saturdays. At four, have a luncheon186 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.of bread. From five to six, all are preparing for the lessons ofthe following day, except twelve, who are occupied by turns,from four to six, in the tailor's room. From six to seven, gymnasticexercises. At seven, take supper, which is followed byevening prayers. The younger boys retire at eight, and theelder ones are, in summer, in the garden until nine, and in winterengaged in handicrafts.In winter they rise one hour later, but in general the orderof the day is nearly the same as in summer.By comparing the number of hours employed in this schooland at Hamburgh, it will be found that, generally, they agreevery well. In the intellectual education thus measured, thisschool is very little behind Hamburgh. It has considerable advantageon the score of the occupation in trades, while theother excels it in the opportunities for play and the exercisesof gymnastics. If we judged only by the programme of studiesat Halle, Hamburgh, and Frankfort, we should place the intellectualeducation on a per, except that in Halle some few in thehighest class study Latin and others French; but, on examiningthe number of hours of occupation, we find four hours of studyin Halle to one in Frankfort, and one hour more of school exercise:this is sufficient to show that the studies are pursuedfurther, though the same in kind, a fact confirmed by my examination.The select class, when it existed at Hamburgh,was probably on a par with the oldest class at Halle. Thisuniformity I believe to be attributable to the common senseview taken by the German schoolmasters, who have given theimpress to the present system, of adapting means to ends. Theybegin by laying down the purpose of a school, and then organizeit accordingly, and I believe the boys at Frankfort tobe quite as well fitted as those at Halle for the particular positionwhich they are to occupy. When boys are to be pushedin their studies, so as to select the best to carry forward, thenthe time of study must be increased, as at Halle, or a selectclass must be established, as formerly at Hamburgh. It will beobserved that in all these schools, the interest of the majorityof the boys is made the regulating principle of the instruction.SCHOOL rOR soldiers' Children AT STRUPPEHf. 137SCHOOL FOR SOLDIERS' CHILDREN AT Stripped, NEARDRESDEN.This institution is under the enlightened superintendence ofthe Minister of War of Saxony, and under the immediate directionof a teacher,* who carries out the plan in a thoroughway, both as regards manual labour and instruction. The pupilsare the orphan boys of soldiers, and are received at an early age,and prepared for apprenticeship in civil life, or for the army.The system is a judicious mixture of instruction and work; inwinter, at various trades and family occupations, and in summer,out of doors, in the garden and fields, as well as in-doors.The institution is beautifully situated on the borders of theSaxon Switzerland, and its accommodations are well adaptedto the purposes of the school.The grade of instruction is that of an elementary school, thesubjects being religious instruction, the German language, reading,arithmetic, the elements of geometry and natural philosophy,natural history, geography and history, writing, drawing,and singing. A portion of the classes were examined upon theprincipal subjects of study during my visits and specimens oftheir writing and drawing were submitted for inspection. Theproficiency of the pupils was highly satisfactory.The distribution of the time which is allotted to intellectualinstruction, during the winter session, is given below. Thereare three classes, of which the highest is called " select," manypupils, however, are apprenticed to a trade, or enter the armyas drummers or musicians, before reaching that grade. .The basis of their education is moral and religious, and theprincipal subjects in addition, are the mother tongue, and mathematics.The study of French by the select class is easilyexplained, from the peculiar political position of Saxony in referenceto the rest of the German states.Mr. Braun.t For the advantageous opportunity of visiting this school in his company, Iam indebted to the Minister of War of Saxony, Lieut. General Von Zezschwits.138 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.Table of the distribution of study at the School for Soldiers' Childrenat Struppen, near Dresden.Religious Instruction, - - -WINTER TERM.SUMMER TERM.iQi■aGerman Language,Reading,Arithmetic,Geometry,Natural Philosophy, - - -Natural History, - - . .Geography and History, - -French,Writing,Drawing,Singing,The distribution of instruction and labour is such, that duringthe week, in summer, each class has from twenty-six to twenty-eighthours of instruction, and from twenty to twenty-two ofmanual labour, and during the winter, from twenty-six to thirtyhours of instruction, and from eighteen to twenty-one of work.The various trades and occupations within doors are tailoring,(making and mending their own clothes), speaking andmending, sawing and chopping wood for the house, working inpasteboard, in straw, and in wood, making nets, filling mat-schoolFOR SOLDIERS* CHILDREN AT STRUPPEJf. 139tresses, spinning, writing for the war office and school, andmiscellaneous house work. These occupations are all carriedon regularly, and with a view to defray a portion of the expensesof the institution ; the farm is worked for the same purpose,and there is a large dairy attached to it. The pupils aredetailed for the different duties every month, and the regularhours of work are fixed by the school programme.The order of the day in winter is as follows: the pupils riseat six o'clock, wash, dress, and make their beds. At seven,they attend prayers, and take their breakfast. From eight totwelve, there is instruction every week-day, with an intermissionof a quarter of an hour at ten o'clock for recreation andluncheon. From twelve until two, they dine, have recreationand gymnastic exercises. From two until five, except in thecases of a few pupils, there is manual labour. From five to six,recreation and supper. From six to eight, ^ study, singing lessons,and manual labour. At half past eight, prayers, and atnine the classes retire. In summer they rise at five, at halfpast six have prayers, and religious instruction until seven.Breakfast, and have recreation until eight. Are engaged inschool or manual labour until twelve, with an intermission of aquarter of an hour, for relaxation, at ten. Have recreation,gymnastic exercises, and dine between twelve and two. Areengaged in school or manual labour until six, with an intervalat five for recreation, during which, as in the morning, theyreceive a luncheon of bread. On Wednesday afternoon, theybathe in the Elbe, which is at an easy walk from the institution.About seven o'clock they sup, and then are free until the hourfor prayers, towards nine o'clock. At nine they retire.The arrangements of the school are military, the studentswear a neat uniform, and those who are appointed to thecommand of the others at meals, in the dormitories, &c., aredistinguished by particular badges. The discipline is mild.The fare exceedingly simple. In the morning, flour gruel, ormilk and bread is given for breakfast ; at noon, vegetables fordinner, except on one day of the week a milk gruel. They alsoreceive a piece of bread in the intervals of recreation, in the140 Eleemosynary INSTITUTIONS.morning in winter, and both morning and afternoon in summer.The appearance of the children is healthy.The number of pupils in the several classes, in 1837-8, was,in the select class twenty-six, in the first class forty-seven, andin the second class fifty-one. Total, one hundred and twenty-four.There is a principal and two assistant teachers, besidesthose for the handicrafts. The steward has charge of the farm,and gives the pupils instruction in agriculture.ST. JOHN'S Orphan-house AT PRAGUE.This was the best orphan-house which I visited in the Austriandominions, and I give it as containing some of the peculiararrangements found in southern Germany.History Building, and General Government. The institutionwas founded in 1773, after the close of the seven years' war,by Count Runigh and others, for the maintenance and educationof twenty-five orphans. The funds* have been increasedby imperial grants, especially by those of Maria Theresa, andin consequence of a fever of violent type having broken out inthe house, which was attributed to its contracted dimensions,that empress gave money for erecting a more spacious one.The present building contains not only all necessary accommodations,but is better adapted to its object than most of the or-playhouseswhich I have seen on the continent. It containslarge halls for school-rooms and studies, for dormitories, andfor a refectory, for examinations, and dancing lessons; also, achapel with a gallery for the choir, a meeting-room for thetrustees, and for the teachers, apartments for the teachers, &c.The establishment is administered by seven trustees, appointedby the city of Prague, each of whom takes a separate departmentof it under his superintendence, the president having ageneral responsibility. They meet once a month at the house,for the transaction of business, inspect the institution everyquarter, and receive a yearly report from the superintendentwho has charge of all the departments. At present, one of the• The income it now about twenty-one thousand dollars.ST. John's orphan-house at Prague. 141teachers has been chosen to this office, but continues also togive instruction.There are, besides, three teachers, and one assistant, all ofwhom, as well as the superintendent, must be unmarried. Theteachers hold monthly conferences, to discuss the progress andconduct of the pupils, a system which cannot be too warmlyrecommended, as producing concert of action in teachers ofthe same age, and improvement in younger ones. The economyof the house is in charge of a stewardess, who receivesa fixed sum for the board of each pupil and teacher, and has,besides, a small salary from the institution, with certain perquisites.Admission ^c. To be admitted, a child must be fatherless, theson of a citizen of Prague, or of one of the inferior town officers,in necessitous circumstances, and of six years of age. On applicationfor admission, a certificate of the marriage of parents, ofbaptism, vaccination, and of having attended school, must be presented.There is no fixed age beyond which children are not received,but in general they are not admitted when over twelveyears. Special exceptions to these rules, particularly as regardsbeing the sons of burghers, have been made in certain cases,as, for example, in the orphans rendered so by the cholera.When the claims of several children are considered equal,and the number of applications exceed the vacancies, they areobliged to draw for their places. If it is discovered, after theadmission of a child, that any deception has been used, hisfriends are obliged to pay the expenses which have been incurredfor his maintenance, &c. The admission takes placeonce a year, on St. John's day.The pupils are retained until between thirteen and fourteenyears of age, and are then apprenticed by the institution. Atthe close of the apprenticeship, they receive certain gratuities.As the custom of paying apprentice fees still exists in Austria,and the institution does not pay them, these children are obligedto serve for a longer term than others, as an equivalent. Themaster to whom they are bound is obliged, if he have fault to142 ELEEMOSYNARY Institutions.find with his apprentice, to report it to the trustees, and in generalcannot break the indenture without consuming them. Noregular provision is made for the advancement of the moreintelligent.According to the rules of the house, children who are notorphans may be taken on the payment of a certain sum annually.This practice prevailed also formerly in some of theorphan-houses of Switzerland. It was intended partly to benefitthe funds of the house, and partly to prevent that isolation otthe orphans from society, which their own friendless conditionwould tend to produce. It has been found, howsoever, not towork well. The objections which appeared here were twofold ;the want of equality in the pupils who were on the charity, andof those who paid, was a source "of discomfort to the former,when the pay pupils were numerous, and the guardians of badchildren frequently took advantage of this way of educatingthem, and thus the mas of the school was corrupted by theintroduction of a few immoral individuals. The number ofthese pupils is, in consequence, in the course of gradual reduction.The whole number of boys in the house, in 1837, was fifty.Education. The courses of study here are those of the Austrianmodel high-school, and consist of reading, Writing, arithmetic,geography, and German and Bohemian grammar.There are three classes, the lowest of which, the first, can bepassed through in one year, and the other two in from two tothree years.As part of these children speak the Bohemian language only,and part the German, one of the main objects of instruction isto produce an interchange of the two. Accuracy is not attainedby their intermixture in conversation, for they tend tocorrupt each other's language by introducing a different idiom.The case is a very different one from that of a single individualplaced in a community whose language he wishesto acquire, and the result shows conclusively that this differenceis not to be overlooked in determining how a foreignlanguage is to be taught. The necessity for this devotion toST. John's orphan-house at Prague. 143language for its own sake, limits very much the intellectual developmentof the pupils.Drawing is one of the courses in which very great pains aretaken, and boys who have chosen their intended occupations,are directed to the kind of drawing judged most suitable forthem. This selection is usually made about a year before leavingthe house, so that some time is afforded for special drawing.Music is not taught in any form, except to the few who constitutethe choir of the chapel ; neither is singing used in theschool, which, to my apprehension, is an important omission.The religious instruction of the school is given, at present, bya Roman Catholic clergyman, one of the trustees,* who alsoholds a service on Sundays and holidays, in the chapel. Theinstruction consists of catechetical exercises, Bible history, &c.The teachers have not separate subjects precisely, nor yetare they confined to one class, to which they give instructionin several branches, but a kind of mixed system is in use, whichis not very advantageous. The reason assigned for this is,that as each teacher must in turn superintend the study hoursof all the classes, he must teach every class, in order to beable to keep them in due order. I was not satisfied with theresult, and believe that either system, would be preferable,but that for an elementary school, like this, the class system, asfar as it can be pursued, is the better. When a teacher is thoroughlytrained, for example, as those who are sent out by theseminaries for teachers in northern Germany, he has more thanthe acquirement requisite for such a purpose.Each teacher, in turn, is expected to superintend the pupilsfrom rising until they are in bed, which is an excellent arrangement.In this he is assisted by certain boys, appointedto the charge of divisions of six, and who are selected for thispurpose at the monthly conference of the teachers.The rewards for conduct and progress are permissions toPater Schneider has devoted the small amount now available as a salary foran ecclesiastic acting as instructor, to create, by its accumulation, a fund for achaplain. His benefits to the institution cannot, however, be estimated by pecuniarymeasure.144 ELEEMOSYNARY Institut JIQNS.visit friends on Sundays and holidays, the inscription of the pupil'sname in a book of honour, presenting him favourably tothe trustees, appointing him to the charge of others, and renderinghim eligible to prizes at the examinations. These areonly bestowed in cases where the conduct of a superintendenthas been irreproachable for six months.The punishments are varied in reference to the dispositionsof individuals, but consist principally in abridging their pleasures.Corporal punishment is permitted, but is rarely resortedto.There are no mechanic arts taught in the institution, nor dothe pupils even assist the workmen, (tailor and shoemaker,)who are employed in the house.* They take but little part inthe police of the establishment, merely waiting on each otherat naeals. Thus they lose much good moral and physical discipline.The gardens attached to the house are rented, andnothing but their prey-ground reserved for the use of the boys.Their exercises consist of gymnastics and of walks in summeralmost every day, and in winter, in walks on Thursdayand Sunday, and dancing. Their health is in general good, noindisposition having occurred during the year before my visit,requiring the use of the sick-room. The clothing is ample, inthe ordinary fashion of the boys of the town, and is changedfrom winter to summer. They have an out and in-door suit,which are supplied as the occasion requires.The diet is quite generous, resembling that of the Englishschools, more than those of northern Germany. They havemeat every day but Friday, and in the evening beer, withbread and butter. This fare shows how local such mattersare, when we find in the south a northern diet and beverage.Their food is inspected by the superintendent, and by one of thetrustees, who attends from time to time for that purpose. Theteachers dine in the same hall with the boys, and, with the stewardess,superintend them at meals. The boys who wait attable receive a small gratuity for their services.• There carr five female servant, besides a porter for the house service.IIIST. John's orphan-house at Prague. 145The provision for cleanliness is, in general, good. There isa special wash-house for summer use, but in winter they areobliged to use the school-rooms for this and other duties ofcleanliness, which, it is needless to say, is a very bad arrangement.The police of the dormitories is good, and the linen frequentlychanged ; each boy has his own bed, but the bedsteadsare of wood, except in the dormitories of the infirmary, whereiron has been introduced, and its advantage recognised. Ateacher sleeps in each dormitory, and a lamp is kept burningthrough the night.The order of the day gives four hours of study, four of recitation,three devoted to household duties, meals, &c., four anda-half to play, exercise, and gymnastics, and eight and a-halfto sleep, in the summer time. In the winter they rise half anhour later than in summer.146 Eleemosynary Institutions.CHAPTER III.NOTICES OF THE ORPHAN-HOUSES OF HOLLAND.There are two classes of Orphan-houses in Holland, the firstare conducted with a view to strict economy as the primaryconsideration, the second are foundation establishments, whichbefore the French occupation were rich, and are, even now, usuallysufficiently well off to look to higher considerations than thoseof mere economy, and to give those pupils who show great intelligencea better education than ordinary. Both classes ofthese schools have an interesting provision in the late age towhich the pupils are superintended by the establishment, whichreplaces the home of the more fortunate child; and as the modeof carrying out the provision will appear equally by selectingan institution of either class, I shall take for description theBurgher Orphan-house of Amsterdam, which belongs to thesecond. In charge of the trustees of the orphan-houses at Utrechtand the Hague, are certain foundations for educating young menof talent, which I shall describe in connexion with a few remarkson those establishments.It is a remarkable fact that one country borrows very littlefrom another, in regard to the organization of such institutions,while similar ideas prevail in nearly all where particularsigns of nationality are exhibited. They all have atendency, too, to retain the organization, in every respect,of a past age, and when the vv^orld around them is changingrapidly, are left behind in regard both to matters of littleimportance, such as dress and diet, and also to the essentialsof education. In countries where education is in astate of transition, they are in general the last to benefit bythe changes, an observation which will serve to explain mysilence in regard to many of the schools which I visited withoutthe invidiousness of special remark. My mission wasBURGHER Orphan-house OF AMSTERDAM. 147rather to discover, if possible, the good, and to place someaccount of their peculiarities before the Board, than to noticeall indiscriminately. I have considered myself bound to noticedefects in those described, where they seemed to bear uponour institution, and have treasured up mistakes of various kinds,as warnings to which we may profitably turn, but I have feltthe task of presenting either in this Report an ungrateful one, andhave avoided it where I could do so without a violation of duty.BURGHER Orphan-house OF AMSTERDAM.This establishment was founded in 1520, by a charitablelady (Haasje Plans), who, during her lifetime, had educatedseveral orphan children, and at her decease left a house andfunds to continue this benevolent practice. Subsequent legacies,by citizens of Amsterdam, have increased the funds of the institution,which at present supports itself, without drawing uponthe resources either of the city or the state. There are sixtrustees, or governors, who are named by the magistrates ofthe city, and have absolute control over the institution and itsfunds. The Board meets once a week, at the house, and thepresident is charged, in the interim, with all their duties andpowers. They report yearly to the burgomaster of the city.The officers of the establishment are, a director, who attendsto the out-door affairs, and to whom, when the trustees are notin session, the other officers of the house are responsible. Asuperintendent, and matron for the boys, and another for thegirls, called in the language of the orphan-houses of Holland,the father and mother of the boys and of the girls. The superintendentof the boys has charge of them at all times, but especiallywhen not in school; has the power to correct them atdiscretion, reporting the circumstances to the president on hisdaily visit. He makes a verbal report to the trustees at theirweekly meetings. The other superintendent, the steward of thehouse, and the two matrons, have charge of the kitchen, of theclothing, and the domestic work. The arrangement by whichthe boys are intrusted out of school hours to an officer as highas a superintendent, is much better tian that of turning them148 ELEEMOSYNARY Institutions:over to servants, but the danger is, that the inspection comesat last to be really executed by the latter, since the superintendenthas many other duties to attend to, and some of which callhim away from the house.The servants are, two nurses for the sick, one to take careof the children below eleven years of age, who are united inone building, and five women. A baker is attached to the establishment,receiving a salary, and a shoemaker does the workof the house on his own account.The buildings are very commodious, and so arranged as toadmit of an entire separation of the two sexes in the older department.The neatness of Holland is too proverbial to requireremark on that score. There is a commodious chapel, and theboys' department has memorials of deceased pupils who havedistinguished themselves in after-life, to serve as a stimulus tothe present generation.This institution was founded for the children of those whohad the rights of citizenship in Amsterdam, and now that theserights are obsolete, descendants of those who formerly enjoyedthem may claim the places, and children of parents by whoma certain amount has been paid may be admitted. Childrenwho have lost a parent have a preference over others, andthose who have lost both parents are considered to have thestrongest claim.There are three hundred and thirty-nine pupils in the chargeof the institution; of these, one hundred and fourteen are boysbelow fourteen years of age. The instruction is on the footingof the elementary schools of Holland, and will be hereafter describedin detail. It does not require special notice here. Theteachers are selected as in the other schools of Holland, by competition,unless there is some one whose abilities are sufficientlyknown to the trustees not to make examination necessary. Atfourteen, the boys are apprenticed, or begin the studies preparatoryto sea service ; they are frequently, in the latter case,drafted into the army at the age of eighteen, but always remain•* children of the house" until they reach twenty years of age.Those who are apprenticed return to the house to lodge, andBURGHER Orphan-house OF AMSTERDAM. 149to receive instruction in the evening, and those who go to sea,come back to the institution as to a home, at the end of everyvoyage. The superintendent of the boys is charged with frequentvisits of inspection at the houses where they are apprenticed,during which he informs himself of their conduct andprogress. This regulation I regard as much better contrivedthan that of the English schools, where the boys are to receivemoney at certain stated periods during their apprenticeship; soloose a connexion being attended with little advantage. In theformer case, the superintendent really supplies the place of afather, and the house of a home for the orphan child, who, insteadof being thrown upon the world at once, from his stateof seclusion, is by degrees prepared to begin his solitary career.A theoretical objection, made sometimes to this course, is, thatthese boys, acquiring bad habits out of doors, return, and maycommunicate the infection to those within, but there are man yreasons why this result should not take place. The boys aresupposed to be well brought up, and to return daily to the family,still under superintendence, the object of which is to preventthe acquisition of those bad habits which they are assumed atonce to have acquired. Besides, they do not mingle freely withthe pupils of the house; on the contrary, their return is at statedintervals, for fixed purposes, needing no communication withthe others. I took particular pains to inform myself in the differentinstitutions where this practice prevails in the form inwhich I have described it, and was told, that it was not productiveof any bad results. I remember especially the remarkof the superintendent of the Orphan-house of the ReformedChurch at Amsterdam, that if the arrangement gave muchmore trouble than it really did, he was so well satisfied of itsgood fruits, that he should regret to see it abandoned. Theidea is a beautiful one, and I should be most happy to see itfairly tried in our institution, and under our circumstances. Thelocation of the Girard College is an obstacle, but not one thatI should consider insurmountable. The practice of over-workwith apprentices of an early age, cannot be too strongly deprecated,and therefore I do not regard its existence as a bar to150 ELEEMOSYNARy mSTlTUTlONS.the plan. If fairly tried and diligently watched, 1 should notapprehend much risk of a failure, provided the school departmentsare organized in a proper way. If it were found impossible,on account of the location of the College, a similar butless efficacious arrangement of superintendence, retaining thefamily connexion with the College, might be substituted for itThe first mentioned arrangement would, perhaps, limit thenumber of places for our apprentices to particular quarters ofthe city, though this could hardly occur, connected as the differentparts of the city are by ready and cheap conveyances.The religious instruction given in the Burgher Orphan-houseis according to the doctrines of the reformed church of Holland,and dissenters go to their own ministers for instruction. Thereare two clergymen attached to the house, who hold catecheticaland other exercises on Wednesday evening and on Sunday.There are, besides, morning and evening prayers, and the usualgrace and thanks before and after meals. During meals, one ofthe pupils reads aloud from the Bible, a practice which, as conducted,is not only unserviceable, but savours, in my opinion, ofirreverence. The punishments are, preventing from a visit tofriends on Sunday, admonition, particular places at table, confinementwith or without the usual food, and dismission. Corporalchastisement is not used. The location at table is apublic punishment, and liable, on that account, to objection.There are no regular vacations, but in the holiday time of otherschools the pupils are allowed to go to their friends, if requestis made, and there is no objection on the part of the officers ofthe institution. Small pecuniary allowances are made to thepupils, at the discretion of the superintendent.The physical education of the children in the orphan housesof Holland, on the average, is by no means attended to as inthose of Germany. Gymnastics have never found favour inHolland, and amusements out of doors are less in accordancewith the spirit of the children than in England, from causesconnected, no doubt, originally with the peculiarities of thesurface of their country. At the orphan colonies of William-sword,the boys are occupied in agriculture, and are certainlyTHE RENSWOUDE FOUNDATIONS. 151more robust in consequence. The play-grounds of the cityorphan-houses are in general very contracted, and do not admitof active sports taking place in them.The following is the order of the day in winter. The elderboys rise at half past five, the younger at seven. Their breakfastof bread and butter is taken as soon as they are washedand dressed, those who live out of the house receiving theirs,which they may take away with them. From nine until halfpast eleven there is school for the boys of the house, and againfrom ten until four. They dine at one, sftp at half past eight,and retire at ten. They are free to amuse themselves fromafter supper until bed time. The time devoted to instructiongives an idea of the limited course intended. There is no provisionfor the development of higher intellect in regular connexionwith the institution.THE RENSWOUDE FOUNDATIONS.These foundations are for the benefit of the orphan-houses ofUtrecht and the Hague, and the funds are administered by theirgovernors. They were left by a lady,* (Mrs. Van Renswoude,)for the purpose of training those pupils who distinguished themselves,to higher callings not requiring a complete university education.There are seven young men now on this foundation atUtrecht, and six at the Hague. Most of those selected have becomehighly respected in their professions, and several have risento distinction. This is the more encouraging, that both the institutionsfrom which the young men have been chosen have butfew inmates; neither have now more than twenty, and thoughformerly the number was larger, they have always been smallestablishments. As these youths are, upon the average, aboutseven years upon the foundation, there is only about one choiceevery year. The pupils are selected for these places whenbetween eleven and thirteen years of age, and then receive, inor out of the orphan-house, a higher grade of instruction thanthe other children. After spending about two years in generalstudies, the youth and his teacher fix upon the profession whichseems to promise fairest, and the pupil begins the particularThe " Wry Vrouw Van Renswoude."152 ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTIONS.Studies most appropriate as a preparation. He resides in thehouse until it is necessary to seek in some public school, awayfrom the city, the special branches necessary to his profession.When I visited the Hague school, three of the pupils on theRenswoude foundation were at Utrecht, attending to clinicalmedicine in the medical department of the university, one in theveterinary school of the same place, one studying mathematicsat Leyden, and one, a pupil of the architectural school, hadgained the approbation of government, and been sent to travel,at the public expense, for improvement in his art. Of ten pupilsat Utrecht, who have been educated on this foundation, between1834 and 1836, one is a surgeon, one a veterinary surgeon, twoare painters, one is a surveyor, two are officers in the colonies,two pilots, and one is an organ-builder. The actual director ofthe hydraulic works of Holland was a Renswoude pupil, andbefore the existence of special schools for professions requiringconsiderable scientific attainments, these foundations wereof great importance.Before leaving the subject of the orphan-houses of Holland,I may state, that both at Utrecht and the Hague, and indeedalso in part at Rotterdam, the pupils reside in the house afterhaving been apprenticed. x\t the Hague they are apprenticedat between twelve and thirteen years of age, a stipulation beingmade with the master in regard to the hours of meals and ofthe cessation of work. Both here and at Utrecht the institutionsaves the gains of the apprentices, and pays them overto them on leaving the establishment, deducting only an allowancefor pocket-money. At Rotterdam the institution retainsfive-sixths of the earnings, as an equivalent for the pupil's boardingand education. In this latter institution the children areapprenticed at the early age of ten, in the city, and those whogo to sea, at twelve. With so many examples there can be nodoubt that, under the circumstances of society in Holland, andof the institutions in that country, this plan is not only perfectlypracticable, but is entirely approved after full experience. Thehabits of life there are much more like those in England and theUnited States than those in any other nation of the continentof Europe.PART II.EDUCATION IN GENERAL.The first part of this Report is devoted to institutions fororphans and destitute children, as these might be supposed tobear more especially upon the organization of the Girard College.By examples selected from among the best establishmentsof the kind which I visited, the scope of these institutionshas been shown to vary very considerably. In some we haveseen provision made for preparing the more able students forthe university; while others confined their training to the humblerwalks of life. In others, again, we have found systematicarrangements for educating the pupils to grades depending upontheir abilities, and for occupations in life selected accordingto their particular talents. The foundations which have themeans to accomplish the last named result are, however, few innumber. There are but two among those in Great Britainwhich have funds adequate to the purpose, and I am not acquaintedwith a single institution on the continent of Europewhich is thus endowed. The two in Great Britain originatedat a period when distinction was only to be attained throughthe learned professions, and a character was thus impressedupon them which has not since been changed. As a generalrule, changes are less readily made in institutions of this class,than in the schools at large; so that when education is progressive,they are apt to be left behind. Nothing is clearer, however,than that Mr. Girard intended his institution to have theentire range of usefulness to which I have referred. Hencemy investigations would have been incomplete, had they not includedpublic schools in general, and my Report deficient, didit not present to the trustees some account of the institutions forgeneral education in those countries of Europe where it is onthe best footing. From these descriptions various hints mayj^ PUBLIC INSTRUCTION IX GENERAL.be gathered, and measures suggested which cannot fail to beserviceable in the general organization or minute arrangementof the Girard College. If this account should further contributeto awaken attention in our schools to improvements which havebeen introduced abroad, I am sure that the trustees of the GirardCollege will feel gratified at this useful result of their measures.The periods of education for which separate schools and differentmaterials of instruction have been appropriately provided,are, the Infant, the Elementary or Primary the Secondary, andthe Superior. Schools for the one class sometimes include departmentsfor the other; but, in general, the classification holdsgood. These four classes include the period up to the age atwhich education is completed, and the career of active life iscommenced. The first period extends, generally, to six yearsof age; the second to ten or twelve years; the third to sixteenor eighteen; and the fourth to about twenty-one. These limitsvary in different countries, under different social organizations,and with different individuals. Circumstances do not permitevery one to pass through these several periods, nor are theyall required for the different callings of life. Hence the educationfrequently terminates with the elementary period, which isthen extended to the age of fourteen. The limits of secondaryinstruction are frequently changed in the same way. As in allartificial classifications, the limits of the classes are not preciselydefined, though the division is, nevertheless, convenientfor the arrangement and discussion of facts.The lowest period of education is entirely anterior to that atwhich the pupil must enter the Girard College, according tothe will of the founder; but, for reasons which will be stated inthe introduction to it, I have concluded to embrace a notice ofit in this report. It is of comparatively recent origin; is welldeveloped in but one country in Europe ; and hence occupiesbut a snrjall space, which is altogether insignificant when comparedwith the principles embraced. The elementary and secondaryperiods arc those which the limits of age fixed by thewill of Mr. Girard would indicate as especially embraced in ourcourse of education. A portion of that of superior instructionis, however, included within them, especially, according to theINTRODUCTION. 155educational arrangements common in the United States. Thisgrade of education, as given in Europe, has two distinct objects.The first is, an introduction to the learned professions; the second,to the higher occupations in the arts, manufactures, andcommerce. The first kind of instruction is given in the universities,and, in general, the universities of Great Britain formingthe exception, the studies are of a professional character or tendency.For this, and other reasons, more fully developed inthe remarks introductory to the chapter on superior education,I have chiefly confined myself to the schools of the second divisionof this grade.In submitting, then, the view of the different periods of education,to which the remainder of this Report is principally devoted,I shall take them up in the succession already mentioned,preceding each by a statement of the order in which the differentcountries are treated, and with such remarks as mayseem necessary, by way of introduction. As it would havebeen manifestly impossible to give an account of general educationin all the countries I visited, within the limits appropriateto a report, 1 have selected in each period, those whichappeared to me most important as examples, making such remarksas a view of the whole ground has suggested, and occasionallyinstituting direct comparisons. Following out thesame principle, I have not undertaken to give an account of allthe schools I visited ; but have confined my Report to such asseemed best calculated to serve as types of different classes ofinstitutions.After brief notices of certain infant schools, elementary instructionis considered under two heads: the first, embracingthe schools for general purposes, the second, those intended forspecial training, as for the education of a rural or industrial population,and of teachers for the elementary schools. Under theformer head will be given a notice of the provisions for elementaryinstruction in Great Britain; a notice of the primary publicinstruction in France; a more particular description of the primarysystem of Holland, and of some schools which illustrate itsapplication; a history and general sketch of the Prussian system,with detailed descriptions and notices of several prominent156 PUBLIC INSTRUCTION IN GENERAL.schools; a notice of the system of primary instruction in Saxony,and of some of the schools, and an account of the methodapplied in the schools of Bayreuth, in Bavaria. The seconddivision of primary instruction will comprehend descriptions ofcertain rural schools of Switzerland and Great Britain, an industrialprimary school of France, and of some of the schools forprimary teachers in Prussia, France, Holland, and Switzerland.Passing to the head of secondary instruction, the Report willinclude descriptions and notices of schools in Great Britain,France, Prussia, and Saxony ; each chapter being devoted toa separate country, and preceded by general introductoryremarks. I have ventured to propose a subdivision of thishead, which appears to me borne out by reason, and by thepresent state of facts in regard to education; the argument inreference to it will be found among the matter introductory tothat division of the Report.In some countries it would appear, from the nature of theirinstitutions, to be assumed that there is but one way of formingcharacter, and of training the faculties of the mind, and that bythis way all, if they are to be educated, must pass, whatevertheir occupation in after life. In others, a diversity in the methodsof training appears to be admitted. In the first, if it benot the lot of the individual to remain sufficiently long undereducation to master the entire scholastic course, he is expectedat least to possess a fragment of it. In the second, fragmentaryeducation is not admitted; but according to the time the individualmay have to dispose of before entering active life, hiscourse of education is directed; and as this cannot be accuratelyknown in early life, the different paths diverge at first slowly,to render a passage from one to the other easy. Examples willbe furnished of both these systems; and, if I mistake not, it will beseen that the second, while its theory commends itself to reason,if, at the same time, entirely practicable.Under the division of Superior Instruction will be given descriptionsof some special schools for the arts, manufactures,and commerce of France, Prussia, and Austria, and the higheragricultural school of Wirtemburgh, besides brief notices ofa few other similar institutions.INFANT SCHOOLS. 167CHAPTER 1.INFANT SCHOOLS.As the pupils of the Girard College cannot be admitted beforethe age of six, they are past the infant period, and thus it maybesupposed that I am departing from the rule which I havebeen obliged to lay down, in order to confine my Report withinreasonable bounds. I am so fully impressed, however, with theimportance of infant education, that I would not feel justifiedin passing over the period without a brief notice. The infantschool system embraces so much of the philosophy of education,has been made so entirely an inductive branch, has beenpondered over by so many minds of a superior order, that wecannot fail to derive advantage from a consideration of some ofits principles and practical results. I am persuaded, that fromthe quarter of infant school instruction will one day come thereform of the English juvenile schools, and indeed this reformhas already commenced, in the instance of the Juvenile ModelSchool of Glasgow, and must extend widely, by the influenceof its school for teachers.The infant school system seems to have originated about thesame time in Great Britain and Switzerland. In the formercountry, the first idea has been steadily improved upon, andthere also it is now best carried out. Oberlin, the pastor ofSteinthal (Ban de la Roche), collected the younger children ofthe poor of his parish into schools, where a female superintendenttaught them spinning or knitting, and at intervals a littlegeography, from a Map of Steinthal and its Environs, or, by thehelp of pictures, a portion of Bible or natural history. Aboutthe same time, the children of the workmen in Mr. Owen's extensivemanufacturing establishments, at New Lanark, werecollected in schools, for the purpose of healthful recreation, andof due care and of a certain degree of intellectual instruction;and, subsequently, a similar establishment was commenced byLord Brougham, in Westminster. Mr. Wilderspin must, GEJfERAL Education. INFANT PERIOD.ever, be considered as the author of the infant school as it nowexists, having, in his connexion with a proposed asylum in anotherpart of Tendon, first proposed the name, defined the age, andestablished the true principles of infant education.It is mainly by his instrumentality that the present system isnow diffused so extensively over Great Britain. Of this systemthe infant schools of Liverpool, which he was engaged to reform,offered me an example for inspection, though not of themost favourable kind. The model infant schools of Glasgow,Edinburgh, and London, are improvements on the system, presentingmarked varieties: that in London being derived, however,from the Glasgow model.The necessity for the existence of such schools must varymuch in different countries, and hence their not being adoptedin all is no argument against the general principle of infant education.The want of such schools is most felt in a dense andmanufacturing population, least in a scattered and agriculturalone. Independently of essentially different degrees of usefulness,under different circumstances, various prejudices have concurredto prevent the introduction of these schools into some countries.Certain governments, as those of Germany in general, have notlent their influence to them, and the clergy have, in some partsof Europe, been as warmly opposed to them as in others theyhave been their friends. The deformed models which have beentransplanted from England to other countries, have tended inmany cases to foster these prejudices. In some of these the intellectualdevelopment of the pupils has been attempted to becarried on to their manifest injury, physically and mentally.In others, a mere mechanical and lifeless routine has been followed.The infant schools which I saw at Paris, called " colesd*asile," seem to me to educate upon wrong principles, havingadopted the mechanical arrangements of the English infantschools, without having seized their spirit. I believe, that of the female superintendence which they formerly 'enjoyed, to make them a part of the government system, willreact further very injuriously upon them.In lome of the cities of Holland, as Rotterdam, Amsterdam,and Swollen, I saw good infant schools. In the capital ofGLASGOW MODEL INFANT SCHOOL. 169Prussia they are beginning to take permanent root. In AustriaProper, their condition is rather languishing, but in theItalian provinces they are deemed most important means ofultimately effecting a great change in the character of the people.At Venice the establishment is fostered by the governmentand liked by the people. At Milan is an admirable institution,growing out of that founded at Cremona, by the Abbe d'Apos-ti, who first introduced these schools into Italy. In Lombardyand Venice the schools are under the control of a society.The best infant schools which I visited were decidedly thoseof Glasgow, Edinburgh, and London. The system of the infantschools of Lombardy, as I saw it at Milan, comes next to theEnglish model, *but is comparatively too verbal and precise,dealing too little with realities.* I propose to give an accountof the school at Glasgow, and merely a notice of those atEdinburgh and Gray's Inn Road, London, that I may not besupposed to dwell unnecessarily upon the subject.Model Infant School of the Glasgow Education Society.This is the first of the schools of the Glasgow EducationSociety, and was founded in 1826. At my visit in 1836, itcontained two hundred pupils, and the success of the societyhad been such as to induce the erection of new buildings tocontain their infant, juvenile, normal, and other schoolsThe principles of the system of education in this school are,first, that the corporal, intellectual, and moral nature of itspupils, is to be improved. Second, that this is to be done by inculcatinggood principles, and training to the practice of them.Third, that to render such training effectual, the nature of theindividual to be educated must be studied. In a day-school likeI am indebted to the Marquis of Beccaria, one of the most strenuous friendsof infant schools in Lombardy, for an account of the foundation and actual conditionof the asylums of charity at Milan, in 1837, and the "Manual of Educationand Administration of Infant Schools," by the Rev. Abbe d'Aposti, and aGuide for the Founders and Directors of Infant Charity Schools, derived fromthe Practice in the Infant Schools of Cremona." Milan, 1836.t I am particularly indebted, for the opportunities of freely visiting the schools^1 of this society to the intelligent secretary, David Stow, Esq., author of Stow'sSystem of Moral Training aid of the Training System Adopted in the ModelSchools of the Glasgow Education Society, &,c.1^ GENERAL EDUCATION. INFANT PERIOD.this one, for example, corporal training would include the acquisitionof proper habits of walking, sitting, standing, holding abook or slate, which, with manners, cleanliness, and a varietyof others, will naturally suggest themselves. Intellectual trainingexercises the observing, perceiving, knowing, and reasoningfaculties in a due degree, and here the art of the teacher is exercisedmainly to judge how far he shall offer food to these. Andso also of the moral and religious. It is frequently forgotten thatthe amelioration of the heart should precede that of the head, andmoral and physical development are sacrificed to intellectual*Not so in this school. Its peculiar characteristic may be considered,the great stress which it lays upon the daily use ofthe Bible, as a means of both moral and intellectual training,and the constant preference given to such exercises as may beconnected with it over all others. I subjoin, in the Appendix,(No. Ix,) an example of a Bible lesson, to illustrate my meaningin asserting the connexion of various intellectual exerciseswith its lessons. In Wilderspin's system there were twenty-fourBible lessons, selected with a view to avoid any of thepoints on which sects of Christians differ; in this there is a lessonfor each day in the year, giving the variety which theother system wants, but at the expense, in part, of simplicity.The mechanical arrangements of the school are, first, theschool-room, with its platforms as usual raised in steps, called thegallery, occupying a considerable part of the breadth of the room.Second, the lesson-posts and forms, where the little classes assembleunder their monitors. Third, the detached room, wherethe master may retire with a class. Fourth, the play-ground,with its implements for exercise and amusement, its flowersand fruits. The school-room is but tolerably well ventilated,though, no doubt, this will be remedied in a house built expresslyfor the purposes of the school. It is hung round with• The abu of intellectual development is nowhere more admirably set forththan in the treatise by our countrymen, A. Brigham, M. D., which has been re-pobliiOMd in England, and ia considered a standard work on the subject. our countrymen, Mr. Abbott, Stands high as authority in relation to in-sot culture.GLASGOW MODEL mPANT SCHOOL. 161boards, on which, in large letters, are inscribed words or religioussentiments, or on which are pictures of animals, &c.The raised platform, in steps of due height, and where bothboys and girls* are seated, combines many advantages; it enablesthe teacher distinctly to see every pupil, and in turn thepupils to see the master and each other. Thus the ponder ofimitation and sympathy, which play so great a part in education,are brought to bear under the most advantageous circumstances.It is in this gallery that the most important exercises aregiven. The school opens with a short prayer, adapted to thecomprehension of the children, order being first secured, if thereare untrained pupils among them, by the aid of short physicalexercises, raising and lowering the hands, rising and sittingdown, and so on — such exercises never failing to produce thisresult. The children assembled here listen to the Bible lesson,the master occupying the front and centre of the little assemblage,with the Bible-stand to support his book, and by its sidethe whistle and bell, which are to convey signals, intended tosecure prompt obedience. The lesson having been read, it isbroken up into detached parts. The simple ones afford matterfor direct questions, or the children are led to understand themby other preliminary questions, proceeding always from theknown to the unknown. Replies from many are secured bythe elliptical form of answer, in which the master leaves asimple but emphatic word, or part of a word, to be supplied.These are impressed upon all by a repetition of the ellipsis,the filling up of which all have now caught from those whofirst supplied it, and finally the whole answer is repeated.The Bible lesson is frequently one of civil or natural historyand geography. Simplicity in question is the desideratum inthis and other exercises. The master must descend to thelevel of the child, or he effects nothing. Singing a hymn, orphysical exercises, or the inspection which ensures cleanliness,It is considered most important to infant training that both boys and girlsshould be united in a class under a master and mistress103 GENERAL EDUCATION. INFANT .PERIOD.will vary this course, and above all, care must be taken thatthe attention of the children is kept up. If this fails, it is themaster himself who fails. A principle which, if at all admitted,in more advanced education, does not occupy the place whichit deserves.The gallery serves also for the lessons on objects, or picturesof objects, where simple specimens from the animal, vegetable,and mineral kingdom, or of artificial productions, are made thesubjects of actual examination or of description. Their properties,as far as may be, are observed by the children, led by themaster, who directs their feeble perceptions. Words to expresstheir ideas are furnished, when the want of these words is felt.With those somewhat advanced, the printed or written wordis shown and imitated on the slate.At an earlier period the letter which begins the word is selectedfrom a series of large brass letters, cut out for this purpose,and is held before the pupil, and its name or its mostcommon sound in combination given. A word beginning withthe same letter is suggested by a pupil, another and anothermay be written on the board and copied, and all or any ofthem may be made the subject of instructive exercise.At a later day the exercise of practical grammar, which willbe explained when speaking of the juvenile school, is added.When places are spoken of, objects or pictures are shown inconnexion with them. The children are in the gallery alsoduring their arithmetic lessons, when the ball frame, so wellknown in all infant schools, is substituted for the Bible-stand,and the teacher gives his lessons by question and answer elliptically,by teaching a song in which the ellipsis of a word occursin each line, or by the pupils singing simple songs alreadylearned. These impress the easy operations of infant arithmeticpowerfully upon the memory. The eye and ear are thus improvingwith the intellect, or the eye is exercised by the determinationof angles by the jointed instrument, called a monograph.or by geometrical figures. The children are also in thegallery when hearing from the master a story, embodying circumstancesof a moral tendency, or calculated to instruct oramuse, or to arouse curiosity. This is one of the exercisesGLASGOW MODEL INFANT SCHOOL. 163they are most fond of, and which, if the master be apt, maybemade as useful as any. The characters of the great andthe good may be brought before them, their feelings interested,and thus early elevated, their patriotism excited, and evil tendenciesrepressed. It is the peculiar feature of this school todraw such stories often from the sacred volume, and in general,as an illustration of how attractive these may be rendered, itmay be stated, that when left to choose the kind of story theywill have, the children prefer a Bible history to any other.These various exercises of course are not continuous, nor dothey even occur, sometimes, on the same day, and each of themisinterrupted frequently for exercise, especially with untrainedchildren.•^The elliptical method* spoken of is to omit the last or someimportant word of a sentence, taking care that it is one easily suppliedby the children, and which leaves the sentence plainly imperfectuntil it is given. Thus the children are engaged in a kind ofconversation with the teacher, interesting to them because theyare parties in it, and watching keenly the sentence, that theymay seize the wanting word. In the ellipsis used in this school,the first sounds of a word are frequently supplied, requiring thelittle assembly to suggest the rest. I observed a great differencein the facility with which the children supped the ellipsisof their master, by whom they were in the habit of being questioned,and that of others by whom they were addressed, butfound that it arose, generally, from the too great rapidity of theuninitiated teachers, by which they did not allow the childrentime to think and to answer. This explanation supposes theellipsis well contrived. The method of responses is frequentlyvaried, by inducing some one or more of the children to askquestions of the class, two or more of each other, or one or moreto volunteer to be questioned by the class. From the wholeof this method, emulation as a principle is excluded, it is notneeded, and indeed it is truly held that it would be pernicious.This method is stated to have been first announced by Dr. Borthwick Gilchrist,in his lectures on Oriental literature. It was adopted early by Mr. VVil-dessein.164 OEIfERAL EDUCATION. Infant PERIOD.I was surprised, in witnessing some of these exercises, at theaccuracy with which the children stated their questions, resultingentirely from the imitation of the perspicuous style of themaster.* On the subject of imitative powers at this early age,many facts might be brought together; one struck me so muchthat I mention it here. 1 never visited an infant school in whichthe voice of the master or mistress was agreeable in singing,without finding melody among the children, and vice versa. Itis recorded in this school that nearly all the children learn tosing agreeably.The passage from the gallery to the lesson posts is performedwhile singing, and always in regular order. Sometimes aninterval of out or in-door exercise separates the lessons. Themonitors are chosen by the master, or offer themselves by beholdingup of hands, when he calls for it, before the childrenleave the gallery. Each monitor has a class of half a dozenor more, to whom he explains the picture suspended upon theirparticular reading-post, and the letters or words beneath it.The classes change posts, after a reasonable interval, and themonitor has a new set to drill. Such teaching is not to beexpected to be deficient, but it nevertheless answers a goodpurpose at this age. The lesson-posts are arranged so that theboard on which the lesson is pasted may be readily changed,and so that its height may be varied to suit the size of thepupils receiving the lesson. The boards are covered with colouredprints of animals, representations of trades, of costumes,&c. No formal attempt is made to teach reading, but it isfound without it that the children insensibly learn to read. Auseful exercise for the more advanced children, requiring studyat home, and which also frequently excites the attention of parents,is to give them cards, with questions relating to naturalhistory &c., to be answered on a subsequent day. The answersare sometimes required from particular parts of the Bible.Behind the gallery are the places for hanging the caps andcloak of the children, which they are trained to put off and• Mr. David Caught, whcwe wife ii his assistant in the school.GLASGOW MODEL INFANT SCHOOL. 165to take again in an orderly manner. The detached room enablesa master to hear any class which he may wish, apartfrom the others, the mistress meanwhile superintending theschool, or to teach the monitors, or furnishes a place for thenoon luncheon, which many of the children bring with them.The play-ground in the system of this school is considered the"uncovered school-room," the true place for moral training,where the principles inculcated within are to be carried intopractice, and where the tempers and dispositions show themselvesmore fully, in unrestrained intercourse, than in the school.There is in it a circular swing* for exercise, wooden prismsin the proportions of bricks, for amusement, and flowers andfruits, to train them to respect the goods of others and of thepublic.The master is constantly with, or overlooking them, sometimesmixing in their sports, or showing them new or amusinggames, and always attentive to their development of character,but unless in extraordinary cases, his interference is not necessary.The benevolence of some children prevents or remediesthe accidents incident to their plays, and justice insures a tolerablyequal share of the sports. When a fault is committed, it'is noticed after the assembling of the children in the gallery,where the public opinion of his equals in age is brought to bearupon the offender by a judicious series of questions from themaster, without, however, making the punishment a public one,by directly designating the individual who is under censure.Punishments in or out of school are adapted to the tender ageof the child, and addressed to his peculiar temperament. Corporalpunishment, even of the mildest kind, is seldom found necessary.This consists of a mast or post, about eighteen feet high, on the top of whichis a plate of iron, movable upon a pin of the same material, fastened into the post.Four ropes hang from this plate, and each has knots or sticks across it, at heightssuitable to the size of the children, who are to grasp them. These ropes beingseized, the children run round, keeping them fully stretched. The motion soonproduces a sufficient centrifugal force to take them off their feet. If a child letsgo of the rope, he is carried beyond the circle where the others would touch himin their course round.166 GENERAL Education. INFANT PERIOD.When the play-ground cannot be used, the want is supplied,/ . as far as possible, by games within doors, which are, however,very imperfect substitutes for those in the open air.SCHOOL OF THE EDINBURGH INFANT SCHOOL SOCIETY.This establishment was founded by the Edinburgh InfantSchool Society, in 1829, subsequently to that of Glasgow, andupon principles of education very similar to those of the GlasgowModel School. The necessity of combining moral with intellectualtraining is especially insisted upon here as in the other,and the same importance is attached to physical training. Thesame use is made of the play-ground as in the Glasgow school,and with similar efficacy as to the bodily and moral improvementof the children. The system of Wilderspin was at theoutset the guide of both.The general principles which regulate the establishment of aschool, however closely it may be the intention of the teacher tofollow them, will always receive a modifying impress from hisown peculiar views and qualities. Thus, while intellectual educationis declared to be a secondary object here, the amount ofactual attainment by the pupil is much greater than at Glasgow,from the circumstance that the turn of the master's mind is constantlytowards inventing ways of simplifying the mode of instruction.Some part of the time occupied in the other schoolin religious training is spent in this in intellectual, and the childrenleave it, having advanced so far as to read, spell, and parse,and having a knowledge of the elements of geography, history,and arithmetic, with the properties of various objects, &c. Theseason at which I visited the school, the winter, was unfavourableto a judgment of the physical education, but the appearanceof the children indicated that it was good. The moral resultsappear from published documents highly satisfactory, andthe intellectual struck me as perhaps even too high; a correctdecision, however, on this important question would requiremore time for observation than 1 had to bestow, especially fromthe fact which I have before remarked, that the talent of theINFANT SCHOOL SOCIETY OF LONDON.master* particularly showed itself in intellectual training. Hismultiplied means of addressing instruction through the eye, theproducts in great part of his own ingenuity in devising and skill inexecuting, were very remarkable; added to which he had thrownmany subjects into the form of games, rendering them attractiveto the children. Among the former were the progressivemaps of travel for infant geography, the historical maps, withpicture illustrations, the illustrated grammar exercises, the exercisesin measures and weights, and in Arabic and Roman numerals,all illustrated by ingenious and perspicuous diagrams.I was also particularly pleased with a series of moral traininglessons, which, beginning with a statement of what the schoolshould be, provides rules for attaining this condition, and reasonsfor the rules; precepts in regard to the virtues, and remarksupon faults to be avoided.This school has had as many as one hundred and sixty pupils,and the general attendance averages about one hundredand twenty. The mixed system of lessons in the gallery, andof monitors for the classes, is used in it as at Glasgow, and theother general arrangements are also much the same in the twoschools.SCHOOL OF THE HOME AND COLONIAL INFANT SCHOOLSOCIETY OF LONDON."The Home and Colonial Infant School Society" was institutedin 1836, to promote the cause of infant education, by pointingout to the public the indispensable qualifications of teachers,by providing an establishment where teachers might be receivedand their acquirements put to the test and improved, and by publishinglectures, lessons, manuals, and other appropriate works-fTo carry out the second part of this undertaking, the societyfound a model infant school absolutely necessary. The teachersMr. Milne, who has his wife for his assistant in the school.t The society has been fortunate in securing the assistance of some of themost distinguished friends of education in their enterprise, as Doctor and MissMayo, of London, Dr. Bryce, of Belfast, &c. Dr. Mayo is well known as theprincipal of a Pestalozzianan school at Cheap, in Surrey.168 General EDUCATION. IWFAITT PERIOD.were instructed in the principles of their art, but as the schoolswhich they visited did not exemplify these principles, they werenot trained in the practice of them, and hence, in many cases,their career did not justify the expectations of the society.The model infant school established by this society is uponthe enlightened plan which I have already described, theteacher having been trained in the Normal school at Glasgow;but it partakes, in a considerable degree, of the peculiaritiesof the Edinburgh school. Thus, in religious instruction, itsaim is to avoid such matter as shall be objectionable to anydenomination of Christians, and it carries intellectual educationfurther than its Glasgow model. It is true, indeed, that in the recentofficial work* on infant education issued by the society, apart of the instruction actually given, namely, teaching to read,is not spoken of with special approbation, but rather as a yieldingto the supposed prejudices of parents. The method itselfdraws strong encomiums from the managers of the society,and will be found described in the Appendix to this Report,(No. X.)t I vv^as particularly pleased with the lessons givenin sensible objects, and the incidental exercises of orthographyto which they led. The pictures used are a decided improvementon those commonly employed, but a difficulty in their usehas been discovered, from the very precise ideas which thechild attaches to them, by which truth appears to be violated,when the same subject is illustrated differently in two pictures.It has been found possible to overcome this difficulty, in adegree, by impressing upon the child that these pictures aremerely general illustrations, and not precise representations ofevents which the artist has witnessed.The small play-ground here is better furnished with the meansof infant gymnastic exercises than that of Glasgow, but is byDO means commodious.• PncUc&l Remarks on Infant Education, by the Rev. Dr. Mayo and MissMayo. It is interesting to sec, in this work, how admirably the natural methodof instruction by Pestalozzi adapts itself to the infant school.t It is entitled "Reading Disentangled," and is divided into twenty-sevenINFANT SCHOOL SOCIETY OP LONDON.The teachers who are in training receive theoretical lessons,attend the practice of the school, are employed to teachsmall classes in separate rooms, under superintendence, and,finally, practice with the entire class. The course for teachersis, as yet, however, of too Limited a duration, being only threemonths ; but it is proposed to extend it when further means ofreducing the cost of the maintenance of the pupil-teachers shallbe afforded.170 GEWERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.CHAPTER II.ELEMENTARY OR PRIMARY EDUCATION.INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.Elementary education may be considered in two points ofview, both of great importance: as the sole education of themass of the community, or as leading to higher instruction.In the former view, it requires to be complete, as a whole; inthe latter, it is essentially preparatory. In reference to each,its character is materially different. In our country at large,"we have been necessarily more occupied with creating commonschools, than with elevating the standard of the instructiongiven in them. In the meantime, education has been advancing; and, unless we would be untrue to ourselves and to ourpolitical institutions, we must gather experience wherever it isto be found, and apply those practical results which are bestadapted to our circumstances. In like manner, on the morelimited field of the Girard College, we must raise our systemupon the basis of the successful experiments of others, unlesswe would encounter the vexations incident to the acquisition ofexperience by our own failures.The importance of primary instruction in both these references,has induced me to extend this notice of its present conditionto a considerable number of countries, and to multiplythe examples illustrative of the systems, where the schools are inaflourishing condition.It happens, and I believe unfortunately for us, that the elementaryschools of Great Britain are, in general, behind thoseof oilier countries of Europe with which we are less connected.Desultory, and sometimes conflicting, efforts at improvementhave not made an impression proportioned to thewants of the people of that country, and have left them behindolden, Mrho have much less need of cultivated intelligence toINTRODUCTORY REMARKS. 171enable them to fusil the duties of citizens. Through the mediumof schools for teachers, the importance of which is nowrecognised, the same rapid reforms may, however, be workedthere, as have been effected in some countries on the continent.It will be found that, at present, I have been obliged to drawmy examples of the schools for popular instruction in GreatBritain from Scotland exclusively, but descriptions of departmentsfor primary instruction will be found in some of thenotices of secondary schools of other parts of the country.Although the primary schools of France are not yet, in general,upon a level with those of Holland and Prussia, I haveappended a brief notice of the system and progress of publicinstruction there. The view affords great encouragement, byI showing how much may be realized by judicious laws, and inawell-arranged system of inspection. A rapid improvement inthe schools in general will, no doubt, result from the operationof the normal schools.The system of primary instruction in Holland is particularlyinteresting to an American, from its organization in an ascendingseries ; beginning with the local school authorities, and terminating,after progressive degrees of representation, as it< were, in the highest authority; instead of emanating, as in thecentralized systems, from that authority. A fair trial has beengiven to a system of inspection which is almost entirely applicableto our country, and which has succeeded with them.They have tried an important experiment, in communicatingreligious without sectarian instruction; another, which hasresulted in demonstrating the necessity of special schools forteachers; and another, entirely unfavourable to the system ofmutual instruction. I have enlarged, therefore, upon the generalaccount of their system of public instruction, and havegiven rather a general notice of the schools, than of any one inparticular. I have, however, made one of the schools for thepoor, which seemed to me superior even to those of the sameclass in Prussia, the subject of special description and remark.The account in reference to Holland is followed by that ofthe Prussian system and schools. This is the most perfect of179 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.the centralized systems, allowing considerable latitude in thearrangement of the individual schools, while all are subject to theinfluence of the central authority. It has not, as is commonlysupposed, recently sprung into existence, but has been the workof time, has been altered and amended, and is still in progress.Its present condition is the result of experience, and thus it commendsitself to enlightened imitation, by which I mean thatwhich, laying aside what is inapplicable to the political or socialinstitutions of the country adopting it, would employ the largeamount of useful material which it contains. The schools containmuch more that is applicable to our country than the system ingeneral, and hence I have enlarged upon them, particularly uponthe higher class of primary schools, which seem to me in bettercondition than those of any other of the larger European states.It is in what may be called the incidental parts of instruction,and which do not appear upon paper; in the spirit of the teacher,and sometimes in that of the books; that the peculiarities of nationalorganization in these schools are chiefly to be found.The chapter on Prussia is followed by a notice of the schoolsof Saxony, and by an account of the excellent higher primaryschool, or Burgher School of Leipsic. The Model PrimarySchool of Frankfort on Maine is described in the same chapter.The necessity of confining myself within limits has alone preventedme from giving an account of some of the schools ofWeimar, of Nassau, and of Switzerland.The Bavarian schools, according to Graser's method, followin the chapter succeeding Saxony. I have omitted mention ofthe others, as throwing no new light upon the subject. This istrue also of the Austrian primary schools. These latter arechiefly characterized by a spirit of system, which exactly regulatesthe method and amount of what is to be taught, and whenit shall be taught, throughout this vast empire. The mode ofeducating teachers tends to give them rather the routine thanthe spirit of their profession. My remarks apply to AustriaProper, and have no reference to the number, but to the generalcharacter of the schools. I was most favourably impressed withthe earnest efforts making in the Italian provinces of Austria toINTRODUCTORY REMARKS. 173spread primary instruction, an important measure where theschools have been so much neglected.In the notices introductory to the description of schools in thedifferent countries, I have endeavoured to give an outline of theorganization of public instruction, of the regulations upon whichit is founded, and of the mode of supplying teachers. The varietiesin the schools are represented by some of the best whichI visited, and of these I have given a more or less minute account,as the subject seemed to require, endeavouring, as in theformer part of the Report, rather to notice peculiarities and differencesthan to repeat the same details in every case. In general,however, as before, the history and purpose of the schoolis first given, then its organization and government, then theadmission and dismission of pupils, then the moral, intellectual,and physical education which it provides are discussed, andcomparisons drawn between it and other similar institutions.These are interspersed with such remarks as reflection uponthe subject may have suggested.Besides the class of general primary schools, others whichmay be considered as of a special character have been planned,by which, while pursuing the studies of the elementary period,the individual is, at the same time, trained for his calling in afterlife.Such are the rural schools of Switzerland, which have alsobeen transplanted to England and Ireland, and the manufacturingand industrial schools of France. I have placed this classin a separate chapter, and described, in turn, two of the ruralschools of Switzerland, one of Ireland, one of a mixed rural andindustrial character in England, and one industrial school ofFrance.I have preferred, for the sake of a better comparison of theseminaries for teachers, sometimes called normal schools, toplace those of different countries together, and they will accordinglybe found in a separate chapter, after those containing anaccount of the primary schools. The seminaries of Prussia areplaced first, then those of France, and lastly, a notice is givenof one of the normal schools of Holland and of Switzerland.174 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.These notices will terminate the division of my Report relatingto primary schools.ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OF GREAT BRITAIN.Until lately, the only part of Great Britain which had theadvantages of a system of public elementary instruction, wasScotland. In England the establishment of schools has beenleft to private enterprise or charity, or religious zeal and liberality,assisted, but not efficiently, by appropriations from Parliament.The schools for the instruction of the people duringweek days are still miserably deficient, both in number andkind, and as yet there appears no prospect of concert of effortto bring about a better state of general education. The exertionswhich have produced here and there endowed schools,factory schools, schools of industry, schools for paupers or foradults, though of course highly commendable, can lead to nogeneral system of national education; and the same may beremarked of Sunday schools, however good and useful in theirparticular way. In no country in Europe, I believe, is so muchbenevolent effort to be met with as in Great Britain, and couldit be directed in concert, it is capable of the highest results. Thetwo associations which have done most for general elementaryinstruction are the " British and Foreign School Society," establishedin 1805, to aid in extending the system proposed byJoseph Lancaster, and the "National Society for Promotingthe Education of the Poor on the Principles of the EstablishedChurch, throughout England and Wales," founded in 1811,to disseminate the system of Dr. Bell. With the different principlesof action of these societies I have nothing to do in thisplace. I visited schools in connexion with both, or followingtheir methods, and as might have been expected, found theirmodel schools established in London, in general, the best specimensof their views.The model school of the first named society in the Borough-road,is under the charge of an enlightened teacher,* who has• Mr. S. Crowley.ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OF GREAT BRITAIN. 175done much to improve the Lancastrian method, by renderingit less mechanical, infusing a more intellectual character into itsexercises, and adding new branches of instruction.* The successis limited, however, by the capacity of the method itself,and I cannot hold up even this improved form of it as a modelfor imitation. The results produced at a public examinationpleased me very much, but these were, in fact, in great part,consequences of the master's instruction, and of the verysuperior intelligence of a few pupils. To judge of the effectupon the whole school, it should be visited in working-hours,and especially when the classes are under their monitors, whocarry on the principal business of teaching. The humble characterof the intellectual and moral teaching belonging to thesystem of mutual instruction is then fully visible. While I estimatehighly the good which this society has done by establishingschools when there were none, I do not find it necessary todescribe the particulars of their method of instruction. Themodel school of the National Society did not come up to theexample of the modified Bell system, already presented in theLiverpool Blue-coat School. The system of mutual instructionbelongs to a very advanced grade of public education, andin which the means of procuring or compensating masters arelimited. When large numbers of children must be collected inone school, or be destitute of instruction on account of limitedmeans, then the method is the only one feasible, and ought tobe encouraged.The society for the promotion of the education of the poor inIreland, established in 1811, has been of essential service in thatcountry. At first, they acted as a private body, but subsequentlyreceived a grant of money from the British Parliament. Theyhave a model school in Dublin, and during the continuance of thegovernment grant, educated a considerable number of teachers,published many cheap school-books, and works for lending-libraries.With them also originated, in its application to Ireland,the admirable system of regular school inspectors. This grantLinear drawing and music are both cultivated.176 General EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.was withdrawn in 1831, which has reduced very essentiallythe scale of their operations.The Board of National Education for Ireland was appointedin 1831, and is intended as the head of a government systemof elementary instruction for the population of the whole island.This Board has not only greatly increased the number of elementaryschools, and supplied new text-books, but has established,on a considerable scale, a seminary where the futureteacher is first instructed in the elementary branches in whichhe may be deficient, and then is furnished with the principlesof education, and an opportunity to reduce them to practice,under superintendence, in model schools. At the time of myvisit to Dublin, these schools were in the course of organizationin a new building, erected specially for them. The appointmentof school-inspectors, a practice followed up by this Board,is no doubt one of its most important measures, affording, asit does, in connexion with the control of pecuniary supplies,the means of continual improvement in the individual schools.The system of parochial schools in Scotland was establisheda century and a-half ago, by an act of the Scottish Parliament.This act provided for the existence of a school in each parish,for the manner of election of the schoolmaster, and for hiscompensation, no mention being made of the branches requiredto be taught. The masters have been, in general, selectedeither from among candidates for the ecclesiastical profession,or such persons as could not pursue the requisite studies farenough to reach the ministry, and from persons of the humbleclasses who were physically incompetent for trades, and endeavouredto secure the patronage and instruction necessary toobtain places as teachers.The General Assembly of the Church of Scotland has theright of inspecting these schools, but not that of displacingtheir teachers, and hence the system is wanting in the meansof improvement It has, in fact, not kept pace with the generalprogress of the country, the schools being deficient both innumber and quality. To remedy this, efforts have been madeby the General Assembly and by benevolent individuals, byELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OF GREAT BRITAIN. 177the erection of new schools, and of model schools, by endeavouringto improve the condition of the teachers, and byfurnishing those who aspire to this profession the means of propertraining in their art. The sessional school* of Edinburghhas opened its doors to persons wishing to procure practicalknowledge in teaching, and more lately the Normal Seminary ofGlasgow for training Teachers has been established and takenunder the patronage of the Education Committee of the GeneralAssemblyThe instruction in the parochial schools is generally confinedto reading, writing, and capering. Occasionally, in the higherschools, a little Latin is taught. The Bible and Catechism frequentlyconstitute the text-books for reading. In some schoolsthere are spelling-books, with selections of stories for children.The former collection of reading-lessons was absurd in the extremeas a book for children, consisting of extracts for the mostpart above their comprehension; it has been, however, morerecently replaced by a judicious selection. Most of the childrenwho go to these schools are between the ages of six andtwelve.Besides the parochial schools, there are, especially in thelarge towns, endowed schools, the state of instruction in which,at any given time, depends much upon the trustees into whosehands the endowment has fallen. The subscription and privateschools have, in general, not been in advance of the others,and in many of the Highland schools, neither writing nor arithmeticare taught.It seems to be generally conceded that a great change isnecessary in the character of popular instruction, but the natureSchools under the charge of the ministers and elders, or church-session of aparish, are so called.t The petition of the Education Committee of the General Assembly of theScottish Church to Parliament for aid, states, that in the Highlands alone therewere, in 1833, eighty-three thousand three hundred and ninety-seven personsabove six years of age who could neither read nor write, and twenty-eight thousandbetween six and twenty years of age in this predicament. One-sixth ofthe population was thus without instruction, and means were wanting to providethem with schools.178 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.of the change is the subject of much keen controversy, in regardto which I should be going out of my way to speak.The public school which has produced the most importantresults in improving the state of elementary instruction in Scotland,is the Sessional School of Edinburgh. The Juvenile ModelSchool at Glasgow* has been founded later, but its effects arealready felt. The elementary departments of the Madras College,at St. Andrews, have also contributed to the same object.After giving a description of these establishments, I shall concludethis section with a notice of the Circus Place School atEdinburgh, intended to prepare pupils for the public or privateclassical schools, by the improved methods which the sessionalschool has made so well known in Scotland. The elementaryteaching in the lower classes of the High School of Glasgowand of the Hill-street Institution of Edinburgh, ranks with thebest which I saw, but I shall refer to it in speaking of therespective schools which belong to the secondary grade of instruction.JUVENILE Training-school OF THE GLASGOW EDUCATIONSOCIETY.This Is the only attempt which I witnessed to carry the"training system" of the infant-school into the juvenile day-schoolsof Great Britain. The endeavour is made, under thissystem, not only to inculcate good principles, but also to formgood habits — not only to teach, but to train. A child enteringfrom the infant school is prepared for the instruction and disciplineof this; his education goes on in the same way and withthe same spirit here as in the former school. Other children,entering at six, may have positively bad habits to eradicate. Experiencehas proved, however, that they may be trained with theothers, only at a greater cost of time and labour. In this system,as in the corresponding infant school system, the playsIn describing thew schools, I have given that of Glasgow the first place,btcauM it it quite distinct from the otlicrs in its character, while they havegeneral roMrobUnces to each other.rJUVENILE Training-school AT GLASGOW. 179ground is the "uncovered school," and the moral training goeson in it; hence the pupils must necessarily be under the superintendenceof the master, who notices their aberrations withoutinterfering, unless when absolutely necessary, and makes aschool-room lesson of their conduct. The effective characterof this training is proved by the fact that one hundred andeighty children of the lower classes of Glasgow were in thedaily habit, for five months, of frequenting the play-ground ofthe school, without any injury to the borders planted withflowers, shrubs, and fruits.The designs of the Glasgow Educational Society include notonly this school, but the infant school which has been described,and a normal seminary for the education of teachers. To aidincarrying out especially the latter part of the design, the rectorof the normal seminary made a tour on the continent,visiting the best seminaries of Prussia, and even attending apart of their courses. His return occurred just before my secondvisit to Glasgow, and I had not, therefore, the benefit ofseeing the fruits of his experience in the practice of the schools.*At present, the courses of the normal school are so restrictedin point of time, from the limited means of the teachers whoresort to it for instruction, that little more than a generalidea of the system can be obtained by the pupils, and vigorousefforts were making to induce the government of Great Britain,and the wealthy of Glasgow, to contribute to the support ofyoung men while in the school, and thus to enable them to remainsufficiently long to become imbued with the spirit andpractice of the methods of teaching.The course of instruction in the juvenile training-school is tobe considered still in a great degree experimental, but the resultsalready obtained are of the most encouraging character.Intellectual and Moral Education. It is understood from mypreface, that this school is intended to give an elementary educa-• The Rev. John M'Crie, a young teacher of the highest promise, whose untimelydeath has prevented the career of usefulness for which he had preparedhimself.180 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.tion to children between six and twelve or fourteen years of age.Contrived as an improvement on the Scottish parochial system, itsupposes the means of procuring teachers to be small. Henceit places a large number, even as many as a hundred, underone teacher, adapts its arrangements to render his services asefficient as possible, and employs the more advanced pupils asmonitors. Emanating from the Scottish Church, it inculcatesits observances and doctrines, adopting a mode of impartingChristian truths which renders them eminently attractive. Itseeks (and here I consider the system overstrained) to attachto the knowledge of the Bible all other branches, and thus tomake it the medium by which a child shall not only learn morals,but, in connexion with which he shall receive lessons inhistory, natural history and philosophy, geography, mannersand customs, an grammar. The system discards, in a greatdegree, all use of books, and substitutes the lively oral methodemployed in the German schools. It requires the master to bethoroughly acquainted with the subjects he teaches, in order tobe able to communicate them in the manner exactly suited tothe different capacities of the pupils, which he is expected tostudy. The children are assembled here, as in the infant school,in the gallery, and, in general, the methods of communicatingknowledge, or of drawing from them their ideas, do not differin the two schools. There is a little more form here, perhaps,but the methods are substantially the same. The exercises ofthe gallery terminated, the classes take their places upon thefloor under the charge of monitors, or range themselves at thedesks for writing. The master examines, in a room apart, oneclass at a time, and, after this lesson, gives an interval for theplay-ground. From the play-ground the classes return to thecharge of the monitors. When all have passed thus before themaster, an exercise in the gallery closes the instruction for thetime.The alternation is shown by the following order of the day:At half past nine o'clock the school-room and play-groundarc open to the pupils, and the school commences at ten.JUVENILE Training-school AT GLASGOW. 181Ten to eleven, Bible training and religious teaching in thegallery.Ten minutes play.Until a quarter past twelve, reading under monitors, themaster examining each class in turn.Until one, may leave the premises or play.One to two, intellectual training in the gallery.Ten minutes interval for play.Until half-past three, classes under the monitors.Play until four, when the ground is closed.The efficacy of such a school depends almost entirely uponthe character of the master, and during my visit, this truthwas fully impressed, by seeing it under the charge of thehead master, and again under that of an assistant, and by comparingit with the infant school. There is no teaching so difficultto many instructors as that by the natural method. For,brought up in stiff and artificial habits, they cannot breakthemselves into those required, and descend to the level of theirpupils. I saw, however, quite enough to convince me that thiswas a great improvement upon the old system of the Scottishschools. The questioning, conversation between the teacherand pupils, singing, and other exercises of the gallery, go onwith more spirit when considerable numbers are present thanwhen few are there, and hence are particularly valuable inschools which require instruction to be given by one teacher tomany pupils. The arrangement of the gallery admits of everychild hoeing distinctly seen, and of his seeing the master, andhence is much better than the usual one of benches. When theschool contains pupils of very different states of progress, itloses its efficacy in a great degree, and I consider it still doubtfulwhether it will answer thus to unite all classes composing alarge school. As this school had been only four years in existencewhen I saw it, the difficulty did not show itself very prominently.A provision is made for this case, in the excellentmanual drawn up by Mr. Stow, in which it is recommended todivide the pupils into one or more classes, so that while a partare in the gallery, another may be on the floor with monitors,182 OEIfERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.and another in the play-ground. The monitorial system workedno better here than elsewhere. Indeed, if the master had no assistant,and should retire to an adjoining room with a class, themechanism would go on very irregularly, as I had an opportunityof seeing actually proved.Advantage is taken in the arrangement of the school-roomto keep such printed moral precepts and attractive representationsbefore the eyes of the children as it may be desiredto impress on their memory, care being taken to changethe objects from time to time, that too great familiarity maynot blunt the sense of curiosity or interest. Order and neatnessare inculcated by the proper arrangement of every articleof school-furniture, and by that of their own hats andcloaks.I propose now to state the subjects of instruction, to takeup each and to notice it in a general way, referring to theimplements of teaching as the several branches are under examination.English reading. Roots. Construction and meaning of Englishwords. Practical grammar. Mental arithmetic. Practicalgeography. Sacred geography. Objects. Natural history,assisted by pictures. Outlines of general science. Outlines ofgeometry. Outlines of civil history. Writing. Arithmetic onslates, by rule. Grammar by rule. Geography, with the useof globes. Daily Bible training. Vocal music, chiefly sacred.If the pupils have come from the Infant School, they are inpart prepared to read without the necessity of referring to firstelements. In the alphabet class there are pictorial representationsto impress the words upon the memory. An orthographicaldesk is described, in Mr. Stow's book, as an auxiliary tothis exercise, but I did not see it in the school. It contains compartmentsor small boxes, each of which has within it severalsets of a letter of the alphabet, printed on paper and pasted onsmall square plates of wood. Other boxes contain pictures.The child selects a picture, and spells the name of the object,forming the word with the letters taken from his set of boxes.Another method of learning the alphabet and spelling, recoilTraining-school AT GLASGOW. 183mended by Mr. Stow, is to select a letter on a printed page,calling it by name, and requiring the child, as an exercise, topoint out every recurrence of the same letter on the page.Among the various methods of teaching to read which havebeen tried, I regret not to have seen in use, so as to form anopinion of its success, Jacotot's method of teaching, by beginningwith words instead of letters, especially as it has been supposedparticularly applicable to our language, owing to the varioussounds belonging to the same letter. It is the fact, that thechildren in the Infant School at Glasgow actually recognise thewords, and can name them at sight before they can spell them.For the introduction of the admirable exercise on the roots,construction and meaning of English words, the Scottish schoolsare indebted to Mr. Wood, of Edinburgh, and I shall speak ofit particularly in describing the Sessional School.By practical grammar is meant such as the pupil can obtainby his own induction or by teaching, aided by his own comparisons.It is the true elementary grammar, and the name practicaldoes not seem to me well chosen. I can give a clearer ideaof it by an example. Several things are named over to a class —hat, desk, chair, &c. These are the names of things. Theyare called nouns. Or, to employ the elliptical rfiethod of theschool, these are the names of , leaving to the pupil toreply things. If it is perceived that all have not caughtthe answer, the class are made to repeat it. They are callednouns, is stated by the master. A noun is the name of a ■thing, the ellipsis being supplied by the class. Further. Youwish me to give you a stick of what kind? A short, a long, asmooth, &c., will be answered. Short, long, &c., are qualitiesof the stick. They are called adjectives. Short is an ' —adjective. Stick is a noun. An adjective is the qualityof a noun. Combining such exercises with pictorialrepresentations of the parts of speech, and varying them untilthey suit the mind of every pupil, an indelible impression ismade. A foundation is laid for grammar by rules taught in thehigher classes, which should, however, be so accompanied byexercises as to be quite as practical as this.'184 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.The practical geography consists also of elements, but taughtin a much less natural way than in the German schools alreadyspoken of. Fictitious travelling should follow a knowledge ofhome ; putting a map into a boy's hand, without explanation,is not likely to lead to much-inquiry. The methods of thisschool, however, it should be considered, are in a great degreeexperimental.In speaking of the courses in the German eleemosynary institutions,I have already said so much of mental arithmetic, thatit is not necessary to dwell here again upon it. It has beenpermanently adopted in many of the English schools, whereother improvements have been slowly introduced. The lessonsin arithmetic are begun with the ball frame used for infant instruction.Sacred geography is used not only for the purpose of makingthe pupils accurately acquainted with the localities mentionedin the Scriptures, and with the curious physical state of thecountry, with its manners and customs and profane history, butas an incentive to them to search out from specified parts of theBible the verses where particular places are mentioned, and toconnect with the localities the incidents of the narrative.The lessons in objects are modified from those arranged byMiss Mayo, and are adapted to the different ages of an elementaryschool. They are intended as guides to teachers incommunicating oral instruction in regard to the objects metwith in common life. The box of objects connected with themcontains, in the small compass of less than three-sixteenths ofa cubic foot, one hundred and twelve specimens of variousproductions of nature and art in different countries, each ofwhich may form some part of an instructive conversation.*These lessons are supplementary to those of the infant school,in which more common specimens are used. They serve notonly to give the direct mental exercise and the information,which are their principal purposes, but incidentally are made• I halo Uie picture to blow to the Board one of these cases. A similar oneoufbtto be finished to every elementary school in the country.rJUVENILE Training-school AT GLASGOW. 185the means of instruction in orthography, writing, and grammar.In their direct bearing they may be considered as introductoryto the courses of technology, which belong to higher instruction.The courses of natural history are among those which excitethe greatest interest in the mind of a child, and which may bemade most useful in developing the intelligence, strengtheningthe observation and memory, and conveying religious impressionsappropriate to the age. Illustrated by pictures they arevery attractive; but when the means of acquiring specimensare within the power of the school, the courses are renderedmuch more interesting. In the examination of plants and stones,they may be made subservient, also, to the purposes of air andexercise. It is, of course, understood that there is no attemptto teach the subjects as sciences, and specially for their ownsake. They are mere introductory exercises to such studies,to which the tastes of pupils may perhaps lead them at a laterperiod of instruction. The importance of forming museumsof these objects is beginning now to be fully appreciated in thebest schools.Vocal music is not used solely for cultivating the ear or taste,but for producing its appropriate moral effects from the characterof the songs, and as an important auxiliary to order anddiscipline, substituting harmony for noise during changes ofposition, and promoting regularity.The Bible-training has already been described, and in regardto the higher subjects of instruction, which follow it immediatelyupon the programme, the classes had not yet reachedthem when I visited the school. Linear drawing upon theslate, and copying lines, or tracing the outlines of simple objects,are intended to be introduced. In general, the mechanicalparts of instruction have not yet received their intended development.There is a lesson of an hour in Bible-reading* everyday,in which the outline given in the infant school is filled upThe Bible-stand is placed in front of the gallery, and is so arranged that itmay be used to support a black-board or pictures. The hand-bell and whistle forsignals used in the infant school, are still employed in this. The posts for themonitorial lessons are, in a great degree, superseded by books.186 General EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.by more copious selections of historical or other matter. Thepupils are exercised on the meaning of the words, on the leadingpoints of the story, and on the moral lessons to be deduced,and it is found that if the premises are well laid down, the childrenwill themselves draw the proper conclusions. The teacheris not permitted to inform them directly of any thing which byanalysis, comparison, or illustration, they can be made to findout for themselves. Those pupils who can read are expectedto go over the lesson. The mode of obtaining answers is, inpart, by direct interrogation, and in part by the elliptical method.From the character of this school, and the connexion ofits directors with the church, it must be considered a most importantconclusion, in reference to the improvement of the parochialschools, that the method of conveying religious instructionby the learning of catechisms by rote, is inferior to thatalready described as in use here. .The system of changing places in the class is not approved as aprinciple, yet a modification of it is nevertheless in use. It wouldrequire very careful experiment under the actual circumstancesof the pupils and teachers of any school, to prove that this modecan be dispensed with. I agree entirely as to the necessity forgreatly modifying it, and as to the principle that the motive ofemulation is an inferior one. In the present condition of society,however, I do not believe that emulation in schools can be entirelydispensed with, if we would have the youth in them preparedfor active life. Men are esteemed by their fellows inproportion to their intellectual and moral qualities, and thoughsociety is not formally graded by placing individuals in the preciseorder of these qualities, yet every one is aware that somemen have greater influence than others, because of higher intellectualand moral attainments, and the desire to stand highin the estimation of others is, at present, one of the strongest,though certainly not of the purest, motives to exertion. Self-emulationis a much more noble and safe guide to action, andno doubt may, under judicious management, be rendered a verypowerful stimulus.The principle of discipline laid down in this school, not to useJUVENILE TRAIlflNG-SCHCMDL AT GLASGOW. 187things which you desire a child should love, as a punishment,is an excellent one, and I regretted to see the practice, in somecases, going counter to it Corporal chastisement has not beenresorted to for two and a-half years.Moral and Physical Training. As already stated, the playground,or " uncovered school-room," is considered the placein which moral training is to be accomplished, where the principlestaught in the school may be carried into practice soas to become habits. Accordingly, the play-ground is notmerely fitted up with the means of exercise, but is planted, inpart, with flowers and fruit, accessible to all, but which are tobe enjoyed under the injunction, "smell, see, but touch not."It has been, and is, in part, to this day, the reproach of Englandand the United States, that public property is always injured;that flowers cannot bloom, nor fruit ripen, unless whenenclosed ; and in France, which is considered as offering an exceptionto this barbarous practice, I fear that the result is producedrather by the certainty of detection and punishment, thanfrom the influence of a higher motive. Education is the truesource of relief from this reproach ; if the child be trained torespect what belongs to the public, the man will never injure it.Such views have been decried as visionary, and the idea that achild could be so trained has been scouted. But facts provethat the visionary persons were only a little in advance of thetimes, and their training system has succeeded, and its principleswill finally be so generally adopted, that to doubt them willbe as remarkable as the idea itself originally appeared. In thisparticular school upwards of one hundred and eighty scholars,from the manufacturing classes of Glasgow, have been in thehabit of using the play-ground for more than an hour anda-quarter every day for two years and a-half, without damageto the flowers or fruits which it contains. Great attention is paidto neatness in the play-ground, that the habits inculcated in theschool may be carried out here. It affords, also, opportunitiesof exemplifying lessons on cruelty to animals, on truth, justice,kindness, and other virtues. The means of healthy exercise isgiven by the more simple kinds of gymnastics, one of the most188 GENERAL Educators. PRIMARY PERIOD.popular and excellent of which is the circular swing. Woodenprisms are furnished for building, and the more ordinary gamesof ball, &c., are also practised. There is an opportunity inthe play-ground for a full display of character, which, whenobserved, and rightly managed, leads to the same system employedby a judicious parent at home, with the advantage ofbetter opportunities of judging of the points of character whichrequire developing or repressing, from the influence of numbersin making these points more prominent. It is plain that such asystem of moral training, carried into an institution ike ours,must be invaluable, and that its results will be felt not only byour pupils, but by the society through which they will be dispersed.There is, however, one consideration which shouldnot be lost sight of. The recluse system which we are to followin the main, not being that according to which society isorganized, our pupils might not be trained for after life. Habitsacquired in the institution might thus easily be brokenthrough under the influence of new circumstances out of doors.The necessity for gradually approximating our arrangementsto those of society at large is thus suggested, of developing thepupil as far as possible in the way in which he would be treatedin a family. Of gradually, not suddenly, taking from aroundand beneath him the fostering arms of the institution, and ofnot abandoning him to his own direction until all reasonablemeans have been taken to give self-government, under the circumstancesin which he is to be placed.As a vent for the animal spirits of a child, the play-groundis an important auxiliary to the school. A quarter of an hourspent there between the lessons leads not only to health, but togreater quiet on the return of the pupil to the room. Supplementaryto it are simultaneous movements, executed by theclass by express direction of the master. The subdued quietproduced by a rigid discipline may be a necessary evil in largeschools, but should still be considered as an evil, and meanstaken to counteract its effects by exercise from time to time inand out of the class-room. Hence the mechanical motions consideredby some as so ludicrous in the Lancastrian system areSESSIONAL SCHOOL OF EDINBURGH. 189founded on a proper regard to the principles of physical education.It need scarcely be remarked that this system of trainingcan no more be carried on without the master's presence inthe play-ground, than without it in the school-room, and in thisparticular it coincides with the best examples of practice in theGerman schools.THE SESSIONAL SCHOOL OF EDINBURGH.The formation of a system of Sunday schools by the differentchurch sessions of Edinburgh in 1813, showed that theweek-day education of those who came for religious instructionon Sundays, was in many cases most grossly neglected, from adeficiency in the number of and attendance on the parochialschools, and that a reform in this particular must take placebefore any real progress could be made in the Sunday instruction.This led to the establishment of a day-school, in whicha certain number of pupils, sent by the different sessions, wereinstructed gratuitously, and a still larger number from the quarterof the town where the school was placed, at merely a nominalfee. This school has been up to the time of taking its presentform, entirely an experimental one. It was not begun by layingdown a set of rules and regulations, but by authorizing the Secretaryand Committee of the Board of Delegates to try suchplans as might seem good to them. At first the arrangementsand methods of the Lancastrian system were introduced; thesemade way for those of Dr. Bell, and the school owes its presentreputation and influence to the admirable methods engraftedby Sheriff Wood, upon a skeleton form of the latter system.These were also experimental. Mr. Wood was not a teacherhimself, but became so from the interest which he felt in thisparticular school. Beginning with his ideas as to the manner ofimproving the teaching of arithmetic, he made trial of hismethod, and its success led in turn to the explanatory' systemin reading, to its extension through all the classes, to the etymologicalmethod among the higher classes, to inductive instructionin grammar, and to an improved method in geography.too GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.This system is eminently intellectual, its leading characteristic,howcv^cr, being the exercise of the faculties through language.It neglects the advantages to be derived from objects, takeslittle or no cognizance of the physical education, and inculcatesmorals, without specially training in their practice. It is in factthe old method of the English school made intellectual. I shouldsay that its influence has been more extensively felt in thehigher schools than in the lover, and that its verbal characterbelongs rather to them than to the others. With Mr. Wood asthe master, this system is intellectual in spite of the monitorialarrangements which it uses, but it is in the upper classes especially,whence the monitors are derived, that it shows its fullcharacter. With the monitors in general, though they may bedirected to avoid routine, it is difficult to secure such a result;accordingly, I perceived distinctly, that under the diminishedattention of Sheriff Wood at the school, and the administrationof it by another teacher, its tone had essentially lowered fromthat usually supposed to prevail in it. This remark will bebetter understood, however, when speaking of the method ofteaching.The school-room is arranged as in the Madras system, withwriting-desks around the wall. The classes occupy the floor,one-half of the pupils being there at a time. They form in arcsof circles, one behind the other, the middle scholar exactlyfacing the desk of the master, which is at one end of the room,and the monitors standing near the front and middle of theclasses, which they face.The arrangements of books and slates are made by the monitorsa little before ten o'clock, and at ten the school begins.A prayer is said. Half the pupils occupy the desks, engagedin writing or capering. The other half are in classes on thefloor, occupied with spelling, reading, grammar, 6z^c. In halfan hour they change occupations with each other. From eleveno'clock until twelve the first division is engaged with arithmetic,in classes on the floor, and the second writes. The monitorsreceive instruction from twelve until one, with a brief interval,the other pupils having an hour of recreation. At one the schoolSESSIONAL SCHOOL AT EDINBURGH. 191recommences, the first division writing while the second is on thefloor. These change at two o'clock; at three the places of thepupils in their classes are recorded. They repeat the Lord'sPrayer and are dismissed, except those who volunteer to attenda lesson in geography.Saturday is a half-holiday. On Mondays and Saturdays theschool is open to the inspection of visitors.In the explanatory method of this school the reading-lessonsare the great means of imparting incidental instruction; its applicationbegins with the very elements, so that the child neverreads a word without being made to understand it, nor a sentencewithout comprehending the words and their connexion.This renders the reading-lessons pleasing as well as easy, andthus they are made the vehicles of much useful information.The habit of minute analysis is cultivated, and, in the end, agreat command and thorough knowledge of the English languageis obtained by it.The alphabet is learned as usual, the child being taught toname each letter and to recognise it. Then follow words (notmere unmeaning syllables) of two letters,* printed both in Romanand Italic characters, and simple sentences framed fromthem, all of which should in turn be explained by or to the pupil.Next are words of threes letters, arranged according to a system,with sentences combining the words, and adapted to thecomprehension of the child. The reading-book, with words offour letters, which follows this, admits of a considerable varietyFor example, the first lesson contains the words Be, He, Me, We, Ye, &c.,which the child should give his own notion of. Thus, spelling Be, he illustratesit by saying " to be good," «fec., Me, the pupil may point to himself, &c. Any answersshould be satisfactory which show some apprehension of the use of theword or its meaning.t The first lesson in these letters contains words with two consonants followedby a vowel, as Fly, Cry, Ply, Sly, &c., sentences combining these and the foregoing,as " why do you cry." Next a vowel between two consonants. Here thepupil is called upon to supply examples which rhyme, and to read sentences madeup of words not in the lesson, the sentences beginning now to assume a highercharacter as to moral sentiment or intellect. The succeeding lessons contain wordsending with a diphthong or a silent e.192 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.of matter, as Bible histories, ideas of natural phenomena, or ofthe more common trades and processes. All of these shouldbe made instructive exercises, and will be so under intelligentteachers. Routine in all should be strictly avoided, as it destroysthe spirit* of the method. The higher reading brings ingeography and history incidentally, and subjects connectedwith mechanics, which are exceedingly popular among thepupils. There is a lending-library, to encourage a taste forreading out of school, which is much used.Instruction in grammar, upon the inductive plan and withoutthe use of a text-book, is begun early in the school. Themethod is that already described under the title of practicalgrammar in the Juvenile School at Glasgow. It is eminentlysuccessful as an introduction to grammar by rule, and is anexercise in which the pupil takes an interest, from the investigationwhich it requires of him.fThe etymological instruction introduced by Mr. Wood isone of the most striking features of his method. The teachingis also inductive, and even incidental to the reading, though, ofcourse, the teacher must have a plan or systematic arrangementin his own mind, that important omissions may not occursAs an example of their etymological lessons, suppose the pupil,in reading, meets the word " introduce," he is made to divide it,Intro" and " duce." He is told that " intro" is a prefix from theAt my first visit to this school, I was highly pleased with the answers ofa class of little urchins who were in words of three syllables. " You " waswell illustrated by pointing to the master. " Two" by another pointing to himselfand neighbour. " Yet/j," a yew tree. " Ewe," a female sheep. " Dew"water on the grass. Returning on the following public day, my pleasure wasmarred by hearing identically the same boys give precisely the same answers,bowing that they had as much learned them by rote, as if they were definitionsiVom an Expositor.t Mr. Wood's plan will be found fully detailed in his " Account of the EdinburghSessional School'*t Wood's Etymological Guide, Oswald's Etymological Manual, and Oswald'sEtymological Dictionary, have all been published to supply the demand for thiskind of instruction, which has spread through the schools of Edinburgh with thebMt results. Mr. Gibson, of Cauvin's Hospital, was also engaged on a work onIhb subject when I visited Edinburgh, in 1837.rSESSIONAL SCHOOL AT EDINBURGH. 193Latin, and means within. He is asked for some other wordbeginning with " intro," and soon exhausts " introduction," " introductory,"&c. The other part is next taken up, and its meaning(to lead) is explained. Examples of it are given by differentmembers of the class, as "adduce," "conduce," "deduce," "educate,""induce," "induction," "produce," &c. The teachertakes care that no important word is omitted in furnishing theseexamples. The true knowledge of the meaning of words thusacquired has led to the use of the method even in the classicalschools, where it is found to furnish a new motive to study, byplacing one application of his knowledge immediately beforethe pupil. The great command of words which it must give,when derivations from different ancient and modern languagesare thus called for, is quite obvious.The instruction in geography is entirely by the use of mapsand oral explanations ; places are pointed out on a map, andinformation given in-respect to them. When their relative positionsare well fixed in the pupil's mind, the points markingthem are transferred to a black-board, with or without an outlineof the limits of the country where they are situated, andthe pupil is exercised in naming them; similar plans are pursuedin regard to other parts of the subject. This, as well as otherbranches of Mr. Wood's method, approaches closely to thatused in the best German schools, and requires considerableattainments in the teachers. If left to monitors, it cannot failto lose its spirit.The exercises in arithmetic are among the most striking inthe school. Mental arithmetic is particularly cultivated, andthe higher classes acquire an extraordinary facility in its accurateuse. It is begun simultaneously with the second book ofreading, and the lessons generally consist in part of mentaland in part of written arithmetic,* one portion of the time beingdevoted exclusively to exercises, another to teaching a newIn one of my visits to the school, a row of twelve figures was multiplied bythe number five, in four seconds from the time when the instructor had given outthe question, but he began by the multiplier, and some of the pupils were atwork as he gave out the multiplicand,2.5194 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.rule with examples. The dull method of working through thequestions of a book is not countenanced, the instruction as wellas examples being given by the teacher or monitor.In writing, which is begun upon the slate, as well as incapering, the pencil is put into a tin tube, that the child maynot acquire a bad habit of holding it. Steel pens are used hereand in several other schools which I visited, and answer well.In regard to discipline and other school and class arrangements,this establishment is not peculiar. Mr. Wood regards corporalpunishment as necessary, but requires that it should be usedas seldom as possible. He is also an advocate for the systemof places in a class, and of prizes for scholarship, but wouldespecially encourage self-emulation, the principle upon whichsome other teachers rely entirely, to the exclusion of the firstHe disapproves^pf tasks or confinement in the school-room, asassociating study and school with ideas of punishment.This institution is a remarkable instance of an intellectualreform, beginning with a charity-school, and extending upwards.It is but too often the case that schools for the poor are consideredas appropriately of a lower grade than others; at least itis so in Europe.ELEMENTARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE MADRAS COLLEGE.This institution resulted from an arrangement made by thelate Dr. Bell, author of the Madras system* of education, with theauthorities of St. Andrews, his native place. The Madras Collegereplaces the Borough School, and besides is intended toexemplify the application of the system of mutual instruction tothe various departments of elementary and higher education.It is under the direction of four trustees, of whom the provostof the burgh is one. They legislate in regard to the institutionin general, but the details of instruction are left entirely to themasters.The college building is a beautiful structure, in the Elizabethan• Bo called from iU having been first applied by Dr. Bell, in a large schoolunder bu care, attached to an aajrlum for soldiers' children at Madras.rMADRAS SCHOOLS OP ST. ANDREWS. 195Gothic style, standing at a convenient distance from one of themain streets, and having in front upon the street the picturesqueruin of the monastery of the Greyfriars. The different schoolsare erected about a quadrangle, the cloistered sides of whichform a sheltered play-ground, and all but the classical departmentbeing a single story in height. The great height of theserooms secures a good ventilation, but the arched ceilings andsmooth walls are the worst possible for school-rooms, from theexcessive reverberation. On the lower floor of the building ofthe classical department are a series of small school-rooms, intendedfor the teachers of modern languages, fcc. Two of themasters have houses at the entrance of the grounds, and areallowed to take boarders.The college is divided into five departments, entirely distinctfrom each other, the classical, French, mathematical, writingand drawing, and English departments. As the instruction in thelast three belongs either in whole or part to the elementary period,I propose to make a few remarks upon it here, not intending,however, again to discuss the Bell system, but merely topresent some of the peculiar points which were brought to mynotice by a visit to this school, and intercourse with its intelligentteachers.Each school has a teacher and an assistant, and every teacheris independent of the other, the arrangements in the subsidiaryschools being, however, such as to admit attendance therewithout interference with the others, and the parents being freeto choose which departments their children shall attend. TheEnglish department is divided into two sections, the school feesbeing higher in the one than in the other, which produces acorresponding difference in the character of the pupils. Thelower school, as it may be called, contains four hundred children,varying in age from four to sixteen. Each class is separatedinto two parts, if required by its numbers, and is underthe charge of monitors. The thorough Bell system is used inthis section, and its intellectual character is much below that ofthe higher section, which is less numerous, and where the classeshave the benefit of more immediate instruction from the assistsGENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.ant master. It is a general rule that every class in both sectionsshall come before the master or his assistant every day,and this rule prelates the other departments of the college. Inthe lower section of the English school, however, from its numbers,this exercise must be a mere revision by the master, whilein the higher it is a true lesson. In this section I heard an excellentrecitation from the pupils in reading, with explanatoryand etymological exercises, according to Mr. Wood's plan, inEnglish grammar with the correction of false syntax, and inhistory. Girls and boys were mingled in the classes.In the mathematical school arithmetic is taught by monitors,the lessons being revised by the master. Modern geographyis also taught here, and the school is well furnished with outlinemaps without names. In the higher classes of arithmetic,the revisions by^the master are more in the form of lessons,and in geometry the mutual instruction nearly disappears.The pupils of the English schools all attend the writingschool for an hour a-day. The monitorial system here producesvery good results, and I have no doubt that when a merelymechanical branch is to be taught, it is entirely applicable. Themonitors are divided into four classes, each of which serves duringa quarter of the hour spent in school. Drawing is pursuedat other hours by those who have the disposition for it.The schools composing this college, the higher departmentsinclusive,* are among the best in Scotland, but they owe theirmerits to the character of the masters, and not of the method.In fact, the instruction appears to produce the best results wherethe monitorial system is least used, and the master's talent isdirectly exercised in teaching.CIRCUS PLACE SCHOOL, EDINBURGH.It is seldom that the advantages of a decided improvement ininstruction in one institution are lost to the public from not being• The clatttcal department i« under the charge of the Rev. Mr. Carmichael,U» whoM hospitality and kind altcnlion I feel much indebted.ICIRCUS PLACE SCHOOL OF EDINBURGH. 197transferred to others. I have already stated that the system ofthe Sessional School has led to considerable improvement inthe various schools of Edinburgh. That in Circus Place wasfounded by subscription, to apply the intellectual method of Mr.Wood to the instruction of boys who are preparing for theEdinburgh High School or Academy, or other classical schools.It receives pupils from the age of four to six years, and retainsthem until nine or ten, when they are fitted to begin aclassical course. The intelligent rector* informed me, that hepreferred decidedly such pupils as came from the infant schoolsto others, finding them more teachable and more tractable.The school is purely an English one, and the branches taughtare generally similar to those of the Sessional School. It has,however, a great advantage over the latter, in the fact that eachclass has an intelligent teacher, and hence no monitors are used,unless for the relief of the master in promoting order, by noticingoffences. The classes are in different rooms, some ofwhich have the benches placed upon forms rising in steps.A great improvement has been made in the intellectual systemhere, by the introduction of objects of nature and art asthe ground-work of many lessons. The advantages of this improvementare hardly yet fully realized. The directors areearnestly engaged, however, in extending the museum auxiliaryto these lessons. There is a lending-library for the use of theschool.In the higher classes half an hour of each week day, exceptSaturday, is occupied with religious instruction. Two hourswith reading and incidental instruction in grammar and history,&c. Half an hour with geography. Half an hour withgrammar. Half an hour with arithmetic, and one hour withwriting.The highest class, composed only of boys, during their are fully drilled on " prefixes and post-fixes," andthe analysis of our language, according to the method of Mr.The Rev, Alexander Reid,198 GENERAL EDUCATIOy. PRIMARY PERIOD.Wood. Both in this and the next class the instruction whichI witnessed was excellent.The classes have an hour of interval in the middle of the day,which they are allowed to spend in the play-ground attached tothe school, but no attempt at regular physical education has yetbeen made.\PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE. IWCHAPTER III.PUBLIC ELEMENTARY INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE.The present law regulating primary instruction in France,dates from the year 1833. Previous to framing it, M. Cousinwas deputed by the Minister of Public Instruction to visit someof the states of Germany, the systems of which have the highestreputation, and especially Prussia, The information collectedby him, and chiefly embodied in his Report,* is supposed tohave contributed in an important degree to the framing of thenew law. By one of the provisions of this law, primary instructionis divided into two grades, elementary, and superiorprimary, and the least amount of instruction admissible in eachgrade is defined. In the first is enumerated moral and religiousinstruction, reading, writing, the elements of the French language,and arithmetic, and the system of weights and measuresprescribed by law. Linear drawing, is very generally addedto these branches, and in many of the schools, vocal music isalso taught.To the subjects just enumerated, the law adds, as a minimumfor superior primary instruction, the elements of geometry, withits common applications, particularly to geometrical drawingand surveying, the elementary principles of physical scierKie,and natural history and geography, and particularly the historyand geography of France. This superior primary instructionhas spread but little, even in the metropolis of France, and thewhole kingdom contained in 1838 but three hundred and thirty-twoschools of the sort.-)- In Lyons I found but one publicReport on the state of public instruction in several of the countries ofEurope, and especially in the kingdom of Prussia, by Victor Cousin, Peer ofFrance, Sec.+ Two hundred and thirty-five of these schools are public, and ninety-seven,private. Report of the Minister of Public Instruction to the King, on primaryinstruction, June 1, 1838.800 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.school of this grade in 1838, and that but imperfectly developed.While the law thus lays down the branches of instructionconstituting the least admissible, it very properly saysnothing about the methods of teaching. In the public schoolsthere are, however, two leading methods, those of mutualand simultaneous instruction. The first is a modified Lancastriansystem, originally introduced from England. Thesecond is used chiefly in the schools of the "Christian Brothers,"and its practices are derived from the founder of thisreligious body, the Abbe John La Salle. Specimens of bothare to be found in the model schools attached to the Normalseminaries for educating primary teachers, of which there isone for every department of France, with one exception.Teachers educated in these establishments are expected to beable to use either method. In many of the schools fragmentsof the two are joined, constituting what has been termed amixed system. It cannot, with propriety, however, be considereda special method, but is rather a modification, in variousdegrees, of one of the systems by the introduction of parts ofthe other. Of the schools upon the system of mutual instruction,I visited at Paris, with greater or less care, four, besidesgiving a glance at two others, in reference to musical instruction.Of those taught by the Christian Brothers I visited two.At Versailles, the two in connexion with the primary Normalschools, and the similar ones at Dijon. At Lyons, two of thefirst named kind and one of the second. The selection wasmade, of course, with reference to the merits of the schools inregard to which I had the best advice.* Those on the plan ofmutual instruction were inferior to the English model, and thoseupon the other system, to the similar schools in Holland, or inGermany, generally. Hence, I do not feel warranted in enteringinto details in regard to them in this Report. Primary• At Paris I was much indebted to the obliging offices of M. Motte, In-•pcclor of Primary Schools, to whom I was introduced by the kindness of M.Cousin. I was also much obliged by the kind introductions of the Minister ofPublic Instruction, M. Ralvandy, ofM. Arno, and »>f M. Charles Coqucrcl.PRIMARY SCHOOLS OF TRANCE. 901instruction in France is in a state of transition, which, althoughit holds out a fair promise for the future, presents, at present,but little for imitation in the individual schools.I ought to notice that the mode of teaching music adoptedin the mutual instruction schools of Paris, has proved highlysuccessful, and that, in general, the results of the attempt tointroduce vocal music into these schools have surpassed theexpectation even of its advocates. The introduction of lineardrawing has also been attended with success, but the mode ofteaching from engravings is, I think, for the purposes in view,inferior to that used in the schools of Berlin.It must not be supposed, from the foregoing remarks, that Iundervalue the efforts lately made and now making in France,in behalf of primary instruction. The law itself was a greatstep. The system of inspection, which was begun in 1833, wascarried out by the permanent appointment of one inspector toeach department in 1835, and greatly extended by creatingsub-inspectors in 1838, and is a most valuable auxiliary to thelaw. The regulation of the schools for girls in 1836; the increaseof primary normal schools from forty-seven in 1833 toseventy-four in 1838; the increase of more than a million inthe attendance on the boys' schools alone, between 1829 and1838;* the systematic encouragement to infant schools; all theseare positive results, which have been already obtained, and onwhich France has great reason to congratulate herself. It wasnot to be expected that, with the previous deficiency in thenumber of schools for primary instruction in France, therewould be great fastidiousness as to their character, which must,however, rapidly improve, if the introduction of well preparedteachers from the normal schools is allowed to have its fulleffectThese numbers are from a Report on Primary Instruction, by the Ministerof Public Instruction (M. Salvandy) to the King of the French. Dated June1, 1838.GENERAL EDUCATIOy, PRIMARY PERIOD.CHAPTER IV.PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN HOLLAND.Among the primary schools of Holland are some of the bestwhich I visited, and the whole condition of popular instructionis worthy of a nation which has ever been distinguished for itsvirtue and intelligence.The primary instruction of Holland began to receive its presentform at the close of the last century, and chiefly by the instrumentalityxof the " Society for Public Utility," the branchesof which extended throughout the country. This society establishedmodel schools where they were required, published cheaptext-books, excited discussions on methods of teaching, and stimulatedthe local authorities and others to the establishment ofnew schools. Always withdrawing its efforts when no longerneeded in the cause, it avoided the effects of jealousy, by showingthat it had no desire for control.With a view to produce system throughout the then BataviaRepublic, a law containing the general principles whichshould govern primary instruction was passed in 1806, andwas accompanied by a series of regulations, to carry out itsdetails. The most important provisions of the law are thosefor the inspection and management of the schools, and for thedue qualification of schoolmasters, the establishment of individualschools being left to the local authorities. The system of inspectionis eminently adapted to a country where centralizationhas never existed, and has proved highly successful in its operation.It begins with the appointment in each school district ofan inspector, and, when the schools are numerous, gives himthe assistance of a committee.The inspectors of the different school districts of a provinceform the Provincial Board of Primary Instruction, who meetthrice every year, receive the reports of the inspectors, deliverSCHOOLS OF HOLLAND.rate upon the concerns of primary instruction in the province,and make report annually to the minister of the interior. Tocarry out this system, the minister of the interior has authorityto convene at the capital an assembly of delegates from theprovincial Boards, to advise upon general matters. Only onesuch meeting has, however, taken place. In the general controlof primary instruction, the minister of the interior is replacedby an officer called a referendary, and there is also aninspector general,* who resides at the Hague.To be admitted to the rank of a teacher, certain preliminaryexaminations must be passed before the school-inspector, orlocal or provincial Board, according to the grade sought.There are four grades, requiring each a different examination.The lowest of these may be obtained at the age of sixteen, thethird at eighteen, and the second at twenty-two. The secondqualifies for the mastership of any primary school, and the firstis, in fact, honorary. To pass the examination for the secondgrade, the candidate must be able to read and spell correctly,to write a good hand, must have a knowledge of the theory ofthe Dutch language, geography, history, arithmetic in all itsbranches, and a facility in imparting instruction. His moraland religious qualifications are also ascertained.This general examination entitles an instructor to become acandidate for vacant schools, either public or private, but doesnot supersede the special examination or competition whichmay be required by their directors.The law, besides, enjoins upon the local authorities, on theone hand, to furnish a sufficient number of schools for the population,and on the other, not to allow such a number as torender the income of the several masters inadequate to theirsupport.The definition of a primary school, as given in one of theregulations issued to complete the law, covers a wide field.According to it, a primary school is one in which youth is in-• To this gentleman, M. Wynbeek, I am indebted for much attention, forwhich I beg leave here to return my thanks.f04 GEIfERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.strutted in the first principles of knowledge, such as reading,writing, arithmetic, and the Dutch language, or the more advancedbranches, such as the French, or other modern languages,or the ancient languages, geography, history, and othersubjects of that description. There are several different kindsof schools, corresponding to different grades of instruction inthese branches. Infant school instruction is included in theprimary department, but it is not yet fully developed, beinglimited chiefly to Rotterdam and Swollen.The lowest schools are those for the poor (armen-scholen),and which are entirely gratuitous. The children enter at fromsix to seven, and remain until twelve or fourteen. As supplementaryto them are evening schools, principally intended forrevising former courses, and which should be attended untilsixteen or eighteen years of age. As the attendance in theselatter schools is not obligatory, the proportion of those whoreceive instruction in them varies much in different localities.The next are called intermediate schools (tusschen-scholen),in which the pupils pay a trifling fee.* Both these are, ingeneral, public. Some have been established by the school-committees,and after a few years have become self-supporting.The grade of instruction is rather higher than in theschools for the poor, but as the law does not prescribe anyparticular programme, it varies much in the different parts ofHolland — a school which would be called intermediate in asmall town ranking below one of the gratuitous establishmentsfor the poor in one of the chief cities. The amount taughtdepends, other circumstances being the same, upon the averageage to which the children remain at school, and, therefore,varies also in the different parts of the kingdom.The next grade, or burgher school (burger school), is, ingeneral, a private establishment. It is distinguished from boththe classes just enumerated by a larger feet and, in general, by• For example, in an intermediate school at Rotterdam which I visited, eightMeta a week.t The school f«« at the burgher school at Haarlem is between six and sevennolan a star.PRIMARY SCHOOLS OF HOLLAND. 205a higher grade of instruction; but while in a single town ordistrict it is easy to perceive this gradation, yet it is scarcelypossible to observe it on a comparison of the country at large.In some places, the last mentioned school is called the Dutchschool, to distinguish it from the following class.The school denominated the "French School"* is the highestof the primary division, and is, in general, a private establishment,though frequently of the kind classed by the law withprivate schools, but superintended, in reality, by the localschool-committee itself. Besides the branches taught in theother schools, the courses of this embrace the French language,of which the pupils acquire a grammatical knowledge, andwhich they are enabled to speak with considerable facility.These schools prepare their pupils for entrance into active life,and serve, also, in some degree, as feeders to the grammar orLatin schools. The instruction in French is not, however, anexclusive mark of this grade of institution, as the descendantsof the French emigrants, constituting the Walloon congregations,continue the teaching of this language in the gratuitousschools for the poor connected with their churches.While, in point of fact, there is not the regular fourfold divisionof primary instruction which thus appears, it is difficult todraw a separating lines The intermediate school connectsthe school for the poor and the burgher school, while in theburgher schools, the same branches are studied as in the Frenchschools, except the French language. The less number ofchildren under the charge of one master, the greater age towhich the children in general remain at school, the generallygreater capacity of the master, from the higher salary whichhis talents command, the greater family culture of the childrenbefore coming into and while in the school, render the averageprogress in the burgher school of a given place superior to thatAll these classes, viz., Infant, Poor, Intermediate, Dutch, and French Schools,were noted in the returns of the school-committee at Rotterdam, which their secretary,M. Meet, had the kindness to show metM. Cousin, in his work, "De I'lnstruction Publique en Holland," 1837,places the division between the burgher and the French schools.GENERAL EDUCATION. Palmar PERIOD.in the intermediate school, and in this latter higher than in theschool for the poor. I must say, however, that in more thanone case, in the same place, I could detect no difference in theschool itself, between the intermediate and the burgher school,except in the greater comfort of the accommodations of thelatter; and I have already remarked that, in comparing theestablishments of different places, the name is not an accurateguide to the grade of the school.A sketch of the arrangement of the primary schools themselveswould, I have thought, be rendered more compendious,without injury to its fidelity, by selecting for particular descriptionone of the schools for the poor, which, as a class, rankhigher in Holland than in any other of the European states, andengrafting upon the account of this, remarks on the methods ofother schools; concluding by a brief statement of the particularsin which the intermediate, burgher, or French schools differ, ingeneral, from the assumed type, or from each other.Before doing so, however, there are some points fixed by theschool regulations which require notice. The first is, that thesystem of instruction must be that called simultaneous, or inwhich all the pupils of a class take part at once. In practice,this requires to be varied by questions adapted to individuals, andthe classes, therefore, must not be too large. In the intermediateschools I found, more commonly, classes of from thirty to fifty,the lesser number being well adapted to the method. With awell trained master, and a class of moderate numbers, this kindof instruction is the most lively that can be imagined, and whenjudiciously varied by questions put to all, but which only one ispermitted to answer, it is also thorough. It is, in a great degree,the system already described of Mr. Wood's own classin the Edinburgh Sessional School.The method of mutual instruction is not at all favoured inHolland. A very decided and general opinion against it appearsearly to have been brought about by the comparison ofthe English schools with their own. A prize was offered forthe best dissertation on the subject by the society for publicutility, and taken by M. Visser, inspector of primary schoolsIPPRIMARY SCHOOLS OP HOLLAND. 207in Friesland. This excellent dissertation* which was publishedand widely distributed by the society, no doubt contributed toform or to strengthen the opinion which prevails at this day.The only approach to the monitorial system in the schoolsof Holland is, that pupils who have an inclination to teach, andwho will probably become teachers, are put in charge of thelower classes of a school. Thus, also, some of the best monitorsof the Borough-road School in London are boys who arelikely one day to follow the career of teaching. There is,however, a very wide difference between the use of a few apprenticesto the profession, and that of a large number of monitorsto give instruction. I had occasion to observe, however,that in many cases there was a want of life in the youngerclasses entrusted to these inexperienced teachers. If they areto be used, it would be better to employ them in classes whichhave some training, even though nearer the teacher's age andattainments.The next point is in regard to religious instruction in theschools. There is unbounded toleration of religious creed inHolland, and while the necessity df religious instruction in theschools has been strongly felt, it has been made to stop shortof the point at which, becoming doctrinal, the subjects taughtcould interfere with the views of any sect. Bible storiesare made the means of moral and religious teaching in theschool, and the doctrinal instruction is given by the pastors ofthe different churches on days appointed for the purpose, andusually not in the school-room.The last point is in regard to the choice of school-books.The publication of them is not left to open competition. Everybook, before it can be used in a public school, must be submittedto the examination of the minister of the interior, acting ofcourse by deputy, and if approved, is admitted to the list ofbooks which may be used in the schools. From this list theprovincial board of primary schools select those which they" Essays on the subjects of instruction necessary in the schools for the poor,and on the best methods of instruction, with a comparison of these methods andthat of the BcU-Lancastrian method." 1820.906 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARy PERIOD.consider best, to be used in their province, and from their listthe teachers choose such as they approve. In private schoolsthe teacher selects his own books, but he must report a list ofthem to the inspector.There are two normal schools for the education of teachersfor the primary schools, one at Groningen, established by thesociety for public utility, the other at Haarlem,* by the governmentFormerly all instructors were prepared in the differentprimary schools. They began to teach as early as twelveyears of age, attending the evening school to make up theirloss of time during the day. x\t sixteen they had served theirapprenticeship, and were admissible to the fourth grade ofteachers. This method prevails still to a considerable extent,but as it has been found to produce rather routine than intelligentteaching, \he two normal schools have been establishedto supply the defect.The material of elementary intellectual instruction consists inmostcountries of reading, waiting, arithmetic, and a knowledgeof the mother tongue, to which the geography of the country,and sometimes general geography, natural history, linear drawingand vocal music are added. Special exercises of the perceptiveand reflective faculties are also included in the more improvedintellectual systems. While the material is thus nearlythe same, nothing can be more different than the results producedby the schools, according to the use which is made of it. Insome the means are mistaken for the end, and if the pupil is enabledto read, write, and cypher mechanically, the school issupposed to have done its duty. In others these branches areemployed as the means of developing the intellect as well asfor the communication of useful knowledge; according as oneor the other view is taken, the instruction is arranged in conformitywith it. In Holland the intellectual methods of Pestshave taken deep root, and the enlightened state of publicopinion, in regard to elementary education, prevents in a greatHogrcc a mechanical system of teaching.• GfltabUBhcil in 1816.PRIMARY SCHOOLS OF HOLLAND. 209The plan of the school for the poor at the Hague, to whichI now proceed, will justify this remark. To render it clear,I shall, even at the risk of dwelling rather long upon it, presentfirst the essential features of the instruction; next show thechief steps in the entire course, from which a just idea of thecharacter of the whole of it can be formed, appending tothis some remarks upon the methods of teaching and the textbooks:then, by separating the exercises of the classes, andattaching to each the number of hours devoted to it per week,I shall show that this is no theoretical programme,* but oneformed for practice; and this will further appear by stating, inconclusion, some of the results which I witnessed at an examinationof the pupils.This school, I should remark, though ranking with the bestof those which I saw in Holland, is not distinguished aboveseveral others of its class, and in its intellectual character seemedto me decidedly below many of the intermediate schools wherethe pupils are less numerous. It is therefore no exaggeratedstatement of what is obtained between the ages of six andtwelve or fourteen. The subjects of instruction, including intellectualand moral, are:Exercise of the perceptive and reflective faculties. Learning to read accordingto Prince's method, including the spelling of words and the analysis of wordsand simple sentences. The composition of simple sentences with printed letters.A knowledge of the different kinds of printed and written letters. Writing fromdictation, for orthography. Correct reading of prose and poetry. Grammar ofthe Dutch language. Geography of Holland. History of Holland, including itschronology. Writing, beginning and ending with writing on the black-board.Linear drawing. Arithmetic by induction. Mental and written arithmetic,with a knowledge of the Roman numerals. Practical arithmetic, to decimalfractions inclusive. The theory of numbers. Moral and religious instruction.Vocal music.As natural history does not appear either in this programme orinothers of primary schools, I was at the pains to ascertain ifKindly furnished me by the request of the Inspector-general, M. Wynbeek.f It occurs by name as well as physics, upon a list of subjects and books furnishedto me by Mr. Prince, at Haarlem, as those used in the normal school,but I did not see it on the list of exercises of the primary schools,210 GENERAL EDUCATION. Primary, PERIOD.any thing was taught in relation to a branch so eminently calculatedto promote early religious impressions, and found thatincidentally information was given on the habits of animals, andsome of the phenomena of the physical world. It will be observedthat in this school, as in general, physical training formsno part of the system. In Holland the gymnastics, so popularin Northern Germany, have never been permanently introduced,even in the boarding schools.The nature and extent of the instruction in the branches enumeratedabove will be best understood by the following list ofprogressive exercises :1. Exercises of thought, reason, and intelligence.2. Reading. Prince's Reading Tables. Vowels and consonants from the letter-box.Composition <?f words on the reading-board. Explanation of words andsimple sentences. Spelling from memory. Exercises in reading different printedand written characters. Simultaneous reading from a series of books graduatedto the capacity of the class. Explanation of words met in reading. Compositiono€ sentences on the reading-board. Writing from dictation for orthography.Correct reading. Composition of simple sentences.3. Grammar practically. Conjugation of verbs, &c. Parsing.4. History of Holland and chronology.5. Geography of Holland.6. Writing. Elements of writing on the black-board. Writing on slates.Writing of numbers. Linear drawing. Writing on paper. Writing capitalletters and targe hand. Exercises of writing on the black-board.7. Arithmetic by induction. Mental arithmetic. Reading Roman numbers.Practical arithmetic. Tables of moneys. Exercises in reading numbers. Decimalfractions. Tables of weights and measures. Theory of arithmetic. Elementsof form.8. Moral and regions instruction. Bible stories, &c.9. Singing.In giving a short explanation of the exercises just enumerated,I shall not confine myself to the methods followed in this particularschool, with all of which indeed I am not acquainted,but give them as in most general use, especially as I saw thempractised in the schools of Haarlem, which have the advantageof immediate contact with the seminary for teachers there, andthe use of its pupils as sub-teachers.The exercises of perception and reflection in frequent useA CHARITY SCHOOL AT THE Hate. 211are those recommended by Ewald,* and consist of a selectionfrom various authors, as well as of many subjects on which theteacher is expected to be informed. The instruction is givenorally, according to the following outline: The child is taughtto observe and to speak correctly, by referring to objectswhich are about him.f Knowledge of colours. Of some varietiesof form, as round, square, &c. Naming of words ofsimilar and contrary significations-J Meaning of verbs in commonuse. Enumerating by cubes. Knowledge of coins of thecountry and their relative values. Division of time. To tellthe time by a watch. To distinguish the true from the false.Questions on nature and arts Qualities of resemblance anddistinction. Compound expressions, as "good day," "besides,"&c. Witty sayings. Points of the compass. Lessons onweights and measures. On different metals. Articles of furniturein common use. Different daily occupations. The fourages of man. Different ranks of society. Proverbs and phrases.Riddles and charades. Fables. Honourable and dubious actions.Explanations of words.Systems, in my opinion better than those of Lor, are in usein Germany, but this enumeration shows what in general theseexercises are in the Dutch schools.The arrangements for teaching reading, according to Prin-sortehandwriting poor het Onderwijs der Jeugd, &c., door Johann LudwigEwald, heel omgewerkt en met aanteekeningen verraeerderd. (Amsterdam,1826.) From the German, with revision and additions.t Pestalozzi's Book for Mothers is referred to. I had an interesting exampleof the entire want of previous instruction of a class of children of six years ofage, who had just entered an intermediate school at Haarlem. They had receivedtheir first lesson in the morning, that of keeping quiet, and in the afternoon, theteacher, to show me the materials upon which he had to work, gave a lesson ofinduction. The children did not know the meaning of the words right and left.The front of the head from the back. And when taught to know the right handfrom the left, could not tell the right eye from the left. Reading is taught infrom nine to twelve months, to such pupils, by the phonic method applicable tothe Dutch language.X Lor's " Food for the Understanding," translated from the German, is themanual referred to by the teachers.4 Loln-'s work is used as a guide to many of the exercises which follow.212 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.sen, are a spelling and reading-board to be presently described,reading-tables or progressive lessons printed and pasted uponboards, and a series of reading-books, beginning with the simplevowel sounds and rising to stories for children who have a facilityin reading. There is a manual also for the teacher toguide his lessons. The reading-board* consists of a centrepiecewith horizontal grooves, or raised ledges forming groovesbetween them, into which small wooden prisms, having lettersmarked, or printed letters pasted upon them, may be placed.The vowels are arranged in compartments on one side ofthe centre-piece, and the consonants on the other. The letter-prismshave the same letter in different characters, capitalsand small letters, on four faces of the prism. This readingmachine admits of a great variety of exercises in the mechanicalarrangements concerned, in which the pupil takes part, suchas composing simple words and sentences, and forming wordsfrom the letters composing them, which have been purposelydisarranged. The reading-tables of progressive lessons are forthe purposes of varying the exercises, of employing a numberof children actively at the same time, and for habituating themto letters of the ordinary size. They are nine in number, beginningwith single vowels, and terminating with words containingseveral compound sounds. All the combinations of lettersused form words, as in Mr. Wood's plan, and the teacheris careful to require an explanation of every word as it occurs.Prince's Primer enables the teacher to exercise the intelligenceof the pupil, and to give a pleasing variety to his instruction.There are pictures attached to each letter, representing someobject or action, the word referring to which contains the vowelsound to be taught. The teacher draws from the pupil a descriptionof the object or action, and when he has obtained theright word, makes the child remark the sound of the letters.Of course, these sounds are not the arbitrary names of the letsPrince, iu Inn book on the methods of teaching to read, "Te leered leven,"attribute* the invention of the reading. board to Dollebarre.PRIMARY SCHOOLS OF HOLLAND. 213tears, and hence this method, to distinguish it from the spellingmethod, is called "phonic" (lautir). The reading-machine andprimer are used in conjunction. When the pupil has reachedthe " first reading-book," the teacher reads aloud, that the former,by following, may receive ideas of emphasis. The contain stories entirely adapted to the comprehensionof children, giving them ideas of common trades and operations,of moral sentiments, of nature, of the biographies ofthe worthies of Holland, familiar letters, &c. They containvarious forms of printed and written alphabets.In learning to write, beginning upon the slate or board, oneof the pupils composes a word upon the reading-board withwritten letters; then all name the sounds, and copy the formsupon their slates. In some schools, elementary forms are firsttaught, and the letters of large hand next written. In others,small hand is made the basis; and in the school for the poor at theHague, the teacher has ingeniously sifted out the elements of acurrent small hand, and begins with them. From the bestexamination I could give these methods, it appeared to methat the hand begun by small letters was not so good as thatbegun by large ones.A specimen of the method of teaching geography will beseen by following the outline of Prince's Description of harlem,used as a guide to the teachers of that place. It beginswith the elementary notions of the manner of representing acountry on a map, the points of the compass, &c. Then followsthe position of the town, its size and the character of itsenvirons, number of its inhabitants, most remarkable buildings,the divisions of the town, the gates, principal canals and streams,principal streets, and particulars relating to remarkable buildingsin them, and minute descriptions of the more importantplaces in the several wards, from the first to the sixth. Afterthus becoming acquainted with the geography of the town andits environs, that of Holland follows. In some schools, the oldmethod is still in use.Arithmetic is chiefly taught according to Pestalozzi's GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.shod, cubical blocks being used for numeration. These havebeen superseded, in sonne countries, by the arithmetical framespoken of before, which answers the same purpose of addressingthe eye, while its use is more convenient than that ofthe cubes. The method is by induction. The first lessonteaches to combine three units, variously, by addition. Thesecond, to reckon these forwards or backwards. The third, toname them from the middle. Then ideas of comparison, as ofgreater or less numbers, up to three units. Of differences, ofhow many times unity must be repeated to make two or three,X)T elementary ideas of subtraction, of multiplication, and ofdivision. The same course of lessons is repeated, increasingthe number of cubes (units) up to ten. Next follows ideas ofeven and uneven numbers, and of the result of their combinations,reaching as high as fifteen. Counting by units, by twos,by threes, and following the same steps as in the earlier lessons.Counting by twos and threes, by ones and threes, 6zc. and alwaysrepeating the same train. A similar course is followed in reckoningup to twenty, adding counting by fours, by threes and fours,by twos and fours, by ones and fours, and a similar seriesby fives. This course is kept up as long as necessary, andfrom the insight it gives, from the very beginning, into thetheory of arithmetic, a judicious teacher will be amply repaidfor the somewhat tedious repetition of the earlier steps, by thefacility of the later progress. The various exercises in arithmeticare fully detailed in the programme of the Hague school,already given. The elements of form are also taught accordingto Pestalozzi.The results of the moral and religious instruction communicatedin and out of school, are fully shown in the character ofthe people of Holland; and these must be deemed satisfactory.Sectarian instruction is carefully kept out of the schools, whilethe historical parts of the Bible and its moral lessons are fullydwelt upon. There are various collections of Bible stories forthis purpose, which are commented on by the teacher, and alltie incidental instruction, so important in a school, has the samePRIMARY SCHOOLS OF Holland. 1^15tendency. Doctrinal instruction is given, according to an arrangementmade with the churches of the various denominationswhen the school law was promulgated; this instruction isimparted out of the school, on the half-holidays and Sundays.Sometimes, when, as at the Hague, the pupils nearly all belongto one communion, a catechist attends at the school; but eventhen, only those children whose parents wish it are present atthe exercises.Music is taught by note, and most of the schools have ablack-board with the ledger lines painted in white or red uponit, to assist the teacher. The songs are of very various characters,as moral, religious, patriotic, grave, gay, and loyal; andvery considerable attainment is made in vocal music.I return now to the school of the Hague, to give an accountof the manner in which the various exercises are accomplished,within the six or eight years devoted to elementary instruction.As the law requires but three classes in each school, these aresub-divided. Each division is, in fact, a separate class, with adistinct course of study, and an industrious pupil can passthrough one division each year. The number of hours marked,are those devoted per week to the several subjects.FIRST, OR LOWEST CLASS.FIRST DIVISION.Hours.Exercises of thought and reason, 2Prince's Tables, 6Vowels and consonants from the letter-box, 1Composition of words on the reading-board, . * - - 3General exercises with the letter-box, 1Spelling from memory, - -1Explanation of words and sentences, - 2Simultaneous reading from books, 4Individual reading-.1Reading different printed characters, 1Mental arithmetic, ^.- 1Exercises in arithmetic, 2Learning Roman and Arabic numerals, . - . 1'Sitting quiet, 1Exercises of thought and reason, continued, 2GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.SECOND DIVISION.Hours.Vowels and consonants from the letter-box, continued,Spelling from memory, continued, - - . . .Explanations of words and sentences, continued, .Simultaneous reading from books, continued .Composition of sentences on the reading-board, - - -Reading written characters,Writing on the black-board,Arithmetic by induction, continued, .Mental arithmetic, continued,Writing and reading numbers, - - . . , 2Reading Roman numerals, .Elements of form, ,Sitting quiet,\ THIRD DIVISION.Exercises of thought and reason, continued.Spelling from memory, continued,Explanation of words and sentences, continued,Simultaneous reading from books, continued.Composition of sentences on the reading-board, continued,Writing on the black-board, continued, . - .Reading written characters, continued, .Grammar, the conjugations,Writing on slates,Writing out verses to learn by rote,Linear drawing, .Arithmetic by induction, continued,Mental arithmetic, continued, .Practical arithmetic, . - - .Writing and reading numbers, continued,Reading Roman numerals, continued,Elements of form, continued,Tables of coins,CatechismSECOND CLASS.FIRST DIVISION.Exercise of thought and reason, continued, -Analysis of sentences,Explanation of words and sentences, continued,Composition of sentences, continued, .Simultaneous reading, continued,A PRIMARY SCHOOL AT THE HAGUE. 217Hours.Correct reading, 1Parsing-.1Writing on slates, 2Writing small hand on paper, -5Mental arithmetic, continued, 1Practical arithmetic, continued, 2Tables of coins, continued, \Elements of form, continued, 1Linear drawing, continued, 1Moral and religious instruction, continued, 1Singing, 1SECOND DIVISION.Exercises of thought and reason, continued, 1Simultaneous reading from books, continued, . - - - 5Correct reading, continued, - - - . 1Composition of sentences, continued, .-., 1Writing on the slate, continued, 1Writing on paper, continued, 4Writing capital letters, 1Linear drawing, continued, 1History of Holland, 1Geography of Holland, 1Arithmetic by induction, continued, 1Mental arithmetic, continued, --.-. 1Practical arithmetic, continued, - 3Rules of arithmetic, IDecimal fractions, 1Elements of form, continued, - 1Moral and religious instruction, continued, 1Vocal music, continued, 1THIRD CLASS.Exercises of thought and reason, continued, . ISimultaneous reading, continued, - ICorrect reading of prose and poetry, lWriting from dictation for orthography, 2Grammar, continued, 1History of Holland, continued, \Chronology of Holland, 1Geography of Holland, 2Writing of small hand from copy-slips, 2Writing capital letters and figures, 1Writing on black-board, • 1218 GENERAL Education. ELEMENTARY PERIOD.Hours.Mental arithmetic, continued, .- : 1Practical ditto, ditto, 4Rules of ditto, ditto, 3System of weights and measures, 1Theory of numbers, 1Moral and religious instruction, continued, 1Catechism, continued, -1Vocal music, continued, 1The half-yearly examination of the pupils, at which I waspresent, enabled me to hear their progress in arithmetic withthe cubes, in reading and spelling, in forming words and sentences,in enumerating written numbers, making Roman numerals,in higher reading, in the elements of form, in higher arithmetic,in mental arithmetic, in the geography of Holland, andin vocal music. Their attainments in these branches were, ingeneral, quite respectable, and in some of them very satisfactoryindeed.The system of weights and measures is taught in the schoolsof Holland, not only by learning tables, but by reference to thestandards themselves, a complete set of copies of which is expectedto be preserved in every school. The advantages ofthis method are very great.The branches taught in the schools for the poor are carriedfurther in the burgher schools. Thus the course of grammaris extended, and general history and geography are added.The essentials are, however, the same, and there is no newtrain of study.The instruction in the, so called, French schools, may beillustrated by that in the one established by the school-committeeof Utrecht. This school consists of three divisions: twofor boys and one for girls. Of those for boys, the first is aDutch elementary school, which takes its pupils at about fiveyears of age, and carries them through a course very similarto that already described.* At from ten to eleven they pass• I was much pleased to see the method of teaching geography by delineatingmap* on Uio black-board in use in this school. The master himself must beprACticed in trio art, in order that the pupils may learn by imitation.PRIMARY SCHOOLS OF HOLLAND.to the French school. Here they make further attainmentsin the Dutch language, study general geography and historyin detail, carry their arithmetic further, and begin algebra,continue the course of geometry, make greater progress inthe theory and practice of music, and, above all, study theFrench language grammatically, and, by using it as the languageof recitation, and learning much of the other branchesthrough its medium, acquire a great facility in speaking it. Insome of these schools physics and natural history are taught,and Latin is begun by those who intend to enter the GrammarSchool.*• As, for example, in an admirable private school by Mr. Tip, at UtrechtThe school of the committee just referred to is also called private, not beingsupported by the public funds, but its plan is prescribed by the committee.220 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.CHAPTER V.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION AND SCHOOLS OF PRUSSIA.Of the primary schools in the different states of Germanywhich I visited, those of Prussia, and of the smaller states in itsimmediate neighbourhood, struck me most favourably. Aftergiving a sketch of the system of public instruction in Prussia,I shall proceed to an account of certain of its primary schools;then notice some of the primary schools of Saxony, prefacingthe account by a few v^^ords on its system of publicinstruction; next describe the model primary school of thetown of Frankfort on Maine ; and, finally, conclude the subjectof the primary period by an account of the school methodof Graser of Breath, in Bavaria. The organization of primaryinstruction in general, in Bavaria, is not such as to demanda special notice.It is a very general impression, that the present primaryschool system of Prussia is of comparatively recent date, orthat it has been, within twenty years, recast and moulded intoits present form.* The fact however is, that it is a system• This impression is derived, as well as I can trace it, from the Report on theState of Public Instruction in Prussia, &c., by M. Victor Cousin. M. Cousinquotes largely from, and comments upon, "the legislative project of 1819, whichhas the force of law, and regulates the present order of things throughout thecountry." (American edition of Report, &c., p. 25.) He speaks so often of "thelaw of 1819," that it never occurred to me to doubt that there was such a law,until I came to consult authorities, namely, the authorized collection of laws onprimary instruction, by Dr. Neigebaur, (Sammlung der auf den OffentlichenUntcrricht in den Konigl. Preuss Staaten such beziehenden Verordnungen, &,c.,1826.) (Daa Volks-Schulwesen in den Preussischen Staaten, 1834), and the Annualof Common School Instruction, by Dr. Beckcdorff. (Jalirbtieher des Prcus-kitchen Volks^hulwesens.) In neither of them is a general law on public in-•truclion of the dato of 1819, or notice of such a law, to be found, and some ofIc provisions enumerated by M. Cousin arc not contained in any of the decreesSYSTEM or PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA. 221composed of fragments of very different dates, beginning inthe Mark of Brandenburg, before the kingdom of Prussia existed,and variously modified from that time to the present. Itis one of the peculiar merits of the system, that its provisionshave, for the most part, been tried on a small scale before theyhave been applied to the vv^hole country, and that v^^hen a provisionhas, on trial, proved ill devised, it has been promptly modifiedor annulled. Prussia seems, for a series of years, to havepossessed patriotic and enlightened citizens, who have devotedthemselves to the cause of public instruction, and monarchswho have duly estimated and encouraged their exertions inthis cause.I propose to sketch some of the earlier measures, in regardto primary instruction, in chronological order, to establish thepoint as to the early date of many important regulations nowin operation; then to give a short account of the most importantprovisions of existing laws, attaching to each the dateat which it appears in the statute-book, so that the chronologicalorder may still be ascertained.As early as the reign of the Elector Joachim the Second(1540), visitors were appointed to inspect the town schools of theactually given, while many arc in decrees antecedent, and others in decreessubsequent to 1819. These and other German authorities are, besides, directlyopposed to the existence of such a law. Neigebaur, in the preface of his workpublished in 1834, expressly says that no general law exists. " The progressof the important department of public instruction has hitherto rendered it impossibleto make a general law in relation to public instruction in Prussia. Allthe important measures, up to this time, are contained in separate ordinances,which, as the older collections have become obsolete by this progress, must becompiled anew for the use of teachers and officers." Mr. Thiersch, of Munich,in his work on the present condition of public instruction in certain states ofGermany, (Uber den gegenwartigen Zustand des OfFentlichen Unterrichts in denwest lichen Staaten von Deutschland, &c., von Friedrich Thiersch, 1833,) says,in speaking of Prussia, " In a decree in relation to public instruction in 1817, ageneral school system had been promised'* * » • * « but this royal promisehas remained unfulfilled for eighteen years."The numerous writers out of Germany, who speak on this subject, have evidentlydrawn their conclusions that the law of 1819 is in existence, from M. Cousin'sauthority, and hence cannot be considered as giving independent testimonyon the matter.222 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Electorate, with express directions to report in relation to themeasures deemed necessary for their improvement.* In 1545the same elector appointed a permanent council, or board, onchurch and school matters. In a decree of some length by theelector John George (1573), special sections are devoted to theschools, to teachers and their assistants, and to pupils. It isremarkable as containing a provision for committees of superintendence,consisting of the parish clergyman, the magistrates,and two notables, exactly similar in constitution to the presentschool-committees. It provides also for Sunday catecheticalinstruction of children.In 1717 a decree of Frederick William the First, King ofPrussia, enjoins upon parents to send their children to school,provides for the payment of teachers, for the education of poorchildren, and for catechetical instruction by the parochial clergymenIn 1735 the first regular seminary for teachers inPrussia was established at Stettin, in Pomerania To inducea better attendance at school, a decree of 1736 requires thatthe parent of every child between five and twelve years ofage shall pay a certain fee, whether his child goes to schoolor not ; this rule being, as it were, preliminary to the presentone of forced attendance The same decree refers to schoolhouseserected by associated parishes, showing that such associationsexisted previously to the decree for providing publicschools; similar associations may even now exist, but they arenot numerous, forming exceptions to the general rule, requiringeach parish to have its public school. The decree providesfurther for the amount of fees to be paid to the teacher by thepupils, the church, or the state, and for aid to peasants who• Beckedorff Johrbttcher des Preussischen Volks-Schulwesens. SweeterBand. Erst HeO, Beckedorff's Annual of Common Schools in Prussia, vol. ii.,No. 1, pp. 18, 19, &c. f Ibid., p. 30.t Ibid., p. 32. Dr. KrOger, of Hamburgh, says, in reply to my inquiries on Diissubject, Fiat imi)crfcct establishments existed as early as 1G80 in Gotha, Weel,and Brunswick, and us curly us 1701 at KOnigsbcrg.^ Dan Vol Schulwcsen in den Preuss. Staten, &c., von Dr. .Tt.hann FerdinandNcigobaur, 1831. Ncigebaur's Collection of Decrees, &c., relating toCommon School, &c., lb.?4, p. 1.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY mSTRUCTIONT IN PRUSSIA. 223have more than two children above five years of age, by thepayment of the fees of all over this number from a schoolfund.* A rescript of 1738 constitutes the clergy the inspectorsof schoolsAn attempt to provide more precisely, by law, for the regulationof the schools in Berlin, was made by a decree of 1738.-This decree requires that teachers shall be regularly examinedby the inspectors of schools, before being allowed to teach,and prescribes their acquirements in detail. It directs the openingand closing of the schools with prayers; fixes the hours ofdaily attendance at from eight to eleven or seven to ten in themorning, and one to three in the afternoon; prescribes instructionin spelling, reading, writing, arithmetic, and singing, andregulates the emoluments and perquisites of the mastersA new impulse was given to public instruction under thereign of Frederick the Great. The regulations drawn up byHecker,§ and approved by the king (1763), are very precise,and though they have been in part superseded by later decrees,many of their provisions are still in force. They provide for theselection of school-books by the consistory; that children shall besent to school at five years of age, and be kept there until thirteenor fourteen, or until they have made satisfactory attainmentsin reading and writing, in the knowledge of Christiandoctrine, and of such matters as are to be found in their textbooks; fix the school hours, requiring six hours a-day of instructionin winter, and three in summer, and one hour of catecheticalinstruction, besides the Sunday teaching; require that all unmarriedpersons of the parish shall attend the hour of instruction \nthe catechism, and besides, receive lessons in reading and writingfrom the Bible. The regulations provide anew for the schoolmasters'fees, and for the instruction of poor children; requirethat the school-master shall be furnished from the church registerwith a list of all the children of the age to attend school,Das Vol Schulwescn in den Preuss. Staten, &c., von Dr. Johann FerdinandNeigebaur, 1834. Neigebaur's Collection of Decrees, &c., relating to CommonSchools, «&c., 1834, p. 1, &c. t Ibid. p. 3.t Beckedorff 's Annual, vol. ii., p. 32. § Ibid., p. 38.9S4 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.and that he shall prepare a list of those who. are actually inattendance, and submit both to the clergyman, in his periodicalvisits; direct anew the examination of candidates for the situationof school-master, and refer particularly to the advantages ofthe seminary opened at Berlin for preparing teachers for the Markof Brandenburg; lay down minutely the scheme of elementaryinstruction, and actually specify the time to be devoted to thedifferent branches with each of the two classes composing theschool;* require the parochial clergy to visit the schools twice aweek, and inspectors of circles to perform the same service atleast once a year.The decree of Frederick regulating the Catholic schools ofSilesia (1765), is even more particular than the foregoing. Itshows the settled policy in regard to educating teachers inspecial seminaries, now so important a part of the Prussian system,by setting apart certain schools by name for this purpose,requiring the appointment of a director to each, and assigninghis dutiesIn 1787 Frederick William the Second created a council ofinstruction, under the title of an "Upper School Board," (OverSchul-Collegium,) of which the minister of state was president.This council was directed to examine text-books, and to pass uponthe licenses of masters, on the reports of the provincial schoolboards. They were authorized to erect seminaries for teachers atthe government expense, and to frame their regulations; to sendout an inspector from their body to examine any part of publicinstruction, and to rectify all wrongs by a direct order, or throughthe school boards of the provinces, the school-committees, orpatrons-t This organization remained substantially in forceuntil the separation of the departments of state and instructionin 1817, with the creation of a ministry of public instruction.• Neigebaur of 1834, p. 5, &c.t Ibid. p. 18. This decree contains the remarkable sentence, " The gentry, aswell OB tho common people, must not consider or treat the teacher as a servant,but u an offer, whoso duty it is to form good tenants for landlords, and childrenfor i>aront«."t Bcckodorff '• Annual, vol. ii,, p. 45.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IX PRUSSIA. 225The attributes of this upper school board, it will be seen, iiowbelong to that council.The school plan of 1763 was modified by an ordinance of1794, which introduces geography and natural history in theelementary schools, and refers to vocal music as one of theirmost important exercises; it also attempts, by minute prescriptions,to introduce uniformity in the methods of instruction anddiscipline.* The regulation for the catholic schools of Silesia wasalso revised in 180 leavingnow brought this chronological account to the beginningof our century, and shown that many provisions ofweight originated previous to this period, I proceed, accordingto the purpose already explained, to leave the chronologicalorder, and to give a view of the more important regulations nowin force, appending to them the date of their enactment. Thesedates, with the foregoing, show, that while the separation of theministry of public instruction from that of the state, in 1817,no doubt gave a new impulse to the present system, and wasan important change in administration, it was by no meansthe beginning of a new system. This division, in fact, resultedfrom the effects of the earlier provisions of the system itself,,and especially of the seminaries for teachers. As early as 1806,a measure of great consequence was adopted, that of sendingteachers to the school of Pestalozzi and others ; many, also,went at their own expense; and thus improved methods weredistributed over the kingdom and over Germany in generalThe authorities which administer public instruction in Prussiaare the following: The chief authority is the minister, who joinsto this supervision that of ecclesiastical and medical affairsNeigebaur of 1834, p. 71, &c., No. 29. t Ibid., No. 8, p. 41, &c.X Dr. KrOger gives me the names of several men now high in the duties ofpublic instruction, (Kawerau, Hoffman, Hiensch, Kunze, Plomann,) which fullybear out my assertion. Letter of 22d May, 1838. Dr. K. was also one ofthese teachers.§ Cabinet order of November 3, 1817. Frederick William the Third. (neighbour,1834, p. 186, &c.) The duties of the section of public instruction and re-hgious affairs of the state council were already defined in 1810. (Neigebaur,p. 177,&c.)906 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.He is assisted by a council consisting of a variable number ofmembers, and divided into three sections corresponding to thethree charges of the minister. The section for public instructionhas its president and secretary, and meets usually twice aweek for the transaction of business. One of this body is generallydeputed as extraordinary inspector in cases requiring examination,and reports to the minister.* The kingdom of Prussiais divided into ten provinces, each of which has its governor,styled Superior President, (Over-President,) who is assisted bya council called a Consistory, (Consistorium.)t This councilhas functions in the province similar to those of the ministerialcouncil in the kingdom at large, and has direct control of secondarypublic instruction, and of the schools for the educationof primary teachers It is subdivided into two sections, ofwhich one has charge of the primary instruction in the provincesunder the title of the School Board, (Provincial Schul-collegium.)The school board, in addition to exercising thegeneral supervision of education in the province, examines thestatutes and regulations of the schools, insures the execution ofexisting laws and regulations, examines text books, and givespermission for their introduction after having obtained the approbationof the ministry. This Board communicates with thehigher authorities through their president, to whom the reportsfrom the next lower authority, to be presently spoken of, areaddressed, and by whom, when these relate to school matters,they are referred to the Board for examinationsThe next smaller political division to a province is called aRegency, (Regierungs-Bezirk,) which is again subdivided intoCircles, (Risen,) and those into Parishes, (Gemeinden). Thechief civil authority in the regency is a president, who is assistedby a council called also a regency.This body is divided into three sections, having charge respectivelyof the internal affairs, of direct taxes, and of church• BcckodorfTs Annual, vol. ii., p. 86. t Neigebaur, 1834, p. 179.t Ncigebaur of 1834. Instructions for Provincial School Boards, October 23,1817, p. 179. Cousin, Public Instruction in Prussia, p. 20, American edition.Neighbour of 1834, p. 188-9. |j Ibid., p. 179, &c.rSYSTEM OP PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA. 227and school matters.* The last named committee examinesand appoints all the teachers of elementary and burgher schoolswithin the regency, superintends the schools, ascertains thatthe school-houses and churches are duly kept in order, administersthe funds of schools and churches, or superintendsthe administration when vested in corporations, and collectsthe church and school fees.t This committee is presided overby a member of the regency called a School-councillor, (Schul-hath.)As councillor, he has a seat and voice in the provincialconsistory, where he is required to appear at least once a year,and to report upon their affairs in his regency, of which theprovincial consistory has the superintendence It is also hisduty to visit the schools, and to satisfy himself that they are ingood condition.The next school authority is the inspector of a circle, whohas charge of several parishes These inspectors are generallyclergymen, while the school-councillors are laymen. Nextbelow the special superintendents is the immediate authority,namely, the school-committee, (Schul-Vorstand.) Each parish(Gemeinde) must, by law, have its school, except in specialcases,|| and each school its committee of superintendence, (,)consisting of the curate, the local magistrate, andfrom two to four notables; the constitution of the committeevarying somewhat with the character of the school, whetherendowed, entirely supported by the parish, in part by the provinceor state, or by subscription. The committee appoints aschool-inspector, who is usually the clergyman of the parish.!In cities, the magistrates form the school-committee or school-deputation,as it is there called, the curates still acting as localinspectors.• Neigebaur of 1834, Instructions of 31st December, 1825, p. 189.t Ibid., Instruction for the Regencies, October, 1817, p. 183, &c.t Ibid., Ordinance of 1815, p. 179.§ School Regulations, Neigebaur of 1834, p. 5, &c., No. 6.II Neigebaur of 1826. Order, &,c., June, 1820, p. 181, and previous decrees, allpointing to the same result.^ Neigebaur of 1834. Cabinet Order of 1812, p. 195.GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Thus there is a regular series of authorities, from the masterof the school up to the minister, and every part of primary instructionis entirely within the control of an impulse from thecentral government, and takes its direction according to thewill of the highest authorities. With such a system, under adespotic government, it is obvious that the provisions of anylaw may be successfully enforced.The cardinal provisions of the school system of Prussia are:First That als children between the ages of seven and fourteenyears shall go regularly to school.* This is enforced bythe school-committees, who are furnished with lists of the childrenwho should attend, and of those actually in the schoolsunder their charge, and who are required to enforce the penaltiesof the law.Second. That each parish shall, in general, have an elementaryschool. When the inhabitants are of different religiouspersuasions,! ^^^^^ denomination has its school, and if not, provisionis made for the religious instruction of the children by• Royal Prussian General Regulations for the Schools of the Country. (neighbourof 1826, p. 126.) Five years is named as the period for beginning school, butseven is that when the police regulations render the attendance obligatory. Seealso Neigebaur of 1834. Cabinet Order of 1825, p. 64. M. Cousin calculatesthe number of children between the ages of seven and fourteen in Prussia, in1631, at 2,043,030, and shows, from the returns of the number of pupils in thedifferent primary schools, that 2,021,421 were in actual attendance, leaving but21,609 to be accounted for by the children educated in private schools, at home,and in the lower classes of the gymnasia. The latter, in 1832, amounted to17,935. (Cousin's Report, Amer. Edit. p. 311). Nearly one-sixth of the entirepopulation of the kingdom would thus appear to be in the schools. The ratio,however, varies exceedingly in different parts of the kingdom ; in the provinces ofSaxony, Silesia, and Brandenburg, the proportion was, in 1831, higher than one-sixth),wliilc, in the Rhenish provinces, it was one-seventh, and in Posen, as lowu onc-clcvenlh. (KrOgcr's Appendix to his Trans. of Cousin, p. 213.) Thenumber is swelled to that stated above, the sixth of the entire population, by theintroduction into the account of children under seven years of age: the pupils ofthe infant-schools, the work-schools, orphan asylums, &c., being included underthe head of those who are in the elementary schools,t This if easy of accomplishment, as since the union of the Lutherans andCalvinists to form the Evangelical church, there are but two divisions, Protestantsand Roman Catholics.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA. 229their own pastors. The erection of the school-house, its furniture,the income of the master, and aid to poor scholars, are allprovided for. The requisite sum comes, in part, from parochialfunds, and in part from a tax upon house-holders. When theparish is poor, it is assisted by the circle, by the province, andeven by the state. Besides these elementary schools, most ofthe towns in Prussia have one or more upper primary or burgherschools.*Third. The education of teachers in seminaries,! adaptedto the grade of instruction to which they intend devoting themselves.Their exemption during their term of study from activemilitary service required of other citizens. A provision fortheir support during their term of study. A preference givento them over school-masters not similarly educated. Their examinationprevious to receiving a certificate of capacity, whichentitles them to become candidates for any vacant post in theprovince where they have been examined. Their subsequentexemption from active military service, and even from the annualdrill of the militia, if they cannot, in the opinion of theschool-inspector, be spared from their duties. Provision for theremoval of the incompetent or immoral. A provision for thesupport of decayed teachers.Fourth, The authorities which regulate the schools and renderthem a branch of the general government, and the teachersin fact its officers. In a country like Prussia, this connexionsecures to the teacher the respect due to his station, and thusfacilitates the discharge of his important duties. It gives thegovernment, however, almost unlimited control over the schools,securing that no principles shall be disseminated in- them whichare not in accordance with the wishes of the central authority,and even providing for the propagation among the people ofthose in which it may desire them to be educated.* In 1833 there were eight hundred and twenty-eight burgher schools inPrussia. (KrOger's Appendix to his Trans. of Cousin.)t In 1833 there were forty-three such seminaries in Prussia, attended by twothousand and thirty-six pupils, and furnishing nearly eight hundred teachersannually880 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Having thus completed a brief sketch of the. system of publicinstruction, I proceed, according to the division made in thebeginning of this chapter, to describe some of the individualschools. It will be seen that the subjects of popular instructionare excellent in themselves, and that the methods of teachingare in general the most improved. Prussia has certainly set anoble example in this respect. It is true that the governmenthas provided that the incidentals of instruction, which exert sostrong an influence on the mind, shall all tend to educate thepeople in sentiments of attachment to the existing order ofthings, but they would have been untrue to their political systemhad they not done so, and this fact, instead of leading toa rejection of the experience of their schools by nations moreadvanced in the true principles of government, should stimulatethem to a like'care in their systems of education.*As already stated, the primary schools of Prussia are of twokinds, the elementary, and the burgher or middle school. Thefirst is not an introduction to the second, as might be supposedby its name, but is intended for such children as are to receivean elementary education, only remaining at school until thirteenor fourteen years of age. These schools in the cities and largetowns educate the poor, and are frequently designated as pooror charity-schools, (Armen-schulen.) The others are intendedfor children whose parents can dispense with their servicesuntil fifteen or sixteen. Their pupils generally become artisansor shopkeepers.There are, in fact, two grades of burgher schools, of whichthe higher, usually found in the cities, besides preparing itspupils as just stated, enables them to enter the third class of the• It is frequently a question what results have been derived from tills muchvaunted aystcm. What has been the effect upon the people? To answer thisaccurately would require a long residence in the country; to have known itsstate in past years, and to estimate accurately the causes of any observed changes.It ia t most difficult question, and I do not pretend to give my results as an answer,but merely to bear testimony to the superior intellectual and moral conditionof Uiia pcojilo to others of the same race, in circumstances otherwise somewhatsimilar, but less favoured by education. It is impossible to judge of the re-suits which would be produced in a country where the press is free, by those ofPrussia.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA. 231grammar school or gymnasium. The instruction in them isaltogether better than that in the elementary schools, whichlatter, as far as I saw them, were inferior to those of Holland.The lower burgher schools, on the contrary, afford an elevatedstandard of true primary instruction, and Prussia has specialreason to be proud of the whole class.Uniformity of instruction throughout this kingdom would nodoubt be practicable in a general sense, by means of the systemalready described. There is, indeed, at present, a closeapproach to uniformity of spirit in the schools and in the subjectstaught. Very wisely, however, the methods of teachingare not prescribed, and though a common sentiment amongthe directors of the seminaries for teachers, produces an approximationto uniformity of method among the younger masters,yet even among these there is some diversity of opinionand action. When we speak, then, of uniformity in the Prussianschools, it must be-understood with great limitations, or wegive a theoretical view of what might be, instead of a practicalone of what is.PUBLIC ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OF BERLIN.The Prussian system admits of so much license in its minorarrangements, that the elementary schools of Berlin, as at presentestablished, vary from the parochial system in use in thekingdom at large, resulting from a plan proposed to the regencyby School-counsellor Reichelen, and adopted in 1827. There areat present nine public elementary schools in the city, but if theclasses were confined to seventy-five pupils each, as originallyintended, fourteen schools would be required, according to thecalculations of Mr. Reichelen. The number of pupils, however,in charge of a single master, is greater than that just stated,thereby impairing essentially the efficiency of the schools.The masters receive fixed salaries,* the fees which theyThe salary of the head master of both boys' and girls* schools is two hundredand twenty-five dollars per annum, besides which he has his lodging andcertain allowances, amounting to from seventy-five to a hundred and twelve OKlfERAL EDUCATION. Primary PERIOD.collect being paid over to the school-committee. Of the twoschools of this kind at Berlin which I visited, one came up to therequirements of the law in the branches of instruction, except inthe omission of linear drawing. In the other, both drawing andnatural history were omitted. In the first, the branches were:1. Religious instruction. 2. Reading. 3. German language.4. The geography and history of Prussia. 5. Arithmetic.6. Elements of geometry. 7. Weights and measures of thecountry. 8. Natural history. 9. Writing. 10. Singing. Innone of these schools is the physical education of the pupils attendedto. In each there is a girls' school, separated from thatof the boys', and giving similar instruction, except that a portionof the time is occupied in works appropriate to the sex.According to rule, these schools should have two classes foreach sex, the head master teaching the first, and the assistantthe second; in one, however, the two classes were subdivided,forming four. The lowest class learns to read and write a little,and is then promoted. In the school of two classes, thelower contained pupils from six to nine and even ten years ofage, and the upper class pupils from eight and nine to twelveand thirteen years. This division is much inferior to that ofthe school for the poor at the Hague, which I have alreadydescribed; it requires the union in one class of pupils in verydifferent stages of progress, and renders simultaneous teachingalmost out of the question. The lower class has twenty-six,and the upper thirty-two to thirty-four hours of instruction perweek, the former having one hour less per day than the latter,which is a good arrangement. There is a short interval ofrecess in the morning exercises. 1. The religious instructionconsists in all the schools, of Bible history catechism, andreading the Bible. The schools are for Protestants, and theLutheran Catechism is used. 2. The reading is taught by thephonic method, already described at length under the head ofHurt. The pupils pay at the minimum three, and at the maximum thirty centsper month. In one of the schools which I visited, the fees amounted in all to aboutnine dollars and seventy .five cents per month, the two-fifths of which, formingthe master's perquisite, amounted, therefore, to about forty-seven dollars a year.ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OF BERLIN. 883primary instruction in Holland. In many schools the reading-boardand letter-blocks are used ; in one of those which I visited,writing was taught with reading. Exercises of thought andspeech are interwoven with the elements of reading. Thereading-books* are various, and combine progressive instructionin this branch with incidental information in morals, thehistory of the country, history of the church and of sects, biography,geography, natural history and elementary physics,grammar, &lc. This incidental method is, however, far fromgiving sufficient instruction, unless combined with the direct,though, by keeping it in view, the exercises in reading are preventedfrom degenerating into mere lessons of sounds. Fromthe books which are allowed by the highest school authoritiesto be used, the committee of any particular school, after consultingthe master, adopt such as they please, and when the.teacher wishes a change, he applies to the same authority.The list of approved books is always sufficiently large to admitof the exercise of the individual judgments of the master andcommittee. The analysis of words and sentences is attendedto in these schools, and exercises of induction are practised,especially where younger masters from the teachers* seminariesare employed. As the method of teaching depends principallyupon the master, it sometimes varies even in the sameschool. If the precise routine were laid down, the spirit wouldbe different, and thus, at last, it is the kind of education givento the teacher which determines the character of the school. Itmay be stated, however, that the instruction is either simultaneousor individual. 3. The German requires no special remark;it includes instruction in grammar. 4. The geographyis taught by beginning with an outline of general geography,referring to maps, and learning from books. There isHempel's "Common School Friend," which I found in use in the schools,appears to mc, in general, to be a good compilation, though the ideas of historywhich it gives are very limited. The statements in regard to North Americaarc, besides, of a kind to lead the child to suppose that the country is still peopledby red men, who are without the institutions of the old world, which areenumerated, to show the superior advantages of civilized over savage life.• 30234 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.a great deficiency in the implements for teaching this branch.5. Both mental and written arithmetic are taught. In one ofthe schools, the ground-work is laid according to Pestalozzi'smethod, and the extent of the course is to the single rule ofthree, inclusive. Some of the pupils acquire great facility inmental arithmetic, but I have seen better results in this branchin the English schools. 6. The geometry consists of the elementsof form, according to Pestalozzi. 7. The weights andmeasures are taught as in our schools, by committing tables tomemory, and not, as in Holland, by actual reference to the standardsthemselves. 9. The writing is taught by copying fromordinary copy-boards, first on the slate, then on paper. Theblack-board is used in some cases. Writing from dictation isresorted to for orthography. The proficiency in this branchis, however, 6h\y tolerable. 10. Vocal music is taught by note,and particular attention is paid to church music. The schoolis begun and ended with a psalm or hymn, as well as withprayer.The ordinary discipline is conducted without corporal punishment,though it is allowed in extreme cases. The individualsof the classes retain the same places, unless in cases of grossneglect, or as a kind of punishment. These places are in someschools regulated in the upper classes by a writing-lesson atthe end of the month, in which correctness in spelling as wellas neatness of handwriting are taken into the account.The arrangements of the school-houses in Berlin, both interiorand exterior, have undergone considerable change of lateyears. The eighth town-school is in a very neat building, ailthe rooms are commodious, and provided with raised platformsfor the benches and desks; all those, however occupied by thelarger classes are defective in ventilation.*• The number of children in Berlin requiring nearly or quite gratuitous in-sanction was reckoned, in 1827, at four thousand five hundred. These are supposedto be gatlicrcd principally in the nine school-houses now erected. One ofLose which I visited contained six hundred children. It is intended to increasethe number of houses, so as to prevent such an accumulation in any one, threehundred being the number calculated for each school.ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OP BERLIN. 235These schools are reasonably good, and if they were in acountry less celebrated for the character of its public instructionthan Prussia, would not call for special remark, but they canby no means be held up as having attained all that is possible,or even that is required, in establishments of the kind.In addition to these charity schools, each of which is commonto both sexes, there are nine schools of industry (Erwerb-schouten) for girls; in these the pupils work, receiving a smallcompensation, besides instruction in the rudiments. There arealso evening schools, at which the attendance is voluntary, andwhere those who have gone through the elementary coursesmay revise or extend their knowledge.*BURGHER OR MIDDLE SCHOOLS.These are the higher primary schools already referred to.They owe their superiority over the others not only to thegreater variety of subjects of instruction, and to the greater extentto which they are carried, but to various minor advantages.Among the first of these may be stated the greaternumber of classes, admitting of a nearer equality in the knowledgeof the pupils, and hence of more efficient instruction.The number of regular classes in these schools is usually fromfour to six, and in the others only two. Next, the number ofpupils under the charge of one teacher is less than in the elementaryschools, which is attended with the same effect as juststated, especially where individual teaching is attempted, in connexionwith the simultaneous method. In the whole kingdomThe number of elementary schools, public and private, in Berlin, is given inthe census of 1831 at 117, and the pupils in attendance at 13,131. Of burgher-schools80, attended by 7,210 pupils, making 197 primary schools, attended by20,341 pupils. Adding 750, the probable number in the lower classes of thegymnasia and real schools, we have 21,091 children between the ages of sevenand fourteen in the schools. The number of children in Berlin between the agesof one day and fourteen years is reported in the same census to be 67,709. Admittingthat three-sevenths of them are between seven and fourteen years, wehave 29,019 children, who, according to law, should be in the schools. Thereis, therefore, an unexplained deficiency in the capital of nearly 8000. Thesenumbers are taken from the table given in the Supplement to M. Cousin's Report,American edition.296 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.of Prussia, in 1831, the average number of pupils to one instructorin the elementary schools, was seventy-seven, and inthe burgher schools, thirty-seven, or less than half the formernumber. Again, the higher salaries paid in these schools securesto them, in general, advantages in the choice of teachers notpossessed by the others, which frequently must be entrusted toinferior abilities or experience. There is, further, no doubt, asfar as observation may be trusted, that the grade of intelligenceof the children in the burgher schools is higher than in theothers, their opportunities of domestic culture and the incentivesto exertion are greater, and the intercourse of homeis usually more improving. All these, and perhaps othercauses, tend to widen the interval between these classes ofschools. The connecting link between the higher burgherand the elementary schools of the cities, is afforded bythe burgher schools of the smaller towns, sometimes calledlower burgher schools. Both divisions educate the sameclasses of individuals, but the wants, both material and intellectual,of the tradesman of the small town and of the city arevery different, and the instruction to which they aspire differsessentially. The village tradesman of Prussia is satisfied to beable to read and write German, and to cast accounts, while thecity tradesman of the same class must be better informed inthese, and add a knowledge of French and some mathematicsto his elementary acquirements. Besides, the higher burgherschools are made to serve as preparatory establishments forthe gymnasia, and the plan of instruction is modified accordingly,being in the higher classes so far changed as almost toremove them from the sphere of legitimate primary instruction.It is the lower class of these schools which appears to me toafford a suitable standard for the primary grade, in regard tothe nature, extent, and methods of instruction, and the classificationin general of the school. Divesting the higher schools ofcertain features which do not appear essential, they afford excellentmodels, upon which it would not be too much to askthat the primary schools should be arranged, or to the standardof which they should endeavour to attain. Postponing furtherSEMINARY SCHOOL AT WEISSENFELS. 237remark on this subject until some of the individual schools havebeen described, I proceed to art account of the seminary schoolat Weissenfels, belonging to the lower burgher school class,and of three higher burgher schools, presenting varieties of thesame grade of establishment, namely, the Dorothea highercity school, and the seminary school of Berlin, and the higherburgher school of Potsdam. I have selected these as characteristicspecimens of the best schools of the kind which I visited,and they are all which my limits will permit me to presentSEMINARY SCHOOL AT WEISSENFELS.This is a higher elementary, or lower burgher school, attachedto the seminary for teachers at Weissenfels, and is underthe charge of the director of the seminary.* The school is intendednot only for the benefit of the citizens of Weissenfels,but also as a model school, in which the pupils of the seminarymay reduce to practice, under the eye of their teachers, thelessons of theory in the art of teaching, which forms an importantpart of the course of the seminary.The school has four hundred pupils, male and female. Theyare divided into five classes, in the three lower of which thetwo sexes receive instruction in common, being separated inthe highest. Each class averages thus eighty under the chargeof one master, who is, however, assisted by the pupils of theseminary. The following table shows the subjects of instruction,and the amount of time devoted to each. The wholecourse usually lasts seven years, when the pupil enters at theage of six or seven.Dr. Harnisch, one of the most highly esteemed teachers of Germany, towhom I am indebted for a MS. account of his seminary, and other valuable documents,besides a kind welcome. Dr. H. docs not consider Diis school a trueburgher school, (see his work, Die Deutsche Biirgerschule,) but I speak of thingsas they exist, and with names as commonly applied. This school was placedunder its present director in 1822, when the normal school was re-organized.The pupils of the highest class pay but two dollars and seven-five cents per yearfor tuition.OBIfERAL EDUCATION. IICEAUT PERIOD.Table of the distribution of time in the " Seminary School" at Weissenfels.SUBJECTSOFINSTRUCTION.Religious Instruction, - -German Language, - - -Reading,Inductive Exercises, - -Arithmetic,Geometry,Geog., Hist., Nat. Hist., &c.,Writing,Drawing,Singing,Total,NO. OF HOURS PER WEEK.The religious instruction consists in the narration of Biblestories and in pointing out the appropriate moral; in Biblehistory in a more connected form ; in learning Luther's Catechism,and committing parts of the Bible to memory. Thepupils are also expected to give an account of the Sunday's• This column is calculated on the supposition that the pupil remains in theschool from six until thirteen years of age, passing through the lowest class inone year, and each of the others in two years.♦ Ab Uie instruction in writing and reading is combined, I have placed half ofthe number of hour under each head.t Of tliciic oiglit hours throe arc combined reading and writing, and twocopying.SEMINARY SCHOOL AT WEISSENFELS. 239sermon. The study of Gei-man includes the grammar. Thereare exercises specially of orthography and syntax in the upperclasses. Poetry is also committed to memory.The elements of reading and writing are taught together,according to Dr. Harnisch's method, already described as inuse at Halle. In the upper classes the reading-lessons are intendednot only to give fluency in the art of reading, but alsoincidental instruction in grammar and general knowledge.Direct exercises of induction are in use only in the lowestclass.The instruction in arithmetic extends through fractions: mentalarithmetic preceding written through all the rules. That ofgeometry consists merely of the elements of form, according toPestalozzi.Under geography and history arc included both physical andpolitical geography and biography. With the physical geographyis interwoven an account of the productions of natureand art of different countries. In the summer the pupils aremade acquainted with the botany of the environs, and in winterreceive lessons upon animals, &c.Writing on paper is a matter of privilege attainable by thosewho improve sufficiently. The others write on slates. Thefirst lessons in drawing are introductory to writing; afterwardsit is made a separate branch.The higher classes learn music by note, and sing twice aweek in company with the pupils of the normal school. Theviolin is used in leading the class singing exercises.The discipline and instruction are admirable. The teachershave little occasion to use punishment. The instruction ischiefly given viva voce, and the pupils in general appear interestedin their studies. A book is kept for the record of delinquencies,which is examined by one of the superior mastersonce a week, and notice taken of the faults recorded. Thedirector examines it once a month, and admonishes those whoneed it. Corporal punishment is resorted to only in extremecases.According to the views of director Harnisch, as to what a240 GENERAL EDUCATION, PRIMARY PERIOD.true burgher school should be, the pupils who have gone throughthe courses of this school are just fit to enter one, and I mustexpress my entire approbation of thus making the elementaryschool merely a step in the general course of education, andone which leads to further advance.The schools next to be described will be found to vary veryconsiderably in their arrangements from this one, forming theopposite extreme, as it were, of the class, but a connecting linkwill be supplied by the burgher school of Potsdam, which is intendedto cover the ground occupied by both divisions.DOROTHEAN HIGHER CITY SCHOOL.This is a burgher school of recent establishment, which Iwas recommended to visit as one of the best in Berlin.* Thecity has recently erected a very neat and commodious buildingsfor it in the Dorothea quarter of the town, from whichthe school takes its name. The pupils are admitted at six years jof age, and may remain until sixteen, when they are preparedto enter a business life. If intended for a professional career,they pass from the second class to the third of a gymnasiumor grammar school at about fourteen. At present there is nofirst class, but this deficiency is to be supplied, and it is intendedthat a pupil of capacity, who has passed through its studies,shall be prepared for the second class of a gymnasium. Inthis case private lessons in Greek must be taken, and I shouldjudge that, when established, this class will be composed onlyof those who intend to finish their education here, so as to passto a "real school," or to some "technical school." Many pupilsarc actually prepared here for entrance into the third classof a gymnasium, and the courses have been in part adaptedto this purpose. The certificate of the first class of thisschool, as of others of its grade, gives the privilege of claimingbut one year of military service, and qualifies for emsIt U under Uio charge of Mr. Minnow, a most intelligent nd devoted teacher,t The cost of the building was ulalcd to have been 25,000 thalers, (118,750.)aDOROTHEAN HIGHER CITY SCHOOL AT BERLIN. 241employments in the government bureaux, which, however, do notrequire, in genera], a knowledge of Latin,The school* now consists of five classes, of which the sixthand fifth, the lowest two, have courses of one year each, andthe others of two years. There is a head master and fourregular teachers, besides four assistants or special masters, whoare employed during part of the school hours, or in teachingparticular subjects. In the lower classes each master teaches,in general, the whole round of subjects in which his class isoccupied. In the upper classes, the teachers are confined to afew subjects. The arrangement of this matter is, however, atthe discretion of the director, or head master, who varies it asappears best for the interests of the schools In some of theclasses there is a special master for religious instruction, which,,however, is not usual in Prussia.The methods of instruction in this school are, in general,most excellent, and I was particularly struck with the smaHnumber of text-books employed This is not peculiar, however,to this establishment, but is a feature in every good schoolin Germany. The master is expected to be so fully imbuedwith his subject, and expert in his art, as to be able to impartknowledge principally orally to his pupils, and in such a wayas to adapt it to each individual; hence books are chiefly requiredfor study at home, and individual training is possible toan extent which no routine system with books would permit.At the date of my visit in December, 1837, the school numbered one hundredand ninety-seven pupils. The fees were nearly five dollars per quarter, but itwas intended to reduce them to less than four dollars. Should these at any timenot prove adequate to the support of the school, the city must supply the deficiency.t The masters are appointed by the school-committee, on the nomination ofthe head master.t I annex the list, as presenting this fact in a striking point of view. There-arebut ten text-books, exclusive of those for teaching Latin, used in the sixclasses. Bedecked's Primer, Diesterweg's Reading Book for Schools, Erk'sSchool Songs, the Bible, Luther's Catechism, Church Songs, Schulze^ LatinGrammar, Drogan "Materials," Roquette's French Grammar, Pedicle's LatinReading Book, Schulze's Latin Exercises, Cornelius Nepos, Florin's NumbPompilius, Ovid's Metamorphoses, Diesterweg's Practical Arithmetic, Zinnow'»Geometry, Dielitz's Historical Tables.S48 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRlJlAIVy PERIOD.The following statements give the course of instruction indetail. Leaving out some of the subjects as unnecessary forelementary instruction, I can see no reason why a very similarprogramme should not be adopted in the lower schools, theperiod of instruction being nearly the same in the two cases.*The difference between the instruction in a Berlin charityschool and in a burgher school like this, is at present verygreat indeed.Religious Instruction.Class VI. Stories from the Old Testament.Class V. Stories from the New Testament.Class IV. Bible History.Class III. Reading and explanation of selections from the Scriptures.Class II. The Evidences of Christianity.The stories alluded to in the course of the sixth and fifthclasses are the most remarkable biographies of the Old andNew Testaments. The stories are chiefly narrated by theteacher, frequently in the words used in the sacred volume;and in the fourth class these same histories are read in the Bibleitself The narrations in the lower classes admit of variousexplanatory remarks and illustrations of the history, the naturalhistory, and geography referred to. The subject of thenarrative being thus familiar to the pupil, he is interested bythe beautiful simplicity of the language of the Bible, whichotherwise he might fail to perceive, since his attention wouldbe engaged with the incidents about which he was reading,rather than with the style. The study of the Evidences ofChristianity would, it seems to me, be more suitable to the ageof the first than of the second class.German Language.Class VI. Exercises of speech and thought (inductive exercises). Preparatoryexercises in reading by the phonic (lautir) method. Fluentreading of words and sentences.Class V. The most important parts of etymology explained by reading lessons.Exercises of orthography.• The expense I do not consider a reasonable objection, for if the people havea rijfht to instruction, they should be well taught.DOROTHEAN HIGHER CITY SCHOOL AT BERLIN. 243Class IV. Exercises of etymology Reading from a text-book. Stories narratedfor written exercises. Orthographical exercises.Class III. Grammatical analysis of sentences.Class II. The same continued. Original written exercises and descriptions.The exercises of speech and thought are admirably conducted.In teaching to read, the letter-box and composition-board,similar to that which I have already described in thechapter on the schools of Holland, are used. The lowest classisdivided into two sections in receiving this instruction, so thateach teacher has not more than twenty-five pupils under hischarge. The reading exercises throughout the course will befound included under the title of "German." Diesterweg'sReading Book for Schools is used in the lower classes.Latin Language.Class IV. Regular verbs and other parts of speech. Translation of Gedicke*sReading Book.Class III. Constructions varying from the German. More difficult parts ofPedicle's Reading Book. Cornelius Nepos.Class II. Irregular parts of etymology. Syntax. Special reference to thedifferences from the German. Ovid.Although the Latin is begun with the fourth class, it will beseen hereafter that it occupies but a small portion of the timeof each week, and as far as mental culture is concerned tothose who leave off this study at fourteen, I cannot say thatobservation indicated its utility. On the contrary, an imperfectknowledge is acquired, which can produce no good effect.French Language.Class V. Exercises in reading and translating small sentences.Class IV. Auxiliary and regular verbs. Exercises on simple sentences.Class III. Irregular verbs and rules on the use of pronouns. Numb Pontofilius begun.Class II. More difficult parts of the French Grammar. Numb Pompiliuscompleted.Arithmetic.Class VI. The four ground rules, with numbers up to one thousand.Class V. Denominate number* and preparatory exercises in fractions.Class IV. Fractions.344 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Class III. Proportions, with their applications.Class II. Elements of Algebra, Involution, and Evolution.The course of arithmetic, as taught in the seminary school,of which I shall next give an account, is, I think, betterarranged than this.Geometry.Class V. Regular figures, &c. from the Elements of Geometry.Class IV. Lines, angles, and triangles.Class Hi. Circles and polygons. Mensuration of plane figures.Class II. Similarity of figures, &c.The geometry is here introduced earlier than in the seminaryschool, and, in general, the studies of the fifth class appearto me rather too much diversified for their age.Natural HistoryClass IV. Domestic animals.Class III. Viviparous animals.Class II. Birds and fishes, illustrated by a small collection.Physics is also taught in the second class, so far as to give aknowledge of the general properties of bodies.Geography.Class V. Knowledge of home. The district. The province. The kingdom.Class IV. General geography.Class III. Principal countries of Europe.Class II. Europe more in particular.The knowledge of home includes an account of its history,its monuments, distinguished men, &c. The course follows,in general, the plan already so often spoken of, and more particularlydescribed in the schools of Halle and Haarlem.History.Class IV. A general view of the more important historical events, with thestudy of particular ones in detail.Class III. Ancient history.Class II. Modern history, to the time of the Reformation.The general history is rather a series of biographical sketchesthan a regular narration of events, and serves well as an introductionto systematic historical studies.IDOROTHEAN HIGHER CITY SCHOOL AT BERLIN. 245Writing.Class VI. Preparatory exercises in the lower division Letters and wordsin the upper.Class V. Single letters and small sentences.Class IV. Writing from copy-slips.Class III. Writing, with facial reference to orthography.The elements of writing are taught according to Pestalozzi'smethod, the upper and lower limits of the letters being givenby horizontal, and the slope by inclined lines. In regard to thisbranch it may be remarked, that very few schools which Ivisited did not present a satisfactory proficiency.Drawing.Class VI. Preparatory exercises. Regular figures.Class V. Drawing of bodies in elevation.Class IV. Solids bounded by plane figures and straight lines.Class III. Solids bounded by plane figures and straight lines, with shadows.Class II. Solids bounded by curved surfaces.The method of instruction is that devised by Mr. P. Schmidt,which I shall describe more particularly when speaking ofone of the so called "real schools" of Berlin, where he isteacher.Singing is taught by ear in the two lower classes, and bynote in the upper. The execution by the second class, which Iheard, was excellent. They sing in parts, and by note.The following table shows the time devoted, in school, duringthe week by each class to the several subjects of instruction: —GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Arrangement of the branches of instruction at the Dorothea Higher CitySchool.SUBJECTS OF STUDY.Religious instruction, - -German Language, - - -Latin, - -French, - -,Arithmetic,Geometry,Natural History,Geography,History,Writing,Drawing,Singing,Total,HOURS PER WEEK.10*28 26The three higher classes have, as shown by the table justgiven, six hours of recitation every day except Wednesday• Six hours of the instruction, called "German," are devoted in the sixth classto learning to read, and four to "Exercises of speech and thought."t Two hours of this instruction is given to physics.t In the fifth class, geography and history are combined under the title of"Knowledge of home."^ This column is obtained by doubling the numbers in those classes of whichthe rour»4c is for two years, and adding the numbers for the other classes.SEMINARY SCHOOL OP Belief. 247and Saturday, which are half-holidays, and on which they havebut four hours. The lowest class has but five hours for fourdays in the week, and three the other two. The increase ofschool hours in the upper classes is manifestly a proper arrangement.This distribution of time assigns to language, including German,Latin, and French, ninety-eight hours; to sciences and thekindred branches, namely, arithmetic, geometry, natural history,geography, and history, eighty-two; to the branches whichspecially educate a part of the senses, while they have importantapplications in after life, as writing, drawing, and singing,forty-eight hours, and to morals and religion, eighteen hours.Similar tabular statements will be furnished for the other schoolsof this class, by which numerical comparisons may be instituted.SEMINARY SCHOOL OF BERLIN.This is a burgher or middle school, founded in 1S32, andattached to the Teacher's Seminary of Berlin,* taking itsname from this connexion. The school is for boys only, and,like other higher burgher schools, it serves to prepare for thethe third class of a gymnasium, as well as for entrance into activelife. The same teachers give instruction in this school and inthe seminary, being assisted here by the pupils of the seminary,to whom this serves as a school of practice. There are fourregular teachers, besides the director, and also masters fordrawing and singing.The pupils are admitted as early as five and six years of age.The time of year for general admission is Easter. There aresix classes in the school, the lower four of which each retainthe pupil, if industrious and intelligent, a year, and the twoupper, each two years. The whole course thus lasts eightyears. Fifteen is, however, the usual age at which those whodo not pass to the gymnasium leave the school. The averagenumber of pupils in each class is thirtyOf which Dr. Diesterweg is director,t Time school fees for the four lower classes are three dollars and seventy-fiveGENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Every month there is a private examination, in presence ofall the teachers, at which the parents may attend. Everythree months the pupil receives a note of progress and conduct,to be handed to his parents. Formerly a printed circular wassent, containing information in the form of an abstract fromthe account kept of recitations and conduct. It has been found,however, much more effectual to give a written statement ctfthe character of the pupil, derived from the school journal, inasmuchas it insures more certainly the attention of parents.At Easter a public examination is held, and those who havemade a proper proficiency in their studies are passed to ahigher class.Arrangements exist by which those pupils whose parents desireit, may study under the superintendence of a teacher,*during the time considered necessary for the preparation ofthe lessons of their class. The following division of the studiesof the school is made by the director,1. Religious Instruction. Bible history. History of the Church and of tharReformation. Protestant Catechism.2. Languages, (a) German. Fluency in reading, and readiness in answeringquestions. Capability of writing an exercise upon an ordinary subject. Grammarof the language. (6) Latin. Orthography, etymology, and the elements ofjsyntax. Translation of aa easy Latin author (Cornelius Nepos) into German, ot 'of an easy German author into Latin, (c) French. Knowledge of the grammar.Facility in the translation of easy authors, and in writing compositions,3. Sciences, (a) Arithmetic. Mental and written. Positive and negative]quantities. Involution and evolution, (b) Geometry. Plane geometry, withpractical applications, (c) Natural history. Knowledge of the most important]minerals and plants of the neighbourhood. General outline of zoology andanthropology, (d) Geography, physical and mathematical, (c) History. Outlinesof universal history. History of the country.4. Mechanical Acquirements, (a) Reading. (6) A good handwriting.(c) Draughts of models, furniture, &,c. (d) Singing.It will be found, subsequently, that I have taken reading oatccni« per quarter, and for Uie two higher classes four dollars and fifty centsquarter, besides a charge of one dollar twelve and a-half cents for fuel tuithe winter.• The fee for private study is four dollars and fifty cents \xir quarter.SEMINARY SCHOOL OF BERLIN. 249of this class, and placed it beside the German language, towhich it is subsidiary, and where it is classed in the precedingschool.In regard to the methods of carrying out this course, the followingrules are laid down,* and after carefully visiting theschool, I can testify that they are fully observed. Indeed, thisis one of the most interesting establishments which I saw, fromthe liveliness and activity which prevails in its classes.The principle of induction is used, as far as practicable, inall branches: thus, in the earlier exercises, an object is presentedto the pupil, who is led to notice its peculiarities, and to expresshis conceptions of them. He passes from objects which areknown, and even familiar, to the unknown. Unknown objectsare illustrated, if possible, by models, and the names of the partsare taught, and their uses or properties examined. The pupilproceeds first from particulars to generals. Subsequently, theorder is reversed. He is made to understand whatever he isrequired to remember; to find out for himself, if possible,' ratherthan to be taught directly.Historical and similar subjects are taught by lecture, mingledwith questions. The pupil is led to express himselfreadily and correctly ; the teacher speaks no more, therefore,than is absolutely necessary for explanation, or to inducesuitable answers. Self-exertion, on the part of the pupil, is constantlyencouraged. He is taught to observe whatever is interesting.Imitation of what is seen, and repetition of what isheard, lead to original thought. This, however, is to be expectedonly from pupils of talent, and hence the teacher mustbe satisfied to allow some to learn what others have foundout. The common mistakes of overburthening the mind withpositive knowledge, and of too much system in teaching, areI give merely an abstract of the views of Dr. Diesterweg, as suited to thelimits of my Report. Dr. Diesterweg is one of the most enlightened practicalteachers of Germany. He was formerly director of the normal school at Morsein the Rhenish provinces, and was transferred from that post to the seminaryat Berlin. He is the editor of the Pedagogical Journal, the Rhine sheets foreducation and instruction. CRhcinischc Blatter fiir Erziehung und Interdict.)860 GENERAL EDUCATION. Primary PERIOD.to be avoided, as both are injurious to mental development.The teacher must be able to make his subject interesting, and,therefore, should knov^ how to communicate it without a book,and to elicit the knowledge of his pupil by proper questions.It is the mental activity of the pupil which will determine themeasure of his success in after life ; and hence this activity,rather than positive knowledge, should be looked to as theobject of the instruction at school.In regard to this last named principle, although I consider itapplicable, in a great degree, in elementary education, yet itappears to me that exception must be made of the cases of pupilswho intend to enter active life on leaving the school, andto whom, therefore, the knowledge which they will have immediateoccasion to use, should be imparted, to render their educationeffective. In general, where the mind may be cultivatedby different studies, choice should be made of those most likelyto be applied by the individual in his future career, especiallyif his education is necessarily to terminate before he can havetime to master the complete circle.I proceed to give a detailed account of the arrangement ofthe studies, following it by such remarks as to the methodspursued in the particular branches as may appear necessary,and by a comparison of the courses with those of the Dorotheaschool.Religious Instruction.Class VI. Four hours per week. Narration by the teacher of stories fromthe Old Testament, in the words of the Bible, repeated by thepupils. Easy verses learned by heart.Class V. Four hours. Stories from the gospels, except the latter portion ofthe Life of Christ. Church songs and Bible verses learned.Class IV. Three hours. The Old Testament in a more connected form.The moral of the history is impressed upon the children. TheTen Commandments and church songs committed to memory.Class III. Two hours. The life and doctrines of Christ, to the period of hisimprisonment. Church history. Four weeks are set apartfor Icamuig the geography of Palestine.Class II. Two hours. The Protestant Catechism committed to memoryand explained. Church songs and verses committed.SEMINARY SCHOOL OF BERLIN. 251Class I. Two hours. A compendium of the history of the Christian Church,particularly after the Apostolic age. History of the Reformation.Review of the Bible. Committing to memory psalms andhymns, continued.German Language.Class VI. Four hours. Exercises of speech. Stories narrated to the childrenand repeated by them. After learning to write, thesestories are written upon the slate.Class V. Four hours. Exercises in orthography. Etymology begun.Class IV. Four hours. Exercises in orthography and style. Every week ashort composition is written on some subject which has beennarrated.Class III. Grammar continued.Class II. Four hours. Original compositions, which are corrected duringthe recitation. Syntax commenced.Class I. Three hours. Compositions on historical subjects. Essays writtenat home and corrected in the class-room. Syntax continued.Latin Language.Class IV. Three hours. Declensions of nouns, adjectives, and pronounslearned. Examples learned by heart, and others written as anexercise at home. Auxiliary verbs conjugated.Class III. Four hours. Comparison of adjectives. Regular verbs conjugated.Class II. Four hours. Irregular verbs. Syntax begun. Translation fromLatin into German.Class I. Six hours. Grammar continued. Written exercises at home andin the class. Every four weeks an extempore exercise is written,which the teachers correct out of school hours. CorneliusNepos read and construed.French Language.Class III. Three hours. Exercises in reading. Elements of grammar.Words learned by heart. Easy exercises written at home andin school hours.Class II. Four hours. Regular and irregular verbs learned. Syntax.Translations from French into German. Words learned byrote.Class I. Four hours. Written exercises of increased difficulty. Tablesdictated and learned by heart. Voltaire's Charles XII. read.Arithmetic.Class VI. Four hours. Practical Arithmetic. The fundamental operationstaught with numbers from one to one hundred ; first mentally,then with blocks, and afterwards with figures. Exercises preparedat home twice a week.358 GENERAL EDUCATION. I'RIMAKY PERIOD.ChM V. Four hours. The four ground rules continued, with numbers ashigh as one thousand. Exercises in reading and writing largenumbers. Mental arithmetic especially practised. Additionand subtraction of abstract numbers.Class IV. Four hours. Addition and subtraction revised. Multiplicationand division of abstract numbers. Weights and measuresexplained.Class III. Four hours. The four ground rules, with fractions.Class II. Three hours. Revision of the above. Rule of three.Class I. Three hours. In the first year practical arithmetic finished. Proportionsand decimal fractions. Elements of algebra. Mentalalgebra.Geometry.Class IV. Two hours. The essential preparatory exercises in form, in connexionwith drawing. Rudiments explained.Class III. Two hours. Practice in the position of points, drawing of lines,angles, plane figures, representations of solids.Class II. Two hours. Elements of geometry proper, the point, line, angles,triangles, and measures of straight lines, surfaces, and contents.Class I. Two hours. Plane geometry completed, with practical exercises.Every alternate six months lessons in physics are given.Natural History.Class II. Two hours. In the summer term, study of certain classes ofplants. In the winter term, of animals. The subject is illustratedby drawings.Class I. Two hours. Systematic botany during the winter term, and zoologyand mineralogy during the winter.GBOaRAPHV.Class III. Two hours. Knowledge of home. Berlin and its environs. Regencyof Potsdam. Province of Brandenburg. Necessarytechnical terms explained, as horizontal, vertical, &c.Class II. Two hours. Geography of Prussia and Germany.Class 1. Two hours. General geography, particularly Europe and America.Asia more generally. Africa and Australia very briefly.History.Class II. Two hours. View of universal history, biographical ratlicr thanchronological.Clash I. Two hours. First year universal history completed. Second yearthe history of Germany, and particularly of Prussia. Themost important inventions and discoveries are noticed in connexionwith the history of these countries.SEMINARY SCHOOL OF BERLIN. 253Reading.Class VI. Seven hours. Reading by the platonic (lautir) method. Analysisof words in regard to division into syllables and sounds.Class V. Seven hours. Mechanical reading continued, but with reference tothe meaning of the words. The pupils are examined uponwords, sentences, and paragraphs.Class IV. Four hours. Explanatory reading continued. Accentuation. Nopiece is allowed to be read without its being understood.Class III. Two hours. Rhythmical reading begun. Interesting portions ofthe matter read, narrated by the pupils in their own words.Class II. Two hours. Rhythmical reading continued.Class I. Two hours. Reading of some of the German classics. Analysisof the subject read.Writing.Class VI. Five hours. Introductory exercises of drawing upon the slate.Copying the small letters from the black-board. Writing onpaper. Capital letters. Written exercises at home twice aweek.Class V. Five hours. Writing of German characters continued. Romanletters begmi. Copying from a book at home, with special referenceto orthography.Class IV. Four hours. Writing in German and Roman characters continued.Two hours copying from copy-slips. Two hourswriting from dictation.Class III. Three hours. Exercises of Class IV. continued. Pupils whowrite well are allowed to write without lines. Writing withoutcopies, according to progress.Class II. Two hours. Exercises continued. Most of the pupils writewithout lines or by directing points merely.Class I. The written exercises in other departments are examined, to ascertainthe character of the handwriting. No special lessons aregiven.Drawing.Class IV. Two hours. Drawing straight lines in various directions and ofvarious lengths. Making definite angles. Drawing triangles,squares, and other rectilinear figures.Class III. Two hours. Drawing of circles and ovals.Class II. Two hours. Drawing of bodies bounded by planes and straightlines in perspective. Drawing of curves.Class I. Drawing from natural objects, from plaster casts, and models.Singing.Class IV. Two hours suffice to learn fifteen or twenty songs, of one or twoverses, by note, and some ten choral songs.264 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.casa III. Two hours. Songs with two parts continued. Chorals with onevoice.Class II. Two hours. Songs with two or three voices continued.Class I. Two hours. Songs and chorals with three or four parts.Once during the morning there is an interval for recreationin the court-yard of the school, and the pupils are directed intheir exercises of marching and counter-marching, and the like,by one of the teachers.The course marked out in the foregoing programme, as faras it extends, seems to me well adapted to educate the moraland intellectual faculties, as well as the senses; to give mentalvigour, while it furnishes information useful to the pupil in afterlife.There arcxpeculiarities in regard to the religious instruction,even as intended for Protestants, which may be remarked in thefifth and third classes, the object of which I do not understand.In other respects, when sectarian instruction may be given, asin this school, where all the pupils are of one denomination, thecourse appears to be good. The manner of communicatingthe instruction by conversation and lectures, used in both thisand the Dorothea school, renders it very effective. Thereare in all the classes, taken together, twenty-two hours perweek devoted to religious instruction here, and eighteen in theother, but the programme does not show a gain in the amountof knowledge communicated.The course in the mother tongue is fully explained in theprogramme, and is well adapted to produce fluency and accuracyof expression in conversation and writing. Both this andthe foregoing course extend, as they should, through all theclasses.The Latin language is introduced with a view to preparationfor a gymnasium, to the nomenclature of natural history,the business of the chemist and druggist, and perhaps, to usethe language of an accomplished teacher in one of the highertown schools, "because such always has been the custom." Iwould give the preference to the course of this school overSEMINARY SCHOOL OF Berlin. 255that of the other, considering the time of twenty-seven hoursdevoted to it naore appropriate than of thirty, as in the other.The French, besides combining with the German and Latin togive the due proportion of intellectual culture from language, isintroductory to the courses in the real schools, which are parallelwith the gymnasia, and prepare for the polytechnic orother special schools, as the latter do for the university. It ispractically useful, too, to the shopkeeper and tradesman of thecontinent of Europe, and was, probably, formerly more so thanat present. The Latin language is begun in the fourth class, orat about eight years of age, and the French language in the thirdclass, but neither occupy more than three hours a week, untila year afterwards. These languages occupy fifty-six hours inthe Dorothea school, and forty-seven in this, per week, duringthe entire period through which they are taught.Nothing can be better than the foundation laid for arithmetic.The pupils are engaged a year in practical arithmetic beforethey are introduced to a knowledge of abstract numbers. Habitsof thought are given by simple exercises in mental arithmetic.The eye is enlisted to aid the mind by computing withcubes, according to the method already described in the schoolsof Holland. Written arithmetic relieves the mental exertion,aids the memory, and trains the hand. The course is then carriedon, combining mental and written arithmetic, and reachingalgebra, which is also, in part, taught mentally. The textbookof arithmetic is a very useful treatise, by Dr. Diesterwegand Mr. Heuser.* I liked the course in this school altogetherbetter than that in the other, where, however, in the olderclasses, the same text-book is used.The course of geometry begins with ideas of form, in connexionwith drawing, according to Pestalozzi's method, whichit follows in general. It is thus a powerful means of stimulatingthe mind, and, though the time occupied is greater than ifthe subject were taught in the ordinary way, the results aremuch more satisfactory. If there is latent mathematical talentThis work has gone through ten editions.256 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.in a pupil, his powers of invention cannot fail to be drawn outbythis method.Natural history is not left to incidental instruction, to be derivedfrom the reading book, but is directly taught in the last twoyears. I had not the opportunity of judging of the fruits of thisinstruction in the seminary school itself, but the pupils of theseminary were pursuing the subject with zeal. In comparingthis course with that of the other school, I think it preferable,except in the omission, at the beginning, of an account of thedomestic animals. There will be, I doubt not, great improvementsin teaching this branch at a future day. At present, theplan is hardly formed, and the collections for illustration, wherethey exist at all, are, in general, quite small. There is, besides,a tendency to make the course too strictly scientific.The system of instruction in geography is that already minutelydescribed in the school at Haarlem and at Halle. It isbegun in the third class, or at nine years of age, with a descriptionof home. History, which in its elements is combinedwith geography, takes a separate place in the second class.The practice of giving biographical sketches instead of merechronological details, cannot be too much commended. Thepupil learns with interest the events of the lives of men whohave made an impression upon the age in which they lived:these events form an outline which is easily fixed in the mind,and may subsequently be filled up in detail Again, the discussionsof inventions and discoveries in art or science afford relieffrom the descriptions of battles and revolutions, and serveto show the influence of genius exerted in civil life.The phonic method of teaching to read, wants only the useof words having a meaning, as in Mr. Wood's system, to benearly perfect. No reading is allowed, however, without understandingnot only the words, but their connexion, and the ideasconveyed by the sentences. The habit of thus giving paraphrasesof subjects, leads to facility of expression, and by combiningthis with copying from good models, a correct style is formed.The course of reading of the highest class, includes selectionsfrom the German classics. introductory exercises in drawing;SEMINARY SCHOOL OF Berlin* 257precede the instruction in writing ; these might, I have no doubt,be much further extended with advantage.* A good handwritingis produced by the succession of exercises described in theprogramme. The course of drawing, which is commenced asadistinct branch in the fourth class, is intended to enable thepupil to sketch correctly, and with facility, such objects offurniture, machinery, &c., as he may have occasion to representin his occupations in after life. The addition of two hoursof drawing in the fifth class, as in the Dorothea school, wouldseem to me not to over burthen the class with work, while itwould add materially to their proficiency in this useful branch.Singing is successfully taught, and by note. It is consideredan indispensable branch of instruction, and all my convictionsare in its favour, whether as a means of developing moralsentiment, or of physical education. Singing by ear might,however, very well begin in the lower classes, and for thispurpose the number of hours of instruction per week might beincreased from twenty-four to twenty-six in the lowest, andtwenty-eight in the fifth class. This would make the numberof hours for these classes the same as in the Dorothea school.The time allotted to the different studies will appear betterby the annexed table. In regard to the ages of the pupils, insertedin the heading of the columns, it is to be understoodthat they are those of intelligent and industrious boys, enteringat six years, and going regularly through the classes. As inthe former tables, the subjects of instruction are placed in thefirst column, the number of hours per week occupied by theseveral classes in the following ones, and the total number ofhours devoted to each subject, while in the school, in the lastcolumn. In forming this total, the number of hours occupiedby the four lower classes, the course in each of which is of oneyear, is reckoned once; and the number of hours of the twaupper classes, each course occupying two years, is doubled.As has been done for the elements of an English hand, by our countrymanMr. Rembrandt Peale, in his admirable System of Graphics. The forms of theGerman letters would require a different system,858 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Table of distribution of time in the Royal Seminary School of Berlin.ISUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION.Religious Instruction,German Language,Reading,Latin Language, .French Language, -Arithmetic, . . -Geometry, - - -Natural History, -Geography, - - -History,Writing,Drawing,Singing, . . . ,NUMBER OF HOURS PER Wee•Seii ^o >>beoJ OO £u4*laFrom this table it appears that language occupies one hundredand five hours, estimating the time devoted to reading with thatfor German, Latin, and French, science sixty-four hours, andthe mechanical branches, including writing, drawing, and singing,forty-three. It would be erroneous, however, to suppose thatthe results are in these proportions. The least consideration willshow that the progress in different branches in the same school• This includes preparatory geometrical exercises.rSEMINARY SCHOOL OP BERLIN. 259cannot be estimated by the time devoted to them; the intrinsicdifficulties of acquisition, the different periods of the course atwhich they are introduced, and various other causes, preventcomparisons of this sort. Not only so, but the time occupied inthe same subjects in different schools, which might be thought toafford an accurate test of comparative progress in them, cannot,in reality, be employed for this purpose, without at thesame time carefully studying the programmes, to ascertain howthe time is applied in each class, and the manner in which it isdistributed among the several classes. The two higher cityschools just described, afford conclusive evidence of this fact.There can be no doubt, I think, that the Dorothea school isthe stronger in language, and the seminary school in science.Such is the general reputation of the two, and such is the tonewhich the director of each would be likely to give to the schoolunder his charge. The impression which I derived from visitingthe two establishments was to the same effect. The numberof hours per week devoted to language in all the classesof the two schools is, however, ninety-eight for the first, and onehundred and five for the second, and to science, eighty-two forthe former and sixty-four for the latter; leading, in both cases,to the reverse of the conclusion just stated. If differences inthe arrangement of studies, in the power of the teachers, in themethods and implements of instruction, and even in the pupilsthemselves, may lead to such results, small differences in theproportion of time allotted to different branches should not,without carefully checking their results by other comparisons,be assumed to indicate corresponding differences in the valueof the courses.In following the course of studies of these two schools, itwill be seen that those of the lowest class, in each, are almostidentical. In the next, the seminary school has greatly theadvantage in the compactness of arrangement, by which theattention of the pupil is confined to fewer subjects. No lessthan ten branches are introduced into the programme of thisclass in the Dorothea school, while there are but five in theseminary school. The scientific branches, except those which260 GENERAL EDUCATION. Primary PERIOD.run through all the years, are introduced later in the latterschool, which is in accordance with the principle of concentratingthe attention on a few subjects, where it is possible. Itappears to me that, in general, it is not proper to introduce thesebranches early, except as matters of incidental instruction.The separation of the programmes of the two schools, producedas just stated, renders it difficult briefly to compare the coursesof the same class in each. A general comparison of the subjectsshows that the German language is taught accordingto the same plan in each, and that the highest class attains thesame level in each, as far as the grammar is concerned; muchmore attention, however, is paid in the seminary school to thereading courses, as well for the acquisition of reading as anart, and to cultivate a taste for it, as for the incidental knowledgeto be communicated. Nearly one-fourth of the pupil'stime, in the school just named, is devoted to the vernacular.The Latin is begun in the same class in both schools, but thecourse in the Dorothea school at once takes the lead ofthe other, and keeps it throughout. The French begins inthe fifth class in one school, and in the third in the other; and,though the programmes terminate at about the same point, thereis a greater proficiency made in the Dorothea school. Oneobject, if not the principal one, of learning this language beingto speak it, the early commencement is an advantage. Inageneral comparison of progress in language, the Dorotheaschool, as already stated, ranks higher than the other.The courses of arithmetic are different, but terminate at thesame level ; I have already mentioned my preference for thecourse of the seminary. Geometry is begun in the fifth classin the Dorothea, and in the fourth in the seminary school;the courses go on together for three classes, and extend furtherin the latter institution. The differences in the courses of naturalhistory have already been the subject of remark. Thecourse of geography is essentially the same, differing only inthe age of the pupil at beginning. History is begun in thefourth class of the Dorothea, and in the second in the seminaryschool: it is more systematic in the former, and assumes moreHIGHER BURGHER SCHOOL OF POTSDAM. 261the form of biography in the latter: the range of the two coursesdoes not differ essentially. Taking these branches, classed asscientific, together, the superiority is with the seminary school,and thus, in both this and the former case, the judgment whichwould have been pronounced by referring to the numbersmerely, is reversed.HIGHER BURGHER SCHOOL OF POTSDAM.This school* differs from those already described in severalparticulars, exemplifying, in its arrangements, the division intolower and higher burgher schools, and carrying the courses ofthe latter decidedly into the domain of secondary instruction.Its principal objects are to prepare children of both sexes foroccupations connected with, or corresponding to, the lowertrades, and boys for the higher mechanical occupations, asbuilders, architects, 6z:c., or for admission into the trade schoolconnected with the Government, Mechanics', or Trade Instituteat Berlin,! and for the gymnasium. This school thus suppliesinstruction of different grades; first, elementary instruction of ahigher kind ; second, that usually given in the " real schools" ofPrussia, and third, that. necessary for entrance into the higherclasses of a gymnasium, or grammar school. Hence its studiesembrace many subjects and stages of progress which properlybelong to secondary instruction, and even to a greater degreethan other higher burgher schools.The pupils pursue a course common to all in the three lowerclasses, or from about six to eleven or twelve years of age,when a separation takes place. Those who are to leave schoolat thirteen or fourteen, pass into the " middle burgher schoolclass," in which the study of Latin and French is dropped, andthe time is devoted to religious instruction, German, mathematics,geography and history, the elements of natural history,technology and physics, writing, drawing, and vocal music.Those pupils who are preparing for a higher class of a gym-underthe charge of director Offer.f This excellent institution will he hereafter particularly described.202 GENERAL EDUCATION. Primary PERIOD.nasium, or who intend to pursue the entire course here, passfrom the third class to the "second burgher school class."These arrangements appear to meet the wants of the citizensof Potsdam, for, in 1837, forty-two pupils passed from the thirdclass to the middle burgher school class, and forty-one to thesecond class of the higher school.Pupils preparing for the sixth class of a gymnasium leavethis school in the " second elementary class," or at about nineor ten years of age, and those who aim at the third class of agymnasium, usually pass from this at the close of the courseof the second class in the higher school. The first, or upperclass, thus contains only those pupils who intend to enter into activebusiness life on leaving the school, or to enter a specialschool of arts and trades. On this account, the branches ofscience which are immediately applicable to such objects, areintroduced into the course. This class consisted, in 1837, oftenpupils. The complete course is usually gone through at orbefore sixteen years of age, and entitles the pupil to claim oneyear of voluntary military service, instead of the three regularyears, and qualifies him for appointment in the governmentbureaux.The six boys' and three girls' classes have twelve ordinaryteachers, besides one assistant, and two female teachers. Eachof the lower classes has but one teacher, who attends to allthe subjects as in the other schools already described. Thetotal number of pupils was, in 1937, four hundred and fifty-six,of whom three hundred and twenty-three were boys.The usual system of change of place in the classes is employedto excite emulation, and discipline is mainly conductedby means of a black-book, in which a pupil's name is enteredat the end of the week or month, when he has had a certainnumber of faults per week or per month marked against himby the teacher. Marks of merit are allowed to cancel those ofdemerit. The entry is communicated to the pupil's comrades,and also to his parents. As far as I have been able to judge ofthese and similar systems of discipline in day schools, I havenot found any marked good effects from them. If a teacher is«HIGHER BURGHER SCHOOL OP POTSDAM. 263competent, he keeps up good discipline without them, and if heis not, they are of little or no service to him. In this remarkI do not mean tc include communications to parents, which arefrequently of the greatest utility. The following plan, whichapparently bears some analogy to this, but which owes its efficacyto a different principle, is in successful operation in Dr.Mayo's excellent boarding-school at Cheap, in Surrey, England.When a pupil proves insensible to the admonitions of theteacher, and is frequently reported for offences or negligence,he is required to show to the principal a written statement ofcharacter from each master after every hour. He is thus subjectedto admonition or other punishment from the principalimmediately after committing an offence. For this very strict supervision,one extending over a day or week is substituted whenimprovement manifests itself, or when the case does not requireso great severity.I propose now to give a statement of the courses of theburgher school at Potsdam, and of the time required for theircompletion, with remarks and comparisons with the schoolsalready described.The annexed plan of the distribution of time gives also a listof the subjects of instruction; it is arranged exactly like thesimilar ones already presented. The first two columns of figureson the left hand refer to the number of hours of study per weekin the two classes of the higher school. The third containsthose of the middle burgher school class, the pupils in whichterminate their course here. The next three contain the hoursof study of the elementary classes, which are common to thewhole school.264 GENERAL EDUCATION. Primary PERIOD.Table of the distribution of time of the Higher Burgher School of Potsdam.SUBJECTSOFINSTRUCTION.Religious Instruction,German Language,Reading, - - . .Latin,French,Arithmetic, . - -Geometry, .Natural History, -Geography, .History, . - . . .Technology, - .Physics, - - . . ,Chemistry, . . . .Writing, . . . .Drawing, . . . .Singing,&§2^5i» *s "to55.tC u3 ojg ocCO5*2§• Includes orthography, 2 hours; grammar, 2 hours; exercises of style, 1hour.t Includes exercises of memory, 2 hours.t Preparatory exercises.§ Elements of form.II The column of totals refers to the regular progression of five classes, and isobtained by doubling the numbers here given for the three elementary and twoupper burgher school classes.HIGHER BURGHER SCHOOL OF POTSDAM. 265Besides the branches taught in the burgher schools already-described,we have in this one technology, physics, and chermisery, and the number of hours attached to them in the foregoingtable shows that they are actually taught to a considerableextent. These subjects are introduced, and at the same time theamount of study in the languages is increased, requiring an unduedegree of labour of the classes, and dividing their attentionamong too many subjects. Thirty-eight hours of attendanceon school per week is certainly too much to require.Latin is begun in the second elementary class, where the firstrudiments of grammar are learned, and easy sentences translated.This course is continued in the next class. Those whointend to leave the school in the middle burgher school class,may be excused from attending the Latin lessons in the first.The second class of the higher school read Cornelius Nepos,and the first Caesar and Ovid. Their proficiency did not, however,seem to me to correspond at all with the number of hoursdevoted to this branch, viz. forty. The object of this instruction,for those who do not go to the gymnasium, is stated to be toenable them to pursue the science necessary to their callings,without embarrassment from the terms. I am of opinion that,in such a case, the system pursued in Mr. Wood's school, appliedto learning the etymology of compound Latin words, and of theGerman words derived from the Latin, would answer the endbetter, with a less consumption of time; and if Latin is to be retained,the number of hours devoted to it in the Dorotheaschool (thirty), or in the seminary school (twenty-seven), seemmuch better suited to the object in view. I am induced to whatmay seem a tedious discussion of these programmes, becausethey afford different examples of primary instruction — the gradewith which our college must begin, and we cannot examinetoo carefully the subjects which should compose it, nor drawtoo largely upon experience in the details of arrangement.French. This course does not differ materially from thosealready given. Telemachus is used as a text-book. The timeappropriated to the language appears sufficient, without beingburthensome. Both the Latin and French being commenced266 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.in the second elementary class, which contains pupils whointend to leave school at the end of the " middle burgher schoolclass year," it may be supposed that this time is thrown away,as very little proficiency can be made in so short a period ; theforce of this objection is, however, somewhat diminished bythe fact, that the arrangement gives an opportunity for the developmentof a disposition for language which may warranta change in the destination of the pupilIn arithmetic the lowest class is employed mainly in the mentalexercises. After they have learned to make figures, theyprepare Written examples at home. In the next class, writtenarithmetic is combined with mental. The four ground rulesare learned with abstract and concrete numbers. Preparatoryexercises in fractions are taught. The first elementary classproceed as far as to include fractions, and a part of the classstudy proportions. The middle burgher school class pass ontodecimal fractions and the square and cube root. The secondburgher school class have their attention in these same partsof arithmetic directed to the technical applications, and besides,begin algebra, and proceed as far as simple equations. Thefirst burgher school class extend their course of algebrathrough equations of the second and third degrees, progressions,and logarithms. Mercantile arithmetic also forms partof their course. These latter subjects, however, can in no wisebe considered as belonging to primary instruction.Geometry. Preparatory exercises of form, after the methodof Pestalozzi, are taught in the elementary classes, and thehigher ones proceed through the elements of geometry, andinclude mensuration and plane trigonometry. The head masterhas arranged, for the benefit of his pupils, a course containingthe most important elements, and teaches also by lectures,which the pupils are required to write out. The time allotted tothis subject is nearly double that of the seminary school, and Isaw some reason to doubt the propriety of beginning the elementaryexercises so early.Knowledge of nature and art. The introduction to this subject,taught in the lowest two classes, is drawn from naturalHIGHER BURGHER SCHOOL OP POTSDAM. 267history, physical geography, and physics, and is made themeans of inductive exercise. The recitations and conversationlectures which I heard, evidently interested the pupils, whilethey cultivated habits of reflection and observation. They areparallel with the lessons on objects of the English schools,being, however, more extended. The more systematic courseof natural history of the higher classes, is like that of theseminary school. In summer the pupils make occasional excursionsinto the country, for practical exercise in this branch,under charge of a teacher: these excursions, if rightly improved,may be made also the means of cultivating proper relationsbetween the pupil and teacher, but they are liable to abuse,and should be carefully attended to, in order to prevent suchresults. This school possesses a good collection of plates ofnatural history,* and has the use of the museum of the tradeschool, which is under its roof.The course of technology intended to give a knowledge ofthe principal arts and their processes, lies open to the objectionalready urged, on the score of overburthening the pupils withwork. Such knowledge, as well as that of physics and chemistry,would be of service in after life, but I do not see thepossibility of teaching it, except in a mere outline, in a shortcourse, and the time allotted appears to contemplate somethingmore.Geography. This course is begun with physical geography.The natural and artificial divisions of the world follow.Then the physical and political geography of Europe is takenup. The course of the upper or middle burgher school classterminates with that of Germany, and especially of the Mark ofBrandenburghh, and with a review of the whole. The secondburgher school class has the same course with the middle class.The first takes up mathematical geography, and reviews physicalgeography more minutely, adding a knowledge of the climate,productions, commerce, manufactures, &c. of the countriesstudied. Maps are drawn, as an exercise, at home. ThisBy. Fisher of Breslau. ,268 General EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.geographical course, which attaches every other part of theinformation to physical geography, appeared to me next in itssuccess to the inductive plan already described. It is muchfacilitated by the use of raised maps, on which the naturalfeatures of the country strike the eye more forcibly than on acommon map, where, if the physical details are given, thenames and positions of the places, the boundaries, &c. are obscuredby them.The course of history, in the lower classes, is like that in theother schools. In the middle class the subject is reviewed, andthe history of Germany, and especially that of Prussia, andof the Mark of Brandenburghh is studied. The second higherburgher school class is taught an outline of ancient history, ofthat of the middle ages, and of later times, and then proceedsto the history of Germany and of Brandenburghh. In the firstclass, the history of Germany, and of modern Europe in general,is continued. ~In the mechanical branches, the distribution of time agreeswith that in the other schools, except in the number of hoursallotted to writing, which is here twenty-eight, and in the Dorotheaschool but sixteen. Focal music is taught by ear in thelower classes, and by note in the upper.Physical education. There is an interval of a quarter of anhour in the middle of the morning, during which the pupils arefree to take exercise, but there is no regular gymnastic or otherexercise under the superintendence of the teachers.GENERAL REMARKS.It is clear, from the foregoing examples of schools usuallyconsidered as belonging to the same class, that any general lawrequiring exact uniformity in all, would not meet the wants ofthe people, the varieties having been framed to meet thesewants.Accordingly, the project of 1819,* which contains a particularcourse for the burgher school, has not been adopted, and• Report of M. Cousin, Amer. Edit., pp. 56, 57.BURGHER SCHOOLS OF PRUSSIA. 269though the Royal Cabinet Order of September, 1829,* refers toimprovements in the burgher schools generally, as recommendedto the attention of the minister of public instruction, I am notaware that any steps have been taken to produce a more systematicarrangement of the class-fIt is obvious, also, from what has been presented, that theelementary instruction requires raising to a higher level thanat present, namely, to that of which an example has been givenin the higher elementary school of Weissenfels. That then allpupils whose circumstances permit them to devote a longertime to education should pass to other schools, of a kind dependingupon their destination in after life, as determined bythe circumstances of their parents End their own talents. Thetone of these higher schools would, it appears, require to bevaried according to the wants of the population among whichthey are placed, whether that of the country, of small towns, orof cities. In the cities, it has been seen that one class of burgherschools required is provided, and others will be described belongingmore properly to a higher grade of instruction, uponthe province of which, however, these latter decidedly trench.An example of a systematic arrangement appropriate to a cityis afforded by the burgher school of Leipsic, presently to bedescribed. Such a plan would, however, be inappropriate toa small town, where, of necessity, several schools must beunited in one. In this case, it would require care to avoid theunion of incompatible classes of pupils, causing mutual losses oftime, and giving rise to defective habits of study. The sameteachers should give instruction in the different departments ofthe school, in the same or kindred subjects, rather than to unitedifferent classes. The pupil preparing for the gymnasiumshould not be called upon to study the natural sciences or mathematicswhich he will pursue there, and of which he doesnot feel the want for admission, nor the student who is to enterAlgerine Schul Zeitung, Auth. 1, Num. 9, quoted by Dr. Harnisch, "DieDeutsche Burgerscliule," p. 99.t See also Harnisch "Die Deutsche Bttrgerschule," page 101.870 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.an architectural, commercial, or trade school, the classicswhich the gymnasia student requires for his admission.When there are equally good means for the cultivation ofthe faculties, it is clear that the destination of the individualshould regulate those which are to be applied to his case. Asthis destination usually only appears as the pupil advances in ageand intellectual development, many different classes must necessarilybe kept together during the elementary period. Subsequently,when a separation in the character of the studies becomesexpedient, it should, at first, be gradual, to give opportunityfor the transfer of a pupil from one line to another, and,finally, be entirely determined by the nature of the future occupation.Mental discipline is, doubtless, the chief object of thefirst periods of education, but if it be attainable by the acquisitionof knowledge directly applicable to the pursuits in life,such an advantage is by no means to be neglected. If therewere but one method for a thorough culture of mind, still, whentime is allowed for only a partial application of that method, itmight be expedient to adopt inferior means, which would producea result complete in itself, with the advantage that theknowledge used to train the mental powers is also directly applicableto the pursuits in life. Where primary education ismerely to serve as an introduction to secondary, the problemis much more simple.PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN SAXONY. 271CHAPTER VI.PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN SAXONY.The existing law on primary instruction dates only from1835,* and is as yet but imperfectly carried into practice, exceptin the provisions which formed the law of the land, and which hadgrown into usage previously to the promulgation of the presentsystem. I shall give a very brief sketch of the main featuresof this law, which, in essentials, differs but little from the existingdecrees in Prussia. At one period of its history, Saxonywas in advance of Prussia in the character of its public instruction,a distinction which it has now lost, but which it is makingvigorous efforts to regain.A number of common schools, corresponding to the wants ofthe people, is ensured by a division of the kingdom into school-circuits(schul-belike), and all the children residing in eachcircuit must attend the school there established for eight years,beginning at least at the age of six.f No boy can be apprenticeduntil after the age at which he may lawfully leave school.Congregations of different religious persuasions are allowed toestablish schools in their circuit, and if no other school existsthan one so established, all the children of the circuit are boundLaw No. 60, concerning popular elementary instruction, June 6, 1835.(Gesetz cas Elemental Volkschulwesen bet ref fend von ten June, 1835.) Also No.61 : (Dispositions relating to the law on popular elementary instruction, 9th June,1835.) (Verordriung sum Gestetze, «Stc., von ten June, 1835.) These laws, withthe regulations for the examination of teachers, a list of a teacher's library, anddirections for the erection of school-houses, are collected in one volume, by Dr.G. L. Schulze, under the title " Das Elementar-volksschulgesetz fur die KOniglichSachsischen Land, &c., mit Inhaltsiibersichten, verschiedenen anmerkungen anderlauterungen und linen volstandigsten register, &c.t There is attached to each school a person whose duty it is to ascertain thecauses of the absence of pupils, and who is entitled to a small fee from the parentsfor each call he makes upon them.272 General EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.to attend it; they are not, however, required to take part in thereligious instruction.Every school circuit must furnish a scHool-house, and adwelling for the teacher. Populous villages are frequently dividedinto several circuits. The schools are supported fromfunds of the church, from the interest on donations to the school-fund,from fines levied on parents who neglect to send theirchildren to school, from a payment made to the school-fund inpurchases of property, from collections, from the fees paid bythe pupils, and from direct taxation. These funds are chargeablewith the master's salary,* with the furniture of the schoolbooksand slates for poor children, prizes, insurance, and incidentalexpenses.According to a census in July, 1832, Saxony contained 273,535children between the ages of six and fourteen years. Addingto this 112^,t the probable increase up to the close of 1832, wehave at that period 274,661 children required to be in theschools. The census for the same period gives 274,305 in theelementary and burgher schools, leaving but 356 to be accountedfor by those under private instruction, and in the lower classesof the gymnasia. At the same time there were 4397 pupilsin the private schools of Dresden and Leipsic alone, besides upwardsof 2400 in the lower classes of the gymnasia Thisexcess is explained, as in the case of the Prussian schools,by the fact that children above fourteen and below six yearsof age are included in the number of those reported. It seems,then, that as far as the number of pupils in the schools are concerned,education in Saxony is in a highly satisfactory statesEach primary school contained, in 1832, at a mean, one hundredand thirty-four children, those in the country averaging• The minimum salary is ninety dollars per annum.t Deduced from the returns of the Statistical Society of the Kingdom ofSaxony.I Dr. Roger's translation of Cousin's Report has furnished me with these hubert,or with the data for calculating them. Appendix, pp. 218, 219.ff T\w number of children at school is more than one-sixth of the populationoTBajumy, rated at 1,445,000. The proportion exceeds that in the kingdom ofPruMia.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN SAXONY. 273one hundred and twelve, and each teacher had one hundred andtwo pupils under his charge; these facts show that the numberof schools and the number of teachers both require to be multiplied,especially the latter, for in the cities, some of the schoolhousescan properly accommodate a large number of pupils.Primary schools in Saxony, as in Prussia, are of two grades.In the lower, or elementary school, pupils must receive instruction,by law, in: — 1st. Religion. 2d. Exercises of speech andreading. 3d. Calligraphy and orthography, with written exerciseson subjects relating to the affairs of common life. 4th.Mental and written arithmetic. 5th. Singing. 6th. The mostimportant portions of natural history, geography, and history,especially those of the country. The details of the school planare left to the teacher and local school-inspector.In the higher grade, or lower burgher school,* the amounttaught in these branches is increased, and exercises of style,geometry, and drawing, are added.These subjects will be recognised as the same with those ofthe Prussian schools. Physical education is alike left out ofthe general plan in both countries.The books used in the Protestant schools are, the Bible, Luther'sCatechism, the hymn book, and three reading-books, theselection of which is made by the local school-inspector. Inthe Roman Catholic schools, the selection of books is left to theecclesiastical authorities.The regular time for attendance is six hours on three dB.ysin the week, and four on two other days, making twenty-sixhours per week. The vacations are regulated by the churchfestivals, and last about a week at a time. Children above tenyears of age, in the country, are exempted, during harvest time,from attendance at school.The punishments are chiefly addressed to the moral sentiments,but corporal chastisement, in extreme cases, is allowed.A systematic nomenclature for schools is yet much needed in Germany.In Dresden they apply the title of " real school" to what would be called a lowerburgher school in Prussia. A normal school in Prussia is a seminary for teachers,in Austria it is a model higher elementary school.274 Numeral EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.The code of discipline is required to be placed in a conspicuoussituation in the school-room.Besides the regular day schools, there are Sunday schools,for extending or repeating the lessons learned in the former.In order to provide the schools with qualified teachers, candidatesare subjected to examination by a committee. No personcan be licensed who has not attained twenty-one years of agpassed one examination as a candidate, served two years asan assistant, and passed a second examination of a highergrade. The seminaries are expected to furnish the greaternumber of teachers, but as yet have not been able to do so.There are six seminaries for teachers, which had, in 1832, twohundred and twenty-three pupils; or, including the preparatoryseminary at Freyburg, two hundred and fifty-three. Theseinstitutions cou not furnish more than between seventy andeighty teachers annually, while the primary schools require-probably,upwards of one hundreds It is a remarkable fact,that there is no seminary for teachers in Leipsic, and that itscommon schools are still usually supplied with teachers fromamong the candidates of theology.The authorities who have the superintendence of publicinstruction, beginning with the lowest, are, first, the local schoolcommittees and inspectors. These committees are composedof at least four members each, one of whom must be a clergyman.If the school has a patron, or founder, he is ex-officio amember of the committee. They make regulations for theschool, holding meetings on fixed days of their own appointment.They receive from the master reports of the progress ofhis pupils, of their attendance at school, &c. Public semi-annualexaminations take place in their presence and in that of the inspector.This latter officer is a clergyman. It is his duty tovisit the school frequently, and to see that the regulations areenforced. After the semi-annual examination, he reports to the• Calculating on the received proportion, that about four per cent of thewhole number of the teachers is required, annually, to supply vacancies.ISYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN SAXONY. 275district inspector the state of the classes. If there are schoolsof different religions denominations in a circuit, each denominationis entitled to its committee and inspector.The next body is the board of inspectors, who have severalschools under their charge, and to whom the local committeesare subordinate. Co-ordinate with this board is the districtschool-inspector. The board of inspectors consists of thesuperintendent, an ecclesiastical functionary, of the patrons ofthe different schools, and of the magistracy. The superintendentis, besides, the district school-inspector. It is his duty tovisit all the primary schools of his district, private as well aspublic, and in case they are numerous, he is allowed to name aclergyman to assist him. He has power to grant leaves ofabsence to teachers, and to supply temporary vacancies. Heis expected to see that the teachers perform their duties faithfully,and reports upon all these matters to the higher authoritiesonce a year.The next higher authority is the board of directors of thecircle (Reis direction.) Saxony is divided into five circles, ineach of which a board regulates the school circuits, districts, andassociations. It has charge of all primary schools, and of theseminaries for primary teachers, with the general managementof the property and funds of the schools, and regulates pecuniaryallowances, and appoints or dismisses teachers.The minister of public instruction and religious worship isthe highest authority in school matters.The two most important points which I visited in Saxonywere Dresden* and Leipsic. In the former I examined,more or less particularly, six elementary and three higherFor great facilities in examining the institutions of Dresden, I am indebtedto the American consul, E. F. Divines, Esq. I owe my thanks in connexionwith these schools to town councillor Gee and director Otto, of the normalseminary.t There is a class of establishments corresponding to the infant schools inother places, called Bewahr-Anstalten, literally guardian institutions, which arerather nurseries than schools. The children of mothers who go out to work arewell taken care of in these establishments, but there is little instruction given.•276 OBWBRAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.primary; and in the latter, three large elementary schools, andtheir admirable higher burgher school, which occupied muchof my attention. The course of instruction in the charityschool which I examined in Dresden, conforms in general toUie directions of the law : in the afternoon, however, the pupilsare occupied in manual labour, the boys in weaving straw andspinning, the girls in sewing, knitting, or spinning. It is proposedto introduce, also, into some of these schools, the art ofworking in wood, which consists of making of this materialmany beautiful articles now usually manufactured of straw.* Asedentary employment of this kind, however, should be relievedby active physical exercise, which, I regret to say, is as littleattended to in these schools as in those of other countries ingeneral. In the schools attached to the seminary for teachers,in the Frederick quarter, the number of pupils in each class isnot allowed to exceed fifty in general. Much of the instruction,however, is given by the young, and comparatively unpractised,pupils of the seminary, and thus the effect of the formergood arrangement, is in part neutralized. These pupils are, itmust be admitted, according to my observation, usually betterinstructors than older teachers who have not had their advantages,though they are deficient when compared with finishedtheoretical and practical teachers from the same schools.The city of Dresden owes to the society for promoting education,(Das Padagogische Herein,) the establishment of theclass of schools called district schools, (burgher schools,) inwhich general history, geography, geometry, French, anddrawing, are added to the branches already enumerated ascomposing elementary instruction. The conferences of theirteachers, held once a month, are of the greatest importance totheir improvement, and from the activity displayed in them,♦ The wood used is arisen, which, when cut in pieces, and soaked in water, becometough. It is cut into strips, and then these are separated into fibres ofgreater or lc»s degree of fineness, according to the articles to be made. Theseoonsbt of mats, bags, baskets, bonnets, blinds for windows, &c. The blinds arewoven in u loom.SYSTEM OF PRIMARY INSTRUCTION IN SAXONY. 277I doubt not they will rapidly advance in standing. In theCatholic higher primary school, instruction in Latin is furnished,in addition to the branches taught in the district schools.* Itis confined, however, to the two upper classes of the five ofwhich the school is composed, which are designated as gymnasiumor grammar school classes. The principal part of thepupils leave this school in the third classesIn Leipsic the public primary schools are of three sorts, thefirst for the use of the children of the poor who receive suppliesfrom the public; the second for those who, not belonging to thisclass, would still be burthened by the payment of a school fee;the third, the burgher class. Many of the schools for the poorare endowed. One of them had, at the period of my visit in1838, nine hundred pupils and fourteen teachers, some of whomreceived very good salaries. A second had twelve hundredpupils and twelve teachers. In this latter the pupils receivedinstruction only during half the day, or eighteen hours per week,being divided into two sections, one attending in the morning,and the other in the afternoon. During the other half the daythey were engaged, under superintendence, in the manufactureof pasteboard boxes, which are sold for the benefit of theschool.In 1832 there were fifty-one primary schools in Leipsic, instructing16,603 children. I shall describe the burgher schoolin detail, as one of the most complete in its plan of organizationwhich I have seen. This plan is not yet fully reduced to practice,and in some of the classes the want of experienced teachersrenders its execution imperfect, but these imperfections are incidentalto the present circumstances of the school and city,and will, under the active spirit now prevailing, be speedilychanged for the better.The fees in all these schools are exceedingly low ; in the " real school,"attached to the seminary, the highest fee is three dollars and ninety cents perannum; in the Catholic high school, nine dollars per annum.t I am indebted to the inspector of this school, the clergyman of the CourtChurch, (Hof-prediger,) Pater Diettrich, for very valuable introductions.878 GEWERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.BURGHER SCHOOL OF LEIPSIC.This school* is designed to educate children of the middlecranks of society, and those of the upper ranks whose parentswish then to receive a public education.It is composed : First. Of an elementary school for both boysand girls, which pupils should enter at six years of age. Theresire three classes, in the lowest of which the two sexes aretaught in the same room. The pupils are retained, in general,a year and a-half to two years, leaving this department at eightyears of age and proceeding to the next higher.Second. The burgher school proper. Here . the boys andgirls receive instruction separately. There are six classes forboys, each of which occupies a year. After passing throughthe three lower classes, the sixth, fifth, and fourth, the pupilsbegin separate courses, according to their inclination or supposeddestination in life. This is at about eleven years of age.Those who are intended for trades, and whose school educationmust finish at fourteen, to enable them to begin their apprenticeship,pass through the remaining classes, the third, second,and first of the burgher school.Other boys who are intended to pursue higher departmentsQf mechanical occupations, or for manufacturers, clerks, miners,foresters, stewards of estates, merchants, artists, civil officers,,&c., pass into the department called the " real school' terminatingtheir course there at about sixteen years of age. Otherswho are intended for the learned professions go at eleven to agymnasium, pass through its classes at eighteen, and enter theuniversity, being prepared for a profession at twenty-oqe.Third. The " real school or higher burgher school. In thisthere are four classes, intended to occupy together .about fiveyears, and to prepare the pupils to enter a commercial, polytechnic,architectural, or mining academy, according to his voscation. Omitting the girls' school, the scheme thus marked outwill appear better by the following skeleton.• Now under the charge of director Vogel, who has been called to Leipsic, andunder whole administration this must become a most flourishing establishment.|l« lower close* are already so crowded as to require division.BURGHER SCHOOL OF LEIPSIC.Eleven.MarySchool.Threeclasses.Pupils 6 to8 years ofage.BurgherSchool.Three classes.Pupils 8 to 11years of age.HigherBurgherSchool.Three classesPupils 11 to 14years of age.Or,The pupils are apprenticed on leavingthe school.Real School of four classes.Pupils 11 to 16 years of age, and pass to apolytechnic commercial,miningarchitectural Sc.academy.Gymnasium (grammar school) of six classes.Pupils 11 ta 18 years of age. They pass to the university,whereaftera course ofthree years, theymay be admittedto one of thelearned professions.A plan at once convenient and rational is thus marked outfor a youth's education, depending upon the views of his parents,their circumstances, and his own talents and dispositions.The first four named schools are united in one building, erectedhy the liberality of the town of Leipsic, and have the samedirector.The subjects and the order of succession of the differentcourses are good; there is a constant reference to the ultimateobject of the instruction, and no branches are inserted in theprogramme merely for the purpose of preparing pupils for thehigher classes of other schools. It is, on the contrary, consideredbetter that pupils should obtain access to them through thelower classes of the same school. By detaining'them here, injurywould be done to both schools. The primary instruction whichis common to all the pupils embraces a moderate number ofbranches, and terminates at an age when experience has shownthat the culture by the ancient languages should be no longer280 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.postponed, in the case of those who are intended for the learnedprofessions, and when the studies of others destined for the artsshould take a different direction. The question, whether theproper age has been adopted for this separation is wholly oneof experience, and the facts in reference to it will be submittedin speaking of secondary instruction.The subjects taught and the time they occupy in the elementaryschool agree very closely with those of the first two classesin the seminary school of Berlin. Drawing on slates and singingare both introduced here, constituting an advantage overthe other; they are brought in as a relief from intellectual exercises,and as objects of direct attainment. The number ofhours of duty is but four on four days of the week, and two oneach of the others. These might, I think, be increased to thestandard of the primary schools, twenty-four hours per week,without fear: of over-tasking the pupils; and if a portion of thetime were bestowed on judiciously arranged exercises, the physicalas well as moral education would be improved. The moraltraining of the play-ground is not as yet an element in any ofthe German systems. The same master teaches in successionall the studies of his class.The pupils pass from the third to the second class at the endof six months, a change which is favourable to their progress,since at this early age strongly marked differences appear soonafter entering the school. With a similar view of fitness in regardto their age, the plan of daily exercises is not rigorouslyprescribed, but is merely indicated to serve as a general guidein relation to the time to be devoted to the different subjects.I found occasion in this school to remark the danger of defeatingthe exercises of induction, by making them merelymechanical, by the reception of fixed answers to invariablequestions: and, also, the necessity of selecting very simplemelodies for the early exercises in singing: beyond these, theexertion of the voice of the child, so far from being a physicalbenefit, is a positive injury. My preference for beginningarithmetic with a reference to sensible objects, that is, by denominatenumbers, was again strongly confirmed.BURGHER SCHOOL OF Leipsic. 281It might seem impossible to determine how many pupils of adefinite age might, with advantage, be entrusted to the care of oneteacher under a given method of instruction. The average forbranches of the same kind is not, however, so wide from the extremesas might at first be supposed. In the simultaneous method,the skill of the teacher is the chief determining quality. The varioussubordinate ones depending upon the pupil, the particularexercise, the arrangements in reference to ventilation, warmth,&c., will readily suggest themselves. In the midst of all these,the average shows itself to attentive observation. It is easy tosee how many pupils are attending to what is going on, and ifthe teacher be skilled in his art, the number is thus obtained,which a class should not exceed. For the intellectual exercises,I obtained in this way from thirty-five to forty in the Germanschools as the maximum number of an elementary class; theobservation in reference to the classes of the best teachershere confirmed these numbers. In the mechanical branches,the number of pupils may be very much increased, without materialinjury to the instruction, and hence the classificationwhich suits them is not adapted to the intellectual departments.The principal subjects of instruction in the burgher school includingboth the lower and higher departments, are religion andmorals, German, French, arithmetic, geometry, natural history,history, geography, calligraphy, drawing, and vocal music, andto these are added in the highest classes technology and physics.The list differs from that of the Dorothea higher city school,and the seminary school of Berlin, in the omission of Latinand the introduction of technology and physics, both which differencesmark the proper character of the school. It is not intendedthat the upper classes shall prepare pupils for the higherclasses of the gymnasium, but that those who are to be trainedin the classical studies shall have previously passed to the lowerclasses of the gymnasium, where they properly belong, andwhere they can obtain the instruction appropriate to their objects.The distribution of time is shown in the annexed table,which is similar in its arrangement to those already given.GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD,Plan of instruction in the higher and lower burgher schools of Leipsic.SUBJECTSOFINSTRUCTION.Religious Instruction,German Language,*French, . - - .Arithmetic - - -Geometry, - - -Natural History, -Technology, - - -Physics, - . . -Geography, .History, . - - -Writing,Drawing,Singing,Total,BURGHER SCHOOL, FOR BOYS.Higher School.m o-o «on OLower School.oO 5C533 33 33 28 28 26CD2§The increase in the number of branches as the pupils rise tothe upper classes, seems to me judiciously made in this plan.At the same time, the number of hours per week is gradually• This includes the exercises of reading.t In this is included an hour of preparatory exercises for geometryt Anthropology.k Elementary natural history and natural philosophy.BURGHER SCHOOL OF LEIPSIC. 283increased, and perhaps beyond the due limit, though it wouldrequire longer attention than I could give to this institution toaffirm positively that this is the case. Comparing the programmewith that of the classes of corresponding age in theseminary school of Berlin, a general similarity appears throughout,although each has distinctive features. In the sixth class,of which the pupils are of the same age with those of the fourthin the seminary school, a few lessons of natural history andgeography (knowledge of home") are given, and with advantage.The number of hours per week devoted to the differentstudies is nearly the same in both schools.In the fifth class, natural history and history are introducedin the burgher school, and in its corresponding classes in theseminary school, Latin, French, and geometry. The numberof hours of arithmetical instruction is greater in this schoolthan in the other.A similar difference continues in the fourth class, as it is notthe object to begin French until after those who leave theschool at fourteen have terminated their course. The elementaryexercises of geometry are begun in this class of the burgherschool.The third class is the first or lowest of the higher burgherschool and the programme of this and of the second agree inthe main with those of the seminary school. Greater attentionis devoted to religious instruction, to arithmetic, and drawing,and less to French, in the burgher than in the seminary school.The number of hours given to the first named branch in theburgher school is double that in the other, and the number tothe last only one-half, which is probably too small an allotmentfor the object. Technology and physics are taken up in thefirst class of the Leipsic school, and Latin is continued throughall those of the Berlin institution.In regard to the plan of treating the subjects of instruction,the following is a comparison of the two schools :1. In religious instruction, the general train is the same, beingmore detailed in the burgher school, and having a specialcourse of morals in the higher classes. In general, the GermOEWKRAt EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.man institutions are very free from an objection urged to acourse of religious instruction, in a former part of my Report,namely, that it was addressed rather to the understandingthan to the heart. There is no express instruction in morals,but it is because the morals of the Scriptures mingle with theirdaily lessons, and no special course is needed, until a more advancedage, than that embraced by these schools in general.2. The course of German language (including composition)and reading is parallel with that of the Berlin seminary school,except in the two higher classes. In these a turn is given tothe compositions to adapt them to the peculiar destination ofthe pupils, who are also exercised in speaking, by reading dialoguesand brief dramatic pieces. In a country enjoying aconstitutional government, the art of public speaking may notbe neglected by its citizens.3. The curse of French, in the burgher school, struck me asrather defective, probably from the small amount of time whichis devoted to it, as already stated.4. Mathematics. The courses of arithmetic and geometry arealso parallel with those in the seminary school. The mathematicalstudies here are extended further in algebra, and includelogarithms, mensuration, and surveying.5. Natural history, physics, and technology. The early beginningsof this course are exercises in induction, directedparticularly to awakening habits of observation and reflection.Later, some of the more interesting parts of natural history aretaken up, and, finally, the subject is treated somewhat systematically,and a technological direction given to it. The physicsconsists of such popular notions of natural phenomena as shouldbe possessed by all. The technology explains the processesof some of the common arts and trades.0. The course of geography begins like that already describedat Halle, but subsequently pursues the inverse order, givingan idea of the earth as a part of the world, its form, motions,&c. Director Vogel has conceived the plan of presenting theparts of the earth always in their just proportions, as upon thesphere, and has contrived for this purpose a globe, which mayBURGHER SCHOOL OF LEIPSIC. 285be divided through the equator or through a meridian. Thehemisphere being suspended with its plane surface against thewall, presents the convex surface, with its delineations, in trueproportion. This idea he proposes to extend, by substituting formaps, in the early recitations, portions of spherical surfaces,with the delineations of the countries upon them.After taking a general survey of the different countries, especiallythose of Europe, the pupils pass to the geography ofGermany. They then enter more into the details of the countriesof Europe, draw maps, and, finally, study mathematicaland physical geography in a scientific form. To carry out hisviews of the connexion of history, natural history, and ethnographywith geography, director Vogel has prepared a schoolatlas upon a new plan. The vignettes surrounding the mapscontain illustrations of these different kindred branches, and addressthe eye of the learner, thus impressing the memory withtheir connexion with the countries delineated. For example,around the maps representing the different quarters of the globeare the characteristic plants, animals, and men of the differentregions near to the portions of the country where they arefound. The more detailed maps of the countries give a viewof their natural productions, represent the more prominent orcharacteristic qualities of the nation, the arts which flourishmore particularly among them, and give medallions pourtrayingtheir great historical characters, or including the names oftheir distinguished men, or the dates of important historicalevents. The execution of this work is highly satisfactory, andI am convinced of the advantages of the plan itself.7. The historical course, as far as it is distinct from thatlast mentioned, agrees, in its general features, with that of theBerlin seminary school, being, however, more minute.8. Writing and drawing. In learning to write, the classesbegin with small hand, and succeed better than is usual uponthat plan, probably from the attention, at the same time, todrawing. The last named branch is taught by Schmidt'smethod. The teacher has made an admirable collection ofmodels in wood and plaster, of geometrical solids, of machines,280 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.of buildings, bridges, and the like, of ornaments, &c., and bringshis class forward in this kind of drawing very rapidly. Onlythe more elementary parts of these collections, however, areused for the classes of the burgher school.9. Vocal music is taught as in the other schools.The particular method which the teacher pursues in his instructionis left much to the individual, the director remarkingjustly, that if he is competent to his place, his method must begood. He has for his guide, however, a programme indicatingthe degree of proficiency which his class must show at the endof the year.In the lower classes of a school like this, if the pupils havebeen previously well trained, a larger number can be instructedby the simultaneous method than in the elementary classes, inasubject of the same kind. This advantage is lost as thecourse becomes higher, and the scale turns again in proportionas individual teaching becomes more desirable, with increasedindividual development and differences in mental quality. Thesimultaneous method requires watchfulness on the part of theteacher, not to deceive himself as to the progress of his class.It is, of course, rarely that a question cannot be answered bysome of them, while the mass may be entirely ignorant in relationto the subject. I have seen both skill and attention fall intothe mistake to which I refer.Between each of the hours of recitation there are a few minutesof interval, during which the classes leave the schoolrooms.This is an arrangement favourable to health, andworthy of imitation.The lower classes have each a teacher for all the subjects, asystem which is gradually changed in the higher classes forthat of a teacher for a single subject. Drawing and singingare taught by special instructors in the higher classes.The classes for girls are similar to those described, the instructionbeing modified so as to render it more applicable tothe sex.The plan of instruction in the " Real School'' the highest ofwhich this establishment is composed, can hardly be said toI:BURGHER SCHOOL OP LEIPSIC. 287have received, as yet, its ultimate form. The school belongsto the class of secondary instruction, running parallel with thegymnasium, and preparing for the university of the arts, orpolytechnic school, as the other prepares for the university ofthe learned professions. The branches taught, and which I mayenumerate, to complete the description of the institution, are,1. Religious instruction. 2. German. 3. French. 4. English.5. Mathematics, including algebra; geometry, trigonometry,plane and spherical; practical surveying; a reviews ofarithmetic and technical arithmetic. 6. Physics and chemistry.7. Natural history. 8. History. 9. Geography. 10 Calligraphy.11. Drawing. 12. Vocal music.The separate branches in this school are in general taught byspecial instructors. The methods of Pestalozzi are consideredby the director as less applicable to the higher than to the lowercourses. But I doubt this, for though much less frequently applied,I have seen them used with good effect in advancedcourses. The opposite method takes up less time if the objectbe to communicate positive knowledge, and the importance ofthis object certainly increases, and even becomes paramount, inthe later parts of the student's career. The objection urged tothis plan does not apply in the case of those subjects which arecontinuous through a series of years, but to such as are brokenup into a number of kindred branches, the elements of whichare to be taught at different, and even at advanced stages ofthe course.The plan of special study hours for those whose parents wishthem to be prepared for their lessons under the direction of ateacher, has been adopted in this school.MODEL, OR BURGHER SCHOOL AT FRANKFORT ON THE MAINE.I conclude the account of the German burgher schools,which the interesting nature of the subject has induced me topresent somewhat at length, by a brief notice of the modelschool, (muster-schule,) or burgher school* of Frankfort onUnder the direction of Mr. Barge, an able and experienced teacher.GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.the Maine. This is one of the best conducted of the nrianywhich I have seen, and is of great importance to the city whichsupports it, and whose authorities have the superintendenceof it It differs from those already described in two points; inthe first, that the religious instruction is general, and not sectarian;and second, that the French language has much timedevoted to it, as being indispensable at Frankfort to the classfor whom the school is intended. The school plan, with thehours of instruction, will occupy but little more space than abare enumeration of the subjects taught. It is the result ofmuch experience, and of changes from time to time, to keepthe school up to the level of the instruction of the day. It presentsa well digested course for pupils from six to fourteen orfifteen years of age. As usual, the figures refer to the numberof hours occupied per week by the several subjects of study.IfMODEL BURGHER SCHOOL OF FRANKFORT ON THE MAINE. 289Table of the plan of exercises at the Frankfort Model School, 1836-7.SUBJECTS OF STUDY.2.t3J"io■5OHReligious Instruction, - . .21!Exercises of Thought and Speech,*German Language,GFrench,GeographyNatural Philosophy,Mathematical Geography,! . .Technology and Chemistry, - -History,Arithmetic and Algebra - -Arithmetic,GGGGAlgebra,Geometry,Lessons of form,Writing, - .6*Drawing,Singing,Total, - - .Exercises of induction.t Combined with elementary physics, or a popular view of natural phenomena.t And popular astronomy.§ Higher arithmetic,i] The two classes united.GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.The elementary classes are confined to few subjects, andwhich are introductory to those of the higher classes, and calculatedto develop the moral principles, the intellect, and readinessin the mechanical branches of instruction. The sphere isthen widened, by introducing a foreign language, the study ofnatural phenomena, and of form. In the advanced classes, asconstituting a preparation for the pupil's future career, a moresystematic account of the earth and its productions, of man andhis actions, as recorded in history, and of the processes of art,are furnished him. The programmes of the last two schoolswhich have been under discussion, are both liable to the objectionof attempting too much in the last year.The physical education is so far attended to in this schoolas to provide a very neat and tolerably spacious play-groundsand to give an interval for play during the morning hoursFraser's SYSTEM OP EDUCATION. 801CHAPTER VII.COMMON SCHOOLS OF BAYREUTH IN BAVARIA, AND DR. Fraser'sSYSTEM OF EDUCATION.The reputation of Dr. Graser's system, among certain of theteachers of Germany, induced me to visit Bayreuth, where heresides, to examine, under his direction, the schools whichpursue his method of education. Dr. Graser rejects equally thecommunication of positive knowledge and the giving of intellectualculture as the true ground-work of a system of education;he considers these as incidental objects, and that theprinciples of a system are to be sought a priori by a considerationof the purpose of education, of man as its recipient, and ofthe subjects or branches of instruction.His system, therefore, professes to reject every thing like anarbitrary assemblage of branches, and to present a rationalplan for selecting the subjects of instruction, and for determiningtheir succession. It must require a mind brought up in asimilar school, to enter into the philosophy, so called, of thissystem, and I do not propose to attempt a full view of it.* Ishall, however, briefly state what appears to me its chief principles,of which, though they may be true in the abstract, IIt may be objected to even this brief notice, that it is going out of my way,hand that, if followed, it would require an examination of the system of Jacotot aswell as of this. This objection has not escaped me, but Graser's system is littleknown among us, while Jacotot's has been often discussed. I visited the school ofone of Jacotot's most prominent pupils, at Paris, and must say, that the resultsseemed to me more showy than sound. Dr. Graser's principal works are divinity,oder cas Principe der einzig warren Menschenerziehung, &.c. ; Divineness, orthe Principle of the only true Education for Men, &c. ; Die Elementary Schulefairs Leben, &c. ; Elementary School for Life, and cas Verhaltnisse des Elementzur Politic der Zest, Dependance of Elementary Instruction on thePolitical Circumstances of the Time, &c. There is a good and quite full sketchof Dr. Graser's system in KrOger's Journey through Germany, Risen dutchDeutschland, &c.892 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.confess that I do not perceive the peculiar applicability. I shallthen pass to the practice, which may be of interest, even if thetheory should not be deemed satisfactory.After considering the constitution of man, Dr. Graser laysdown the principle, that he is destined to live in accordancewith it, and in the pursuit of holiness (godliness, divinity). Thechild must be educated in reference to this destination. Manrequires strength of body, hence physical education, and ofsoul (virtue), hence njoral education. His bodily strengthmust be rendered available by dexterity, his virtue, by prudence.Both must be directed by intelligence, hence intellectualeducation. Besides, he must have a just sense of the harmonyin the relations of life, or a feeling of fitness, or beauty, henceaesthetical education. As a condition of his being, man standsin certain relations to external nature, to his fellow men, andto God. instruction in nature, man, and God, must, therefore,form the materials of his education. Nature must be viewedin its productions, the objects of natural history, or its phenomena,the objects of natural philosophy, or physics. To completethe study of nature, geography, arithmetic, geometry andits applications, and drawing, must be called in, and the practicalapplication of the study includes technology and domesticeconomy. The study of man requires that of the theory ofgymnastics, dietetics, history, and geography. To approach toGod, man must know him. The first form of godliness istruth. God's truth, then, as revealed, should be man's study.The second form is justice; jurisprudence in higher education,or the laws of the land in lower, should, therefore, also form apart of man's studies, and as accessory subjects, history andgrammar. The third is love, taught through morals or practicalreligion. The fourth is beauty, requiring the study of painting,music, poetry, and decorum. Graser next endeavours tomodify the several subjects of education, according to thespecial wants of those who are to receive it, which he considersto depend upon their political situation. Thus, for hiscountry, he divides men into three classes, the people, or governed;the nobles; and the reigning family, or governors.Fraser's SYSTEM OF EDUCATION. 293The first he considers as more concerned with material objects,the others with the ideal, or spiritual, and hence adoptstwo divisions of the subjects of study, as calculated for theirschools.In the arrangement of instruction, his principle, that theschool must prepare for actual life, is brought into play. Headmits no separation into branches of study, no natural orderof succession in the branches, but insists that all instructionshall be grouped according to the wants of some particularmode of life. Taking society as the state of man's existence,he begins instruction with the paternal mansion of the child andhis family relations, and attaches to these all the elementary-knowledgeof morals, manners, speech, number, form, objects,drawing, and writing, which would be found necessary in thissphere. He next widens the sphere to include the place of residence,with its community; extends it to the circle or judicialdistrict, to the province, to the country, to the assemblage of theGerman states, the division of the earth, the entire earth, theuniverse.The application of Graser's principles to a common schoolwill be best understood by following up the course of instructionas far as it has been developed in one of the schools ofBayreuth.*The sixth, or lowest class, is instructed in what relates tofamily life. The exterior of the house. Its interior. Its inhabitants.Their wants.The classification followed in Whilst's reading-book will show,generally, the way in which these subjects are taught.Dr. Graser is not himself a teacher, nor has he, at present, the means of enforcing,by authority, the adoption of his methods; hence they have not the advantageof execution by the designer, nor do they appear in all the classes of thisschool. To the kind attention of Dr. Graser I was indebted for an opportunity ofvisiting three of the common schools of Bayreuth, in v^^hich his method weirsmore or less used. In speaking of the principles of this method, I have endeavouredto keep in view the respect which is due to the personal character andzeal of Dr. Graser, and also the fact that, having been educated in a totally differentatmosphere, as it were, I should be likely to err in forming an estimate ofthe value of similar speculations. I have aimed, therefore, at giving an accountof the system, as far as I understand it, leaving to others to pass judgment on it.394 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.1. Tie paternal mansion, considered as the dwelling-place of the family.Boiues and huts. Stones and lime. (Story of an accident from playing withlime.) The walls and the roof Doors and windows. (History of the discoveryof glass.) Earth, fire, water, and light. Comparison of building materials.Gloom, darkness, light, shadow. Property. Owner. Rectitude. Goodness.Decorum. Politeness. (Story of the polite and the rude boy.) Pilfering. Theft.Robbery. Robbers. 2. The inmates of the house. Enumeration of them.Exterior distinctions between the men and animals. Distinctive qualities of thedifferent domestic animals. The poultry. Further distinctions between men andanimals. Voice. Speech as a characteristic of man. Power of induction. Moralorder of the family. (The intractable child.) Uses of the domestic animals,obligations towards them. (Tormentors of animals.) Noxious domestic animals.Conduct towards them. Flies. Spiders. Review of conduct towards animalsin general. 3. Wants of the inmates of the house. The dwelling itself Furnitureand clothing. Arrangements for their preservation. Inviolability of theproperty of children and servants. Activity and offices of parents. Duties ofchildren towards their parents.This course is commenced between six and seven years ofage, and occupies about six months. I shall go into someparticulars in regard to parts of the instruction. 1. The .— The teacher shows a model of a simple ,of which the gable end may be removed, and is arectangular block, surmounted by a triangle. The teachertakes off the triangle, and counts the number of its sides audibly;this part of the house has how many sides? is his question.Three. He shows that it has also three corners, or asks howmany corners, leaving to the more intelligent pupils to lead theclass in the answer, and when the answer is obtained, causingit to be repeated by all. Watching the class, if he finds inattention,he addresses the question where it prevails, giving thepupils as much as possible to find out, in order to keep up theirattention as long as their physical constitution will permit. Achange of subject, physical exercise, or rest, should be allowedwhen the attention is exhausted, the habit of which may begradually established by training. This inductive course, combinedwith repetition, is always employed, and in what followsI shall merely indicate the order of the instruction. The figure inquestion is three-cornered. Interior corners are called angles.*• In GcTtntn the fpac© formed by the meetings of two lines viewed from thfraser's system of education. 295It is a three-angled figure, and called a triangle. Next, thefour-sided figure is similarly treated. Then the triangular capis set upon the rectangle, forming a five-sided figure. Thispart of the model is now placed before the children to drawupon the slate, with the following preliminary instruction.Each group of three or four children, or, if convenient, each •child, is furnished with a rectangle of pasteboard, or thin wood,in which five holes are pierced, corresponding to the five angularpoints of the pentagon to be drawn. These are markedon the slate by inserting the points of the pencil through theholes, and the child is practised in joining the points by hand.Practice in this constitutes his first drawing-lesson. Returningto the rectangular part of the model, the positions of the verticaland horizontal boundary lines are pointed out, and a plummetand common mason's level are shown, to give a notionhow these lines are established in practice, and a correct ideaof their actual positions. Attention is next called to the horizontalside of the triangular cap, then to the sloping sides. Acomparison of the angles which they form with the horizon,and that formed by the horizontal and vertical lines, leads tothe distinction between acute and right angles. The objects ofa triangular roof, and of the rectangular lower part of the house,are next stated. An obtuse-angled polygonal roof is substitutedfor the one already mentioned. The form gives an illustrationof the obtuse-angle, placing it upon the model leads to countingas far as seven. Dividing the house into stories by lines, tocounting to nine. The children are next led to enumerate theparts of the house as shown in the model, and with the namesof which they are of course familiar — as the doors, windows,&c. The distinction between squares and rectangles is madeobvious. The parallelogram and rhomb are also here introduced.The distinction between curved and straight lines, &c.Different simple drawings of cottages are made. Counting iscontinued to ten. Addition is commenced by referring to theinterior, or from the exterior, has different names, and the compounds of these,with the numerals three, four, five, &c., constitute the names of the figures, asdrey-eck, vier-eck, &c.Sq GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.number of panes in the windows of the model, covering upthose not to be added, and proceeding front smaller to largernumbers, within the limits of ten. These are extended to onehundred, stating to the children the mode of formation of compoundnumbers, to assist their memory. Subtraction is introducedby reference to the same illustrations. Mental arithmeticalone is practised. In adding numbers which exceedten, the tens are first added, then the units, carrying to the tens,if necessary : thus, in adding twenty-two and thirty-nine together,their process would be, twenty-two is two tens and twoones — thirty-nine, three tens and nine ones; two tens and threetens are five tens; two ones and nine ones are eleven ones, orone ten and one one; five tens and one ten are six tens, and one,sixty-one. Multiplication is begun also by a reference to thewindow-panes, which afford, usually, many combinations. Divisionsimilarly treated, the question being such as the childrenwould take an interest in solving, and their coins are earlyexplained to them, and made the subjects of their exercises.Fractions grow'naturally from division. The foregoing instructionis interspersed with other matters yet to be described.In fact, there is no fixed order of exercise, or school-plan, accordingto Graser's method, but the teacher is relied upon toadvance the different parts of the instruction duly, accordingto his observation of the progress of the class.The elements of physics, natural history, technology, anddomestic economy, are thus introduced, it being understoodthat the same mixed method of question and answer, and ofdirect and inductive teaching, is used throughout. Men did notalways live in houses, but once in caves and huts. The inconveniencesof such places from cold, damp, &c., are pointedout The materials required for a house, as stone, mortar,wood, iron, &c. Most of the children have seen the operationof building, and can tell the materials required ; those who havenot observed, will probably not let an opportunity pass afterwardsof so doing. Whence the stone is procured, quarries,quarrymen. The hewing of stone. Limestone and lime — theobjects being presented to them. The conversion of the A PRIMARY SCHOOL OF BAYREUTH. 297stone into lime. The slaking of lime, making of mortar, ilshardening, laying the stones. Digging of the trench for thefoundations, &c.Next the wood is taken for the subject of a lesson. The distinctionof wood from fruit trees and forest trees is shown.Shaping of the wood by sawing. Beams. Planks. Boards.Laths. Trade of house-carpenter. Of joiner, &c. In the sameway iron is treated of. Bricks and tiles. Glass.In recapitulating these matters, or in presenting new ones, theelements of grammar are begun. The nouns and adjectivesare easily distinguished from the other parts of speech by theinduction of the pupils themselves, when directed in the rightway.Used as incidental matters of instruction, but not as formingits ground-work, it appears to me that the foregoing subjectsare of value, and that useful hints may be gathered from theway of treating them ; hence, I am led to remark upon certainsources of difficulty in their execution. The instruction may berendered wholly ineffective by the teacher treating the subjectin a mechanical way, so that what is intended to excite theobserving and reflecting faculties, especially the former, shallbecome a mere memory of words. It may be rendered actuallymischievous by the teacher inculcating erroneous ideas ofnatural phenomena and natural history. The teacher's guideshould be prepared with care, and revised by adepts in thesciences, to avoid such mischief, which 1 have known to occurin many cases.*Elementary ideas of right and wrong, of goodness, of " fitness"(the beautiful), are inculcated in the following way:The dwelling being still under discussion, the attention is calledto the parts of the door, its lock, &c. The object of the doorTo show that this is not imaginary, I may mention that, in a school wherethe subject of the caustic nature of Hie, and of its heating during slaking, wereunder examination, they were explained thus: — the limestone was turned intolime by heat, in which process it absorbed a great deal of heat, which made itburning, or caustic; when water is thrown upon it, the water unites with thehie, and this heat escapes.298 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.and its fastenings. Who may rightfully enter a house. Theright to put out those entering wrongfully. A story is toldhere of a poor child begging for admission to a house during astorm — cold, hungry, and ill-clothed. The child is received andsupplied. The moral is drawn from the children, and benevolence,love to man, is inculcated. In entering a strangehouse or a room, leave must be asked. The contrast of goodand bad manners in making or answering the request is broughthome to the children. The subject is next followed up by supposingan unlawful entry made into the dwelling, and the differencebetween theft and burglary, or stealing and robbing, is broughtout. The smallest possible theft of any kind, or pilfering, is immoral.A story is told to illustrate the fate of the pilferer.Next the inmates of the house and out-houses form subjectsof instruction, the mode of treating which will easily be conceivedby referring again to the general enumeration of the arrangementof the subjects. Exercises of speech and thought,natural history of domestic animals, and much elementarytechnological information, are thus introduced. Proverbs arecommitted to memory, inculcating moral lessons or duties.The next head furnishes an opportunity to examine the wantsof the inmates of the house, the topography of the dwelling andits grounds, as introductory to geography, the construction anduses of the furniture in continuation of technology, and to introducethe drawing of simple articles of furniture. Speech isconsidered as the means of communicating between the membersof a family. Other modes of communicating ideas by signsand gestures are adverted to. The sight may be addressedthrough pictures as substitutes for verbal descriptions addressedto the car. Hieroglyphics or signs may be substituted for pictures.Trials of these are resorted to, as, for example, the curveof the forefinger and thumb forming a C, may be imitated on theslate, and understood to stand for " come here." A number ofsigns, having reference to letters subsequently to be formed, andto their actual use in the spelling of words, are taught to the children,who at first are delighted with these acquisitions, but aftera time find the accumulation of signs very troublesome. ThisA PRIMARY SCHOOL OF BAYREUTH. 299is supposed to prepare the way for a zeal in acquiring writingand reading. To connect the written with the spoken language,Dr. Graser goes back to the origin of the former, and imaginesthat the forms of the letters result, in general, from an attemptto imitate the position of the lips, or lips and tongue, in soundingthe component parts of a word. This requires a difficult andin many cases a most fanciful* connexion to be formed in themind of the pupil between the sound and its sign. Four differentseries of lines are ruled by the pupils upon the slates, onwhich they write ; one is a set of two parallels for the standardletters; another of three parallels for the letters which projectabove the standard lines, the interval between the upper twobeing less than that between the lower; another set, also of threeparallels, for the letters which extend below, and a fourth forthose which extend in both directions. Words are formed assoon as possible, and of a kind intelligible to the child, and sentencesof the same character. I doubt much if the pupil receivesany real aid from the connexion assumed between soundsand signs. The determinate sound of the letters in the Germanrenders the spelling easy, when the true sound and the signs ofthe letters have been connected in the memory .f The previouspractice of drawing has prepared the hand, so that there is aremarkable facility in acquiring the manual part of writing.The selection of intelligible sentences carries out the habit ofunderstanding every thing as it is brought forward. Readingthe written hand soon becomes familiar, and the transition toI have called this fanciful, for so it appears to me, but speak in no spirit ofdisrespect. This method is connected, in Dr. Graser's school, with the instructionof the deaf and dumb with other children. The maxim prevailing in the principalschools of Germany for the instruction of the deaf and dumb is, that theymust be restored to society by enabling them to understand speech and to speak.Hence the first attempt is to make them understand the motions of the organsof speech, and to imitate them, forcing air through them so as to produce thesounds. The perseverance and zeal expended in attempting to carry out thisidea are almost incredible. In some of the institutions for deaf mutes much of theinstruction is actually communicated through the means of speech.t I have a specimen of writing from one of a class who had been five monthsunder this instruction, remarkable for the correctness of spelling and execution.It was written from dictation. The pupil was seven years of age.300 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.the printed letters is easy. In all this instruction the black-boardis used for illustrating the lessons. Elementary principles ofgrammar are inculcated in connexion with the writing andreading.In the next class, occupying also six months, the instructionis connected with "life in the community." This includes thepolitical organization of the community, with the reasons for it;the geography of the place ; the continuation of the exercisesof thought and speech; the commencement of Bible history;an extension of instruction in morals, technology, and naturalhistory; of the elements of form ; of grammar; of drawing andwriting: so at least they would be called in the other schools.The plan of arrangement is as follows:Life in the community. History of the formation of communities, with theirwants and Obligations. Original existence of man. Union of several families.Fatal accidents in communities. Necessity of mutual aid in misfortune. Necessityof a magistracy. Arrangements for safety. Taxes. Laws and punishments.Wants of the community. Roads, bridges, &c. Watchmen. Servants.Council-house. School-house.2. In reference to man. The five senses. Their abuse exposes to punishmentInformation in regard to the organs of sense. Their injury or deficiency.Their preservation and exercise. The mind. Perception not required forthought, or for distingiiisliitig the true from the false, the good from the evil.The soul. Man has reason and will. Stories of good actions. The good is notalways rewarded in this world, but there is a God.3. Relation of man to God. Attributes of the Deity. God is the creator, thesupporter, the governor of the world, the father of all men, the high and righteousjudge, a spirit. Duties to God, Honour, love as of a child, trust, thankfulness,reverence. Constant remembrance of God. Conscience. Stories related. Theevil conscience. Conscience makes a man anxious and uneasy when he doeswrong. The moral to be inculcated is, that man has within him a monitor whichwarns him against doing evil. Story of a pleasant evening. There is also approvalwithin one's self of good deeds. Necessity of a revelation to man. Storiesfrom the Scriptures related. The creation. Cain and Abel. The deluge.Those saved. The prophets. Expectation and coming of the Messiah. Thethree wise men. The child Jesus. John. Jesus the teacher, saviour, andfounder of the kingdom of godliness.4. Relation of man to nature. The native place and its environs. The villageM the dwelling of the community. The cardinal points. Position of thebuildings. Streets. Roads. Springs. Stories of the village. Review of thepotlUoa of the village. Natural history. Beauties of nature. First walk inthe garden. Fruit tree, shrubs, herbs, flowers. The fields, hills, valleys, woods,pA PRIMARY SCHOOL OF BAYREUTH. 801and forests. Morning ramble in the woods. Morning song. Insects. Storiesof cruelty to insects. Natural pldlosofihy. Heat. The sun. Sunrise. Song.Division of time. The calendar. Vapour. Storms. Thunder and lightning.Rules for protection.5. Relation of man to society. Age and youth. Infirm persons. Theable bodied and the sick. Duties towards and protection of the sick. Employments.Labourers and tradesmen. Peacefulness. Willingness in service. Up-'^Tightness. Respectfiilness. Disposition to work. Poverty and riches. Contentment.The same elements of instruction are, in the next class,grouped about the next political division, the circle, the courseoccupying, as before, six months. Beginning here, the divisionrestricts some portions of instruction unnecessarily. In general,however, I was satisfied with the progress of this class. Ihad no opportunity of judging of the results of the followingdivision, namely, "life in the province," no class being in thatstage of progress.In the next following, or " life in the kingdom," the politicalcircumstances became too abstruse for the intellectual developmentof the children, and the attempts at induction in regard tothe government failed almost entirely. All the circumstances,except those relating to the army, were out of the pale of theirordinary experience, and the complex mechanism of governmentwas beyond the power of their reason to grasp. TheGerman language is taught grammatically in this class, and,besides the geography and natural history of Bavaria, its history,the biography of its most distinguished men, arithmetic,mental and written, geometry, drawing, singing, and moralsfrom the Bible. At this stage of progress, it is quite apparentthat the branches require a different mode of instruction, thatthey must be separated, and the progress of each regulated accordingto the adaptation of the mind of the pupil to its reception,and not according to any extraneous theoretical circumstances.The two highest classes being joined under a teacher whopursued altogether the old method of instruction, I had no opportunityto put to the test the judgment formed in the lowerclass, which I have just expressed. Social or political GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.Stances do not afford, I am satisfied, a just method of arrangingthe details of instruction, though a knowledge of them shoulddoubtless form a part of education. The reasons why the arrangementof Graser produces satisfactory results in the lowerclasses are, first, that elementary instruction does not require asystematic division of its subjects, in order to apply them to cultivatingthe intellect or morals, or for communicating knowledge:and second, that the subjects are within the pale ofthe child's experience, and refer to his every-day wants andperceptions. Just the reverse, however, is the case in thehigher divisions, and hence a different method becomes absolutelynecessary.* Still the leading idea of the system, thatto developed the intellectual, moral, and physical faculties of manis not sufficient, but that he must be educated in reference tothe life ia which he is to take a part, strikes with the force oftruth, independently of the details which may be devised tocarry it into effect.The institutions which Dr. Graser considers necessary togive the entire public instruction of a nation are:Popular Schools. Schools for Higher Instruction.1. The elementary school. 1. The elementary school.2. The real school, (" Real Gymna- 2. The gymnasium.slum")3. The real institute, (« Real Uni 3. The university.verity")The character of the instruction appropriate to these establishmentsmay, according to his views, be thus expressed. Inthe elementary school, it should be popular and inductive; inthe real school, practical and scientific; and in the university,scientific and practical, or applying science to practice.• This view is also taken by Dr. KrOger, whose experience and skill as ateacher I have already so often referred to. See his Journey through Germany.(Bciic dutch Deutschland, &c., pp. 132, 133.)IfSCHOOLS OP AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY. 803CHAPTER VIII.SCHOOLS OF AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY.Besides the schools for general instruction, which have beennoticed in the foregoing chapters, others have been devised,intended to give special education for a future calling whilepursuing the branches of common school instruction. Thedevotion of a part of the time to manual labour, as in theschools of Dresden and Leipsic, etc., already spoken of, is incidental,and not a chief feature in the plan, and the occupationslearned in the boys' schools are not such as are likely to befollowed in after life. In the schools now under consideration, onthe contrary, the manual labour, or practical exercises, are leadingfeatures in the system, and are intended to train the pupilfor his future vocation. These establishments require very peculiarcircumstances to render them useful; the future occupationof the pupil must be distinctly pointed out at an early age,or it must be desirable to give him a particular bias by education.Thus, in the rural cantons of Switzerland, there can beno doubt that boys without fortune are to be agriculturallabourers, of a grade depending upon their success in life, andit is highly important to the country that as many as possibleshould be trained in the theory and practice of their calling.Hence the establishment of " rural schools" in these cantons,and the encouragement held out to their multiplication by patrioticcitizens. Again, it is important in a community like that ofLyons, where the manufacture of silk employs so large a numberof the population, that the workman should be acquaintedwith the theory of his art, and should, if he have talent, alsohave the acquirement necessary to improve it. Hence theappropriation of the Lamartiniere funds to give a suitabletraining to those whom it is supposed may become workmenm the extensive manufactories of the city. The creation of804 OEIfERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.such schools, where the conditions necessary to render th(successful cannot be fulfilled, must be followed by failure. Th(belong essentially to particular localities and social circumstances, and their extension, without reference to a due considerationof these, has tended, in some cases, to destroy the favourableopinion formed from the operation of similar establishmentsin their legitimate sphere. The present condition of the ruralschools of Switzerland, as exemplified by those which I visited,a comparison of the organization now existing with that at theoutset, an inquiry into how far the results expected from themhave been realised, and among these results, how far the schoolsmay be considered as self-supporting, afford general matter ofinterest, and will appear in the descriptions of the schools atHofwyl and Carra. An example of a school adapted to therural population of England will follow the notice of the Swissschools, affording an instance of the adoption of a principle,and its ingenious modification, to suit the new circumstancesunder which it is applied.On account of the late age at which the pupils enter, and thegrade of agricultural life for which they are prepared, I havehesitated as to a notice of the agricultural school at Temple-mole,near Londonderry, in this chapter; but considering thatthe intellectual instruction is quite elementary, I have concludedto insert it. It will be remarked, in relation to all the agriculturalschools, that the age to which pupils are retained passes far thelimits of the primary period of education.An admirable plan for adapting the ordinary day school ofthe National Board of Education for Ireland to the wants ofan agricultural community, has been put in practice byCaptain Kennedy, at the estate of Lough Ash, in the countyof Londonderry. The children are taught the theory andpractice of gardening, of farming in a small way, and of thecare of cattle, &c., by the master, working a certain number ofhours every day, when the season permits, in the small gardenand farm attached to the school. When these arrangementshave been matured, and have been in steady operation for aconsiderable time, the results will, I have no doubt, prove offlSCHOOLS OP AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY. 805great value to the portion of the country where they will bedisplayed, extending beyond this one estate by the imitation ofthe system in others.Besides, the general interest which may attach to theseschools, the variety of arrangement, and the methods of instructionin special branches, cannot fail to be of service forthe more direct objects of my Report. The Lamartini^reschool is entitled, I believe, to the credit of carrying into fullexecution the method of teaching the elements of chemistryand mechanics, by combining manipulation with the study ofthe theory.RURAL SCHOOLS OF SWITZERLAND.These are, in general, schools in which manual labour occupiesthe chief part of the pupils time, moral and intellectualtraining being mingled with it, and occupying the intervals ofrest. The master of the school is the farmer, and the pupils arehis family. Labour and instruction are carried on together, andthe discipline is paternal. The arrangement implies that the pupilsreside in the schools, which are in fact charitable establishments,since the pupils do not remain long enough, after theirlabour becomes profitable, to repay the expenses of their educationand maintenance. The present organization of theseschools is due to Mr.de Fellenberg, who first established a modelschool of the kind at Hofwyl, in 1806, and no less than twelvefor boys and girls have been since established in the differentcantons. At the meeting of the society for public utility atGeneva, in August of 1837, a report was made, highly commendatoryof these establishments, and proposing, as a means ofpromoting their extension, a central seminary for the educationof teachers for them; the importance of this suggestion willappear when it is seen how entirely the character of these establishmentsdepends upon the qualities of the teachers, and howdifficult it is to find suitable ones. The two for boys which Ivisited were Carra, near Geneva, and Hofwyl, near Berne.806 OBNBRAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL AT HOFWYL.The establishments for education at Hofwyl have attractedmore attention probably than any other educational institutionsin the world, and have become well known from the variousreports made in relation to them.* At the time of my visit,in 1837, they consisted of a school chiefly for poor children,and called the Agricultural or Rural School, of a middle orreal school for the education of youth not intended for thelearned professions, of a boarding-school for the preparatoryeducation for professional life, and of an agricultural institute,to the lectures of which pupils in the other departments onlywere admitted. All these establishments, requiring such differentmental resources for their organization and management, wereunder the superintendence of Mr. de Fellenberg, their founder,and by whom the whole institution has been reared, withoutpublic aids At the time of my visit to Hofwyl, the middleschool had assumed an important position, and was the mostflourishing, probably, of the different establishments. As, however,the regulations did not permit as close an examination ofthis and of the boarding institute, within the time which I was ^able to devote to them, as of some other similar schools whichI visited, I propose to confine the present notice to the agriculturalschools Not to lose, however, the advantage of the principlesdeveloped in these establishments, I shall place in the• The most particular account, and that in which the spirit of the institutions isconsidered by their founder to have been best exhibited, is given by our countryman,Mr. W. C. Woodbridge, in the Annals of Education, published at Boston.Mr. Woodbridge resided at Hofwyl, and made himself, thoroughly master of theminutiae of the establishments.t Mr. de Fellenberg is one of those rare instances in which, from motives ofpatriotism and benevolence, men occupying high stations by wealth and socialposition devote their means, their time, and talents, to the promotion of education.I am not aware of any case in which equal sacrifices have been made asm that of Mr. do Fellenberg.t In regard to this, Mr. de Fellenberg was good enough to put me in communicationwith an intelligent pupil (John Cabin), who had been ten months in trioschool, and who was then in the middle school, preparing as an instructor, underthe patronage of an Irish nobleman, Lord Wallscourt.RURAL SCHOOLS OF SWITZERLAND. 807Appendix, No. XL, some deductions of Mr. de Fellenberg fromthe experience of Hofwyl.The pupils of the agricultural school are admitted at an early-age,there being, however, no fixed limits, and are expected toremain until twenty-one, if supported gratuitously. By so doing,they would be enabled, by their manual labour, to repay theexpense of their maintenance and education, so as to leave theinstitution without pecuniary obligation. They would, besides,be detained beyond what may be considered the most criticalage. In practice, however, it is found difficult to induce thislengthened stay, the actual expediency of which must depend somuch upon individual circumstances. In addition to the gratuitouspupils, others are taken, who pay, in part or entirely, fortheir education. Twenty is the usual number of gratuitouspupils, and at the time of my visit there were ten pay pupilsbesides; this number is essentially restricted by the plan of theschool.Formerly, the pupils were under the charge of a singleteacher, for manual labour, instruction, and discipline. Theteacher lived with them, and was expected to be their constantcompanion, adviser, and friend, as well as instructor. Thefirst teacher of the agricultural school, Wehrli, was speciallytrained for the purpose by Mr. de Fellenberg, and executed theplan of the school in a way to produce commendation from allquarters.* It is easily seen that such a place would be mostdifficult to supply, and yet, that to preserve the original principleof organization requires absolutely that it should be supplied.At present the arrangement is essentially different. The pupilswork and live with the teacher, but receive instruction in themiddle school. In summer, the time occupied in labour is fromeight to twelve hours per day, and in instruction from two tofour hours. In winter, the amount of labour is less, and of studymore. At particular seasons in the summer, as during the timeMr. Wehrli is now at the head of the normal school at Kreuzlingen, in hisnative canton of Thurgovia.808 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.of harvest and hay-making, the instruction is omitted altogether.In the winter, gymnastic exercises, in a degree, replace agriculturallabour. Thus the character of the instruction is entirelychanged from what the former records of the school representit to have been. It was intermingled with work, and much ofit incidental, the peculiar talent of Wehrli appearing to havedisplayed itself in improving every opportunity for communicatinginstruction of this sort. At present the intellectual andmoral instruction, and the field-work, both assume a moreformal character. The former plan appears to have been peculiarlywell adapted to the Swiss character, and certainlyproduced happy results upon the youth educated under it, and,if I understood Mr. de Fellenberg aright, he is anxious to returnto it when a suitable teacher shall have been obtained. Inaddition to ordinary farming, and labour, and gardening, thepupils are employed in an extensive dairy and a shop for makingagricultural machines. They have, besides, in the agriculturalinstitute, means of acquiring the theory as well as the practice offarming. The farming operations in which they assist are carriedon to great advantage upon the extensive domain of Hofwyl.They rise at five in summer, attend to the police of theirdwelling-house, and unite in the prayers and lessons of themiddle school; breakfast at half past six; are engaged in labouror instruction, with an intermission of an hour at noon for dinner,until six o'clock; sup, and are engaged in their lessons untileight; have prayers and retire to bed at nine. Their mealsare served from the same kitchen, and are of the same qualitywith those of the hands upon the farm. On Sunday they riseat six in summer, breakfast at seven, attend prayers, study, andjoin the classes of vocal music with the pupils of the middleschool until eleven, meet the other classes at chapel, where theyhave a sermon from a Protestant and Catholic clergyman, alternately;dine at twelve; have study and recreation until five,when they sup; are free until seven; have prayers and retire ateight.The instruction received is in reading the German languageand exercises of induction, four hours per week; arithmetic,ItAGRICULTURAL SCHOOL OP HOFWYL. 309three hours; elementary geometry, or knowledge of forms, twohours; geography and the history of Switzerland, three hours;natural history and philosophy, two hours; religion and morals,two hours; writing, drawing, and vocal music, three hours.Three hours per week are devoted to military drill, in whichthe pupils of the several schools are united. An admirable arrangementis made for bathing, by enclosing a copious spring,so as to form a reservoir with an overflow, by which the wateris constantly changed. The depth is regulated so as to beadapted to the use both of those who can and others who cannotswim. A bathing-house, steps to enter the water, and apparatusof various kinds, for instruction in swimming, completethe arrangements.*The discipline of this school is of a mild character; theelder pupils have much influence over the younger; and wherethe teacher is constantly with them, as in the former organization,his control is a substitute for regulations. In the beginning,the number of pupils admitted was so small that no onecould escape the teacher's observation and kindly admonition;and when the numbers were increased, this spirit was propagatedfrom the older pupils to the new comers.In connexion with this rural school should be mentioned theestablishment known as the Colony of Selkirk, placed severalmiles from Hofwyl, upon an uncultivated spot. The objects ofthis establishment were to demonstrate the possibility of renderingrural schools self-supporting, and that they might even beused as the means of improving the agricultural condition of thecountry. A spot of fifteen acres was selected, and a log housebuilt upon it. The colony was opened with six pupils in 1827,and placed under the charge of a pupil of Wehrli's. The numberwas gradually increased. The instruction was made entirelyincidental, agricultural labour being the first necessity for the• The mode of teaching to swim is by a belt, which passes round the body,and is attached to a rope passing through a ring at the end of a bar of woodfrom which it hangs, and which acts as an elastic support. The length of therope can be increased or diminished at pleasure, so as to afford a greater or lesssupport. The more usual instruction, however, is given by the elder pupils supportingthe younger on their hands.810 GEIfERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.colonists. Their mode of life was of the most frugal character,to an extent unpractised in our country; in the earlier periodsthey were supplied from Hofwyl, but were made to dependupon that source as little as possible. The school was discontinueda few years since, and all the accounts relating to itclosed, when it appeared that during its brief existence the estimatedimprovements of the soil had been nearly adequate to defraythe expenses of the* school, over and above its receipts.This result, however, depended upon the peculiar location of thecolony, since it is by no means common to such schools, evenin Switzerland. -RURAL SCHOOL AT CARRA, NEAR Geneva.This rural school was founded in 1820, by Mr. Picket, andis still carried on upon part of the estate of his nephew, the syndicVerhet-Pictet. There is a similar establishment for girls inthe vicinity, and under the charge of charitable ladies. Theschool at Carra belongs to subscribers, and is managed by acommittee, of which Mr. Vernet-Pictet is president. The farmattached to it is forty acres in extent, and is worked, as far aspracticable, by the pupils themselves. Of course, in the heavierparts of farming they require assistance. The master of theschool is the head farmer, as well as schoolmaster and fatherof the family. Agricultural labour is the business of the pupil,and instruction fills up the intervals. The pupils enter at abouteight years of age, and remain until from eighteen to twenty.During the latter years of their stay, their work begins to beprofitable to the establishment, and they are even sent to workin the neighbourhood, or, as is found more advisable, the schooldoes the work of a neighbouring farm on shares. On theaverage, however, the manual labour produces but about one-thirdof the expense of the pupil.The style of living is so plain, that the whole cost of the pupilamounts to but little more than ten cents per day. The societysupports twenty-five boys of different ages, who live with themaster and his family. During the winter, basket-making andother handicraft labour is added to their employments, and thefAGRICULTURAL SCHOOL OF TEMPLEMOYLE. 811older pupils go to market with the produce of the farm. Theyreceive an elementary education, consisting of religious instruction,reading, writing, accounts, mental arithmetic, geography,and Swiss history. The master was educated under the celebratedWehrli. It is plain that, as the master is at once thehead of the family and instructor, the character of the moral,intellectual, and physical culture of the pupils depends entirelyupon him; when it is further considered that a great part of theinstruction is incidental, so that no precise rule can be laiddown, even as to the time when it is to be given, it is quite asobvious that the whole results of education depend upon histact, temper, judgment, and other personal qualities, and uponhis preparation for this difficult task. Since the foundation ofthe school, about sixty-seven pupils have been attached to it ;of these, twenty-four have passed through with approbation,twenty-seven were in the school in 1837, and sixteen have beenwithdrawn. Of twenty pupils for whom places were found bythe directors, after six years residence in the institution, twelvewere apprenticed as farm-servants or gardeners, three as schoolmasters,two as house-servants, and three, who had not adequatestrength for country work, to tradesmen. The committeecomplain of the difficulty of keeping young men, even thusbrought up, in the country, contrary to the general tendencytowards the towns.AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL OF TEMPLEMOYLE, NEAR Londonderry.The Agricultural School of Templemoyle was established bythe Northwest of Ireland Agricultural Society, in 1827.* It isI am indebted for a most favourable introduction to this school to Sir R.Ferguson, of Derry, one of its most active managers, and had the good fortuneto meet there Captain Kennedy, of Lough Ash, the manager of a large estate, inawild district, where he is pursuing plans for the elevation of the peasantry,which must produce the happiest results. The improvement of his tenants is inan increasing ratio with the time of their residence on his estate. His school,saving-funds and bazaar, where articles of use are sold at cost; his arrangementsfor leases, loans, agricultural instruction, and moral and religious culture, are alladmirably conceived, and executed with a zeal beyond my praise. I do notS13 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.situated in a healthful and picturesque part of the county ofLondonderry, about six miles from the city. At the sametime with this school, the subscribers established one for theeducation of mercantile and professional men, not far fromTemplemoyle, expecting that the latter would prove profitablein a pecuniary point of view, and thus yield assistance for thesupport of the former.* The idea was, however, not realized,and after a considerable expense in its establishment, the higherschool was abandoned, and all the efforts of the subscribersconcentrated upon the agricultural school. The plan of Mr.de Fellenberg's establishment was thus taken as a model, but,under the different circumstances of the case, proved a decidedfailure.The agricultural school is designed for the education of thesons of farmers, or of young men intended for farming occupations,either on their own account, or in the employ of others.It aims at giving them a plain English education, and a knowledgeof the principles and practice of agriculture.Pupils are admitted at or after fifteen, and should remain inthe school during a period dependent upon the age of admission,but as they are pay scholars, they may be removed atany time by their parents. The sum paid for education andmaintenance is not adequate for their support, and yet is sohigh as to limit essentially the number of pupils which the institutionactually receives. In the spring of 1836 there werethirty-three in the school, but in the autumn, this number wasincreased to sixty-six, by the pupils sent by the commissionersof woods and forests and by societies. The buildings can, however,furnish accommodation for upwards of one hundred. Theschool has educated, since its establishment, one hundred andknow that I have been ever more impressed with a sense of philanthropic exertion,than by a visit to Lough Ash.• To establish the schools, one hundred and sixteen shares of one hundredand twenty five dollars each were subscribed by different companies and individuals,and six thousand dollars were subsequently subscribed for the erectionof the buildings at Templemoyle. Various other donations and annual subscriptionshave been made.♦ About fifty doUarB per annum, ($48.66.)AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL OP TEMPLEMOYLE. 313seventy-eight youths, from different parts of Ireland and fromScotland.The direction is vested in a committee of the subscribers.The immediate control is divided between the agriculturalmaster, or farmer, vv^ho regulates the agricultural labours,the school-master, who divides the time of the pupils with thefarmer, and the matron, who has charge of the domestic economyof the establishment, under the direction of the farmer andinstructor. A working-gardener has lately been added, and apiece of ground laid off to be cultivated by the pupils under hisdirection.At half past five the pupils rise, arrange their rooms, saytheir prayers, and, in two divisions, which alternate on differentdays, are engaged until eight in study, or in work; half the pupilsare with the farmer, and half under the school-master,except on extraordinary occasions, when the services of all arerequired for the farm, or the season releases them from theiragricultural duties. At eight they breakfast, and arc free untilnine; work and attend school, in alternate divisions, from nineuntil one. Dine at one, and have recreation until two. Fromtwo to six, are at work and in school alternately. From six toseven, sup and have recreation. From seven to nine, preparethe lessons for the next day, have prayers, and retire at nine.On Sundays they attend their respective places of worship, andoccupy a part of the remainder of the day in religious reading.The intellectual instruction consists in spelling, reading, grammar,geography, arithmetic, writing, and book-keeping, withsome elementary and practical geometry, and trigonometry.The farmer gives lectures also in the evening, upon the theoryof agriculture. It is intended to introduce lectures on botanyand agricultural chemistry.The practice includes all the operations of farming, under thedifferent approved systems, the rearing of cattle, the managementof a dairy, and, in general, the incidental as well as thedirect occupations of the farmer or agricultural labourer. Thehead farmer, or agricultural master, is expected to explain theprinciples of the work in which the pupils are engaged, and to814 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.take opportunities for incidental instruction. The operationswhich he is specially called upon, in the regulations of the committee,to teach, are, ploughing and the setting of the plough,the use of farming instruments in general, the qualities of stockand modes of recognising them, the treatment and managementof dairy and farming stock, the making and repairing offences,the rotation of crops and those best adapted to differentvarieties of soils, the modes of draining, reclaiming, and improvinglands, and the most recent inventions and improvementsin agricultural implements. The farmer takes those whoare sufficiently advanced in knowledge and age to be benefitedthereby, to the fairs, to assist in the sale of the products of thefarm and stock.The pupils are divided, for work, into sections, each of whichhas its monitor, or chief, and consists of eight or ten boys.The-head monitor, or superintendent, has the control of them,in the absence of the master, and arranges with him the distributionof their time, takes an account of the stock, and of the productsof the labour, and advises with the master in regard tothe farm, in such a way as to prepare himself for actual superintendence.This place is occupied by the elder pupils in rotation.The farm consists of one hundred and thirty-three acres,* ofwhich one hundred and twenty-five are arable land. It is workedso as to present examples of the most approved rotation ofcrops, the fields embraced in the same series of shifts lying adjacentto one another. The whole is drained by under-grounddrains, according to the Scottish system, and is well enclosedwith different fences as specimens, and trials of the variouskinds. The house is substantially built, and contains a schoolroom,refectory, dormitories, sitting-room, and apartments forthe masters, all arranged in the plainest manner, with the outhousesproper for a farm. The garden is laid out for vegetateA plot of the ground, as surveyed by the pupils, and drawn by one of thenumber, was presented to me, showing the details of the arrangement, and theramification of its parts. Tho construction of this drawing was one of trio practicalexercise of tho class.HA ]^ Bal LABOUR SCHOOL AT EALING. 315tables, fruits, and flowers, and portions have been sown withthe various grasses, to exemplify their growth and uses.The discipline of the school is believed to be good, and to beadministered with little difficulty. It depends mainly upon theadministration of a code of rules by the two masters and matron,and is, therefore, essentially different in spirit from thatof the Swiss rural schools. The scale of the institution is also,in all respects, larger, and the character of the education approachesmuch nearer to that appropriate for a school for specialinstruction, as does also the age of the pupils at admission.These circumstances should, of course, modify materially thesystem, even if the character of the pupils was the same.The domestic economy is simple, and the fare substantial, butvery plain. It is remarkable that, with the simplicity of thelife, and the age of many of the pupils, some of them beingquite men, this school has not yet managed to support itself,even including in the account the payment made by the pupils.It still requires the aid of subscriptions, which, however, aresecured to it by a conviction of the general benefits resultingfrom it. The highest testimony to the usefulness of the pupilswho have been educated here, is borne by those who have employedthem in their service.MANUAL LABOUR SCHOOL AT EALING.There have been, of late years, many independent efforts indifferentparts of England to establish schools upon principlesbetter adapted to the wants of the labouring agricultural classesthan the ordinary day schools. An attempt was made, in 1833,to form a society,* the object of which was the establishment ofa model school for industrial schools for the peasantry, and theunion with it of a school for the education of teachers for similarestablishments. The attempt was unsuccessful in referenceto the society, but a benevolent lady undertook to carry out theplan, in regard to the model school, at her own expense. TheSee an excellent memoir on Industrial Schools for the Peasantry, in thefirst publication of the Central Society of Education in London, by Mr. Duppa,secretary of the society.816 General EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.new school was established at Ealing, a village about five milesfrom London. It was intended to combine manual labour,chiefly gardening, with instruction in the usual elementarybranches, but to introduce the later improvements in the modesof elementary teaching. The task of finding a master capableof filling such a place was obviously no easy one, and thenecessity for employing a teacher imbued with the routine spiritof the common village schools, has, no doubt, retarded the developmentof the plan. I saw enough during my visit to thisschool to be persuaded that, when in full operation, according tothe original idea, its results must be of considerable importance,and that even in its present imperfect state, the school is highlybeneficial to the rural district in which it is situated. It is anattempt to adapt the spirit of the Swiss rural schools to the circumstancesof the English peasantry. " Its leading principlesare, that the children should early acquire habits of patient industry; that they should be acquainted with the value of labour,and know the connexion between it and property ; that theyshould have intelligence, skill, and an acquaintance with theobjects by which they are surrounded; that the higher sentiments,the social and moral part of their being, should receivea full development"*Habits of industry are promoted by labouring in the gardenattached to the school-house. This is divided, one portionbeing reserved for the use of the school, another being subdividedinto small gardens for the boys. The pupils work inthe first under monitors, and receive a compensation in proportionto the useful results of their labour. The second they hireat fixed rates, and dispose of the produce as they please, alwaysreceiving, however, the market price for it from theschool, if they choose to dispose of it there. The youngerchildren are not allowed to undertake gardens on their ownaccount, but work for others or for the establishment. Partnershipsare sometimes formed among them for the more advantageouscultivation of larger pieces of ground. At the pesSee the article before referred to, and which is official.MANUAL LABOUR SCHOOL AT EALING. 317riot of my visit, the gardens were planted with vegetables andflowers, and many of them tastefully arranged. All exhibitedan appearance of neatness, and during the hours of workthe renters appeared busily occupied. The best order reignedamong all the children. An occasional simple song was sungin the group who were working for the school, under the directionof a monitor. The master directs the whole, and tohis suggestions they are indebted for many improvements; it istheir privilege to resort to his counsel in cases of difficulty. Theschool furnishes the working-tools, which for the youngestchildren are merely a hoe and rake. They have also in-doorwork for bad weather, consisting of carpentry, the making ofwooden shoes, &c. 1 was told that the room for containing theirgardening-tools, where there is also a trough for washing, hadbeen fitted up by the pupils, and they have shown considerableingenuity in the repairs of the out-houses attached to the school,and have even entirely constructed one of them. In thebeginning a gardener was employed to teach the boys, but thisis now done by the master and monitors. An account currentwith each pupil is kept, in which he is charged with the rent ofhis ground, and the seeds and plants which he has purchasedfrom the stock, and credited with the produce which he hassold to the school. Some of the pupils have a considerablesurplus on the credit side at the end of the year; one lad isstated to have gained nearly ten dollars from a sixteenth of anacre ;* another, of thirteen, to have gained nearly five dollarsand a-half, from the gardening between March and November;another, of fourteen, five dollars; and a third, of eleven, the samesum. It is the duty of the master so to arrange that the pupilsmay not lose, unless by providential circumstances; notto intrust, for example, a youth with the charge of a gardenbefore his capability to manage it is sufficiently proved; andnot to allow extravagances or glaringly injudicious measureson the part of the little gardeners. The tendency of theseThey pay six cents per month to the school as rent for this quantity ofground.818 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.measures is, incidentally to train to habits of respect for property,of honesty, fair dealing, and mutual assistance, quite asvaluable as those of industry. The time employed in manuallabour by the elder pupils is three hours, and to this is addedthree hours and a-half of intellectual instruction. The youngerboys are four hours and a-half in school. It would be unfair tocompare a school, where the pupils have been so recentlybrought under instruction, with others of longer standing; henceI would only remark, that the theory of the intellectual instructionwas much better than its practice, and express the opinionthat the same enlightened superintendence which has accomplishedso much, will probably work out satisfactorily all thedetails of the plan. The mechanical parts of a new projectare always more easily realized than the intellectual. Whenthe young men now training up as teachers in this schoolshall, in their turn, come to improve the practice which theywitness, there can be little doubt of the success of the intellectualdepartment. The greatest novelty is that which has alreadyproved successful.LA Martinique SCHOOL OF LYONS.This school was founded in pursuance of the will of a citizenof Lyons, M. Martin, who left the French army while in Syria,went to India, and entered the service of one of the nativeprinces. He acquired a very large fortune, and at his deathleft a considerable portion of it to found three charitable institutions,two in India and one at Lyons. The war with Englandprevented, for a time, the acquisition, by the city of Lyons,of their portion of this legacy, which, when it came into thetreasury, amounted to more than four hundred thousand dollars.With this the municipal council determined to found aschool for the working classes, and that its benefits might beextended as widely as possible, made a day school of it. Thechief object of the institution is to train up an educated classof workmen for the manufactories. The arrangement of thecourses has been governed by two principles, the first, to fulfilthe object just stated; the second, to avoid the danger of Martinique SCHOOL OF LYONS. 319feating it by over education. Pupils enter at the age of ten,and the elementary attainments in language which they mayhave made before admission, are rather kept up than extended.Thorough scientific courses, form the basis of further education,giving them entirely a practical turn, and studiously avoidingthe speculative. The experience of the school, which hasbeen in full activity only five years, is not yet sufficient to showhow far the plan will attain the ends proposed ; but it affords atpresent some of the best illustrations of exact teaching of sciencewhich I have ever seen. In regard to these I shall enter intosome particulars, prefacing them by a general notice of theestablishment.The school is governed by trustees, chosen by the municipalityof the city of Lyons, and constituting a board, whichregulates all the concerns of the institution, and appoints itsofficers. The trustees choose committees from among thecitizens to attend the examinations and to distribute the prizesfor excellence in the different departments. The selection ismade from those who are supposed best acquainted with thebranch under examination.Pupils are admitted between ten and fourteen years of age,and remain two, or in special cases, three years. They areexpected to be familiar with the studies of the primary schoolsbefore entering.The course of instruction is divided into two parts, the firstgeneral, the second special. The general course consists ofmathematics, drawing, writing, and French, the last two namedbeing intended merely to keep up the attainments made in theprimary schools. The special courses are of chemistry andweaving. These latter are not obligatory; the choice as towhether the pupil will pursue one or other of them, or not, beingleft with his parents. The object of restricting the coursesof writing and French, is to prevent the tendency to leave themore laborious occupations, towards which the institution woulddirect its pupils, for situations as clerks, &c.The course of mathematics extends through the two years.320 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.and embraces arithmetic, algebra to quadratic equations, practicalgeometry, descriptive geometry, an mechanical problems.There are two classes, each under a professor, whois assisted by a "repeater" (repetition), to go over the lessons,and to exercise the pupils in examples. I have not seen thesimultaneous method of instruction so well practised elsewhereas in the course of mathematics of the higher class. Eachpupil had a small black-board, on which he wrote with preparedchalk, and at a word from the professor the question waswritten down, and its results shown, after solution. The rapidityand accuracy of the solutions,* and the large proportion of theclass who were able to solve the questions, showed that theyhad been thoroughly taught, and the best possible order resultedfrom the manner of executing the class movements together, atthe word of command. To construct in space the problems ofdescriptive geometry, relating to the right line and plane, eachpupil had a small tablet of wax, and rods of wire of differentlengths. All the introductory definitions, as well as the problems,were required to be illustrated by these contrivances,and the problems themselves to be constructed in space beforerecourse was had to projections. As an introduction to thisexercise, the propositions in the fifth book of Legendre'sgeometry are constructed in a similar manner. The pupilsare engaged in their mathematical studies two hours a-daywith a professor, and two hours with a " repeater," or undermonitors from the class.The course of drawing also occupies two years. The pupilsdraw altogether from models, beginning, as in the Prussian• Among the questions were these : — The cube root of 3.333 to three placesof decimals, was found in three and a-half minutes. The radius of a sphere of532 cubic centimetres in capacity, was found in three-quarters of a minute. Thecapacity of a sphere was given at 513 cubic centimetres, and its specific gravityat 19, the weight was found in three and a-half minutes. In the equations 2a: — 4y■i20, and 3a:-|-5y=50, the values of a: and y were found in three minutes. Theoondcnaer of a steam engine being supposed to contain 3.25 kilogrammes ofsteam, required the quantity of water at 4° C, to reduce the steam to 25° C, thisquestion waa solved in two minutes.LA MARTIN here SCHOOL OF LYONS. 321method, with the most simple forms, going into the delineationof complex machinery, and making projections as well as perspectivedrawings. They begin upon slates, but soon learn todraw upon paper. In general, instruments are not used, evenwhen they come to machine drawing. When I visited theschool, a part of the upper class was engaged in completingthe perspective of a model of a steam engine, for an approachingcompetition for places. The results of this course also appearedto me very satisfactory. These lessons occupy twohours every day.Chemistry is taught practically in the laboratory, and atan hour (from seven to a quarter past eight, A. M.) whichdoes not interfere with the other courses. The class is dividedinto two sections, each of which has its set of apparatus, andgoes through the preparation and execution of the principalexperiments and illustrations of a course of chemistry as appliedto the arts. They are particularly exercised in the chemistryof dyeing and bleaching. The facility in the detectionof mineral salts, which the pupils in general displayed, showedthe efficiency of this method. Habits of observation and exactness,as well as skill in manipulation, are gained by theinstruction.Weaving is taught theoretically as well as practically, withspecial reference to the silk manufacture. Whoever has becomeacquainted with the use of the Jacquard loom, will seethat there is abundance of room for calculation in regard to itscombinations. There are several looms, to afford opportunityfor practical exercise. This branch, also, is taught at an hour(half past five to seven, P. M.) which does not interfere withthe other instruction.There is also a course of exercise in the manipulations ofphysics, the institution possessing, besides an extensive collectionof apparatus and of models of machines, a number of small setsof the commoner apparatus for the use of the pupils. Writing:and French occupy one hour every day.The manner in which all these courses are taught, make922 OEIfERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.them more really valuable, as a means of general mental cultivation,than might at first be supposed, from the limited rangeof the subjects. The resources of intellect, knowledge, andgeneral manual dexterity, furnished by them, must be of incalculablevalue in the particular callings for which the pupils areeducated.IiSEMINARIES FOR PRIMARY TEACHERS. 323CHAPTER IXSEMINARIES FOR THE EDUCATION OF TEACHERS FOR THEPRIMARY SCHOOLS.The influence of these establishments upon the primaryschools is so great that, though the pupils are, even on enteringthem, past the primary period in age, this seems to be an appropriateplace for the introduction of descriptions or notices ofthem. Originating in Germany, they have been gradually improvedthere, and brought into their present condition, and havespread into Holland, France, Switzerland, and, more recently,into England, being modified only so far as to adapt them tothe circumstances of society and education in these severalcountries.The most imperfect arrangement for providing teachers is thatwhich requires an examination into merely the knowledge ofthe candidates in the branches required to be taught. This isspecially imperfect in the case of elementary instruction, wherethe knowledge required is small in amount, and where the artof teaching finds its most difficult exercise. The erroneous notion,that an individual can teach whatever he knows, is nowgenerally abandoned, and in those countries which still adhereto the old method, of depending solely upon examinations forsecuring competent teachers, examination is made not onlyof the acquirements of a candidate, but of his ability to giveinstruction. I have called this the most imperfect method,because the mere employment of a teacher, without examinationor personal knowledge of his powers, which still occurs incountries where education is neglected, does not deserve to bementioned in a discussion of the more enlightened nationalsystems.The most obvious method of acquiring practice in the art of324 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.teaching is by serving in the lower departments of a school,under the eye and direction of an experienced teacher. Accompaniedby private study, founded on previous knowledge,and by private lessons, this method may form excellent teachersof those who have particular aptitude for the profession. Consideredin the general, however, it must be admitted to have atendency to produce a routine system in teaching. The pupil-teacherimitates the methods of those with whom he is associated,and which are placed before him as models, withoutexamining their principles, or discriminating between their meritsand defects. He places great stress upon peculiar modes ofinstruction in particular branches, and when they do not succeed,attributes the fault neither to the methods nor to himself,but to the pupil. The habits of observation and reflection,which enable him to profit by experience, are not developed bythis method, and thus, though he may consider experience as amerit, it may produce none of its appropriate results in his case.Accordingly, wherever this mode of preparing teachers has beenadopted as a system, as in Holland, or has been incidental to themethod of examinations, as in Saxony, it has not stood the testof application in the schools where the modern improvementsin teaching have been introduced, much less of a comparisonwith the method of instruction in special seminaries.The most efficacious means of securing qualified teachersare to be found in the seminaries where a number of youngmen intending to become teachers are collected, receive acommon instruction in the subjects required for the grade ofschools in which they propose to teach, or revise and extendthis knowledge previously acquired, have lessons in the scienceand art of teaching, and practice the art under intelligent supervision.At first, these seminaries produced good scholars, whowere, however, deficient as teachers. Then, to remedy this defect,lectures and lessons on the science and art of teachingwere multiplied, forming good theoretical teachers, but whowere still wanting in practice, which had to be acquired afterentering their profession, and, therefore, at the expense of thefifRt pupils placed under their charge. This difficulty is entirelyStiffly ARIES FOR PRIMARY TEACHERS. 325obviated by schools attached to the seminaries, in which thetheoretical lessons may be put in practice, and where the futureteachers may observe the methods of others, try their ownskill in the art under inspection, and, finally, take part in theregular instruction.The profession of the teacher is raised into respectability bythe considerable acquirements exacted of him, and his salaryis placed upon a footing appropriate to the outlay of lime andmeans which has been made in reaching the profession. It isa mistake to suppose that the low salaries given in somecountries, as in Prussia, for example, indicate that a low estimateis placed upon the station of the teacher; the very reverse isthe fact in the particular country mentioned, and the salarywill be found adapted to the scale of expenditure of the country,and to the general style and cost of living.When education is to be rapidly advanced, seminaries forteachers afford the means of securing this result. An eminentteacher is selected as director of the seminary, and by the aidof competent assistants, and while benefiting the communityby the instruction given in the schools attached to the seminary,trains, yearly, from thirty to forty youths in the enlightenedpractice of his methods; these in their turn become teachersof schools, which they are fit at once to conduct without thefailures and mistakes usual with novices; for, though beginnersin name, they have acquired, in the course of the two or threeyears spent at the seminary, an experience equivalent to manyyears of unguided effort. This result has been fully realizedjn the success of the attempts to spread the methods of Pestalozziand others through Prussia. The plan has been adopted,and is yielding its appropriate fruits in Holland, Switzerland,France, and Saxony, while in Austria, where the method ofpreparing teachers by their attendance on the primary schoolsis still adhered to, the schools are stationary, and behind thoseof Northern and Middle Germany.These seminaries produce a strong esprit de corps amongteachers, which tends powerfully to interest them in their profession,to attach them to it, to elevate it in their eyes, and to826 GEWERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.Stimulate them to improve constantly upon the attainmentswith which they may have commenced its exercise. By theiraid a standard of examination in the theory and practice ofinstruction is furnished, which may be fairly exacted of candidateswho have chosen a different way to obtain access tothe profession.Objections have been urged against seminaries for teachers,which apply rather to a defective organization than to the systemitself. First, that the youths issuing from them being over-taught,are, in consequence, dissatisfied with their duties, and leavethe profession to push themselves forward in a different careerof life; and, second, that theoretical, not practical teachers, areformed by them. The first objection points out the necessity forrestricting the instruction to that which is essential to a completefulfilment of the duties of the teachers educated in these schools.The seminary should not go further, and hence the connexionof such establishments with secondary or other higher schoolsis inadmissible. If the tendency of a seminary course is torender the teacher dissatisfied with his occupation, experienceshows that it is a fault in the particular course, the defect notbeing general to this class of institutions. That a pupil oftalent may seek other and more congenial roads to station inlife, is no reproach to the seminary where he was educated.The institution secures the services of this pupil to primary instructionby his pledge at entrance, for a number of years, inreturn for the education which he has received, and has sofarbenefited the community. If by any means it preventsthe individual from rising to the position where his talentswould place him, an act of positive injustice is committed.Not only the instruction, however, but the whole plan of livingin the seminary should be adapted to the future destination of thepupil, and indulgences should not be allowed which would producewants not subsequently to be gratified ; such is, in fact, thevery system of all properly regulated institutions of this class.That mere theoretical teachers are formed in well conductedseminaries, is by no means the fact. Every care, on the contrary,is taken to avoid this : it is true, that general principlesSEMINARIES FOR PRIMARY TEACHERS IN PRUSSIA. 827are inculcated, in order that routine in teaching may be avoided,but these principles are constantly applied, and under circumstanceswhere error is sure to be pointed out by the observationof class-mates and teachers, and where it can hardly escapecorrection.The question, whether the pupils of these schools shouldreside, in common, in the buildings, or board apart from eachother, and merely come together to receive instruction, appearsto me not to admit of a general solution applicable to everycase. The manners and habits of a country, and even thelocality of the school, will render one or other method preferablein a particular case. Thus, I have no doubt that the arrangementsof the seminaries at Weissenfels and at Berlin, inPrussia, at Haarlem in Holland, at Versailles in France, and atZurich in Switzerland, though they differ from each other areall adapted to the countries and particular localities where theinstitutions are established. It will be my object to make sucha selection from among the best schools of this class which Ivisited, as will show some of their principal varieties. Thegeneral statistics in regard to them have been given in theintroductory remarks upon the systems of primary instruction inthe different countries, and need not, therefore, be presented here.PRIMARY NORMAL SCHOOLS OF PRUSSIA.Of the very interesting schools for the education of primaryteachers in Prussia, I visited several, namely, those at Mers, inthe Rhenish provinces, of Weissenfels and Erfurt in the provinceof Saxony, and of Potsdam and Berlin in the province ofBrandenburghh. These are all of the class called "principalnormal schools." The " small normal schools" are exclusivelyfor the education of country teachers, and present, on a diminishedscale, and with incomplete means, the same general principleswith the others.There is no general code of regulations for the normalschools, the practice being to select some teacher of knownmerit and tried skill for the head master or director of the institution,and to leave the organization to him, under the con-sesGENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.trol of the provincial authorities. I have selected, as representingthis class, an institution in which the pupils live incommon, and another in which they board out of the school.It would be more agreeable to me to give the particulars collectedin each of those which I visited, but this would be impossiblewithin the limits of my Report. I can truly say of thisclass of institutions, that I never visited one without being interestedand instructed, and never made the acquaintance of thedirector of one of them without feeling that his place was worthilyfilled, and that it was wise to have such a man as muchuntrammelled by rules, regulations, and systems, as possible.While these institutions hold out advantages to young menintending to become teachers, other avenues to the professionare not closed by them ; on the contrary, all who can stand therequired examinations may enter this career. Every year anexamination is held at every "principal seminary" for those whointend to leave it, and of other candidates for admission to theteachers' profession. This examination takes place in presenceof the teachers, of one or more commissaries named by theprovincial school-board, and of a school-councillor of the regencyin which the seminary is situated. The authorities ofthe province and regency also hold, about the same time, anexamination for those who have studied at the universities,frequently candidates in theology, who intend to become teachersin the primary schools. The director of the seminary formsone of this board.* The law requires that those who haveappeared feeble at this trial, shall be examined three yearssubsequent thereto.The examinations are of three kinds: in writing, viva voce,and by practical exercises of teaching. The written examinationof candidates from the seminary, and of others who havenot passed through a gymnasium, consists in answering someten or twenty questions in history, geography, natural philosMinisterial orders of June, 1826, and March, 1827, quoted by Dr. HarnischIn hi account of the seminary at Weissenfels (Das Weissenfelser Schullchrerseminary and seine httlfsanstalten, 1838,) to which I am indebted for the accountof the examinations.SEMINARIES FOR PRIMARY TEACHERS OF PRUSSIA. 829Sophy, natural history, arithmetic, and from the Bible. Besideswhich they set a bass to an air given for the purpose, and executea drawing. The character of the handwriting appearsfrom the exercises. The viva voce examination embraces theGerman language, reading, mental arithmetic, geometry, theart of teaching, and the reading of music. The exercise inteaching consists in giving a catechetical lesson upon somesubject assigned by the examiner. The student-candidates(Litcraten, oder Studirten), and those examined for a secondtime, are questioned especially in regard to practical teaching.The candidates are divided, according to the results of the examination,into three classes, entirely satisfactory, satisfactory,and unsatisfactory. The subjects of examination are enumeratedas follows: 1. Christian doctrine and explanation of theBible. 2. Knowledge of the Bible and Bible history. 3. Germanlanguage. 4. Style. 5. Reading. G. Writing. 7. Mentaland written arithmetic. 8. Geometry. 9. Natural philosophyand natural history. 10. Hygiene and gardening. 11. Historyof the earth and its inhabitants. 12. Drawing. 13. Vocalmusic. 14. Science of teaching. 15. Readiness in teaching.Besides which are, in addition, 1. Skill in playing on theorgan. 2. Propriety in leading church music. Of the abovenamed subjects, number 15 is considered the principal; thefirst seven constitute the more important, and the last seven theless important. When a candidate has been marked "entirelysatisfactory" in all the branches, he receives a general markof the same kind; when only in 15, and the first seven branches,the general mark satisfactory. A failure in one of the moreimportant branches, would require a general remark of unsatisfactory.*The results of these examinations afford a directmeans of comparison between the young teachers educated inthe seminaries and others, and serve to stimulate both classes,and especially to point out defects where they exist in theschools for teachers.Order of the Provincial School Board, November, 1834, quoted by Dr. Harnischin his account of the seminary at Weisaenfels,GEDTSRAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.SEMINARY FOR TEACHERS AT WEISSENFELS.This seminary, for the education of teachers for the elementaryschools, is one of four belonging to the province of Saxony,*and was last organized in 1822. It combines within its premises,or in the neighbourhood, so as to be subject to the controlof the same director, the following establishments; 1. Thenormal school, or seminary for teachers, a government institution.2. A preparatory school subsidiary to the former,and established by the enterprise of its teachers. 3. A seminaryschool, or burgher school, of four hundred pupils, alreadydescribed. 4. An elementary school for poor children, of twohundred pupils. 5. A school for the deaf and dumb, of twenty-fivepupils, established in 1828, and supported by the .The last three mentioned schools afford practice tothe students of the seminary.The government of these establishments is confided to adirectors who is responsible immediately to the provincialschool-board in Magdeburg. He has the personal charge ofthe seminary in which he gives instruction, and of which hesuperintends the domestic economy, discipline, and police. Heis assisted, in the seminary, by three teachers, who meet himonce a week in conference, to discuss the progress and conductof the pupils, the plans of instruction, and other matters relatingto the school. There are also seven assistant teachers, five forthe seminary school, and two for the deaf and dumb institutionwho also assist in the seminary itself. Once, a month there isa general meeting of the teachers of all the schools just enumerated,for similar purposes.Applicants for admission are required to produce certificatesof baptism, of moral conduct, and of healths besides an engagementon the part of their parents or guardians to pay an• At Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Erfurt, and Weissenfels.t The Rev. Dr. Harnisch, to whom I am indebted for a kind welcome toinstitution, and a MS. account of its different schools.t The directions issued by the provincial authorities arc, that they shall havea thong cheat and sound lungs, not bo too near-sighted, nor deaf, nor infirmThe physician's certificate must state whether they have had the measles, &c.SEMINARY FOR TEACHERS AT WEISSENFELS. 331annual sum of fifty thalers (thirty-seven dollars) for maintenance.These papers must be forwarded to the director a fortnightbefore the day of examination. The candidates are examinedat a stated time of the year (after Easter), in presence ofall the teachers of the school, and their attainments must provesatisfactory in Bible and church history, the Lutheran Catechism,reading, writing, German grammar, especially the orthographyof the language, the ground-rules of arithmetic(mental and vv^ritten), geography and history, and natural historyand philosophy, of the grade of the highest class of aburgher school. They must also be able to play, at sight, easypieces of music upon the violin. The usual age of admissionis eighteen, and the lowest at which they are admissible, seventeen.On entrance they are entitled to free lodging and instruction,and if their conduct and progress are satisfactory, ingeneral, receive a yearly allowance of twenty-five dollars,which is equivalent, nearly, to the cost of their maintenance.Their clothing and school-books are provided by the pupils.The modes of preparation judged most appropriate by theauthorities of the seminary are, the attendance on a burgherschool, with private lessons from a competent teacher, or entranceinto the preparatory establishment at Weissenfels. Agymnasium is considered by no means a proper place for thepreparation of pupils, its courses, discipline, and mode of lifehaving a different tendency from that required by the futureteacher of a common school.The admission of new pupils takes place with some ceremony,in presence of the teachers and pupils. The directorgives a charge, in which he makes them acquainted withthe rules of the school, chiefly those relating to moral conduct,to obedience to the authorities, punctuality, regular attendanceat study, school, church, and, in general, on the appointedexercises, due exertion, neatness in their habits, andexactness in the payment of dues to the tradesmen with whomthey may deal. They bind themselves to serve for three yearsafter leaving the school, in whatever situation may be assignedthem by the regency of Merseburg, or to pay the cost of their332 GEIfERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.education and maintenance. During their stay at the seminary,they are exempted from military service, except for six weeks;in fact, this service usually takes place at leaving the school,and before entering upon their new career. The number ofpupils, on the average, is sixty.The courses of instruction are, morals and religion, German,arithmetic and geometry, cosmology, pedagogy, terraculture,hygiene, theory and practice of music, drawing, and writing.Cosmology is a comprehensive term for geography, an outlineof history and biography, the elements of natural history andnatural philosophy, all that relates to the world (earth) and itsinhabitants. Pedagogy includes both the science and art ofteaching. The courses just enumerated are divided among themasters, according to the supposed ability of each in the particularbranches, the whole instruction being given by the fourteachers. The director, as is customary in these schools, takesthe religious instruction, and the science and art of teaching,as his especial province, and adds lectures on the theory offarming and gardening (terra culture), and of health.The duration of the course of studies has been reducedfrom three years to two, on account, as is alleged, of the necessityfor a more abundant supply of teachers. There are,probably, other reasons, such as the expense, and the fearof over-educating the pupils for their station, which have beeninfluential in bringing about this reduction. There are twoclasses corresponding to the two years of study. The firstyear is devoted entirely to receiving instruction, and in the second,practice in teaching is combined with it. In the preparatoryschool there is likewise a course of two years, and thepupils are divided into two classes. This establishment is inabuilding near the seminary, which can accommodate fortypupils, and is under the special charge of one of the teachers.*The outline of the studies in the two schools is as follows :• The payments made by the pupils arc, per animi, for instructions, nine dol-ure;for dinner, bread not included, thirteen dollars and fifty cents; lodging,throe dollars, wailing and nursing in time of sickness, one dollar and seventy-fivecent; u»c of library, fifty cents.Seminary FOR TEACHERS AT WEISSENFELS. 333Religious Instruction,PREPARATORY SCHOOL.II Class. Bible stories, which the pupils must be able to narrate with propriety.Christian doctrine. Portions of Scripture committed to memory. Fourhours weekly.I Class. Reading the Bible, especially the historical parts. Krumraacher'sBible Catechism. Christian doctrine. Parables of the New Testament. Sevenhours.In the lectures on Christian doctrine, which the two classesof the normal school attend together, the director gives a portionof Scripture to be committed to memory, explains andillustrates it, and interrogates the pupils, who take notes of thelecture, which they subsequently write outNORMAL SCHOOL.II Class. Reading the Bible, particularly the historical parts ; writing catecheticalexercises, adapted to children. Two hours.I Class. Continuation of the second class course. Two hours.I and II Class. Christian doctrine, from Luther's Catechism. Three hours.History of the different dispensations. Two hours. A course of two years.The course of church history is taught, also, by the mixedmethod of lecture and interrogation, to both classes united.German Language.PREPARATORY SCHOOLII Class. Exercises of speech in reading and delivery. Descriptions andessays on subjects drawn from common life. Grammar. Writing as an exercisein calligraphy and orthography. Nine hours.I Class. Reading, with explanations. Composition. Grammar revised.Writing, as in the second class. Nine hours.NORMAL SCHOOL.II Class. Reading, with explanations. Writing, as an exercise of calligraphyand orthography. Exercises of style. A composition once every month.Essays from history, geography, or natural history. Grammar revised. Eighthours.I Class. Poetry, with readings. Calligraphy. Exercises of style. Grammarrevised. National literature. Seven hours.The first and second classes are united for a portion of instruction in this department,intended to rid them of provincialisms of speech, and to improvetheir handwriting. Three hours.334 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD*Mathematics.PREPARATORY SCHOOL.II Class. Arithmetic, including the Rule of Three. " Three hours.I Class. Arithmetic, revised and extended. Use of compass and ruler. Foihours.NORMAL SCHOOL.II Class, (geometry, commenced. Four hours,I Class. Revision of previous studies. Geometry, continued. Two hours.The method of teaching mathematics is that of Pestalozzi;and director Harnisch has himself prepared a work on geometryfor his pupils. The applications are made to follow theprinciples closely. As in the other courses, the greater partof the learning is done in the school-room, the books beingused rather for reference than for preparation. In the lessonswhich I attended in this department, much skill was displayedby the instructors, and a very considerable degree of intelligenceby the pupils. Considering it as the means of developingthe reasoning powers, this method is very far superior tothat in which the propositions are learned from books. Toexemplify the method of Dr. Harnisch, I may state the followingcase of a recitation in geometry by the second class. Theequality of two triangles, when the two sides and the angle containedbetween them in one are equal respectively to the twosides and the contained angle in the other, had been shown bythe teacher, and the demonstration repeated by the pupils, whowere interrogated closely upon it. An application of thetheorem was at once required, to determining the distancebetween two points, one of which is inaccessible. Two of theclass found the solution immediately, and all were able to takepart in the subsequent discussion of the problem.Cotmology^ (Weltkunde.)PREPARATORY SCHOOL.II Class. Elements of botany and zoology. Excursions for practical instructionin the former. Four hours.I Class. Geography and the drawing of maps. Elements of physics and technology.Biography. Three hours.NORMAL SCHOOL.II Class. Revision of the above studies. Three hours.I and II Classes united. General views of the earth and its productions andSEMINARY FOR TEACHERS AT WEISSENFELS. 335inhabitants. One hour weekly for one year. Gardening and hygiene (Gesund-heitskunde). Two hours weekly for two years.The lectures in the normal school on these subjects are bythe director. The means of illustration in physics are small,and the whole course is chiefly intended to show the futureteachers how wide a range of knowledge may be opened to themby study. The natural history is illustrated for the most partby drawings. To render the seminaries more useful in theirsituation of country school-masters, which a large proportion ofthe pupils become, they have lectures on the principles of agricultureand gardening, and also practical lessons from thegardener, who has charge of the grounds. The pupils workduring the appropriate season every day in turn, under the directionof the gardener. Good manuals, conveying correct butelementary instruction on these matters, are much wanted.They should, perhaps, be prepared by a teacher, but by nomeans allowed to go into use without revision by personsspecially acquainted with the different branches of science thusgrouped together. This revision would insure the accuracywhich, though difficult to attain, is so necessary; the more soinconveying such elements, as there is no collateral knowledgeto correct or modify error as to fact or theory.Science and Art of Teaching.PREPARATORY SCHOOL.The first class receive simple directions for keeping school, and lessons onteaching. They attend in turn the classes of the seminary schools two hoursweekly, but take no part in teaching.NORMAL SCHOOL.II Class. Lessons on teaching, three hours. Visits to the schools, three hours,I Class. Lessons on the art of teaching, three hours. Visits to the schools, fivehours. Lessons on the instruction of the deaf and dumb, by the director of thatdepartment, one hour.I and II Classes united. Science of teaching, two hours.The director delivers the course on the science of teaching,which in these schools is considered of the highest importance,and also gives a portion of the lessons in the art of teachingto the first class.836 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.The theoretical instruction in the science and art of teaching embraces two courses, each of a year, the first being d<voted chiefly to education in genera], the second, to instructedand the arrangements of the school.* The director remarkof this course, that the pupils learn by it to say a good deiupon these subjects, and sometimes believe that they can easilyexecute what they can so readily describe, an opinion (which practice can alone show the error, and which it is e:central should be removed. The general theory of educationis founded upon the constitution of man, and under the leaof instruction, the methods of teaching the various branches ardescribed. The practice which must render this theory of reuseis had in part in the schools. The pupils attend the freschool, the burgher school, and the deaf and dumb school, zstated times. They go at first as listeners, next take part in thinstruction, under direction of the assistant teachers, and lastinstruct the classes. In order that they may have models cteaching, not only in the assistants, but in the teachers of thseminary themselves, the latter give lessons occasionally in thdifferent schools ; thus the director teaches one hour per weein the seminary school, the second teacher two hours, and ththird and fourth teachers four hours. The lower class attendthe several classes of the burgher school, except the highestgirls' class, remaining, in general, one fifth of the time in eacclass except the lowest, where they remain double this timeand visiting each class twice at intervals. The upper clashattend also the girls' class, the deaf and dumb school and thfree school, remaining one-eighth of their time in each of theclasses. Each member of the lower class keeps a journal ohis visits to the schools, which is inspected by the second• Harnisch's Manual of Common School Matters (Handbuch des Volks-schuwoscns) is used as a text-book.A more common division of the course is into pedagogics, or the principles ceducation and instruction. Methodius, or the art of teaching the system omethods of education, to which a third division is sometimes added, called didactic*,which relates to the subjects of education, (Schwarz Erziehung und UrUrrichta lohrc.)SEMINARY FOR TEACHERS AT VVEISSENJPELS. 337teacher. Each of the first class draws up a report of his occupationand observations in the schools, which is reviewedby the assistant teacher of the class to which it refers, and isthen examined by the second teacher and by the director.The several assistant teachers make reports upon the qualificationsof the seminaries who have given instruction in theirclasses. By these arrangements, a pupil who has the mentalqualities essential to a teacher, cannot fail to become wellversed in the practice of his profession. Habits of observationare inculcated, which must be of great service to him in hispractice, enabling him to adapt himself to the circumstances inwhich he is placed, and to profit by the experience of everyday.To exemplify the principles and methods, a small number ofthe children from the seminary school are brought into the classroomof the seminary, and are examined upon a given subjectby some of the pupils. The class present and the director maketheir notes on these examinations, and the exercise terminatesby an examination of the children by the director himself, asan exemplification of his views, and that they may not receiveinjury from being left in a half or ill-informed state on the subjectsof the lesson. The children having retired, the differentmembers of the class make their criticisms, which are acceptedor shown to be erroneous by the director, a conference or discussionbeing kept up until the subject is exhausted. The characterof each exercise is marked by the director, who is thusenabled to judge of the progress made by every member of theclass, and to encourage or admonish privately, according tocircumstances.The lectures given by the head master of the school for thedeaf and dumb are also accompanied by practice, a certainnumber of pupils being detained every day for that purpose.The basis of the method is the idea that it is possible to restorethe deaf mute to society, by enabling him to understand spokenlanguage from the motion of the lips, and to speak intelligiblyby mechanical rules. It is hoped ultimately, by training everyschool-master in this method, that the mute may be instructed in388 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.schools with other children, and thus not be required to sunderties of kindred during a long absence from home. The pupils \of the deaf and dumb institution do not live in the establishment, Ibut are boarded with tradesmen of the town of Weissenfels;the object is to induce the practice of the lessons out of school,the pupils being enjoined to avoid the use of signs. Thefirst lesson is one in articulation. The principle of this instructtion is now dominant in Germany, but up to this time the systemhas not been fairly tried by its results. The indomitableperseverance of the masters of the principal schools which Ivisited struck me with admiration, but I was not convinced ithat what they aimed at was practicable, at least to the extentwhich their principle asserts. The attempt deserves, however,the best encouragement.Drawing. jPREPARATORY SCHOOL. |The two classes united for geometrical and perspective drawing. |tNORMAL SCHOOL. !The same course continued. 'Music.iPREPARATORY SCHOOL. |The two classes united for instruction in the elements of music. Choral sing !ing. Instruction is given on the piano and organ to the pupils, divided into four jsections. They are also taught the violin.NORMAL SCHOOL. jThe instruction, as just stated, is continued. Theory of music. Composition. !The violin is taught as the means of leading the exercises insinging in the elementary schools. The piano serves as an in- ;production to the organ, a knowledge of which is important tothe Prussian school-master, as enabling him to act as organistin the church of the parish where his school may be situated.So high a value is placed upon an elementary knowledge invocal music, that an ability to give instruction in it is indispensableto admission into the class of teachers. It is not, therefore, 'surprising that the pupils of the seminaries in general are proficientin music. I confess, however, that I was not prepared 'SEMINARY FOR TEACHERS AT WEISSENrELS. 330for the advance in the theory and practice to which many ofthe first class in this school had attained. In regard to theformer, I was present at one of the exercises in composition,in which the teacher* read, and the pupils transcribed threestanzas of poetry. This done, they were required to composean air adapted to the words. In less than ten minutes a fifthof the class were ready. The teacher took his station at ablack-board, on which the ledger lines were drawn, and one ofthe pupils whom he designated began to sing the words to theair which he had composed, the teacher writing the musicmeanwhile. This air was pronounced not to be original. Asecond was tried, which the teacher thought an imitation. Athird and fourth he accepted, and wrote upon the board. Theywere criticised by both the class and teacher, set to parts bythe former, and sung. The two classes were in the next hourunited for choral singing, in which many are proficient, theteacher leading at the organ.The course of drawing is limited in extent, the object beingchiefly to give opportunities to those pupils who have a tastefor drawing to cultivate it. In fact, as it tends to divert attentionfrom more important matters, which the short time spentat the seminary requires entire devotion to, it is not much encouraged.The four teachers attached to the normal school have chargeof specific departments of labour, as well as of particular implementsof instruction. The director has the general superintendenceof the instruction, discipline, household arrangements,and finance, and is librarian of their small collection.The second teacher has charge of one of the schools, of the musicalexercises, books, and instruments ; a third, of the studentswhen assembled, especially in the school-house, and of the drawings,copy-slips for writing, and maps. The fourth superintendsthe pupils while in the dwelling-house, and also at meals. Theseteachers are aided in their duties by younger ones attachedto the seminary, under the title of assistant teachers. Thedining-hall, or the recitation-rooms, serve as places of study,Mr. Herschel.^40 GElfERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.according as the pupils are in the school-house or in the dwelling,the two buildings being separated by a portion of thegrounds. The chapel, which is a neat room connected withthe school-house, serves for the music-room, as well as for thereligious exercises.The order of the day in the normal school will serve toshow how constantly these young men are employed in preparingfor the duties of their arduous profession, and yet theyappeared to me always cheerful in the performance of theirself-imposed task. In winter, the pupils rise at five, and, afterwashing and dressing, have a brief religious exercise, and studyuntil breakfast, which is at seven o'clock. Until eight there isrecreation. From eight until twelve they are in school, engagedin recitation, listening to lectures, or teaching. Fromtwelve until one they have dinner and recreation. From oneuntil five they are again in school. From five until seven orhalf past seven, in summer, there is recreation, or excursionsare made with a teacher, and then study until nine. In winterthere is recreation until six, from six to eight study, andfrom eight to nine musical exercises, one-third playing on theviolin, another on the organ or piano, and another singing. Athalf past nine in winter, and ten in summer, the pupils retire.There are prayers morning and evening. On Wednesday andSaturday they have half of the day for recreation, and in summermake excursions to collect plants or minerals. A place forgymnastic exercises is provided, and used during the hours ofrecreation.The moral education of these young men is closely attendedto. They not only receive direct religious instruction, but thebest examples are constantly before them. The chief rewardfor proficiency or good conduct is the approbation of the teachers,the principal punishment, short of dismission, their disapprobation.The director has, also, the influence resultingfrom his power to give pecuniary assistance to the meritorious,while in the school, and to secure them good places at leavingit. The greatest harmony reigns throughout the establishmentOn the evenings of Saturday, there are frequently partiesin turn among the teachers, to which the pupils are invited,SEMINARY FOR TEACHERS AT WEISSENFELS. 841and where there is usually music. Those who have acquaintancesin the town, are encouraged to visit their families, butthe places of visiting faust be known to the director.Physical education is most essential where young men, at thetime of life of these seminaries, are sedulously engaged in intellectualpursuits, and necessarily so much confined to the house.They, therefore, have gymnastic exercises or work in the fieldsor garden, or walk during those periods of the day and parts ofthe week allowed for recreation. Care is taken that, unlessindisposed, they do not remain in the house at those times,when the weather permits them to be in the open air. Thereis an infirmary for the sick, in which one of the pupils in turnacts as nurse, and a physician is called in when necessary.The school year is divided into three terms, the first from thebeginning of June until August, the second from September toChristmas, and the third from January to May. The holidaysare four weeks in August, two at Christmas, and one at Easter.During the first two named, the pupils go home to their friends.Christmas is celebrated in the school, and at the close of thefirst and second terms there are private examinations, the resultsof which are communicated to the students. At the closeof the third term, the examination for passing from the secondto the first class is held, and none are promoted from oneclass to another unless fully proficient in the courses of the pastyear. At the end of the second year, they are examined uponthe whole range of study, and in composition and orthography.Those who pass satisfactorily receive a diploma, and find nodifficulty in obtaining employment as teachers. Some of themost promising are frequently retained in the schools of the institutionas assistant teachers, under the appointment of the director.The additional experience thus gained is of importancein a professional, and ultimately in a pecuniary point of view.Every pupil, on leaving the school with a diploma, makes adrawing, or copies a piece of music or of Writing, which heleaves as a memento.The pupils of all the normal schools are bound by law toserve in such situations as may be assigned to them for threeyears, or to pay certain sums in lieu of this service.842 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.The domestic economy is superintended by the director,who has a house-keeper under his orders. Pinner is providedat a common table, but each person furnishes himself with breakfastand supper. The diet is of the plainest kind, but there ismeat for dinner every day in the week except two.* The policeof the establishment is attended to by the pupils themselves.The members of the second class, in turn, have charge of thepolice of the school-rooms, dormitories, of the lamps, of ringingthe bell, &c., or these duties are executed by those who havefallen under censure. The first class superintend the fires andout of door work, have charged the cellar, store-room, lavatory,&c. There are three dormitories, under the general superintendenceof one of the teachers, aided by pupils selected for thepurpose. The bed and bedding are furnished by the pupils atentrance. The lodging of these youths is, like their fare andclothing, of the plainest sort ; a plainness which puts in strongrelief the richness of the moral and intellectual culture affordedby the institution.!SEMINARY FOR TEACHERS OF THE CITY SCHOOLS ATBERLIN.This is one of the more recently erected seminaries, and itsobjects are declared to be — first, to educate teachers for the cityschools ; second, to enable teachers to advance in their vocation,by providing them with lectures, and with a library ; andthird, to enable candidates for the ministry to become somewhatacquainted with the art of teaching, as they are required,subsequently, to act as inspectors of the schools. The first ofthese is the main object of the institution. The teachers to befurnished are, in general, of the grade required for the burgherschools. This, with its location in the city, renders the general• The dinner costs seven dollars and fifty cents per annum, or about two centsand a-half per day. If a pupil receives no stipend from the institution, he ischarged but half this sum.t The yearly cost of this institution is but about twenty-eight hundred andforty dollars. The director receives a salary of six hundred dollars, which enable*him to live very comfortably, and to maintain his proper station, on a parwith the burgher authorities, the clergyman, district judge, &c.rseminary for city teachers at Berlin*. 343plan of this school different from that already described. Thecare taken in the selection of the directors of the normal schoolsprevents the necessity for minute regulations, and does whatno regulation can, namely, infuses the proper spirit; hence,there will always be found differences in the minute details ofthese institutions, which may not, however, be essential.The director of this seminary* is also the head of the schoolof practice attached to it, and already described. There are,besides him, eight teachers for both the school and seminary.The pupils of the latter are about fifty in number.The pupils generally Hve out of the seminary, there beingaccommodations but for sixteen or eighteen within the buildings.It is an important question, whether the method of boarding thepupils in or out of the house shall be adopted in these institutions,and I believe that it has been rightly solved, both at Weissand here, adopting in the former school the method ofcollecting the pupils, and in the latter, of allowing them todwell apart.The conditions for admission are nearly those, as to certificates,age, and qualification, of the Weissenfels school, takingas the standard of qualification the attainments of pupils fromthe preparatory department. Thus, eighteen years is the generalage of admission, and the applicants must present to theschool-board of the province certificates of baptism, of havingattended the first communion, of having attended school, of moralconduct, of good health, and that their parents or guardianswill support them while at the seminary. The candidates are expectedto be prepared for examination on the principal parts ofthe Bible and the chief truths of Christianity, and to be acquaintedwith some of the principal church songs; to express themselvescorrectly in words and in writing, and to have a good knowledgeof the etymology of the German language; to understandthe ground rules of arithmetic, proportions, and fractions, andthe elements of form in geometry, to possess a competent knowledgeof geography and history, to know the use of mathematicalinstruments, and to have an elementary knowledge ofDr. Diesterweg.344 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.music. The school does not professedly maintain any pupilwhile receiving instruction, but assists sore of those of thesecond year who are meritorious, and makes a further advanceto those of the third year who have shown themselves worthyof their calling.*The courses are of three years' duration, of which the firstis entirely occupied with revising and extending the attainmentsof the pupil; the second is, in part, devoted to teaching, butunder the inspection of tliS^ director, and the third is mainlyfilled up with teaching in the school attached to the seminaryor others of the city. This arrangement is intended, first, tosecure a due amount of scholarship on the part of the pupils, andnext, to make practical teachers of them. The first essays intheir art are made under close supervision, and subsequently,the independent teaching affords them opportunities for comparingthe theoretical principles which are inculcated in the lecturesat the seminary with their daily observation, and thecommunication of their remarks in meetings with the directorgives them the advantage of his experience in guiding theirobservation.The scope of the instruction here does not differ essentiallyfrom that at Weissenfels, the subjects being reproduced in adifferent form. The following table gives the names of thebranches, with the time occupied in each of the classes, thethird class being the lowest. The course of each class is a yearin duration.The hours of duty are from seven in the morning until noon,and from two in the afternoon until four for the second andthird classes, with few exceptions. The first class receivetheir instruction from half past five until half past seven in theevening, except on Wednesday and Saturday. Wednesday is ahalf-holiday for the lower classes, as well as Saturday.The religious instruction is given by a clergyman. Thephysical education is left much to the discretion of the young• ThU may amount to sixty dollars yearly. The boarders at the schoolpay but three dollars and thirty-seven cents per quarter for their lodging. Anentrance fee of twelve dollars is paid, which exempts the pupil from furthercharges for instruction.SEMINARY FOR CITY TEACHERS AT BERLIN.men, at least in case of those who live out of the seminary. Theschool is deficient, as the one already described, in the meansof illustrating the courses of natural philosophy and natural history,but the pupils may have access to the natural history collectionsof the university.Table of the distribution of time among the different employments at theBerlin Seminary.SUBJECTS OF STUDY, &c.Pedagogy, - - -Practice, - . - -Religious Instruction,Theory of Music, -Vocal Music, - -German Language,Reading, . . - -Arithmetic, - - -Geometry, - - -Geography, - - -History,Zoology, . -Mineralogy, - - -Physics, ^ - - -Drawing, - - - .Writing, - - - -Playing the Violin, -HOURS PER WEEK.TSaV.M^46 General Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.The method of instruction, as in the other school, is mainlyby lecture, with interrogations. The inductive system is followedin the mathematical branches. The works of the directoron these subjects enjoy a high reputation, and are inuse in many of the schools. The exercise called " practice**in the duty of the first class, is that which I have alreadydescribed, where the pupil gives instruction under the eyeof his class-mates and of the director, and this instructionis made the matter of subsequent criticism. Here the seminariesthemselves act as pupils, receiving supposed lessonsfrom one of their class, while at Weissenfels, pupils from theseminary class are called in. This latter plan appears to meto have great advantages over the one adopted here, which,however, is used, I believe, only in the case of the first class,who receive lessons at times when the schools are not in session.PRIMARY NORMAL SCHOOL AT Harlem.This school, which has been already referred to in the chapteron primary instruction in Holland, is peculiar in regard toinstruction, practice in teaching, and discipline. It is intended toprepare for at least the second grade among primary teachers,which, it will be remembered, qualifies for the mastership ofany primary school, the first class being an honorary grade.The age of admission, the time of continuance, and the coursesof instruction, are regulated accordingly.The director* is the head of the institution, and controlsabsolutely all its arrangements. His principle, that a teacherin such a place should be left to study the character and dispositionsof his pupils, and to adapt his instruction and disciplineto them, dispenses with rules and regulations, or constitutesthe director the rules To carry out this principle• Mr. Prince, to whom I have already referred as one of a class of teacherswho adorn this profession in Holland.t When M. Cousin, in his visit to Haarlem, invited Mr. Prince to comiimni>cato to lii the regulations of his school, and then to show him how they werecarried out, first the rule, tlicn the result, the director replied, ♦' I am the rule."normal school at harlem. d47requires that the school should not be numerous, and it is accordinglylimited to forty pupils. There is an assistant to thedirector, who shares in the general instruction with him, andupon whom the religious teaching of the pupils specially devolves.The school is visited periodically by the inspector-general,who examines the pupils personally, and notes their generaland individual proficiency.To be admitted, a youth must be over fifteen years of age,and have passed an examination upon the studies of the elementaryschool, satisfactory to a district-inspector, who recommendshim for admission. He is received on probation, and atthe end of three months, if his conduct and proficiency aresatisfactory to the director, is recommended to the ministerof public instruction, who confirms his appointment.The course of theory and practice lasts four years in general,though, if a pupil have the third lower grade of publicinstruction in view, which is attainable at eighteen years of age,he is not required to remain connected with the institution beyondthat age, and indeed may leave it, on his owen responsibility,before the close of the regular course. The secondgrade is only attainable at the age of twenty-two, and hence itis not usual for pupils to enter this school as early as the lawpermits. The theoretical instruction is composed of a reviewand extension of the elementary branches, as the Dutch language,geography, arithmetic, elementary geometry, the historyof the country, natural history, religion, writing, and vocal music,and also of general geography and history, natural philosophy,and the science and art of teaching. This is communicated inthe evenings, the pupils meeting at the school for the purpose.During the day they are occupied in receiving practical instruction,by teaching under the inspection of the director inthe elementary school already spoken of, attached to the normalschool and occupying its rooms, or in teaching in someother of the elementary schools of the town of Haarlem. Theypass through different establishments in turn, so as to see avariety in the character of instruction. The director, as inspectorof primary schools in this district, visits frequently those348 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.where his pupils are employed, and observes their teaching,and also receives a report from the masters. - The observationsand reports are turned to account in subsequent meetings withhis class.The pupils do not board together in the normal school, butare distributed through the town, in certain families selected bythe director. They form a part of these families during theirresidence with them, being responsible to the head for the timeof their absence from the house, their hours, and conductThey take their meals with the families, and are furnishedwith a study and sleeping-room, fire, lights, &c. The directorpays the moderate sum required for this accommodation fromthe annual stipend allowed by government.* The efficiencyof such a system depends, of course, upon the habits of familylife of the country, and upon the locality where the school isestablished. In Holland and Haarlem the plan succeeds wellandhas the advantage that the pupils are constantly, in a degree,their own masters, and must control themselves, and thatthey are never placed in an artificial state of society or kind oflife, which is the case when they are collected in one establishment.The director makes frequent visits to these families,and is informed of the home character of his pupils.! Thediscipline of a normal school is of course one of the easiesttasks connected with it, for improprieties or levities of conductare inconsistent with the future calling of the youth. Admonitionby the assistant and by the director are the only coercivemeans resorted to, previous to dismission. The director hasauthority to dismiss a student without consulting the minister,merely reporting the fact and case to him. Though this powerThis annual stipend is ninety dollars. Supposing that a student has an entirebursary, he will require some additional funds to support him while at theschool ; for his board, lodging, &c. cost two dollars per week, which, for the forty-twoweeks of term-time, amounts to eighty-four dollars, leaving him but six dollarsfor incidental expenses.t Director Prince entirely disclaims the use of the police as aiding in the disciplineof the school, and alleges that, in attributing this to him, M. Cousin hasmisunderstood his remarks on the subject. See Cousin (m Public Instruction inHolland, Chapter on Haarlem.PRIMARY NORMAL SCHOOLS OP VERSAILLES AND DIJON. 349may bo important in increasing his influence, yet it has beennecessary to exercise it but three times in twenty years. Thereare two vacations of from four to six weeks each, during whichthe pupils, in general, return to their friends. The school hasalending-library of books relating to teaching, and of miscellaneousworks. This useful institution supplies for the primaryschools every year from eight to twelve well prepared masters,who propagate throughout the country the excellent methodsand principles of teaching here inculcated.PRIMARY NORMAL SCHOOLS OF VERSAILLES AND DIJON.Of the primary normal schools of France, first organized bythe law of 1833, I visited two, which were specially recommendedby high authority, those at Versailles and Dijon. Withcertain distinctive differences' depending upon the personalcharacter of the directors, and upon the localities, the generalsystem of these schools is the same. I propose, first, to givea sketch of the arrangement of that at Versailles, and to followthis by a notice of that at Dijon. When the normal schools ofFrance have had the same amount of experience which thoseof Germany now enjoy, a comparison can be more fairly madebetween them than at present. In France, the primary normalschools are yet in a condition of experiment, and it must besome time before the system best suited to the different parts ofthe country has been selected. The first of the above namedschools furnished, in 1837, twenty, and the second seventeenprimary teachers.The primary normal school of Versailles is for the departmentof Seine and Oise. It comprises within its ample premises*several establishments for the instruction and practiceof teachers. The school itself contains eighty pupils underregular instruction throughout the year, and furnishes a twomonths' course to adult school-masters. The establishments forpractice begin with the infant school, and rise through the primaryto the grade of primary superior. Of the elementaryUsed under a former dynasty to accommodate the hounds of Charles X.850 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.schools, one affords the young teachers an example of themethod of mutual, and another of simultaneous instruction.The primary superior school had been recently established, atthe date of my visit, in 1837. There is, besides, an eveningdepartment for the elementary instruction of adults, taught bythe pupils of the normal school, and also a school of design,which is established here rather for convenience than as properlybelonging to the range of the institution.The whole establishment is under the immediate control of adirector,* subject to the authority of a committee, and of theuniversity, the inspectors of which make regular visits. Thecommittee inspect the school by sub-committees once a month,visiting the recitation-rooms of the professors without givingspecial notice, a plan much to be preferred to that of statedvisits. If a member of a committee desires questions to be plotupon any particular points, he calls upon the professor to extendhis examination, or asks questions himself. The directorexamines the classes frequently, or is present at the lessons.There are eight professors for the various courses, and two"repeaters" (repetitions), these latter superintending the pupilswhen not with the professors, and giving them assistance ifrequired. The repeaters are responsible for the execution ofthe order of the day in the institution, and for the police, andone of them sleeps in each of the two dormitories. Some ofthe teachers in the normal school also give instruction in themodel schools, and have charge of the pupils while engaged inthe practical exercises. The domestic economy is under thecharge of the director, but he is allowed an assistant, whoactually discharges the duty of superintendence, and who hasbrought this department into most excellent ordersThere are a certain number of gratuitous places, to whichpupils are admitted by competition, those found best preparedat the examination for admission having the preference. PayMr. Lc Brun, to whose politeness I am much indebted.+ During the first year of tho institution, the fare of each student cost fifty-ninecentimes (twelve cents) per day. They had meat twice a-day, except onthe fiisU of the church.NORMAL SCHOOL OP VERSAILLES. 851pupils are also received at a very moderate rate,* but are exactlyon the same footing, in reference to the duties of the institution,with the former. Young men who wish to compete foraplace, and are not sufficiently prepared, may enter as paypupils, and thus receive instruction directly applicable to theirobject. The age of admission is, by rule, between sixteen andtwenty-one, but the former limit is considered too early for profitableentrance. The qualifications for admission consist in athorough knowledge of the subjects taught in the elementaryschools.The period of instruction is two years. The first year isdevoted to the revision of elementary studies, and the secondto an extension of them, and to theoretical and practical instructionin the science and art of teaching. The subjects ofrevision or instruction are, reading, writing, linear drawing,geography, history, the drawing of maps, morals and religion,vocal music, arithmetic, elementary physics, terra culture andpedagogy.The religious instruction is given by an ecclesiastic, who isalmoner to the school; it includes lessons on the doctrines andhistory of the church, given twice per week. Protestants arenot required to attend these lessons, but receive instruction outof the institution from a minister of their own confession.Physical education is conducted by means of exercises ingymnastics, by walks, and the practice of gardening. In summerthe pupils bathe once a week. The gymnastic exercisesare taught by the more expert pupils to the scholars of themodel schools, and appear to have taken well among them.The pupils study in a room common to all, and the degree ofattention which they pay, and their conduct, are marked, accordingto a uniform scale, by the superintending " repeater,"and reported daily to the director. Once every month the professorexamines these classes on the studies of the past month,and reports the standing. Marks are also given for great proficiencyand attention, which are reported with the standing.Five hundred francs, or about one hundred dollars, per annum.853 GEiVERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.These marks, and those of the examination, are summed up,and when they amount to a certain number for the month,the pupil is entitled to a premium. The premiums consist ofbooks uniformly bound, and accompanied by a certificate. Reportis made of these pupils to the minister of public instruction,and the record may serve them when desirous to secure aparticular place. The director assembles the school to hear anaccount of these monthly reports, and makes such remarks asthey may suggest.Besides the more usual school implements, this institution hasalibrary, a small collection of physical and chemical apparatus,of technological specimens, already of considerable interest, andof models of agricultural implements. There are, also, twogardens, one of which is laid out to serve the purposes of systematicinstruction in horticulture, the other of which containsspecimens of agricultural products, and a ground for gymnasticexercises. The pupils work by details of three at a time, underthe direction of the gardener, in cultivating flowers, fruits,vegetables, &c. They have the use of a set of carpenter's andjoiner's tools, with which they have fitted up their own libraryin a very creditable way.* In the second year they receivelectures on the science and art of teaching, and in turn give instructionin the schools, under the direction of the teachers.Their performances are subsequently criticised for their improvement.The order of the day in summer is as follows:The pupils rise at five, wash, make up their beds, and cleantheir dormitories, in two divisions, which alternate; meet inthe study-hall at half past five for prayers, breakfast, engagein studies or recitation until one; dine and have recreation untiltwo; study or recite until four; have exercises or recreation, sup,study and engage in religious reading and prayers; and retire• A carpenter who came to attend the evening classes was found by the directorBO intelligent, that he advised him to prepare for the school. The youngman succeeded in entering, at the annual competition, and subsequently, on leavingthe School, received one of trio best appointments of his year as a teacher.IIINormal school of Versailles* 353at ten, except in special cases. Before meals there is a gracesaid, and during meals one of the pupils reads aloud.In distributing the time devoted to study and recitation, anhour of study is made to precede a lesson, when the latter requiresspecific preparation; when, on the contrary, the lessonrequires after-reflection to fix its principles, or consists of alecture, of which the notes are to be written out, the study hourfollows the lesson. The branches of a mechanical natureare interspersed with the intellectual. The students of thesecond year are employed, in turn, in teaching, and are relievedfrom other duties during the hours devoted to the schools ofpractice.On Sunday, after the morning service, the pupils are free toleave the walls of the institution. The same is the case onThursday afternoon. The director has found, however, badresults from these indiscriminate leaves of absence.The discipline of the school is mild, the age and objects of thepupils being such that the use of coercive means is seldom required.The first step is admonition by a "repeater" or professor,the next a private admonition by the director. If these meansprove ineffectual, dismission follows. The director has great influence,from his personal character, and from the fact that hisrecommendation can secure a good place* to the pupil immediatelyon leaving the school. The mode of life in the institutionis very simple. The pupils are neatly but roughly dressed,and perform most of the services of police for themselves. Thedormitories are very neat. The bedsteads are of wroughtiron, corded at the bottom. During the night the clothes aredeposited in small boxes near the beds. The extra articles ofclothing are in a common room. Cleanliness of dress and personare carefully enjoined. The fare is plain, but good, andthe arrangements connected with the table unexceptionable.There is an infirmary attached to the school, which is, however,but rarely used.The best places, in point of emolument, are worth from fifteen to eighteenhundred francs (about $300 to $360).354 GENERAL EDUCATION. PRIMARY PERIOD.The schools for practice do not require special description,as their organization will be sufficiently understood from whathas already been said of primary schools, and they have notbeen long enough in operation to acquire the improved formwhich, I cannot doubt, they will receive under the present abledirector of the normal school.The primary normal school at Dijon for the departmentof Cote door, in its general organization, is the same as that atVersailles. It differs, however, in one most important particular,which involves other differences of detail. All the instruction,except of religion and music, as well as the superintendence,is under the charge of the director and a singleassistant, who, by the aid of the pupils, carry on the schools ofpractice, as well as the courses of the normal school. Thisarrangement limits the amount of instruction, and interferesvery materially with the arrangement of the studies. Theschool is conducted, however, with an excellent spirit. Anidea of the plan will be obtained from the order of the day,which also contains an outline of the course of instruction.From five to six, A. M., the pupils say their prayers, wash,&c. From six to seven the higher division has a lesson inFrench grammar. The lower receives a lesson in geographyor history alternately. From seven to eight, the higher divisionhas a lesson in geography or history alternately; thelower division in arithmetic. From eight to half past eight,breakfast and recreation. From half past eight until eleven, aportion of the higher division is employed in the primaryschools of practice, and the others are engaged in study. Fromeleven until one, writing and linear drawing for both divisions.From one until two, dinner and recreation. From two untilhalf past four, as from half past eight to eleven. Recreationuntil five. From five to six, instruction in instrumental or vocalmusic for each division alternately. From six to seven, thehigher division has a lesson in geometry or its applications, thelower division in French grammar. From seven until a quarterbefore eight, supper and recreation. From this time until nine,the higher division has a lesson in physical science or naturalNORMAL SCHOOL OP ZURICH. 355history, mechanics, agriculture, and rural economy, or bookkeeping;the lower division in reading. The last quarter ofan hour is occupied by both divisions in prayers, after whichthey retire. This order applies to all the days of the week butThursday, when, from eight to ten, the pupils receive moral andreligious instruction. From ten to eleven, instruction in theforms of simple, legal, and commercial writings, and from twoto four, engaged in the review of part of the week's studies.On the afternoon of Thursday the schools of practice are notin session.On Sunday, after the duties following their rising, the pupilsare occupied in studying and revising some of the lessons ofthe week. From nine to ten o'clock, in religious reading, aloud.At ten they go to service in the parish chapel, attended by thedirector and his assistant. Receive moral and religious instructionon their return until dinner time. After dinner, attendthe evening service, and then take a walk. In the evening,assemble for conversation on pedagogical subjects and forprayers.NORMAL SCHOOL OF THE CANTON OF ZURICH AT KUSSNACHT,NEAR ZURICH.The efforts of the cantons of Switzerland, since 1831, to extendthe benefits of popular education, have been great, andalready, to a certain degree, successful, and the adoption of thesystem of instructing teachers will insure rapid progress for thefuture. This system has been commended and enforced bythe society for public utility, the branches of which, dispersedover the cantons, with their standing committees, and the generalmeetings of the society in different parts of the confederation,give it great influence over public opinion. At its lastmeeting, an able, and I believe impartial, report upon the normalschools was read, and an interesting discussion, productiveof sound views on the subject, was elicited. Of the primarynormal schools already established, I visited those of Lausanne,356 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.the school for the canton of Vaud, Lucerne for the canton ofLucerne, Munchenbuchsee for Berne, Kiisshacht for Zurich,and Kreutzlingen for Thurgovia. Each of these has characteristicsadapting it to its location, and depending upon the viewsof the councils of education of the cantons, and upon those ofthe directors. Obliged to limit myself in this Report to a specimenof these schools, I have taken the seminary of Zurich,and the establishments connected with it, for description.The normal school at Kiissnacht is about a league from thetown of Zurich, and the buildings are prettily situated on theborders of the lake of the same name. This institution wasre-organized in 183G, though the modifications made have beenrather in the details than in general principles. It now consistsof a school for teachers, a preparatory school for this seminary,and three primary model schools. It is intended to supplyteachers for the different grades of primary schools of the canton,and during a portion of the year lectures are also deliveredin the seminary to the older teachers, who are assembled forthat purpose in their vacations.The superintendence and control of the normal school isvested by the legislative council in the council of education,who appoint a committee of superintendence from their ownbody. This committee visits the school at least once a month,attends its examinations, and, in general, inspects its management.The executive power is delegated to a director,* whohas the immediate charge of the school, and arranges theplan of instruction, in subordination to the council of education.He examines the candidates for admission, inspects the classesof the seminary, and of the schools attached to it, and lecturesin the school of repetition for the older teachers. He isalso responsible for the discipline, and reports half yearly theMr. Scherr, a very remarkable teacher. Until recently, Mr. Scherr was aninstructor of the deaf and dumb. The observation required in this departmentof instruction, and the newness of it, by which it has not degenerated into routine,require a constant exercise of the intellect of the teacher, and'render it anexcellent preparation for one who wishes to improve his art.NORMAL SCHOOL OF ZURICH. 357state of the institution to the council of education. He is moreoverpresent at the meeting of the committee of superintendence.There are three other teachers, besides a variable numberof assistants. These teachers in turn have charge of thepupils of the normal school in and out of school-hours. Thereare conferences of all the teachers, at which the director presides.The manners of the people and the purpose of the seminaryrender the discipline of very trifling amount. The pupils ofthe normal school reside in the village of Kiissnacht, but spendthe greater part of their time at the school, under the directionof its masters. All the time devoted to study, recitation or lecture,and regular exercise, is passed there.To be admitted as a candidate for the normal school, a youthmust be sixteen years of age, and of suitable moral, intellectual,and physical qualities for the profession of a teacher. He musthave spent two years in the higher division of primary instruction(called here secondary) in the model school, or someequivalent one, or have passed through the preparatory departmentof the normal school, which gives a preference to thecandidate, other qualifications being equal. The examinationof candidates takes place once a year, and in presence of thecommittee of superintendence, or of a deputation from theirbody. The formal right of admitting to the school is, however,vested alone in the council of education. The subjects of examinationare Bible history, speaking and reading, grammar,the elements of history, geography and natural philosophy,arithmetic and the elements of geometry, writing, drawing, andvocal music. The council of education fixes the number of pupilswho may be admitted, and the most proficient of the candidatesare selected. There are forty stipendiary places, ten ofthe value of one hundred and sixty Swiss francs (forty-eightdollars), and thirty of half that sum. Natives who are admittedall receive their instruction gratis. If there is room in theschool, foreigners may be received, paying twelve dollars perannum for their instruction. The number of pupils at the dateof mv visit, in the autumn of 1837, was one hundred and ten.358 GENERAL Education. PRIMARY PERIOD.The stipendiaries are bound to serve as teachers in the cantontwo years; a very moderate return for the education received.There are two grades of courses in the normal school, oneof two years for pupils intending to become teachers in thelower primary schools, the other of three years for the higherprimary schools, she courses begin in April, and continue,with seven weeks of vacation, throughout the year. The subjectsof instruction are : Religious instruction, German, French,mathematics, history, geography, natural history and philosophy,pedagogy, writing, drawing, and vocal and instrumentalmusic. French is only obligatory upon the students of the threeyears' course. Gymnastic exercises and swimming are regularlytaught and practised.There are three classes, corresponding to the three years ofstudy. The courses were distributed, in 1837, according to thefollowing table:NORMAL SCHOOL OF ZURICH.Table of the distribution of the lessons in the Primary Normal School of Zurich.ISUBJECTS OF STUDY, &c.Religious Instruction,Mode of communicating Religious Instruction,German Language, .Elocution,French Language,Geography,History,Arithmetic,Geometry,Natural History, -Natural Philosophy,Pedagogy,Writing or Drawing,Geometrical Drawing,Vocal Music,Gymnastics,HOURS PER WEEK.H QQ^SOW CO5*There is, besides, a lecture of an hour and a-half on the artof building, once a week, attended by all the students. Thosewho learn instrumental music have lessons two hours andOr individual instruction in music.360 GENERAL Education. Primary PERIOD.a-half every week, and two hours of sunday are occupied withsinging in concert. One of the teachers devotes two extrahours every week to the assistance of some of the pupils in theirstudies, or to repetitions.At the close of each year there is a public examination, andthe pupils are classed according to its results. On leaving theinstitution, they are arranged in three grades, the first, of thosewho have gone very satisfactorily through the school, the second,of those who have passed satisfactorily, and the third, ofthose who have not come up to the standard. Certificates ofthe first two grades entitle their holders to compete for any vacantprimary school.The courses of practice begin in the second year, when thepupils take regular part in the exercises of the schools attachedto the seminary. These are, first, two model schools for childrenfrom the ages of six to nine, and from nine to twelve, atwhich latter age the legal obligation to attend the schoolsceases. The third, called a secondary school, contains pupilsfrom twelve to sixteen years of age. The system of instructionused in the lower schools is attended with very striking results.The lessons are not divided into distinct branches, studiouslykept separate, as in most elementary schools, but are connected,as far as possible, so as to keep the different subjects constantlybefore the mind. Thus, a lesson of geography is, at the sametime, one of history, and incidentally of grammar, natural history,of reading and writing, and so on through the circle ofelementary instruction. The Pestalozzianan lessons on form aremade the basis of writing, and with good success. The lowestclass is taught to speak correctly, and to spell by the phonicmethod, to divide words into syllables, and thus to count. Tonumber the lessons. To make forms and combine them, andthus to write, and through writing to read. The second passesto practical grammar, continues its reading and writing, thelessons in which are made exercises of natural history andgrammar. Reading and speaking are combined to produceaccuracy in the latter, which is a difficulty where the languagehas been corrupted into a dialect, as the German has in northernNORMAL SCHOOL OF ZURICH. 361Switzerland. Movable letters are used to give exercise inspelling and reading. The plan of the Pestalozzianan exercisesin grammar is followed, and when the pupils have learned towrite, a whole class, or even two classes, may be kept employedintellectually, as well as mechanically, by one teacher. Inreading, the understanding of every thing read is insisted upon,and the class-books are graduated accordingly. I never sawmore intelligence and readiness displayed by children than inall these exercises; it affords a strong contrast to the dulness ofschools in which they are taught mechanically. The sameprinciples are carried into the upper classes, and are transplantedinto the schools by the young teachers, who act here as assistants.The examination of the second school in Bible history,with its connected geography and grammar lessons, in composition,with special reference to orthography and to the handwriting,and the music lesson, at all of which the director wasso kind as to enable me to be present, were highly creditable.There are three classes in each of these schools, and the pupilsof the normal seminary practice as assistant teachers inthem at certain periods ; the director also gives lessons, whichthe pupils of the seminary repeat in his presence.In the highest, or secondary school, the elementary coursesare extended, and mathematics and French are added.The pupils of the preparatory department of the seminaryspend two years in teaching in the two model schools, and inreceiving instruction in the " secondary school," under thespecial charge of the director of the seminary. This establishmenthas furnished, during three years of full activity, twohundred teachers to the cantonal primary schools. Theseyoung teachers replace the older ones, who are found by thecourses of repetition not able to come up to the present state ofinstruction, and who receive a retiring pension. The schoolsmust thus be rapidly regenerated throughout the canton, andthe education of the people raised to the standard of their wantsas republicans.362 General EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.CHAPTER X.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION.Secondary instruction occupies the place between elementaryand superior instruction. It follows the attainments which areindispensable to the pursuit of knowledge, and precedes the jspecial studies which bear more or less upon the occupation ofthe individual in future life. It embraces the period from eightor ten years of age to seventeen or nineteen, as the ordinary-averageEmits. Viewed in its most enlarged sense, this instructionprepares for any kind of special studies for which matured iintelligence is necessary, for the higher occupations of the usefularts, as well as for the learned professions. It is no objectionto this view that in some countries there are no public ischools for the arts, as there are for the professions, since thereare also some of the learned professions in certain countries \which have no public schools set apart for them, but which are, |nevertheless, avowedly in the front rank, and which require, as ian introduction to their studies, a thorough secondary training. |This view gives rise to a two-fold division of the subject — first, isecondary instruction, as preparatory to the professions usually idesignated as learned ; second, as preparing for the higher prac- ;tical occupations, which are rising rapidly into, or have takentheir place in the same rank with the professions. I leave these !views to be judged of by the facts to be presented. The first kindof secondary instruction is to be met with, as a national system, ,in most countries of Europe, while in others it is supplied by in- !individual enterprise, and by independent foundations or corporerations. The institutions which supply this instruction in a more ,or less perfect form, are designated by various names. The class jis composed of the academies and grammar schools, some of the !colleges, the proprietary and certain other schools of England; ,ikSecondary INSTRUCTION". 363the colleges, royal and communal "institutions," and boarding-schools(pensions) of France; the Latin schools and others ofHolland; the colleges, auditors, and gymnasia of Switzerland;the colleges of Italy, and the gymnasia of the German states.It is true, that in some of these schools, especially in Englandand France, elementary instruction is given as well as secondary,but this is generally done in separate departments ordivisions. It is also true, that university instruction in somebranches is merely a development of that of the schools, and inEngland, especially, as viewed in one light, is but an extensionof secondary instruction. Nevertheless, the rule is, I believe,as laid down; and these cases must be considered as exceptions,which, with others, tend to prevent any exact classification.The second kind of this grade of instruction existsin its most advanced state in Germany, where the "realschools," and some of the "trade schools," prepare pupils forthe polytechnic institutions, or for " trade institutes," or commercialand other schools, which are the equivalents of the universities.In France, it is by no means supplied by the primarysuperior schools, which are not real substitutes for the tradeschools of Germany, while the higher grade of special instructionis in a flourishing condition, and the pupil must seek therequired preparation in establishments intended for other purposes,or by private study, or in the higher institutions themselves.In England, the recent introduction of courses for civilengineers into the University of Durham, and into London Universityand King's Colleges, is an earnest that the preparatorygrade of schools will, in due time, also be provided.There can be no doubt that the scope and nature of the GirardCollege require us to embrace both these grades of secondaryinstruction, while our strength should be applied to the latter,and will require to be so much more vigorously exerted,as the materials which we can derive from experience aremuch less complete than in the former division. In making aselection from these materials, I shall, as in treating the otherdivisions of my subject, offer such comments upon them, in connexionwith the descriptions, as may seem necessary, and from364 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.these comments, and the comparison of different institutions inthe same country, and of secondary instruction in differentcountries, show not only the grounds of my own opinions, butenable the trustees to judge how far they are founded in reasonand in fact.The great number of institutions for preparation for the professionswhich, in a tour like that directed by the trustees ofthe Girard College, would necessarily be visited, renders anaccount of this branch difficult, from the abundance of mattercollected. With real regret at the necessity for omitting accountsof interesting establishments, I have concluded to limitthis notice to those of Scotland and England, from which thoseof our own country are principally derived, and to those ofFrance and of Prussia. In so doing, though I am obliged to passoverthe institutions of countries such as Switzerland, Holland,and the German states, which I visited with great interest, and,I trust, not without profit, yet I fear that, even with these omissions,my Report will be extended beyond its due limits.Of the objects of sound education, namely, intellectual, moral,and physical development, the first two occupy, in general, nearlyexclusive attention, the last being left to regulate itself, and insome cases being even interfered with by the means taken toencourage the former; a growing attention, however, to thisbranch, at least so far as to prevent injury to the physical man,gives promise of a reform in this particular. The materials forthe secondary instruction abroad, which forms the basis of the intellectualand moral education leading to the learned professions,are selected from among the following: the Latin, Greek, andHebrew languages, the vernacular and other modern languages,mathematics, physics, chemistry, the natural sciences, geography,history, moral and mental science, religious instruction,and the arts. The selection from these varies from the ultraschemes, on one side, which would confine youth to the studyof the ancient languages, with a small proportion of the vernacular,and of geography, history, and religion, to the oppositeextreme, which, without, perhaps, actually excluding the ancientlanguages, would so far restrict the study of them, as to reduceSECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN GREAT BRITAIN. 3G5them to comparative inefficiency as a means of mental training.Between these extremes there exists, as will be shown,a variety of plans of instruction, each one recommending itselfto some particular constitution of mind, and in the results ofsome of which close observation has failed to detect differenceswhich would induce a very decided preference for one or theother.The question of the uses and abuses of classical and scientificinstruction has been held up in almost all possible lights, in thekeen strife which has arisen for the possession of the secondaryschools, and it will be my object in this Report to add to thisbody of argument for the trustees, that of facts and results, producedby the gradual development of public opinion in thecountries which will be under consideration.The secondary and higher departments of instruction werethe first organized in the progress of civilization, while popularprimary instruction has come into being under the impulse ofmodern improvement. Hence, while modifications in the latterhave been easy, the former departments have presented fixedsystems, in which even improvement must make its wayagainst the odium usually attaching to innovation.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN GREAT BRITAIN.There being no general system of secondary instruction inGreat Britain, this account resolves itself, as in the case of theprimary schools, to a description of particular institutions,which may be considered as types of the class to which theybelong. On account of the absence of system, more time isconsumed, both in actual examination and in description, thanis required in countries where the schools are organized accordingto a general plan. There, a few schools give a completeidea of all the variations which the system allows, while here,the number of special cases must be multiplied according tothe variety in the ideas of individuals, or associations, who havethe charge of secondary institutions.In England there is a large amount of endowment for schools,in which secondary instruction, leading to the universities and366 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.professions, is given, or, rather, "which has hitherto been applied,almost exclusively, to that purpose. The second divisionof this grade is left mainly to private establishments andassociations. In Manchester and Birmingham, however, thetrustees of the endowed grammar schools have recently determinedto embrace both objects in their courses, and thus tosatisfy the wants of a very large proportion of the populationof those cities for whose benefit the schools were endowed,when the necessities of the community, in regard to education,were very different from what they are now.In England, secondary instruction for boys is given in thepublic grammar schools, which are endowed, and educate,*gratuitously, certain classes of students, in the preparatoryschools erected by associations, and modelled according to theviews of the committees or proprietors, and in private schools,which are numerous in all parts of the country. Some of thegrammar schools, such as Eton, Winchester, and Westminster,are styled colleges. In many of these institutions, the elementaryperiod, as well as the proper secondary, is embraced.In Scotland, the title of academy, high-school, or college, isapplied to similar establishments ; and in Ireland, that of academy,academical institution, &c. There are very strikingdifferences between the university systems of England andScotland, which tend to impress corresponding differences oforganization on the schools which serve as feeders to them.While the subjects composing the courses of the secondaryschools of Great Britain are not, in general, very different, theproportions in which they enter vary exceedingly. The Englishlanguage, Latin and Greek, one of the modern foreign languages,history, geography, mathematics, and writing, are to be found inmostof the programmes, and to these are added, in some, naturalphilosophy and chemistry, natural history, drawing, and music.In some systems, the ancient languages are relied on almostexclusively for mental culture, and English, with a little mathewCarlisle describes four hundred and sevcnty.five institutions in his workenticed " A Concise Description of the Endowed Grammar Schools of Englandand Wales," &c. London, 1818.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN GREAT BRITAIN. 367matins, history and geography, are admitted into the course;in others, the French is introduced, and the branches subordinateto the classics are raised somewhat in importance; in others,the modern languages, mathematics, and a knowledge of natureare made prominent, the classics and English being, however,the basis of instruction; in others, the leading principle of organizationappears to be to restrict the instruction in the deadlanguages, as far as may be done consistently with giving asufficient knowledge of them for future use, with a view todwell especially upon the modern languages and the sciences.There are instructive examples of all these classes of secondaryschools in Great Britain, and of many varieties between them,specimens of some of which I shall endeavour to select. In"Weighing the advantages of the several plans of education, itwould be exceedingly satisfactory could the data be obtained forfollowing, in life, so many of the pupils from establishments ofthe different kinds, as to form an average estimate of the resultswhich each can produce. In the absence of these conclusivedocuments, the difficulty of obtaining which is too obvious toneed pointing out, I have endeavoured to procure such generalinformation as was possible of the results of the systems, tostate fairly where this information is defective, and to supplythe deficiency, as far as practicable, by general reasoning.Information in regard to the results of plans for moral andphysical education is chiefly to be sought in schools in whichthe pupils live, as well as receive instruction. These afford,especially in their government and discipline, varieties not lessmarked than those in the plans of instruction themselves. Ishall, therefore, introduce notices of some of these schools, witha special view to these characteristic differences.It is impossible to look with an unprejudiced eye upon thepresent state of secondary instruction preparatory to the universitiesin Great Britain, and to compare it with what is recordedof its former condition, without perceiving that it has slowlychanged for the better.* It is in fact even now changing*Improvements will probably become more rapid under the enlightened regulationsof the London University, recently established by act of parliament.368 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The other great branch of secondary education for the higheroccupations, for commerce, the arts and trades, will, I have nodoubt, be efficiently introduced before many years. In fact, thesteps taken by the University of Durham, by King's College, andby the London University College, for introducing courses ofcivil engineering, constitute an important era in this grade ofpublic instruction.In giving an account of the secondary schools, I shall beginwith those of Scotland and of the north of Ireland, which areclosely connected with them, then proceed to the public schoolsof England, and finish by the private schools of the samecountry. For reasons before stated, when speaking of thematerials of instruction, and for others which will appear inthe notices of the schools, I have selected the following fordescription: in Scotland, the Edinburgh Academy and theGlasgow High School, both public institutions, and the Hill-streetInstitute of Edinburgh, a private school ; in Ireland, theBelfast Academy and academical department of the BelfastInstitution; in England, the grammar schools of Rugby andHarrow, and the private schools of St. Domingo House, nearLiverpool, and of Bruce Castle, near London.EDINBURGH ACADEMY.Edinburgh has two public classical schools, which are quitecelebrated, the High School and the Academy. The latter,which I visited under circumstances more favourable to theunderstanding of its arrangements, may serve as the type ofboth. With this I shall compare the Glasgow High School,and the Belfast Academy and Academical Institution.The Edinburgh Academy was founded in 1824, to supplythe demand produced by the increase of the population and extentof the city of Edinburgh. It seems also to have been an objectwith the founders to require more thorough teaching in thebranches of an English education, than was then the case inclassical schools generally. Their choice of a rector* shows,• The honorable Archdeacon William, an Oxford scholar.EDINBURGH ACADEMY. 369however, that there was no design to diminish the amount ofattention paid to the ancient languages.The government of the academy is vested in a board ofdirectors, who manage the concerns of the institution generally.They are elected by the proprietors, who meet annually forthis purpose, three of them retiring each year. The specialsuperintendence of the school is delegated to the rector, whois also head master, and gives instruction in the two higherclasses. He is expected to visit the rooms of the differentmasters, devoting at least two hours per week to this duty.Indeed, the directors have found it to the advantage of the institutionto free him as much as possible from teaching, that hemay give more of his time to the superintendence of the otherteachers.There arc four masters beside the rector, and, in addition, aspecial teacher of English, one of mathematics, one of writing,and one of French. Each regular master has charge, on theaverage, of about forty-nine pupils, giving them instructionprincipally in Latin, Greek, geography, history, and English.The writing-master has also charge of the younger classesin arithmetic, and teaches book-keeping. The whole school,however, is divided into seven classes, the three higher ofwhich are taught the classics by the rector, with one of theregular masters as an assistant for each class.It is required of pupils admitted to this academy that theyhave completed their elementary studies, and are prepared tobegin the ancient languages. They are from seven to nineyears of age, and must have attainments equal to those of thehighest boys' class of the Circus Place school, already described.The number of pupils in 1835 was three hundred and forty-four.The following were the courses taught in 1835 and 1836, withthe distribution of them among the seven classes.FIRST CLASS.Latin. Rudiments with the rules of syntax, and vocabulary of conjugatedverbs. Delectus commenced. Grammatical exercises commenced.Geography. Outlines of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, with the particulargeography of England and Scotland.870 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.History. Simpson History of Scotland.ScHiPTUBE Biography, commenced.Recitation of poetry.Abithmetic. Four ground rules. Reduction, compound addition, &c.SECOND CLASS.Latin. Rudiments revised. Irregular verbs and rules for genders of nouns.Delectus and grammatical exercises continued.Geography. Portugal, Spain, France, Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy,Austria, the smaller German states, Prussia, and Denmark.History. Simpson's History of England, commenced.Scripture Biography and Recitation, continued.Abithmetic, continued through compound addition, &c. Reduction of weightsand measures, vulgar fractions, the ground rules.THIRD CLASS.Latin. Caesar, Books 1st and 2d, Gallic war. Elect ex Ovidio. Grammaticalexercises. Rudiments, with the Latin rules for the genders of nouns andprosody. Third book of the Gallic war read by the highest thirty pupils.Greek. Rudiments through the verb. Extracts.Geography. Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Russia, Turkey in Europe and Asia,Arabia, Persia, Hindostan, Eastern Peninsula, China, Tibet, Tartary,Russia in Asia, and Asiatic Islands.History. Simpson's Roman History.Scripture Biography and Recitations, continued.Arithmetic. Revision, through simple proportions,FOURTH CLASS.Latin. Virgil, 1st eclogue, ^neid, 1st and 2d books. Sallust.Mares Introduction, commenced.Rudiments, with rules for gender and prosody. Written exercises, inprose and verse.Greek. Extracts. Rudiments, revised. (Two divisions of the class in unequalprogress.)Geography. Modern Geography, completed.History. Simpson's History of Greece.Scripture Biography, and Recitations, continued.Abithmetic. Practice. Simple and compound proportions. Interest. Discount.Partnership. Profit and loss. Fractions.FIFTH CLASS.Latin, Virgil, ^neid, 2d book and 6th eclogue. Horace Odes, 1st and2d books. Livy, part of 21st book. Introduction and rudiments,continued.Greek. Xenophon's Anabasis, 1st book and part of 2d. Homer's Iliad, Listbook. Dunhar^s Introduction. Greek Testament. St. John. Greekrudiments, revised. Exercises, in prose and verse.EDINBURGH ACADEMY. 871Geography. Modern Europe, revised. Roman Empire.English. Milton's Paradise Lost, read. Elementary Science.Arithmetic. Revision. Vulgar and decimal fractions; duodecimo, squareand cube root.Geometry. Euclid, book 1st.SIXTH CLASS.Latin. Horace's Odes, books 3d and 4th. Virgil 2d and 4th Georgic.Livy, 21st book, completed. Part of 22d book. Exercises.Greek. Sandford Homeric Exercises, Part 2d. Homer's Iliad, 2d book.Xenophon's Anabasis, 4th and 5th books. Sophocles' (Oedipus tyrannous.Greek Testament St. Mark. Exercises in prose and verse.Geography. Greece, Macedonia, Thrace, Grecian Islands.English. Campbell's Pleasures of Hope. Tragedies of Henry VIII. and Coriolanus.Irving's Elements of English Composition.Arithmetic. Revised.Geometry. Euclid, 1st four books. *Algebra, to Quadratic Equations.French. Levizac's Grammar. Cours de Literature.SEVENTH CLASS.Latin. Horace's Epistles and Ars Poetica. Cicero Selected Orations, &c.Terence the Delphi. Tacitus Germany and Agricola. Adams'Antiquities.Greek. Horner 9th book of Iliad. Sophocles Antigone. Part of Herodotus.Exercises.Geometry. Euclid six books. Trigonometry. Surveying. Navigation.Mensuration. Algebra.French. Levizac's Grammar. Cowper's Letters, translated into French.Cours de Literature. Fables. Tragedies of Cinna, Iphigenia, andZaire.The Bible is read for an hour every Monday morning, andthe school is opened with prayer. The following table, compiledfrom the report of the rector to the directors of theacademy in 1836, gives — though not so definitely as mightbe desired — an idea of the proportion of time allotted to differentobjects of study.GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.Distribution of time in the principal departments of study in the EdinburghAcademy.SUBJECTSOFINSTRUCTION.NUMBER OF HOURS PER WEEK.§Oa■H5SE'iXiatin and Greek, . -EnglishmanFrench,Arithmetic & Geometry,Natural Philosophy, -Scripture Biography,Geography,Writing, .Total, -18*15 1If14^§3**3ttfn6|30i29i30|mThe general system of teaching is that usual in the Englishand Scottish schools. Text-books are multiplied, and the pupilscome to the institution mainly to be examined on the lessons learnedout of it. The lower portion of a class, however, probablyobtain the greater part of their knowledge by the drilling whichtakes place in the recitation. The extent of this drilling, and• Includes geography and composition.t Includes composition.t Besides geography.^ Latin alone.II Includes history.Includes Scripture Biography and spelling.•• Arithmetic and writing are together set down at six.tt Writing and arithmetic, six hours.II In forming the total, the numbers of the sixth column have been doubled.EDINBURGH ACADEMY. 373amount of extra information communicated, depend upon themaster, and upon the character of the course. For example,in the rector's class I heard an excellent extemporaneous lecture,or conversation, on ancient geography, introduced duringa recitation upon a lesson in Livy, and these occasions arealways rendered available by collections of maps and modelswhich belong to the academy. The system is, howsoever, essentiallyone of recitations of fixed portions of a text-book, thebook, and not the teacher, being looked to as the principalsource of information. In arithmetic the black-board is muchused, and the English department has the advantage of thesuperintendence of Sheriff Wood, one of the directors, and will,I doubt not, come, in the end, to be more appreciated than atpresent.The stimulants to exertion are, besides the approbation ofthe teacher, changes of place in the classes during the dailyrecitation, places at the end of the session, and public examinations,with the award of prizes. A register is made at intervalsof the places of the pupils, and the result of its summationdetermines the standing of the individual at the close ofthe session. Recently, the practice of examining in writing hasbeen introduced in the seventh or highest class, in addition tothe usual viva voce method. Questions previously prepared byexaminers not connected with the academy, on the differentsubjects of study, were placed before the class to be answered,and the result is stated to have been satisfactory. This excellentmethod is adopted from the English universities.In order to show the results of the system of education inaparticular school, it is usual to have recourse to the arbitrarystandard of the success of certain pupils in higher institutions.Average success in after life would afford some test of the valueof the education, but that of a few distinguished individualsproves chiefly that men of superior intelligence have at sometimeor other been connected with the school, and that theyhave not lost their powers by the course, without showing thattheir education has been the best possible. When, instead ofconsidering general success in life, the more limited standard374 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.of success in a higher institution is assumed, then it showsrather the adaptation of the lower education to the higher, thanthat the lower is good in itself. The test is, therefore, essentiallydefective, but, by extending the comparison to the careerof many pupils, in a number of institutions, each of a differentscope, It becomes of some value.The cases presented by the directors of the EdinburghAcademy, in their reports for 1835 and 1836, as tests of thecondition of the institution, appear to me too few to give a correctnotion of the average success of pupils for either of theseyears, the greatest number of pupils spoken of, from any oneclass, being eight, or but about one-sixth of the class. Thenumber of higher institutions in which they have gained honorsis, however, more satisfactory than the number of cases, embracingthe Universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow, Cambridge,Oxford and Dublin, the London University and AylesburyColleges, and the Military School at Sandhurst. The numberof different departments in which they have gained distinctionis also quite satisfactory, and the inference, on the whole, iscertainly favourable to the intellectual development which maybeobtained at this institution.The discipline of the school is generally mild, and there is aneffort made to bring the influence of the parents to bear uponthe progress and general deportment of the child.HIGH SCHOOL OF GLASGOW.Having described the Edinburgh Academy somewhat minutely,I shall confine myself, in the notice of the High Schoolof Glasgow, chiefly to the peculiarities of arrangement in thelatter, which result from certain differences in the objects of thetwo schools. Though the High School of Glasgow stands inthe same relation to the university of that city as the academydoes to that of Edinburgh, and, indeed, is more intimately connectedwith it, the former institution has also other objects,namely, to afford elementary instruction, and to educate youthfor the pursuits of commerce, manufactures, and the arts. Thehigh school has separate courses of English, classics, matlje-EDINBURGH ACADEMY. 375matins, writing, and drawing, any one of which may be followedalone, or several at a time. The hours of recitation areso arranged as to admit, as far as possible, that a pupil maypursue those courses which it is thought should be simultaneous.In the academy, as has been seen, the course is indivisible, andall its branches must be pursued by the student. The principleof equality among the teachers is carried out so impartially atthe high school, that as two classical masters are required forthe number of pupils who pursue that course, those who entereach alternate year constitute the class of its two masters respectively.The plan of organization is attended with the defectof want of uniformity in methods, and of adaptation to eachother in the several departments, but it has the advantage ofenabling pupils who are intended for different pursuits in life tofollow the studies most appropriate to them, and thus supplies,in part, the place of the two establishments of Germany, thegymnasium and the real school. The future merchant, manufacturer,and mechanic, may pursue together the courses ofEnglish, French, mathematics, drawing, and chemistry; thefirst may continue French and enter the commercial school,the second, mathematics and drawing, and enter the sameschool, while the third continues mathematics, drawing, andchemistry. This arrangement of the school adapts it to thewants of a manufacturing and commercial city, though I amsatisfied that two schools, each with a fixed course of instruction,would answer the end proposed much better.The classical department prepares for the University of Glasgow,and as pupils may enter there at an early age, and requireno very advanced attainments for admission, the studies of thisschool are comparatively elementary. The course lasts fouryears, and a private class may be followed for a fifth, by thosewho do not intend to pursue an academical career, or who wishto begin it better prepared than is usual. Greek is begun in thethird year.The English department answers two purposes; it preparesvery young pupils for the other classes, and it carries forward370 General EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.the more advanced through the higher courses of grammar,logic, and belles lettres.This admirable course may be thus arranged, according tothe subjects:I. Alphabet^lass. Reading' and spelling taught. Lessons on objects. Classhooks. Wood's Elementary Books. Elliot's Natural History.II. English Reading Class. Bible teaching and training as the foundation ofmoral and religious knowledge. Readings in Biography, Natural, and Civil History,Elementary Sfcience, Sfc. Grammar for beginners. Spelling, meaning, andderivation of veords. Class books. The Bible, Companion to the Bible, Wood'sInstructive Extracts, First Grammar, English Etymologist.III. English Reading Class. Lessons in Natural History, Manufactures,&c. illustrated by specimens and" experiments. Grammar incidentally. Spellingorally and by dictation. Elements of composition by weekly practice in letterwriting. Class books. Book of Trades, English Etymologist, Parley's NaturalHistory.IV. History Class. Familiar Lectures, Ancient History and Biography,Modern History.V. Readings from the British Classics. Grammar and composition. Recitations.VI. GuAMMAK. Science and art of grammar. Pronunciation. Orthography,by dictation. Derivation of words. Synonyms. Punctuation. Composition.Practice in Tetter writing, and in the analysis of narrative and descriptive pieces.Class hooks. M'CuUoch^s Grammar. Booth's or Irvine's Composition. Carpenter'sSynonyms.VII. Higher parts of Grammar. General Grammar. Outlines of Logic,with exercises in composition. Elements of Rhetoric and Belles Lettres,English Literature. Class hooks. Crosbie's Etymology and Syntax. Duncan'sLogic, or Abridgment of Lately's Logic. Abridgment of Blair's Lectures.Each of these classes has, in general, one hour of recitationevery day, but the more advanced pupils attend, usually,more than one of them. The methods of teaching adoptedby the English master* are among the best which I sawabroad. He has combined the knowledge of things with thatof words. His pupils are as well trained in the knowledge• Mr. Alexandre J. Dorset, who, having travelled on trio continent and at home jfor improvement in methods of teaching, has adopted an eclectic method, which 1produce excellent results. He has especially studied the secret of the great |in the more modern German schools, and has followed out their methods ,GLASGOW HIGH SCHOOL. 377of realities as in a school of a disciple of Pestalozzi, and inverbal knowledge as those of Mr. Wood. He relies more onthe training of the school-room than is usual in England, andyet does not neglect the encouragement of study at home.The lessons on objects are illustrated by neat cabinet specimensof minerals, geological specimens, objects of art, &c.Mineralogy is early introduced, as affording a pleasant stimulusduring the walks of the pupils. Practical geology is, to a certainextent, useful in the same way ; but I cannot assent to theintroduction of theoretical generalizations, which are receivedby the pupils as established principles, and which make it difficultfor them, in after life, to separate the theories of thescience from its facts. A knowledge of trades forms a secondpart of this instruction, and the various establishments of Glasgoware visited by the teacher and pupils. Habits of observation,of analysis, and of order are thus inculcated, while much'knowledge, not only of art, but of the people among whamthey are to move, is acquired.The method of teaching orthography seems to me an improvementupon that of the German schools. Besides the ordinarysystem of dictation, the master writes upon the blackboard,by direction of one of the class, a word which is to bespelled, the pupil naming the letters. Criticism is called forfrom the class, and among those who signify, by a sign, thatthey wish to make a correction, the master selects one. Healters the word, according to the direction of the pupil, submitsit anew to criticism, and so on. The whole class is thus keptalive, a result which marks the ability of a teacher, in a waynot to be mistaken. The same words are parsed in the grammarclass, the use of the black-board enabling the teacher tomake the instruction really simultaneous, where, otherwise, itwould be individual.Themes, or short essays, intended to introduce words assignedby the teacher, and more advanced essays, upon specifiedsubjects, are written by the pupils, and read in the class,attention being roused by permitting criticism by the pupils themselves.In the reading lessons, correction by any one of the378 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.class is allowed, the successful corrector taking the turn of thereader. These, and various other applications of the same generalprinciple, of rendering the instruction simultaneous, makethis school very remarkable. The arrangement of the schoolroom,with benches on raised platforms, is an important aid inthe use of the method. The paraphrases of Lately's Logic,and other exercises in this branch, which I heard from the elderpupils, were very good. The historical lessons were illustratedby numerous drawings, calculated to convey accurate generalinformation, and to impress the memory through the eye. Thepupils change places, as in other schools, though this forms byno means the main dependance of the teacher for securingattention. Corporal punishment is not at all resorted to.Between each hour of recitation is an interval of ten minutesfor recreation, during which, also, the air of the school-room isthoroughly changed. Both these are important details, and arevery commonly overlooked.The commercial and mathematical department, besides unitingin a complete course with the classical and English departments,gives special instruction to clerks, book-keepers, surveyors,navigators, &c. The branches taught are geography(principally to pupils from nine to twelve years of age, from theother departments), physical geography, and the elements ofastronomy, arithmetic, geometry, trigonometry, heights and distances,mensuration, algebra, including quadratic equations, andlogarithms. The higher mathematics, including the differentialand integral calculus, and the elements of natural philosophy.The department of foreign languages furnishes instructionin French and German. The writing and drawing departmentsare each under the charge of a separate master, andthe first is subsidiary, in a degree, to the general objects of theschool A chemical course has recently been added to the foregoing,on a plan to which I shall refer more particularly hereafter,in which the pupils manipulate. It is intended for boysfrom seven to fourteen years of age. The high school possessesa library and an increasing collection in natural history.It furnishes, by the private exertions of its teachers, to the in-BELFAST ACADEMY. .inhabitantsof Glasgow, in addition to the regular courses foryouth, others for adults, which, in some departments, are wellattended.While this freedom of choice among the courses has advantagesover the exclusive system, which allows no variation inthe studies, even where pupils are intended for different lines oflife, I confess that I should much prefer a more simple arrangement,the parallel courses in the different schools being so regulatedthat the choice of branches of study would not devolveupon parents, who are most generally unwilling, and often unable,to judge in such matters. The destination of the pupil havingdetermined which of the parallel schools he will enter, he shouldfind a regulated course for him to follow. A facility of transferfrom one school to another would remedy mistakes, or enablechanges of purpose to take place. Such establishments mightbe under a common head, or be governed by a board of teachers,if it were considered desirable to unite them, and thus torealise the advantages which result from uniformity of methodsin the different schools.BELFAST ACADEMY.The Belfast Academy has all the advantages of a generalsuperintendence, with that of the division into particular schools.It consists, in fact, of four schools, a classical,"mathematical,English, and writing school. Over each of them is a master,chosen by the trustees of the academy,* and the whole is superintendedby a principal, who has the chief direction of the dis-formerly,the choice of masters was vested in the principal, who has recentlypreferred to relinquish this right, as making the masters more independent,and, therefore, securing better men. The principal of this academy, Dr. Bryce,is among the most enlightened teachers of Great Britain, and his experience isequal to his talents in his vocation. A thorough classical scholar, and upholderof a complete classical culture, where it is attempted, he freely admits the claimsof natural, mathematical, and mental science to a place in a full course, asdeductions from both theoretical and practical grounds. In giving instruction toteachers. Dr. Bryce labours to inculcate principles rather than methods, and inselecting a teacher, places more stress upon the ability to teach, than upon actualknowledge. Dr. Bryce proposes, for the science and art of education, the termPedeutics.380 general Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.cipline and instruction. The principal is also the classicalmaster, and has the privilege of taking boarders in his family, sothat this may be considered, in part, as a boarding-school.The discipline is of a mild and paternal character, thoughNegligence is by no means tolerated, and corporal chastisementis resorted to when milder punishments have proved unavailing.The classical course prepares for entrance into Trinity College,Dublin, or carries the pupil through the higher studies, includingthe Hebrew.It would be useless to go into a recapitulation of the authorsread, an example of a school of this grade having already beengiven; and I should not succeed in conveying in writing an ideaof the spirit of the Principal, which constitutes the excellence ofhis method. It carries out individual teaching to a great degreeof perfection; watching studiously the workings of the pupil'smind, and entering it by the avenue where it is found most accessible,illustrating, reasoning, and repeating, unfolding to theunderstanding before asking the memory to take cognizance;encouraging to self-exertion, reproving, and persuading — comparingthe pupil frequently with himself, that he may see theprogress which he has made. This system of individual teachingis as remarkable as the simultaneous method of the Englishdepartment of the Glasgow High School.The experience of this institution maybe confidently appealedto in favor of the introduction of the elements of natural historyinto similar schools; it has not only been found to act favourablyby a direct development of the intelligence, but to react alsoas a stimulus to the classical studies, from the terminology whichmust be employed even in the elements of the science. Underthe direction of the mathematical master, the pupils have a naturalhistory society, which has collected a very tolerablemuseum, and which serves to induce exertion out of the schoolroom.In the writing school, a substitute has been tried with successfor the usual practice of determining places in the classby comparative trials of skill between different individuals,namely, to fix the places according to the degree of improverBELFAST nVSTITUTION-. . 381ment of each member of the class. In general, the head masterof this institution is opposed to the system which acts entirelythrough emulation. Comparison of the same individual at differentperiods with himself he considers more correct in principle,as doubtless it is, and where individual teaching can bepractised, it may be used to a great extent. Where a school isefficiently conducted, it is by no means necessary to rely exclusivelyupon emulation as the governing motive, though I donot believe that it can be safely laid aside entirely even then,or that a character formed without its influence will be fittedfor after life. Besides the method just referred to above, and bywhich the pupils are graded at stated intervals, the constantpractice is to hear from them a criticism on their own writinglesson, consisting in a comparison of what they have producedwith the copy which has been set them to imitate.In addition to the natural history society, there is anotheramong the pupils of this school for defamation, &c., the exercisesof which are found beneficial.ROYAL BELFAST ACADEMICAL INSTITUTION.There is a second institution in Belfast, which, while it coversthe same ground as the academy, extends its courses into thedomain of superior instruction. It presents some peculiaritiesof government and arrangement, and which, as far as they belongto the lower, or academical department, should be noticedhere.This department consists of the following schools : " Englishand geography," " arithmetic and mathematics," writing,classics, " French and Italian," and drawing. Each school isunder a head master, who has assistants when required. Themasters form a board, over which one in turn presides, for theregulation of the whole, subject to the inspection and controlof the visitors and managers of the institution. Certain of theteachers are allowed to take private pupils as boarders, whoare, in regard to the domestic concerns, entirely under their control.The Board of Masters, with a Principal, would, it appearsto me, unite the various advantages which I have pointed382 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.out in describing the different kinds of organization for governmentand discipline.The method of free courses is combined with that of a regulargradation of instruction. The Board of Masters recommendsa certain course to be pursued, consisting of the English, writing,and arithmetical departments, or, when the pupil is furtheradvanced, of the English and writing, classical and mathematicaldepartments, and including the modern languages anddrawing, when desired. At the same time the courses areentirely free, and if the parents do not abide by the recommendationof the board, the responsibility of a choice in thedepartments rests with them. The time from ten o'clock A.M. to three P. M. is divided into four periods of an hour and aquarter each, and a pupil attends the schools in rotation, or mayattend one for the whole four periods. The classical and Englishschools are those to which the arrangement of the rest issubordinate: they have regular classes, and the irregularitiesare made to fall upon the writing and mathematical schools, inwhich there are no fixed divisions of classes. The teachers of jFrench and of drawing hold their exercises at hours which donot interfere with those of the other masters. The course of]drawing includes the higher kinds of drawing and painting, aswell as the elements.There is a natural history society formed among the pupils,under the direction of the mathematical master, which has beenfound useful.The number of pupils in attendance is about two hundred,under six masters and ten assistants, averaging thirteen to ateacher.EDINBURGH INSTITUTION FOR LANGUAGES, MATHEMATICS, &<^|Hill-street.This institution was undertaken by its principal* to ascertainRobert Cunningham, A. M., formerly head master of George Watson's Hospital,Edinburgh. This gentleman is now Professor of Languages in Lafayette JCollege, Eaton, Pennsylvania. The Hill-street institution at Edinburgh continuesto be sustained upon the plans which he had adopted.EDINBURGH INSTITUTION.whether a much greater amount of instruction in science, andin the branches commonly called those of an English education,together with the modern languages, might not be communicated,without injury to a thorough classical culture. In describingit, I propose first to state the general arrangement ofthe institution, and then to enter into a comparison of itscourses, as to character, extent, and results, with those of theEdinburgh Academy.There are two distinct courses of study, one intended forthose who wish to become professional men, the other for thoseof more limited views. The following is an outline of bothcourses, which extend over a period of about eight years, thepupil being supposed to enter between seven and ten years ofage.PUPILS ATTEJTDIIf G THE Latin Awn GREEKCLASSES.Age.7 to 10 yrs. English, Latin, arithmetic,and writing.9 to 11 yrs. Latin, English, reading andgrammar, geography, naturalhistory, and writing.11 to 14 yrs. Latin, French, English,reading and grammar,geography, history, andwriting.13 to 16 yrs. Latin, Greek, French, German,English composition,history, mathematics,elementary science.PUPILS WOT ATTEWDTWO THE LatinAND GREEK CLASSES.English, including lessons on objects,arithmetic, and writing.English, French, geography, arithmeticnatural history and writing.English, French, German, Englishreading and grammar, geography,history, arithmetic, andwriting.English, French, German, Italian,:English reading, compositionand grammar, geography, history,mathematics, elementaryscience, architectural and engineeringdrawing.The first of these courses is designed, like that of the EdinburghAcademy, to prepare pupils for the universities, the ageon terminating it being, on the average, about seventeen. Thesecond is intended to prepare for practical life, and is similarto that of a German "real school." I confine my attention atpresent to the first of these. The courses may be divided intoclassical, including Latin and Greek; English, including reading,grammar, composition, geography, and history; foreign384 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.modern languages, including French and German; science,including arithmetic, geometry, the lower, mathematics andelementary natural history, natural philosophy, and chemistry.The attention of the pupil is called to more objects than inthe academy. Is he able to pay sufficient attention to each?This may be determined, in part, by examining the progressmade in the several branches, and as the English instruction isthe basis of the whole, it will be proper to begin the examinationwith it.First, as to the time occupied: The academy devotes twen-ty-nine and three-quarters hours per week, in seven classes, toEnglish, including geography and history; the Edinburgh institutionthirty-nine, in five classes, which cover nearly the sameground as 1o age. Next, as to the progress made in the twoschools: Between the 1st of October, 1835, and the 26th ofJuly, 1836, the following studies were completed in the EdinburghInstitution:First English Class. Read and analyzed the sessional school collection.M'CuUoch's English Grammar. Etymology. Geography of Em-ope, Asia, Africa,and America, and of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Lessons on Objects, partfirst Poetry, committed to memory.Second English Class. Read and analyzed two hundred and forty pages ofWood's Extracts. M'CuUoch's Grammar. Etymology. Latin and Greek prefixes.Geography of Africa, North and South America, and of England and Ireland,France, Belgium, Holland, Spain and Portugal, Switzerland and Italy. Naturalhistory.Third English Class. Higher division. Wood's Instructive Extracts read andanalyzed. Lennie's Grammar. Geography of England, Scotland, Ireland, andFrance; studied maps of Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, British America,and the United States. Outlines of natural history. Written exercises on theweekly lectures of natural history, and outlines of geology and mineralogy.HiSTOUT and Geography Class. Minute geography of Portugal, Spain,France, Belgium, and Holland, Switzerland, Italy, and the Austrian empire, thesmaller German states, and Prussia.Academy Geography. Denmark, Germany, Sweden and Norway, Western Russia,Turkey in Europe and Asia, Hindostan. Decline and subdivision of theWestern Roman empire. Rise of the kingdoms established on its ruins. Easternempire. Kingdom of the Franks. England and Scotland.History of the progress and extension of the Mahometan power. France, tothe death of Louis IX. German empire and Italian states, from Charlemagneto the death of Frederick II. Norman dynasty in Italy. Spain, to the cxpul-EDINBURGH Institutions. 385sion of the Moors. England, to Edward I. Scotland, to Alexander III. Turlis,crusades, and kingdom of Jerusalem.Occasional essays and regular exercises twice a week.Mathematical and Physical Geography.English Literature and Composition. Read and analyzed Thompson'sSeasons, Milton's Paradise Lost, Books 4th, 5th, and 6th. Chambers's EnglishLiterature. Paley's Natural Theology and Written Exercises. Original Essays.The greater extent of this programme is in proportion to thegreater amount of time devoted to the English studies in thisschool than in the academy, especially in the lower classes,which are also those where the excess in time is the greatest.To be more minute — the courses of geography, history, higherEnglish reading, and composition, do not differ materially inextent in the two schools, but the elementary course of grammarand reading of the institution, the frequent verbal analysesand etymological exercises, render its studies in this departmentmuch more complete than those of the academy; indeed, theyform the basis of a superstructure which must be imperfectlyraised in the fifth class of the academy without them. Frommy own observation, I am sure that the ordinary Latin andGreek exercises are not a substitute for the etymological exercisesintroduced by Mr. Wood. The former exercises renderthe latter very easy, and give great advantages in a completeunderstanding of them, but the latter cannot be dispensed with,or left to the unaided ingenuity of the pupil to follow out.Experience proves that he requires to be directed in this valuableapplication of ancient language; and in the extensiongiven to this subject, the course at the institution had a superiority,in 1836, which it is possible it may not retain, since theEnglish department of the academy has nom been for severalyears under the charge of Mr. Wood. The mode of teachinghistory by conversational lectures, combined with the study ofa text-book, and illustrated by maps, drawings, &c., used in theinstitution, is much to be preferred to the dryer method of thestudy of a text-book and recitation, employed at the academy.The frequent recurrence of the names of the same countries inthe list of geographical exercises of the institution, is to be explainedby the mode of studying geography adopted, in which386 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.the particular countries are dwelt iiponivith various degrees ofminuteness, in successive courses, according to the interestwhich may be supposed to attach to them ; the first lessons containinga general outline of the whole.It remains to be seen whether this superior development inthe English studies is consistent with a due attention to otherbranches. Of these, the study of the ancient languages ranksnext upon the programme. In the academy, these studies occupyfrom fifteen to twenty hours per week, in the differentclasses, and in the institution, from ten to fifteen. The greatestdisproportion is in the lower classes. Notwithstanding this, theprogrammes of the Latin studies in the five classes of the institutionare almost exactly the same with those of the first fiveof the academy: the books read and the amount of study inthe several years being also nearly the same. But, then, in theacademy there are two classes which have not their parallelsin the institution, namely, the sixth and seventh; so that, whateveradvantages are to be derived from the higher classicalstudies, must be reckoned against those of the institution inother courses. In this will be found the true difficulty ofthe estimate, for though I believe that with teachers of equalabilities the same progress will be made in fewer hours if thestudies are not exclusively classical, yet this cannot be carriedbeyond a certain point, and we cannot have the advantages ofancient and modern languages, and of mathematical and physicalscience, without extending the time for the course of education.Such is the experience of many classical teachers.In composing the courses in the modern languages, those ofthe institution appear to have decided advantages. There aretwo classes for the French in both the academy and institution.In the former school four hours and a-half per week areallotted on the average, and in the latter five hours, to each ofthe courses. In the latter school there is also a class for theGerman language, to which three hours per week are devoted.There appears no where to be any variance of opinion as tothe fact, that the modern languages are inferior, as means ofintellectual training, to the ancient. They are, in fact, not intro-edinburghINSTITUTION. 887duce into the courses, mainly for this purpose. The object is,usually, to acquire a facility in reading them; the power ofusing them for conversation, and in writing, is further sometimesaimed at, though the time allotted to them seldom allowsthe attainment of such a result. The methods of teachingthem are, generally, and should always be, adapted to these ends,and hence essentially different from those appropriate to thedead languages. All experience shows that the earlier theyare attended to, the greater facility there is in their acquisition,and they should, therefore, by no means be postponedlonger than the period of secondary instruction; and, indeed,when it is practicable, there would, I believe, be great gain inbeginning them in the elementary course. It should be remembered,that the reflecting faculties are naturally little developedin early youth, while the memory for words, as well as for things,is strong, and instruction at this period should be directed accordingly.It is true, that a knowledge of the ancient lends great aidto the study of the modern languages, but I am persuaded thatthe gain is not equivalent to the loss from postponement. Ifthe object be to learn to speak a language as well as to read it,the flexibility of the organs of speech in early youth renders abeginning at that period almost essential to success.The courses of science are raised into high comparative importancein the institution. The attention paid to arithmeticis much greater than in the academy. In the first three classesof the former five hours per week, and of the latter but three,are devoted to this branch, so that in the higher classes the courseof the academy falls decidedly behind that of the institution. Ifit were in the amount of progress only in which the academywas behind, I should make but little objection to it, for it seemsto me that the higher branches of mathematics are better reservedfor superior instruction, unless in special schools ; but,then, the amount of intellectual culture to be gained by the exercisesof arithmetic and algebra, appears to me to be undervalued.Arithmetical analysis, if not as important an intellectualhabit as that of language, is by no means to be neglected,and, in addition to the ready use of figures, or the art of the388 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.accountant, forms a mx)st important part of education. Mentalarithmetic I have already often remarked upon as a most usefulbranch, and I do not think the time devoted to this, and to thepractice of written arithmetic in the institution, at all too great.The course of geometry in the two schools is the same. Thetime spent in the study of trigonometry, and the applicationsto mensuration, &c., in the academy, is too small to secure anyconsiderable progress.The course of mathematics in the institution is as follows :First Class of Arithmetic. The ground-rules and reduction. Compoundaddition, &c.Second Class. Simple and compound division. Proportions and fractions.Practical arithmetical exercises. (Ingram's Arithmetic,) practice. Decimal fractions.Compound proportions.Third Class. Compound rules. Reduction. Practice. Simple and compoundproportions. Vulgar and decimal fractions. Interest. Equation of payments.Stocks. Loss and gain.Fourth Class. Cunningham's Arithmetic. Vulgar and decimal fractions.Practice. Proportions. Commission. Interest. Chain rule. Stocks. Loss andgain. Barter. Distributive proportion. Insurance and exchange.Fifth Class. Algebra. Primary rules. Simple equations. Problems. Algebraicfractions.First Class of Geometry. In three divisions. The highest, studies six booksof Euclid's Elements, and the Appendix of Mayfair. Mensuration and plane trigonometryfrom Davidson's Practical Mathematics. Heights and distances. Examplesand problems.Second Class of Geometry. Revise 5th and 6th books of Euclid. Trigonometry,from Mayfair's Appendix. Mensuration from Davidson. Simple and quadraticequations from the same. Wallace's Conic Sections. Mensuration of solids andspecific gravities, from Davidson's Practical Mathematics. Spherical trigonometry.Geographical and astronomical problems.The higher mathematics, and even in a much greateramount than the one just stated, is indispensably necessary toa course intended for such occupations of practical life as thoseof the civil engineer, architect, or mechanician, but I doubt theimportance of it in a general course, preparatory to a college oruniversity. The advantages which a special professor, devotingall his energies, will have in the powers of communicating suchinstruction over a teacher who is occupied with many otherthings in addition, is too obvious to need discussion. As anIIEDINBURGH Institution. 389instrument of general training, under these circumstances, thehigher mathematics are, in my opinion, of inferior value to otherbranches.The courses of the elements of natural philosophy and ofnatural history in the institution are very appropriate. Thatof chemistry, as taught by Dr. D. B. Reid, of Edinburgh, is oneof the most useful and interesting exercises of the student. Theprofessor assembles a class from the institution in his laboratory,places them at tables, with the materials for experiment beforethem, orders different experiments by the several groups intowhich the class is divided, receives their explanation of theoperations in the hearing, and inspects the results of eachwithin the view of the whole class, and thus exercises the perceptiveand reflective faculties and mechanical skill of the student,and accustoms him to describe as well as to execute andobserve.* When treated in this way, chemistry becomeshighly worthy of a place in a general system of education.The plan is very similar to that in use at the La Martiniereschool at Lyons, already described, though, very properly, thetendency here is more general than practical. Dr. Reid has,many classes, besides this one of the institution, under a similarcourse of instruction.The morning of every Saturday is devoted in this school toreligious instruction. The pupils are divided into four classes,the youngest of which read the Scriptures, and are examinedupon them, and on Wood's Biography of the Old and New Testaments.The oldest class have lectures upon the Evidences ofChristianity, and read the Scriptures, with explanations by theprincipal.In a general review of this comparison, it appears that thecourses of the institution are more numerous, and all, except theclassical course, cultivated to a greater extent than in the academy.The deficiency in the latter appears chiefly due to theAH the experiments are made upon a small scale, and, in general, with suchcommon apparatus as slips and rods of glass, paper, &c. The chemical testsare used in very small quantities. Hence the expense of these lectures is quitetrifling.390 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.considerable effort made to extend' this instruction in mathematicsinto the higher branches, and to the introduction oftwo modern languages. The general arrangement of thecourses in the institution resembles that of the gymnasia orgrammar schools of northern and central Germany, but in thevery points just stated, in reference to classics, mathematics,and the modern languages, differs from them. An appeal,therefore, to the results of those admirable schools induces meto prefer the restriction of these courses, for youth preparingfor the professions, within the limits necessary to the full developmentof the classical course. At the same time, I considerthat the importance given to the English exercises in the institution,the general extension of the studies in the lower mathematicsand in elementary science, all of which I believe to becompatible with the attention to the languages, are real advantageswhich may be claimed by the institution.GRAMMAR SCHOOL AT RUGBY.The grammar schools in England which have attained thehighest distinction, are of the class which receive boarders.Of these the school at Rugby now stands among the first, fromthe character of its head master* and his associates. I havecompiled, from my notes of information derived at Rugby, andfrom the account given in print by the principals himself, aThe Rev. Dr. Arnold. I visited Rugby with letters, which produced muchcourtesy and frankness of intercourse, but found that custom — the law of theschool — did not admit of the presence of a stranger at the recitations of theclasses, or his visits to the rooms of the pupils while at study. This seemed tomeso strange, after being admitted freely even to private schools, that I statedmy wishes to the Rev. Head Master, and understood distinctly from him that hehad never heard of such a thing as the presence of a visitor during the recitationof an English grammar school. Mr. Browning Price, one of the masters towhom I was addressed, received me with much hospitality, and very kindly gaveme the information which I asked, but even in his house etiquette did not permithim to introduce me into the study-rooms of his pupils.I had occasion to verify Dr. Arnold's remark, in the case of two other grammarschools into which I endeavoured, without success, to obtain admission; atChrist's Hospital, liowcvcr, which ranks with the public grammar schools, I wasfreely admitted to all parts of the institution, as has already been stated.t Rugby School, Quarterly Journal of Education, vol. vii. London, 1834.IkkpRUGBY GRAMMAR SCHOOL. 391sketch of the education received at this school, consideringthat the authentic nature of the materials authorized me so todo,though I can say little from personal observation as to theresults of the system.Purpose of the school, general government ^c. The school isintended for preparing students for the universities. It receivespupils of two different classes; the one called "foundations"must be children of parents who have resided for two years inRugby, or in certain parts of the adjacent country. These areeducated gratuitously, and their number is not limited. Theymay enter at the age of seven, though eleven is considered amore suitable period. The others pay for their education, andare limited to two hundred and sixty in number.* In case theparent of a foundation does not live in the town of Rugby,the pupil must board with one of the masters, and is thus on thesame footing as the other students.The buildings containing the dwelling of the head master,the chapel, library, recitation rooms, &c., are in the ElizabethanGothic style, very prettily arranged, and have an extensivecommon or play-ground at the back of them. The othermasters provide their own dwellings, which are in differentquarters of the town.The school is governed by a body of trustees, who holdannual meetings at Rugby, but who may be summoned to specialmeetings, when required, at other places. In general theirauthority is delegated to the head master, who is elected bythem, and the few laws enacted for the government of theinstitution are contained in the act of incorporation. Theassistant masters serve as a council to the head master, bywhom they are appointed, and besides holding regular meetingsonce a week, for the discussion of the affairs of theirclasses, may be convened at the pleasure of the head master.Moral education. This is supposed to centre in the head master,upon whose character its success essentially depends, andThe masters have, besides, established a scholarship, by subscription amongthemselves, of £25 per annum, which may be held for six years.392 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.who is the pastor as well as teacher und governor. He hascharge of the instruction of the highest class, called the sixthform, and from the important part which they play in the disciplineof the school, has in this a high responsibility. Theother Piasters are charged with maintaining order in their severalrooms, but the head master alone has the authority tosanction corporal chastisement. He can suspend or dismiss abad student, and corresponds frequently with the parents, thattheir influence may be brought in aid of his. When necessary,he advises the withdrawal of a pupil, but usually, when dismissionis required, or in cases of difficult investigation, calls inthe board of masters as council. It was stated to me that thesystem of " rights and privileges" of the pupils prevailed to avery injurious extent at this school, before the present administration,but by a calm, temperate, and free use of authority,the features considered most objectionable have been doneaway. The fact exemplifies the theory of the influence of thehead master as the moral centre of the school.The several masters take boarders, the number being onlyrestricted bv the accommodations of the houses. Some of thepupils have separate sleeping and study rooms, others roomtogether.The most striking peculiarity of the discipline of the institutionis to be found out of school hours, when the main body ofthe pupils are freed from the direct control of the masters. Thewhole of the pupils residing in one house are then under thecharge of the boys of the sixth form, or highest class, living withthem, and are subject to their control during both play and studyhours. These members of the sixth form, called at Rugbypreposters (propositi viri), are required to regulate the rising,attendance on prayers, meals, and recitations of those underthem ; to preserve order, and to prevent absence or visitingduring study hours ; to aid the younger members in their studies,and to afford them good counsel and example. To enable thepreposterous to preserve their authority, they are invested with theright to punish, by setting tasks, by confining to the study room,RUGBY GRAMMAR SCHOOL. 393and otherwise cutting off privileges. Besides this, they assumethe right to chastise corporally, and have, by usage, manyprivileges not conferred by the regulations of the school, andwhich give them great power over the comfort and welfare ofthe junior pupils.*This is the system known as " fagging" at Eton and Westminster,and though I was informed that it does not bear thisname at Rugby, even among the pupils themselves, yet it isessentially the same in its rules, if not in its practices.Though the preposterous have privileges by rule, they areyet subject to punishments from the masters, which are, however,usually of a different grade from those of the junior pupils,to mark their station even in the results of deviation fromduty. These pupils are not selected for their office, but acquireit by right of seniority, every member of the sixth form, orhighest class, being a prester. When it happens that too fewof this form live with a particular master, or that those whoreside with him are young, then transfers may be made fromamong those living with others, to secure the better action ofthe system. The fifth form are exempt from the control of thesixth, but have themselves no charge of discipline.The spirit awakened by the head master in the pupils composingthe sixth form, must, as before remarked, determine thecharacter of this system of education, the master in whosehouse the pupils reside giving them up almost entirely to thisartificial arrangement. There is a porter, who has, amongother duties, that of preventing disorder, but he appeals forsupport to the preposterous, and only in flagrant cases to themaster, who thus steps in merely as a last resort, and is not theconstant guardian of the youth nominally under his charge.The teachers who approve of this system lay it down as a principle,that the pupil must be superintended either by preposterous,Among these usurped rights, the consequence of the law of the strongest,are the sending of their juniors upon errands, and imposing certain disagreeableduties upon them in their games. One of these latter, of which there are many,was found so injurious, that it was stopped by authority : it was obliging thelesser boys to leap the line at leap-frog, instead of the prester. I mention itto show the character which this tyranny assumes.894 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.or by ushers, and that all experience has shown the inefficiencyof the latter mode of government. These methods, however, appearto me to form two extremes, neither of which is good. Ifthe selection of the preposterous was made on account of peculiarfitness for their office, the theory of this form of school governmentmight be plausible; if they were required to act accordingto rules emanating from the masters, and deprived of their presentusurped authority, the system would be less objectionable ;and if, in addition, they were controlled by the active and constantsuperintendence of the masters, we should then have theenlightened system which is substituted for that of fagging inmany of the best boarding-schools of Germany ; without suchchanges the theory and practice cannot accord. It is admitted,even by those who uphold it, to be readily liable to greatabuse, and to foster the dangerous spirit of the love of power.I am persuaded it never could have been suffered to exist as asystem, in the schools of our country, and that it cannot continueunder the reforms which must gradually be introducedinto those of England. Enlightened masters, intrusted byparents with the care and guidance of youth, cannot alwaysbe blinded by custom to the true nature of their responsibilities,or willing to transfer them to those who are neither fitted byage nor by habit for the important charge.The care of the pupils on Sunday is principally with the masterswith whom they board, and morning prayers are said atthe house before going to church. Some masters encouragethe pupils to visit in their families, and hold religious lectureson Sunday, after the public duties of the day are over. AtRugby the attendance of the elder pupils on the communion isnot made a matter of rule, but in general the sixth form, andmany of the fifth, are communicants of the church. The youngerpupils are not encouraged to come forward.Pecuniary allowances are distributed regularly by the masters,who feel bound to check extravagances, when known tothem, by correspondence with the parents.The following is the order of the day in the boarding houses,varying somewhat with the season : — The pupils rise at six andRUGBY GRAMMAR SCHOOL. ^^^a-half, and go to prayers in the school at seven ; breakfast ateight, dine at one, take tea at seven, and must be in the housein winter at a quarter before eight, the time varying with theseason ; have evening prayers in the boarding-house at eighto'clock, retire at a quarter before ten, and the lights must beout on the porter's visit at ten o'clock.On half-holidays there is a roll called at three and five,P. M., to prevent the pupils from going too far beyond theschool bounds. On Sundays they rise at half past eight, andattend prayers in the houses.Intellectual education. So far as this is connected with thearrangements for study in the boarding-houses, it has beenalready described. For purposes of instruction, the whole numberof pupils, about three hundred, is divided into eight classesor forms, each of which is instructed by one of the assistantmasters,* or by the head master. These classes are designatedas first, second, and third form, lower remove, fourth form,upper remove, fifth and sixth form ; the object of this nomenclaturebeing to preserve, for the highest or eighth class, thename of sixth form, which has long been applied to it in theEnglish grammar schools ;f a fact which may serve to illustratethe tenacity with which old customs are adhered to in theseinstitutions. The pupils remain, in general, longer than a yearin each class. The subjects of study are divided into three departments,that of classical literature, arithmetic and mathematics,and French. The members of all the classes belowthe sixth form are distributed in these three departments, accordingto their proficiency in each, the same pupils being thususually not in the same form in all : but in the sixth form thesame individuals are associated in all the departments, so thaton reaching the sixth form in classical literature, the pupilpasses at once to the same division in all the studies. Thisarrangement would be nearly impracticable if the mathematicaland French departments were considered of high importance.Each of the assistant masters receives a salary and perquisites of JE200, andhis income from various sources rises to about 2500 dollars.t The " magic name of sixth form."396 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD. ¥Each master teaches in the three departments, though he maynot instruct the same form in each. It is obvious, from thisplan, that very moderate attainments are possible in the auxiliarybranches, the classical department being the one uponwhich the strength of the school is exerted. This, in fact, essentiallygives rank to the pupils while j\t the institution, and onentering the university. The system of special masters for thesubsidiary departments was tried some years since, but failed,from causes which I did not exactly understand.Each half year is divided into two equal periods, called"language time," and "history time." The books read in thesetwo periods vary in several instances, the poets and oratorsbeing read principally during the former, and history andgeography being chiefly studied during the latter. This willbe more clearly seen from the following table of the generaloccupation of the school for a whole year.* It does not include,however, the exercises in Greek and Latin prose and versewhich are required.First FORM.Classical. DIVISION". Language time. Latin grammar and Latin delectus.History time, Markham's England, vol. i. Sfcriptural instruction, Sfc. Churchcatechism and abridgment of New Testament History.Mathematical division. Tables. Addition, subtraction, multiplication, anddivision, simple and compound. Reduction.French divisicit. Hamel's Exercises, up to the auxiliary verbs.SECOND FORM.Classical. division. Language time. Latin grammar and Latin DelectusEutropius. History time. Markham's' England, vol. ii. Scriptural instruction,Sfc. St. Luke. Genesis.Mathematical division. The work done in the first form repeated. Ruleof three. Practice.French division. Hamel's Exercises. Auxiliary verbs. Regular conjugationsand some of the irregular. Gautier's Geography. .THIRD FORM.Classical division. Language time. Greek grammar (Matthias, Abridgment).Valpy'a Greek Exercises. Valpy's Greek Delectus. Florilegium.Translations into Latin. History time. Eutropius. Physical geography.♦ Journal of Education, vol. vii., p. 23.5, &c. The article is understood to beanaulhori-/,c<l publication, and from the \^cn of the Rev. Dr. Arnold.RUGBY GRAMMAR SCHOOL. 397(Useful Knowledge Society.) Sfcriptural instruction, Sfc. ExodUs. Numbers.Judges, i. and ii. Samuel. St. Matthew.Mathematical division. Rule of three. Practice. Vulgar fractions. Interest.Fkewch Division. Hamel's Exercises, first part, continued. Irregular verbs.Elizabeth, ou les Exiles en Siberia.Lower nEMOVS.Classical. DIVISION. Language time. Greek grammar and Valpy's Exercises.Rules oftlic Greek Iambics. Easy parts of the Iambics of the Greek tragedians.Virgil's Eclogues. Cicero de Senectute. History time. Part ofJustin. Parts of Xenophon's Anabasis. Markham's France, to Philip of Valois.Sfcriptural instruction, Sfc. St. Matthew, in Greek Testament Acts, in the EnglishBible.Mathematical. DIVISION. Vulgar fractions. Interest Decimal fractions.Square root.French division. Ilamel continued and repeated. Jessie's Jardin desPlantes.Fourth Form.Classical division. Language time. aeschylus, Promote. Virgil, hen. ii.and iii. Cicero de Militia,. History time. Part of Xenophon's Hellenic.Flores from iii. 21 to iv. 11. History of Greece. (U. K. S.) Markham'sFrance, from Philip of Valois. Detailed geography of Italy and Germany. Scripturalinstruction, Sc. Acts, in the Greek Testament St John, in the EnglishBible. Old Testament History.Mathematical division. Decimals. Involution and evolution. Addition,subtraction, multiplication, and division of algebra. Binomial theorem. Euclid,Book i., Prop. 1 to 15.French division. Hamel's Second Part, chiefly syntax of the pronouns.La Fontaine's Fables.UPPKK BBMOVE.Classical division. Language time. Sophocles' Pilot. ^schyl. Eugenia.Homer's Iliad, i., ii. Virgil sen., iv., v. Parts of Horace, Odes i., ii., iii.Parts of Cicero's Epistles. History time. Parts of Arrian. Parts of Patroclus,Book ii. Sir J. Mackintosh's England. Scriptural instruction. St John, inGreek Testament. Deuteronomy and Epistle of St Peter. Selections from thePsalms.Mathematical division. Equation of payments. Discount. Simple equations.Euclid, Book i., from 15 to end.French division. Translation from English into French. La Fontaine'sFables.LOWER FIFTH.Classical division. Language time, ^schyl. Sept. Contra Thebes. Sophocles,Cet. Tyr. Homer's Iliad, iii., iv. Virgil's aeneid, vi., vii. Extracts fromCicero's Epistles. Parts of Horace. History time. Parts of Arrian. HerosGeneral EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.doria, Hi., 1, 38, 61, 67, 88, 116. LIvy, parts of ii. and iii. Halkm's MiddleAges, "i^'rance, Spain, Greeks, and Saracens. Physical and political geographyof all Europe. Scriptural instruction. St. John. Epistles to Timothy £indTitus. Bible history, from 1 Kings to Nehemiah, inclusive.Mathematical division. Exchange. Alligation. Simple equations withtwo unknown qualities, and problems. Euclid, Book iii.French Drvisiosr. Syntax and idioms. A play of Moliere, to construe, andthen to turn from English into French.FIFTH Forfar.Classical Division. Language time. iEschyl. Agamemnon. Homer'sIliad, v., vi.; Odyssey, ix. Demosthenes' Reptiles in Aphobum i. Virgil'sLen. viii. Parts of Horace. Cicero in Verres. History time. Parts of Herodotusand Thucydides. Parts of Livy. Hallam's Middle Ages. State of society.Scriptural instruction, Sc. Epistles to the Corinthians. Paley's Horae Pauline.Mathematical division. Quadratic equations. Trigonometry. Euclid, tothe end of Book vi.Fresco DiTisioar. Senses de Pascal. Translations from the English intoFrench,SIXTH Form.Classical division. Language time. Various parts of Virgil and Homer.Some one or more of the Greek tragedies. One or more of the private orations iof Demosthenes. Cicero against Verres. Parts of Aristotle's Ethics. History \time. Parts of Thucydides and Arrian. Parts of Tacitus. Parts of Russell IModern Europe. Sfcriptural instruction, Sfc. One of the prophets in the Sep jquaint version. Different parts of the New Testament.Mathematical DiTisioir. Euclid, iii., vi. Simple and quadratic equations.]Plane trigonometry. Conic sections.French division. Parts of Guizot's Histoire de la Revolution angleterre, 'and Signet's Histoire de la Revolt. Francis.A comparison of this course with that of one of the grammarschools still adhering closely to the old system, will serve toshow how far it is in advance; I select an authorized accountof the courses at Harrow for the comparison.*third form.Evangelic. Ovid's Epistles. Select e profanes. Greek grammar. Exempla IMinora. Two sets of Latin verses and one Exempla Minora, during each week, ]as exercises. Monica Christiana. Hartley's Geography. Scriptures readSundays.Quarterly Journal of Education, vol. iii. p. 4, &c. London.HARROW GRAMMAR SCHOOL. 399FOURTH FOR]<f.Repetition of Ovid's Epistles. Ovid's Metamorphoses. Excerpt from Virgiland Horace. Turselini Hist. Caesar and Monica Christiana.Repetition of Greek grammar. Greek Testament. Poesis Graeca. Twocopies of Latin verses and one translation from the Francis of Dr. Butler, perweek, as exercises.A map to be copied and shaded, as a weekly exercise in geography. St. Matthew'sand St. Mark's gospels. Wake's Catechism, with Scripture proofs, forSundays.SHELL FORK.Historia Romana. Cornelius Nepos. Virgil's aeneid. Horace's Odes, Epistles,or Satires. Latin theme. Latin lyrics. Latin hexameter or elegiac. GreekTestament. Musa Graeca. Xenophon's Anabasis. Retranslation of Xenophoninto Greek. Homer's Iliad. Repetition of Greek and Latin verse. Geography.St. Luke's and St. John's gospels. Watts' Scripture History. Doddridge's Sermonson the Evidences of Christianity, for Sundays.FIFTH FORM.Historia Romana. Virgil's aeneid and Georgicss, the latter in the way of lecture,and with repetition. Horace's Odes, construed, explained, and commentsentered in common place book. Repetition of Horace's Odes. Horace's Epistlesand Satires. Latin theme. Latin verse, hexameter or ekgiac (thirty, the compulsorynumber per week). Latin lyrics. MusaGrceca. Homer's Iliad. Thucydides.Demosthenes. Philosophia Graeca. Greek plays, and lectures on the Metresand Greek theatre. Grecian history and chronology. Ancient geography.Modern geography. Lecture on literature.Acts of the Apostles. Paley's Evidences. Watt's Scripture Geography, forSundays.SIXTH FORM.Virgil's aeneid. Horace's Odes, Epistles, and Satires. Historia Romana.Latin themes. Written translations. Latin lyrics. Latin hexameter and pentameterverses.Parts of the Gospels and Acts. Musa Greece. Homer's Iliad. Thucydides.Demosthenes. Philosophia Greece. Greek plays. Greek prose exercises andGreek history. Modern history. English essays.Beausobre on the New Testament. General Scripture history. Euclid. Vulgarand decimal fractions. Logic.New Testament. Newton on the Prophecies. Lectures cm the Articles of theChurch of England, with Scripture proofs, for Sundays.Admitting that by the arrangements at Rugby the mathematicaland French divisions will be, in general, imperfectlytaught, which does not seem to be liable to a doubt in theory.400 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.and which the fact is said to confirm, how vastly superior isits mere classical division to that which occupies the time ofthe Harrow student. In that division the ancient languages,leaving out of consideration the modern history, and reasoningupon the acquisition of these studies for themselves, are as fullytaught, and with materials which appear to me more rational,connected, and better chosen than those of Harrow.* If noliterature existed beyond that of Greece and Rome; if no discoveriesin mathematics or physics, in art or nature ; if no nationshad, by the advance of civilization, come into greaterrelative importance than in the days of Rome's prosperity, thecourse of Harrow might be well adapted to train up Britishyouths of the provinces in the learning of the capital. As it is,the exclusion of all, or nearly all, that characterises moderncivilization, brings discredit upon the system, and the worstfoes of the legitimate use of classical culture are those whoprofess to be its best friends. The success which the pupils ofRugby have had in the universities, the standard by which allthe public schools in England are tried, proves conclusivelythat it has lost nothing on the score of classical instruction byintroducing some modern improvements into its course. Thesuccess, in the same field, of the Edinburgh Academy, whichhas also adopted, and actually gone further in these improvements,shows that an efficient arrangement may carry out themodern courses without interrupting the progress of the ancientlanguages. When we come to consider the gymnasia of Germany,we shall have additional examples of the same kind,embracing a still further extension of modern branches, withoutinjury to the classical departments. This grade of progressin England, and even in Scotland, has yet been too recent toafford the desired experience as to its results.The masters at Rugby are at Liberty to give private instructionin any branches not forming a part of the regular course,but in fact have few private pupils. The practice of givingprivate lessons of revision of the daily exercises, or of preparesI subjoin in the Appendix, No. XII., the remarks understood to be from theI>cn of Dr. Arnold, on tlieUso and Method of the Study of the Ancient Languages.RUGBY GRAMMAR SCHOOL. 401tion for them, is not allowed here, while at Harrow each pupilis required to have a private tutor.The stimulus of taking places in the class is used in all theforms below the sixth; the classes below the lower fifth takingplaces according to proficiency at each recitation. There is ageneral examination before the Christmas holidays, and thenames of the pupils who distinguish themselves are printed. Thestudents have the privilege of presenting themselves for examinationon books which they have read out of school, and thisreading counts in the determination of standing. The fifth andsixth forms are examined by the head master in classics oncea month, and at the June examination of the fifth form theyare rated according to the marks of the last half year. Thesixth form is limited in number, and hence only those in somedegree proficient in the fifth, enter it. A pupil who hasnot reached the fifth form at eighteen, or the sixth at nineteen,is generally allowed to withdraw. The members of thesixth form are not stimulated by daily comparison with eachother, and indeed Dr. Arnold is understood to be very cautiousin exciting the principle of ambition. There ate, however,prizes, consisting of payments called "exhibitions," of sixtypounds (nearly three hundred dollars) a-year for seven years,which may be awarded to pupils entering and residing at eitherof the universities of Oxford or Cambridge. Of those who leaveRugby for the English universities, by far the greater number,perhaps nearly two to one, go to Oxford, indicating by thisselection that they are conscious of full attainment in classicalknowledge. The pupils remain ordinarily in the sixth form twoyears, their age at terminating the course being eighteen ornineteen, on the average.The regular lessons of the school employ five hours anda-half per day on three days of the week, and four hours anda-half on three others, which are half-holidays. They are distributedas follows: from seven to eight, A. M., nine anda-quarter to eleven, two and a-quarter to five, P. M., on threedays; and the same hours between seven and eleven, A. M.,with from eleven, A. M. to one, P. M., on three other days.402 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The distribution of time for recreation seems to me better thanthat at Harrow, where the whole of Tuesday is a holiday, andThursday and Saturday half-holidays.Physical education. This branch, though not specially regulatedin the English schools, is usually in an excellent condition.There is always a spacious play-ground or common attachedto every public school of this grade, and the relish which pupilsdisplay for games requiring skill and strength, and giving exerciseto the various parts of the body, is very great. I havealready alluded to the common or play-ground at Rugby. Theamusements are, in general, never interfered with, the pupilsbeing without superintendence, an attempt at which wouldbe resented as an infringement of privilege. In many privateschools it has been thought better that the teachers should bepresent, and in some they even mingle with the pupils at play;but the relative position of the master and pupil in most of thepublic schools does not permit this mode of combining moralwith physical education. The whole tone of mind of a pupilof an English public school is, in this respect, peculiar, and theeffect, in reference to conduct, has its good and evil features.A spirit of independence is fostered, but frequently at the costof neglect of moral principle.ST. DOMINGO-HOUSE SCHOOL, EVERTON, NEAR LIVERPOOL.In visiting private establishments for education, my inquirieswere necessarily limited by the disposition shown to furnishme with information. It frequently happened, however,that every thing was thrown open without reserve, and everyendeavour shown to enable me to judge for myself of the resultsof the system. Such opportunities I enjoyed through the kindnessof the heads*of the private schools of which I am about togive a sketch.Mr. Voelcker's institution is established in a large mansion,called the St. Domingo house, in the village of Everton, nearthe city of Liverpool. The situation is elevated, the house convenient,and the grounds ample for the purposes of the establishment.It consists, in fact, of two schools in differentwST. DOMINGO-HOUSE SCHOOL. 408buildings, one a day-school, the other, of which I speak, aboarding-school. The institution is intended for the threefoldpurpose of preparing young rien for the universities, for thearmy, navy, and engineering, and for trade. At a certain periodthe courses divide according to the future destination ofthe pupils.The views of Mr. Voelcker in education are understood tocoincide with those of nriany of the most intelligent of the disciplesof Pestalozzi. His plans are very different from thoseof the grammar schools which have just been noticed, and,therefore, afford experience in reference to points not reachedby them. These points are principally the following, the intercourseand relation between the teachers and pupils, and betweenthe pupils themselves, both affecting the ground-work ofmoral education : the result of postponing the study of theancient languages, and of preceding them by the study of modernlanguages; of introducing a knowledge of nature and artthroughout the course; and of dispensing with emulation as ameans of exciting to intellectual exertion.Moral education. Besides the means of religious instructioncommonly used for developing the moral sentiments, there is herea constant endeavour to promote the influence of the teacher,by cultivating friendly feelings and intercourse between himand his pupils. The younger classes have female superintendence.The elder ones are accompanied in their play, andsuperintended in their studies, by the younger assistant teachers.The principal and some of the teachers take their meals withthe pupils, partaking at the same table of the same fare. Someof the assistant teachers, also, sleep in the rooms with thepupils, and thus, as in the German schools, exercise a powerfulinfluence in reference to their moral education. Experience,here and elsewhere, has shown that this intercourse is compatiblewith a due maintenance of discipline, and that it tendsmaterially to lessen the necessity for punishments. The principalmakes, from time to time, a communication to parents, inwhich he states the progress and conduct of their children.The school is assembled at the close of the morning and GENERAL EDUCATIOy. SECONDARY PERIOD.noon recitations, and a report made to the principal by eachteacher. Private admonition is given, if required by the natureof the report, and frequent offences are followed by an appealto the parents, and if this fails to produce the desired effect, orinthe case of flagrant offences, by removal from the school.Corporal punishment is rarely resorted to.Intellectual education. The pupils are divided into sixclasses, in general according to age. Each class containsfrom eight to thirteen or even fifteen pupils, under the chargeof a teacher, who devotes himself to some particular branchor branches. The teaching is, therefore, individual, except incertainsubjects, as drawing, natural philosophy, and chemistry,when two or three classes are united. The lessons are preparedunder the direction, and, if necessary, with the assistanceof the masters.The following is a general statement of the studies of thedifferent classes on which I shall remark in passing :First Class. Age of the pupils from six to eight years. Religion. Dutiesto God, to parents and teachers, to fellow pupils. Views of man and nature, andof their author. Suitable verses from the Bible and hymns committed to memory.Exercises of the perceptive faculties. Properties of different natural and artificialbodies derived from induction, by the pupils. Language. Correct speech andpronunciation, connected with the foregoing exercises. Practical grammar.Reading. Mental arithmetic. Numeration and the ground rules taught withsensible objects. Examples in denominate, or concrete, numbers only. Writing.Letters formed. Significant words, from the foregoing exercises, written. Formand drawing. Tracing of straight and curved lines, variously directed andcombined. Simple objects delineated. The number of hours of instruction if ]about five per day.The pupils of this class being quite young, their power ofcontinued attention is small, and hence the subjects of recitationare frequently varied, and the hours are divided by intervalsof exercise. I had an opportunity of verifying the good effectsof this judicious arrangement. The variety of subject whichpleases the child of this age, induces due mental effort, and contributesto lead to a habit of attention, which is to be cultivatedby gradual steps in the after classes. I saw no experience,any where, which indicated that to render instruction disagreesST. DOMINGO-HOUSE SCHOOL. 405able, to overfatigue the mind of the child, and his body, weresuccessful methods of developing either, or to support the ideathat the education of young children may be marred by renderingtheir instruction too agreeable.Second Class. Eight to ten years of age. Religion. Bible history. Lar'gage. English grammar. Historical compositions. Geography. General ideasof physical geography. History, Stories from general history, and from theHistory of England. Arithmetic. Mental arithmetic, the ground rules, with concrete,abstract, and compound numbers. Fractions. Use of figures, and applicationto foregoing rules. Forms. Ideas of geometrical figures. Natural History.Animals. Writing. Sentences relating to the subjects of study. Drawing.Chiefly from real objects.Third Class. Ten to twelve years of age. Religion. Historical parts of theBible, chiefly from the New Testament. Language. 1. English composition,historical and descriptive; correct reading. 2. French. Sherman. Etymology,and forms of the simple sentences, acquisition of words and phrases. Geography.Europe and Great Britain more in detail. History. Connected English history.Arithmetic. Decimals, square root, proportions, fellowship, interest, &,c. Geometry.Plane figures. Natural Philosophy. Inductive exercises. General propertiesof bodies. Mechanics. Writing and Drawings as in the second class.The peculiarity before mentioned, of beginning with theforeign modern languages, instead of the ancient, is here introduced.The English is supposed to be the language of comparison,and the French and German are taught early, for thesake of accurate pronunciation, and of acquiring a facility intheir use in conversation. I have before offered some remarkson this subject in speaking of the Hill-street Institution, inEdinburgh. As many of the teachers in this school areforeigners, who speak English with difficulty, the pupils areinduced the more readily to converse with them in their ownlanguage.Fourth Class. Twelve to fourteen years of age. Religion. Reading theScriptures. General views of the Christian religion. Language. 1. Englishcomposition. 2. French and German, continued. Committing to memory passagesof prose and verse. 3. Latin begun. Etymology and simple parts ofsyntax. Versions from English into Latin. Cornelius Nepos. Geography. Generalpolitical and statistical geography. History. Ancient history; history ofthe middle ages. Arithmetic and algebra. Cube root. Proportions and logarithms.Algebra, to quadratic equations, inclusive. Geometry. Solids. Trigone-406 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.merry. Natural Philosophy. Elements of Astronomy. Mathematical and physicalgeography. Drawing. From models. Copying drawings of landscapesand the human figure.In the French, the black-board is used by the pupils in writingfrom dictation, or in turning English into French. Anotheruseful method is the preparation of written exercises from abook, in which but few of the French words are given belowthe English. These exercises are afterwards translated, vivavoce, into English, and then the French is read correctly fromthe book. In German, pieces committed to memory are writtenout to acquire the spelling.The natural philosophy lessons are given in conversationallectures, interspersed with questions, to ascertain the state ofthe pupil's knowledge. The class take notes, which are writtenout subsequently in full, and presented at the next recitation forcorrection.In the drawing class a very useful exercise is introduced,consisting in copying drawings upon a different scale from the;original. Latin is begun in this class.Fifth Class. Fourteen to sixteen years of age. Religion. Reading the Scrip-jturns. Morals of Christianity compared with those of paganism. Languages1. English composition and literature. 2. French and German exercises and]composition. Committing selected pieces to memory. 3. Latin. CorneliusNepos, finished. Ovid. History. Modern history. Natural Philosophy. Ele-|ments of hydrostatics, «fec. Heat, &c. Optics. Electricity, Galvanism and]magnetism. Chemistry,The branches just enumerated are common to all divisions]of the class, but here a separation takes place, according to]the destination of the pupils in after life.For the first division, or those preparing for the university,the following studies are added:Latin. Translations from English into Latin. Cicero and Livy read. GreeEtymological parts of the grammar. Greek delectus. Xenophon.For the second division, intended for the military or naveschools, the following courses are added:Spherical trigonometry. Land surveying. Navigation. Mechanics. Technologyand geometrical drawing.ST. DOMINGO-HOUSE SCHOOL. 407For the third division, or those preparing for commerce:Practical arithmetic. Book-keeping. History and geography of commerce,and a knowledge of the chief articles of trade and commerce.The chemistry is taught according to the method already-describedas used by Dr. D. B. Reid, of Edinburgh. It is difficultto introduce a similar system in regard to mechanics, butit has been done, partially, as already stated, at the La martiniqueschool of Lyons.The instruction in regard to the articles of trade and commerceis accompanied by a kind of practical exercise in thesystem of banking, in the different operations of trade, in themode of keeping books, &c., the members of the class beingconverted into an imaginary community, carrying on supposedoperations of this kind under the direction of the teacher. Toconduct these exercises properly, requires considerable skill, aswell as knowledge, but I was much pleased to see that soundinstruction was actually communicated, and the details ofbusiness, with their general theory, were thus impressed in away not easily to be forgotten.Sixth Class. Sixteen to eighteen years of age. This class is only intendedfor those preparing for the university.Language. English, French and German composition. Extracts from classicalauthors. Latin prosody and versification. Translations into Greek, continued.Xenophon, Plato, Herodotus, Thucydides, Homer, Euripides and aeschylus. Geography.Ancient Geography. Mental Philosophy. Mathematics. First six booksof Euclid, in Latin.The propriety of postponing Latin until the age of thirteen,the average of the fourth class, is a question which experiencealone can determine positively. In the case of those who areto go to the universities, where their success depends in a greatmeasure upon their being thoroughly trained classical scholars,I must express my conviction that the period between the fourthclass and the end of the sixth is not sufficient, with the manyother subjects to be attended to, to enable youths of ordinaryabilities to compete successfully with those who begin earlier,and devote more of their time to the classics. In the presentstate of secondary instruction in England, the classics must be408 General EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.the prominent feature of every school which prepares pupils forthe universities. That there is, also, ample time to devote toother studies, I think experience has shown, and I believe, further,that the mental training derived from the combined systemis superior to that from the exclusively classical, but notthat modern languages and science can be made the basis, andthe ancient languages supplementary, consistently with such anacquisition of the latter as to enable the student to compete forstations depending upon them with those who have been drilledin them from early youth. On the other hand, I must express,with equal freedom, my opinion that, as a preparation for engineering,the army, navy, commerce, or trade, or for thegeneral purposes of life, there cannot be a reasonable doubtwhether a student should devote his youth to the ancient languages,as at Harrow, or to the more general course of study,as in the school under consideration. The sources of usefulnessand enjoyment opened by the latter course would, in my opinion,far surpass those presented by the former.The principle of emulation is not admitted, by Mr. Voelcker,as one upon which the training of youth should depend, and,accordingly, there is neither taking of places in the recitations,nor giving of rank at examinations. It would require a moreminute inspection of the system than I was able to give it, tocome to a definitive conclusion as to the results of excludingemulation, but I could not avoid the impression that the classeswould, in many cases, have been more lively, had emulationbeen employed. While it nriay be freely admitted, in a moralpoint of view, that a desire of distinction is not among thehighest motives to exertion, I question whether we are yetprepared to dispense with it in our schools.Physical education. There is a gymnasium, in which regularexercises from the German system are practiced. At thetime of my visit this was deserted for the play-ground in frontof the house, and the exercises were abandoned for those gamesto which the English youth are so much attached.The order of the day in the school is as follows :BRUCE CASTLE SCHOOL. 409The pupils rise at half past six in autumn, the hour varyingwith the season, assemble to prayers at seven, study in classesuntil eight, breakfast and recite until nine, are in school untiltwelve, and play until three in summer and half past three inwinter, with an interval at two, or half past one, for dinner; inschool for three hours until six or half past six ; take tea inwinter at half past six, in summer at seven, and study untileight; at prayers and to bed at nine.BRUCE CASTLE SCHOOL, TOTTENHAM, NEAR LONDON.This is a private school near the village of Tottenham, tenmiles from London, conducted by Messrs. Edwin and ArthurHill, and established by their father. The principles and practicein their establishment are the result of the study andexperience of the able teachers through whose hands it hassuccessively passed. The object of education is thus stated, inthe account of the institution.*The object which we have kept in view, in forming oursystem of government and instruction, is to render our pupils,in the highest degree, virtuous and intelligent men ; and at thesame time so to modify the education of each, as to enable himto pass with honour, success, and happiness, through that pathof life into which he will probably be thrown." To effect thisit is deemed essential to study the individual pupil, and whenhis peculiar talent and disposition are discovered, to direct himin the path which they point out as that which he may pursuemost successfully, and the parent is advised accordingly. Asthere are, however, faculties to be cultivated essential to everyman in a laudable career, so the ground-work is general, while,after a certain period, the education is varied according to thedestination in life.The maxims laid down in relation to the exercise of the facultiesof the mind arc as follows : — The reflecting and inventiveSketch of the System of Education mental and intellectual, in practice atth6schools of Bruce Castle, Tottenham, and Castlewood, near Birmingham. London,1833.410 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.powers should be as much as possible-exercised, by throwingthe pupil upon his own resources in the course of the acquisitionof knowledge. A distinction, however, should be made in theamount and character of the assistance rendered to him betweenthose branches which may be acquired by patient studyand in progressive steps, and those which are in a great degreearbitrary, as, for example, between mathematics and language.The assistance which is afforded must be valued in order tobe beneficial, and must be proportioned, therefore, to the pupil'sown powers, as well as to the nature of his studies. The understandingshould be accustomed to examine for itself everyidea presented to it, and to be certain that it is fully grasped.Concentration of the mind mainly upon one subject is essentialto success in its attainment, and the studies, therefore,should be only so far diversified as to give the repose necessaryto renewed vigour. This concentration cannot, of course, becarried so far in youth as in manhood. Order is essential tothe efficiency of both mental and bodily labour. Desultoryefforts are of little value, when compared with systematicexertion ; a principle which, when a number of individualsare concerned, can only be carried out by punctuality on thepart of each.In regard to the kind of knowledge to be communicated, thefollowing maxims are observed: — The degree of attention paidto each study should be proportioned to its importance to thewelfare and happiness of society at large, and of the individual ;pupil. While, therefore, all the studies which form the basis oia general mental development are pursued, each pupil shouldbestow special attention upon those best calculated to cultivatehis peculiar powers. The formation of good habits of Imind, and the development of the mental, as well as of thebodily strength, is more to be regarded than the early acquire-jment of positive knowledge. As far as possible, however, thaiknowledge should be preferred, as the means of mental cultureswhich will fit the pupils for their duties in after life.In regard to the mode of communicating knowledge, the ar-jrangement of the subjects should be such as to admit of the most]BRUCE CASTLE SCHOOL. 411ready application of their principles by the pupils; and hencethe value of some branches, as introductory to others, shouldnot be lost sight of. No new step should be taken without thecertainty that the ground already passed over has been secured,and constant repetition must be employed to make sure thatwhat has been acquired has not been lost. A succession ofdefinite objects should be presented to the pupil, and the timenecessary, with moderate exertion, to their acquisition dulyassessed.The principles of moral education or discipline, as laid downby the instructors, are as follows: — "In arranging the motiveswhich we hold out to the pupils, for the acquirement of knowledge,of good habits, and of virtuous feelings, we place highestin the scale that which arises from the expectation of the benefitswhich such acquirements will confer on the holder himself,and the power they will give him of benefiting others. Nextto this motive we place love of employment, then hope of artificialreward, and, lastly, fear of punishment." Artificial rewardsand punishments are considered as necessary evils, andhence their use is limited to the smallest possible amount. Mildpunishments, inflicted with certainty, are more efficacious thansevere ones, from which there is a chance of escape. Ail unnecessaryrestraints are to be avoided. If possible, offencesshould be prevented rather than punished.These principles, as far as they cover the ground of education,seem to me to be entitled to a full assent, and it will beinteresting to trace some of the modes of their application; and,first, to the moral education and government of the pupils.Regularity is insured by aiming at exact punctuality. Eachexercise of the school has its appointed time, and rigid conformityto this is required, without which time is lost both tothe tardy pupil himself, and, through his negligence, to others. Itis not uncommon in schools to allow deviation from exactnessin the ringing of the bell, or other signals for exercise, but theeffect is fatal to habits of punctuality. It appears to me, fromobservation, that the happiest results are produced by this rule,which requires the pupil to be in a particular place at a GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.case second, and that it is greatly preferable to that whichallows a latitude of several minutes.An economy of time is produced by this regulation, and alsoby making the acquisition of lessons " piece-work," instead of"day-work." A certain portion of time is allotted, within whichthe pupil may, by proper exertion, master his lesson; if he isspecially active, and has done his work within this time, theremainder of it is at his own disposal. It is left to his judgmentto decide when the lesson is acquired, and he may leavehis desk; but he is responsible, subsequently, for his decision.This regulation is of course only applied after the judgmentnecessary to its execution has been formed.Good conduct is encouraged by various artificial methods,besides the natural ones of approbation and censure, and thefostering of kindly feelings of the pupils toward the teachersand towards each other. One of these is the award of schoolmarks, according to a graduated scale, for the performanceof duty, or extra work, and their forfeiture for the infractionof rules. The boys are divided into circles of ten, over whichan elder pupil, selected by the school, presides, under the titleof guardian. It is the duty of this guardian to assist the membersof his circle in all cases of difficulty, as a friend andadviser. He also collects the fines due from the members ofhis circle. There are rewards and privileges depending uponthe aggregate conduct of the members of a circle, so that eachone may be considered as interested in the good conduct of all,and, therefore, in preventing infractions of laws. A plan somewhatsimilar to this has also been tried at Mr. Fellenberg's institutionin Switzerland. In the case of certain boys, the rulesrelating to rewards and punishments have, at different times,been suspended with success, such boys being bound in honourto enter their conduct in a journal provided for the purpose.For the promotion of good conduct, an analytical table is kept,which displays, under appropriate and well subdivided heads,the opinion of each teacher in regard to every pupil. On achange of conduct, there is a Corresponding change of the register.If the standing upon this roll is good, certain favoursIBRUCE CASTLE SCHOOL. 413are extended to the pupil, such as the use of a small garden, anexcursion of a day or more, every half year, and the use of aseparate small room for a study. A high place in the conduct-rollrequires not merely the absence of infractions of rules, butthe manifestation of active good qualities; absolute merit, notcomparative, is rewarded by testimonials, and the name of apupil who is highly distinguished is inscribed on a tablet ofhonour. In extreme cases, temporary or entire separation of apupil from his fellows is resorted to as a punishment, but in nocase is public shame or corporal punishment allowed. In general,the intention of this method is to dispense, as far as possible,with punishments. Although the result of the regulationsof this school appeared to me, in the main, satisfactory, yetparts of them did not strike me favourably, as, for example, theadmission of the pupil to a share in the enactment of school-lawsand the fixing of penalties, to which there are objections,founded on the loss of time, and the distraction to which it mustgive rise. Well trained pupils will be easily satisfied of thejustice of mild laws emanating from the master, though theyhave had no voice in the enactment.In regard to intellectual education, it is given by instructionin the English branches, French, Latin, Greek, the elements ofnatural science and technology, arithmetic, and other branchesof mathematics, and is upon a liberal scale. Religious instructionand the physical education of the pupils are carefullyattended to.I propose to notice some of the peculiarities of the instructionin these branches, and of arrangements connected with thegeneral subject of intellectual labour. French is taught asnearly as possible in the way in which a child might be supposedto learn its mother tongue. Phrases of common use inthe school-room are first taught, and the pronunciation of themmade distinct and accurate. After this, the language of theclass-room is French, and if a pupil is unable to express himself,he is permitted to ask of the teachers the required phrase,or as much of it as he cannot make out without aid. Abouttwenty lessons, of an hour each, of familiar phrases are given,414 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.and these are repeated simultaneously by the class. After thisand other preliminary exercises, the pupil proceeds to his firstreading-book, a translation of Miss Edgeworth's " Frank,"which has previously been read, explained, transcribed, andcommitted to memory in the English course. A paragraphor more is read, great care being taken with the pronunciation;it is translated, transcribed, and written from dictation,rendered from French into English, and vice versa, in writing.When this process has been perfectly performed, it isnext committed to memory. Easy sentences are then given torender from English into French. The class thus proceedsthrough this book and the accompanying manuscript exercises.The rules of grammar are introduced from time to time, andare drawn from the pupil's own experience. He is now preparedto feel the convenience of learning the conjugations systematically.A second reading-book follows, and with it systematicgrammar is introduced.While the instruction in French is thus adapted to the purposefor which it is taught, the ancient languages are pursuedas in more exclusively classical schools, except that, perhaps,the study of grammar is more gradually introduced. Greatcare is taken that the exact meaning, as well as the language,of the authors studied is understood. The written exercises inlanguage are also considered as exercises in penmanship, beingsubjected to the scrutiny of the writing as well as of the classicalmaster. Before entering the Latin class, therefore, a boy musthave made a certain progress in his English education. TheLatin is begun at between eight and nine years of age by thosewho enter young, and the experience of this school has been,that boys beginning with the preparation, and at the age justmentioned, are better Latin scholars at eleven or twelve thanthose who begin earlier, and with a less complete preparation.Greek is commenced when the pupil can read Caesar. Thenumber of boys in the several sections is, in this department,not suffered to exceed seven.Geography is taught nearly upon the plan described in speakingof the burgher school of Halle, in Prussia. When some■BRUCE CASTLE SCHOOL. 415progress has been made in the study, imaginary voyages andjournies are made, and information is given in relation to theplaces visited. An idea of the dimensions of the earth is derivedfrom comparing upon a globe its circumference with thelongest actual journey which has been performed by the pupil.The earth is next considered as a part of the solar system.A course of private reading is marked out for the pupils,which they are encouraged to follow. The time required for anattentive perusal of each work is estimated, and a number ofmai'ks proportionate to this time may be obtained, provided thepupil passes a satisfactory examination upon its contents. Thesebooks are duly arranged in the school library, to which thepupils have access under certain regulations. The course consistsof works calculated "gradually to impart a strong taste forprivate reading — to lead a boy, by easy steps, from the familiarstory-books of children to the standard works of science and literature,— to store the mind of the pupil with the historical factsbefore exposing him to the risk of false impressions fromthe mixture of history and fiction — to connect the study ofbiography with that of the corresponding portions of history —and where authorities disagree in their views of importantevents, to place the works of the different authors as nearly asconvenient in juxtaposition"* This arrangement has been attendedwith the best effects.To carry out the principle, that clear and definite objects ofattainment should always be presented to a pupil during hiswhole course, schedules of the studies are hung up, and he ismade aware that he cannot proceed to a higher division withouthaving passed a satisfactory examination upon the subjectsof that in which he is. In courses depending upon principles,as arithmetic, &c., he must be able to correct his own errors,and in such as give mechanical facility, as drawing and writing,where exact comparison is practicable, he must come uptoa certain average standard.It must be remembered by those who are disposed to consistencyof the System, &c., p. 15.416 GErrERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.der what are called innovations in education as mere schemingwithout practical results, that the plans which are spoken of asin operation in this school have stood the test of a long experience,and are in no wise liable to the objections of meretheoretical conclusions. The school where they have beentried continues to flourish, and these results to speak for themselves,to every one who will take pains to examine into them.secondary INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE. 4l7CHAPTER XI.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE.It will facilitate the understanding of the notice which I amabout to give of secondary instruction in France, to make afew preliminary remarks upon the general system, of which itis a part, and of the highest instruction to which it leads.The exclusive charge of the entire system of education isvested in a body styled " the University of France"* presidedover by a grand master, who is the minister of public instruction,and president of a council of six, to which the regulationand administration of the whole are committed. Each councillorhas special charge over one or more divisions of publicinstruction, and in the offices connected with the council thedetails of business are transacted. Second to this council arethe inspectors-general of the university, who are required toexamine the institutions of every grade, and to report uponthem to the council.The kingdom is arranged, according to its political divisions,into academies, each academy embracing one or more Departments.The presiding officer of each academy is the rector,who is appointed by the grand master of the university, toserve for five years; the minister of public instruction being,ex officio, rector of the Academy of Paris, the active duties ofthat post are performed by a substitute. The rector is assistedby two inspectors and a council, who have the same dutieswithin the bounds of the academy as the inspectors-general andcouncil of the university have in the kingdom. The academyLaws of 1806. Code Universitaire, 1835. A very excellent account of theUniversity of France is given by our countryman, the Rev. Robert Baird, clergymanat Paris, in the American Quarterly Register for August, 1836.418 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.includes, besides this executive and superintending body, theteaching corps, or faculties, viz. — the faculty of letters, ofscience, of medicine, of law, and of theology, all of which,however, do not actually exist in every academy; in some,indeed, there is no faculty organization. These faculties consistof a variable number of professors, one of whom is dean,and a committee of whom examine candidates for degrees.The two degrees which may be taken at the close of thecareer of secondary instruction, without study in the facultiesthemselves, and which are introductory to the others, are thoseof bachelor of letters (bachelier-es-lettres) and of bachelor ofsciences (bachelier-es-sciences). The preparation necessaryfor these degrees may be made at home, as well as in one ofthe public or private establishments for secondary instruction;the examination is, in a great measure, the test according towhich they are bestowed, though, in cases where the testimonialsof conduct and proficiency are strong, the examinationhas, of course, less weight than in others. As the course ofsecondary instruction hinges, in a measure, upon the qualificationsfor those degrees, it is proper to introduce them here.To be admitted to an examination for the degree of bachelorof letters, the candidate must be at least sixteen years of age.He must prove, by a certificate, that he has studied for oneyear, at least, a course of mental and moral philosophy, andfor the preceding year, a course of rhetoric, in an establishmentconnected with the university; or that he has been similarlyinstructed in the house of his father, brother, or uncle; or thathe has attended the course of philosophy for at least a year, inafaculty of letters, and has, besides, followed the lectures ofother departments. In the last mentioned case he must producea certificate of regular attendance from the dean of thefaculty.The subjects of examination are divided into three classes,Latin, Greek, and rhetoric; history and geography; philosophyand the elements of mathematics and physics. The questionson these several subjects are arranged beforehand, in divisionspSecondary INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE. 419of three each, and the candidate draws, by lot, one of thesedivisions. He is required, also, to give a written exercise,consisting of a translation of Latin phrases.The Greek examination may take place upon selections from Lucian, Xenophon,Excepted c Scrlptoribus Grecs, Greek Chrestomathy, the Thoughts ofPlato, the Apology of Socrates, Plutarch, Aeschines, Demosthenes, Sophocles, Euripides,and Homer.The Latin, upon selections from Sallust, Livy, Tacitus, Quintus Curtis, Cicero,Virgil, and Horace. Rhetoric is considered under the heads of invention,arrangement, and elocution.The other subjects are as follows : History, divided into ancient history andRoman history, history of the middle ages, and modern history, to include theseven years' war.Geography, including a general description of the earth, modern geography,and especially that of France.Philosophy, divided into psychology, logic, morals, natural theology, and thohistory of philosophy.Elements of mathematics, namely, arithmetic, including proportions and vulgarand decimal fractions, partnership, and interest ; algebra, including equationsof the first degree, square and cube root, and proportions ; the most essentialpropositions of plane and solid geometry.The elements of physics include ideas of the laws of gravitation, of heat,electricity, magnetism, &,c.The first principles of chemistry.A competent knowledge of these subjects, it will hereafter beseen, may be obtained by a collegian without passing throughall the classes. A rigorous examination upon such a coursemight be considered quite sufficient for this degree, but it ispossible that, by the aid of manuals ingeniously contrived togive the minimum of information, the student may prepare himselfsuperficially. After all, however, this evil is not so greatto any as to the individual himself, and among the crowds whopress forward for these degrees, the university can lose butlittle in reputation by such cases.To become a candidate for the degree of bachelor ofsciences, the applicant must produce his diploma of bachelorof letters. If he intends to devote himself to giving instructionin philosophy merely, he is not required to be examined onchemistry and natural history, but the diploma has this face420 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.recorded upon it. If he applies for the baccalaureate in mathematicalscience, he is examined on the following subjects:1st. Arithmetic, geometry, plane trigonometry, spherical trigonometry,algebra, including the binomial theorem and the resolution of numerical equations,the application of algebra to geometry, and the elements of statics.2d. The elements of physical science required of the candidate for thebaccalaureate of physical science"*This examination is required to last at least one hour.The candidate for the degree of bachelor of physical scienceis examined —1 st. On arithmetic, elementary geometry, algebra, including problems dependingupon simple equations with one or several unknown quantities; onsimple machines and the part of the elements of statics referring to them.♦* 2d. The elements of physics, chemistry, and natural history, according tothe following programme"*The programme referred to includes, in physics, the general properties ofbodies, gravity, hydrostatics and hydrodynamics, heat, electricity and galvanism,magnetism, electro-magnetism, molecular action, acoustics, optics, andmeteorology. In chemistry, the general principles, nomenclature, some of thesimple non-metallic substances and their compounds, metals, alloys, oxides, andsalts. General questions on zoology, botany, mineralogy, and geology.This examination must last not less than three-quarters of an hour.The mathematical course for the last named degree, exceptingthe part relating to machines and statics, is taught in thefirst year of philosophy in the royal colleges, as will be seenhereafter.As no one can matriculate in any faculty of an academywithout having taken the diploma of bachelor of letters, andthe career of medicine requires also that of sciences, the preparationfor these degrees forms a definite object for attainmentby the course of secondary instruction.The establishments for public secondary instruction inFrance, are the royal and communal colleges (colleges royauxet communal), and the normal school (ecole normale), and forprivate instruction the institutions (institutions) and boarding-schools(pensions). There are, beside, a few private colleges,• Decem of the Royal Council of Public Instruction, Feb. 3, 1837.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE. 421the remains of ancient foundations. The law defines the royalcolleges to be establishments in which the following branchesare taught : — the languages, history, rhetoric, logic, elements ofmathematics, and physical science ; the communal colleges tobe those where instruction is given in the elements of the ancientlanguages, and the first principles of history and science.*The first mentioned private establishment is defined by the lawto be one resembling the colleges, and the second was originallydesigned for a lower grade of attainment.The pupils of the private establishments are now required bylawto attend the recitations of the colleges, but as they mayenter a higher class of a college by examination on the studiesof the previous classes, and even procure a certificate of proficiencyin all the courses by the same means, the law may beconsidered as not rigidly enforced, although, as a general rule,the attendance is customary.The royal colleges are established by, and in part supportedfrom, funds of the state and of the university. In turn, theycontribute to the treasury of the university, of which they formcomponent parts. The communal colleges are established, inlike manner, in part at the expense of the communes. Thereare upwards of forty royal colleges in France, of which fiveare in Paris ; besides these, there are two private colleges inthe same city. The number of communal colleges in thekingdom is about two hundred and thirty " Institutions" andboarding-schools are licensed by the university, and pay forthis a yearly sum into its treasury. As this is less in the caseof the latter than of the former establishment, and as the planof education for them is not specifically laid down, it acts as abounty toward the increase of the boarding-schools. The headof the former must have, according to law, at least the degreeof bachelor in the faculties of letters and sciences, while theDecree of 17th March, 1808, Art. 4, quoted in the Code Universitaire, p. 5,1835.t Expose des motifs et projet de loi sup Instruction secondary presented parM. Guizot, ministre de Instruction publique, dans la seance de lundi, herFever, 1836.422 QEWBRAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.master of the boarding school is required to have only that ofbachelor of letters.These schools are wholly subsidiary to the public ones, andcannot be considered as stimulating then in any degree by awholesome competition. M. Guizot has pointed out the defectsof the system as depending upon the following causes — first,that a special and discretionary authority, available only forone place, is necessary to open such an establishment ; second,that the pupils must be sent to the colleges ; and third, that thegrand master of the university has the right, after an academicalinquest, to close them.* There are more than ninety " institutions,"and six hundred and sixty boarding-schools in France.Since the organization of the imperial university, and connexionof the lyceums (now royal colleges) with it, in 1806,the general outline of public secondary instruction in Francehas not varied materially. Isolated instances of modification,such as the establishment of courses for students of arts andtrades, connected with the royal college of Nancy, cannot beconsidered as contravening this remark. A growing necessityappears, however, to have been felt for a secondary education,bearing the same relation to non-professional occupations asthe present secondary bears to the professions. Accordingly,such a system was proposed by M. Guizot in 1836.He lays down the principle, that it is an abuse of classicalstudies to extend them so far as to create an undue tendencytowards the learned professions, or to prevent the timely acquisitionof the habits of mind and special knowledge required fornon-professional occupations. He considers, therefore, that at acertain period, instruction should assume a special character,being directed according to the future vocation of the recipientof it. This division of courses he is of opinion should take place,either between the elementary or grammar classes of the royalcolleges and the higher classes, or between the two lower ofthe literary classes. The very important modification thus proposedwas accompanied by another, throwing open secondary» Almanac d« rUniversiW Roy ale de France, 1836.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN FRANCE, 423instruction to private competition under suitable regulations, asto the qualifications of the teachers, and repealing the law requiringthe pupils of private establishments to attend the royalcolleges. The project embodying these changes was reported,with some alterations, to the Chamber of Deputies, in June,1836, but has not, I believe, been yet acted on. Certainly ik)changes of the kind contemplated had been made previous tomy visit to the colleges of Paris in 1837.*While the general outline has thus remained the same, greatchanges have been made in the filling up, the details of instructionhaving been much varied in reference both to matter andmethod. Instruction in the physical and mathematical sciences,to prepare for the courses and first degrees of the faculty ofscience, having been necessarily admitted, the manner in whichthese should be combined with the classical studies, appears tohave been subject to much variety of legislation by the councilof the university. At one time, science and letters were studiedconjointly, then they were separated, and science, except in itsvery elements, was postponed to the close of the course ; theyare at this time again united, but with arrangements consideredto be very imperfect. If I may judge by the examinations forthe baccalaureate of sciences, which I attended, this opinion,which came to me from more than one source, is quite correct.The changes of position which the course of natural historyhas undergone, are very remarkable. In 1802 it was directedthat the elements of natural history should be taught in thelowest class of mathematics, corresponding to the next to thelowest in the classics. In 1814 this subject formed a part ofthe courses of the third and second classes. In 1830 it stillcontinued part of the course of the third class, and in 1832was transferred to the sixth or lower grammar class, where itis even now considered a surplus study. The modern languageshave been introduced as voluntary branches with theusual result, where the honours of the institution are reservedI am indebted for letters of admission to the colleges of Part to the Ministerof Public Instruction, M. Salvandy.424 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.for the regular courses. While the studies in science havenot afforded the results which similar ones in other schools ofFrance are daily producing, the lessons of philosophy havesucceeded in rivalling, in the attention of the students, those ofthe languages, and now constitute a striking portion of the collegecourse.In describing the details of this system, I shall confine myremarks to the royal colleges, as the institutions by which thesecondary instruction of France must be judged. It will beconvenient to consider these institutions under the heads of,1st, their government and the admission of pupils ; 2d, theirdiscipline; 3d, their courses of instruction; 4th, the arrangementsfor domestic economy.Government The royal colleges are superintended by anofficer, called a provisor (provider), assisted by a censor (censeur).These officers must be at least licentiates in the facultiesof letters or of sciences. The proviso has the generaldirection of the college. All the other officers are subordinateto him, and he has the appointment of some of them. It is hisduty to visit frequently the infirmary, refectory, study-halls,dormitories, and other parts of the establishment. Accompaniedby the censor, he is present, from time to time, at thelessons of the professors. If he observe negligence on the partof any officer, he communicates with him through the censor.Every evening he receives from the latter the class lists, containingthe remarks of the professors during the day, andevery morning has such students as require admonition summonedbefore him. On Sunday he attends, with the censor, ameeting of the classes, at which the remarks of the week arerecapitulated. Once a month he meets the censor, chaplain,and professors, to discuss the affairs of the college. Everyquarter, at least, he communicates with parents in regard tothe health, progress, and conduct of their sons. Twice a yearhe reports to the council of his academy a detailed list of thepupils, and gives an account of the state of the college.The censor is the immediate superintendent of instructionand discipline, and has charge of the library. He superintendsROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. ' 426in person the rising and going to bed of the pupils, their goingto and coming from the classes and meals, their walks, andtheir reception-room. He furnishes the class-lists for the day,and their recapitulation for the week, to the proviso. He replacesthe proviso, in case of the absence or sickness of thelatter. In point of fact, when the proviso is a man of energy,the office of censor is not of very great importance, but whennot so, and the censor has the requisite character, he is likelyto be the real proviso.The chaplain (almoner) holds the same rank as the censor.He is nominated by the proviso, and appointed by the rectorof the academy, with the advice of the bishop of the diocese.He has charge of the religious instruction of the Roman Catholicpupils, and of the religious services on Sunday. In the collegeof Louis-le-Grand, at Paris, and in some establishments outof the capital, there is, besides, a chaplain for the Protestantstudents.The professors, whose branches will be stated hereafter, arechosen from among the adjuncts (agr^g^s). Each one hascharge of a division of a class, which should not, by law, exceedtwenty-five in number. In case of an excess, the pupilsshould be so distributed between the professor and his adjunct,that the two divisions may, as nearly as possible, contain pupilsof equal capacity, so as to enter into direct competition. Theprofessors make both daily and weekly reports, in relation tothe pupils, to the censor. Besides the professors, there areteachers of the modern languages, of writing, arithmetic, drawing,dancing, and fencing. The first four named branches aretaught at the expense of the college.The adjuncts (agrees) are appointed after a competition,which may take place in one or more of the following fivedivisions, namely, philosophy, the sciences, the higher classesof letters, history and geography, and the grammar classes.The competitors must have passed through the normal school,or have been for two years directors of studies in a royal college,or teachers in a communal college, or have done theduties of adjunct in a royal college, for the same time, or426 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.have served three years continuously as repeaters of lessons(r^petiteurs) in the institutions or boarding-schools of the sameacademy. This term of service is reduced to one year forthose who have the degree of doctor of sciences or letters, andfor the pupils of the polytechnic school admitted to the publicservice. The competitors must also have certain degrees, viz:for the first named competition, those of licentiate of letters andbachelor of sciences; for the second, those of licentiate of themathematical and physical sciences; for the third and fourth,that of Licentiate of letters; and for the fifth, that of bachelor ofletters. The judges are named by the grand master of theuniversity, on the nomination of the rector of the academy.There are three kinds of competition (concours), by writtenexercises, by an argumentation or thesis, and by a lesson. Thesecond trial lasts, at most, three hours. The third, an hour, duringthe first part of which the competitor lectures, and duringthe second, questions one of the others on the subject of thelecture. The competitors in philosophy compose two disputationsin French, one on a philosophical question, the other ona part of the history of philosophy. A thesis is sustained uponsimilar subjects as the second part of the competition. Thecompetition in mathematics and physics consists, for the firsttrial, of an essay on two subjects, one in each of these branches,or in chemistry, as a substitute for physics; for the second, inquestioning and answering questions on the subjects of examinationfor the grades of licentiate of mathematical science, andof licentiate of physical science. That in the higher classes ofletters consists, for the first trial, in composing a Latin dissertationon some subject of ancient or modern literature, a dissertation,in French, on some subject of philosophy, a piece of Latinpoetry, and a translation of Greek into French; for the second,in translating, at sight, passages selected from a Greek orLatin author, and in answering any question of other competitorson the subject, or growing out of it, and asking them questionsin return. The competition in history and geographyrequires no special description. For the grammar class thecompetitor must, on his first trial, translate selected pieces fromROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. 427Latin into French, and vice versa, and from Greek into French,and vice versa, and compose Latin verses ; for his second trialhe must translate, at sight, a passage from a Greek, andanother from a Latin author, into French, and stand an examinationupon it by the other competitors, or by the judges.There are several adjuncts attached to every college, whosupply the places of absent professors. and who take divisionsof the classes for regular instruction. When not thus attached,so that their stipend is furnished by a college, they are entitledto a small payment from the university. In the college ofLouis-le-Grand there are no less than twenty adjuncts, besidesthe officers, professors, and directors of study. There are, inthe same institution, upwards of one thousand pupils of differentclasses, more than five hundred being boarders.This arrangement, by which a number of young men areconnected with public instruction at their entrance into life, andsecured the means of devoting themselves to teaching, is oneof the most, if not the most, important provision of all thosewhich regulate the university of France. The competitionprevents, in general, the connexion of those who are deficientin capacity to learn and to teach, and the supply of vacanciesamong the teachers by young men thus trained has inestimableadvantages.The officers who superintend the pupils when not in the class-roomsare called directors of study (maitres deludes). Theymust be at least of the grade of bachelor of letters. There isone of them to about twenty-five students. This officer eatswith the students, sleeps in a room adjacent to their dormitories,superintends them in their walks, at going to and fromthe recitation-rooms, and when in their dormitories, assists themin the preparation of their lessons, and attends them in thewriting, dancing, music, and fencing exercises. After hearingthe lessons of the students, he reports to the professor hisopinion of the preparation of each, and to the censor theirconduct and progress. The reports to the censor are madedaily, and an abstract is given to him at the close of the week.To assist in the discipline, the pupils are divided into small sectsGENERAL EDUCATION. Secondary PERIOD.tons, over which the director appoints one as the head, who isresponsible for the good order of his fellows. These directorsare thus not mere superintendents of the play hours, as insome of the institutions already noticed in other countries, butalower grade of teachers, who are required to be competent tohear the recitations, to ascertain that due preparation has beenmade, and to assist the pupils, if necessary. They are appointedby the grand master of the university, on the nomination ofthe pro visor, and receive, at first, merely a provisional appointment,during which time their nomination may be recalled.The steward has charge of the domestic economy, underdirection of the proviso. All purchases of considerableamount are made by contract, and according to the estimatessanctioned by the council of the university; smaller purchasesmay be authorized by the council of the academy. The warrantof the proviso is a sufficient authority to the steward forexpenditures which have received the regular sanction, or forsmall extra ones. The steward is also treasurer of the college,keeps a regular account of receipts and disbursements, and ofpurchases. He makes up, weekly, an account of provisionsreceived and issued. Every eight days the proviso verifies thebalance sheet, and inspects the books once a month. Thesteward furnishes to the minister of public instruction amonthly statement of his accounts, with the vouchers, whichare examined in the appropriate bureau. Besides this, he transmits,yearly, an abstract of his account to the same officer.His books, and the state of the treasury, are subject to a quarterlyinspection by an officer deputed by the rector of the academy.He prepares for transmission to the rector, by the proviso,a quarterly account of the stock on hand. This officergives bonds for the faithful performance of his duties.The servants of the college are under the special charge ofthe steward. Some of them sleep in rooms connected with thedormitories. Every night one keeps watch, that there may beassistance at hand in case of sickness, two servants dividingthe night watch between them. During the day, one of them isrequired to go the rounds of the halls, court, and stairs, to seeROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. 429that all is in order, and, during play hours, another is always inattendance at the door of the receiving-room, to call those studentswhose friends desire to see them.Tic officers of the colleges, from the proviso to the professorsinclusive, are appointed by the grand master of the university.The different officers are paid according to the grade of institutionto which they belong, a classification having beenmade for that purpose. When the salaries are small, as in thecase of inferior officers, they are secured an increase accordingto the term of service. All who enter into obligations toserve in the career of public instruction for ten years, are exemptedfrom regular military service, though not from jury-duty,and service in the national guard. AH receive pensionsfor long continued and faithful discharge of duty, and these increasewith the time during which they are enjoyed. Theiremoluments are, in general, not confined to the salaries whichthey receive, but also depend, in part, upon the number of studentsunder their charge, each one having a certain proportionateinterest in the fees paid to the college, according to his responsibility.When the college has a surplus income over andabove its expenditures, it is divided among the officers, underthe direction of the university council. The proviso, censor,chaplain, and directors of studies, are required to live in the college.Rooms are in some cases provided for the professors, butno allowance is made for quarters to those who reside out of theinstitution. The directors of studies and chaplain are boardedby the college. A physician and surgeon visit the college oncea-day. The nursing is done by sisters of charity.Admission. The pupils are of two classes, boarders (interest),and day-scholars (externes), from the " institutions" andboarding-schools. To be admitted, a youth must have attainedeight years of age, and produce a certificate of vaccination.In addition, to be received as a boarder, he must know how toread and write, and, as a day-scholar, to read, write, and cypher.The proviso alone has the authority to grant admission.The boarders are divided into three divisions. The first consistsof the eighth and seventh classes, and forms the petty-coltsGeneral EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.lege (petit-college). The second of the sixth, fifth, fourth, andthird. The third of the second and rhetoric class, and of thephilosophy classes. Each class has its dormitories, with separatebeds for every pupil. There is a special superintendencefor each of these divisions.Among the boarders, part receive both maintenance and instructiongratuitously, having the benefit of the royal or com-nnunal bursaries (courses) founded for that purpose. Othershave aid from parts of bursaries. The expenses for books andfor the studies of those who are full bursars are defrayed, aswell as for their clothing, maintenance, and instruction. Theroyal bursars are appointed by the minister of public instruction,the communal by the municipal councils of the towns whohold the bursaries. These pupils are admitted between theages of nine and twelve, and may, according to law, be sentaway from the college if they do not pass a satisfactory examinationat the close of any year.Order of the day. From five A. M. to six the pupils rise,dress, wash, and attend prayers. Six to seven, the directors ofstudies examine their written exercises, in succession, the pupilsbeing meanwhile at study. Seven to half past seven, the pupilsrecite. Half past seven to eight, breakfast. Eight to ten, lessonsof the professors. Ten to eleven, writing, arithmetic, anddrawing. Eleven to twelve, preparation of lessons. Twelveto half past one, P. M., dinner and recreation. Half past oneto half past four, lessons of the professors. From half past fourto five, luncheon and recreation. Five to half past seven, preparationof lessons. Half past seven to eight, supper. Eightto nine, recreation, religious reading, prayers, and to bed.During meals a pupil reads a lesson pointed out by the proviso.Discipline. The form of the discipline is military; the pupilsmarch in regular order, and are taught the more simple partsof the drill. All the signals are given by the beat of drum.The students are allowed to receive visits from their parentsor guardians, or friends, with express permission of the proviso.These visits are restricted to the period from dinner-timeto half past one, on ordinary days, and on Sundays andROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. 431holidays from dinner-time to three o'clock. As a reward forgood conduct, they may be permitted to leave the college onThursdays at ten o'clock, and on Sundays and festivals afterservice, to remain until seven in the evening in winter, andeight in the summer. One of their parents, or some person ofcredit, must leave the college and return with them. They arerequired to wear the uniform while out.The porter, who receives their permits to go out, marks uponthem the time of their return, and overstaying the time is attendedwith the forfeiture of one or more turns of leave. Thesepermissions to leave the grounds can only be granted twice amonth. Great doubt was expressed to me, by a high authority,of their efficacy, and of the expediency of permitting visits tobe received. In a country, however, where the ties of domesticlife are very feeble, the practice of placing boys in the collegestends to weaken them still further, and they might be quite sunderedif no communication took place between parent and childduring the whole ten years of the collegiate course.Pupils are allowed to correspond with their parents only, orwith persons approved by them, and the letters pass throughthe hands of the proviso. Their pocket-money is regulatedby the proviso; there is an understanding on the subject withthe parents, who are not allowed to furnish money directly totheir children.The day-scholars are marched to and from the college bythe heads of the houses where they reside, or by a responsiblesubstitute. They enter the class-rooms and leave them at adifferent time from the boarders, so as to cut off unnecessarycommunication. In case of absence, the censor reports thepupil to the master of his school or to his parents. A professormay suspend a day-scholar, but the proviso alone candismiss him. The day-scholars are not allowed to wear theuniform of the boarders.The punishments recognised by law for the boarders are,deprivation of recreation and extraordinary task, deprivation ofthe opportunity of walking out, retrenchment in diet, refusalsof leave to go out, or to receive their friends, imprisonment,432 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.with a task, deprivation of the uniform, and occupation of aparticular place in the class-room, study-halls, &c., deprivationof vacations, and dismission. None of the punishments but thelast is permitted to interfere with the attendance on the lessonsof the professors. Nothing can, however, be worse conceivedthan the public shame put on a pupil by changing his dress, andits concomitant circumstances. Whether extra tasks are admissiblein an enlightened system of instruction, seems to memore than doubtful; they serve fully to secure the disgust of thepupil to what he should rather be induced, if possible, to like.The last four named punishments can only be inflicted by theproviso, the others may be inflicted by order of the censor,professors, or directors of studies. In the case of a royal bursar,the proviso has the right of suspension, and must report thecircumstances to the minister; they are examined by an inspector,who reports, and by the result the case is decided : theexplanation of this delicacy towards the royal bursars is, thattheir parents have usually earned these places for their childrenby some service, and hence that they should not be deprived oftheir reward but upon the strongest grounds.Instruction. The courses of the colleges are intended to fittheir pupils for the first degree in letters and science, and forpursuing the course of the different faculties in the academies,to enable them to enter a literary or scientific career, or theprofession of theology, law, or medicine.It has been a subject much agitated, whether the instructionin letters and science should be combined or successive, andthe law at different times has, as already stated, varied on thispoint; that both letters and science were to be embraced in thecourses does not seem, for many years, to have been at alldoubted. The law of 1806, which may be considered as thebasis of the present system, connected them; that of 1821severed them, and confined instruction in the mathematicaland physical sciences to the last year of the course. In 1826they were again united. Great difficulty has been found, apparently,in determining the extent and in giving a place to certainbranches, and natural history has thus, as we have seen, beenROYAL COLLEGES OF TRANCE. 433transferred frequently from one part of the course to another,and has probably never been efficiently taught.The branches are divided into two sets, those which are obligatoryupon all, and those which may be pursued or not, at theoption of the parent of the student. Some of these latter, as, forexample, the modern languages, are furnished by the collegewithout charge, and the others must be paid for extra. Theobligatory courses are those of French, Latin, Greek, geography,history, rhetoric, philosophy, mathematics, physics,chemistry, and natural history.There are nine classes, which are subdivided into sections,according to the number of pupils. Not more than twenty-fiveshould, according to law, be in a division and under one instructor,though this number is frequently exceeded, rising ashigh, including the day scholars, as sixty, and even seventy.Some colleges have a preparatory class, or classes below theeighth, for very young pupils. The following is, according tothe latest laws on the subject, an outline of the instruction inthe different classes:Elementary Classes. These are two in number, and are taught sacredhistory, French and Latin grammar, geography, arithmetic, and writing. Alesson every morning, and one in the afternoon, three times a week, are devotedto the French and Latin grammar. Two lessons a week to sacred history, geography,and arithmetic.Sixth Class. The Sunday Gospels in Latin. Selected 6 Profanes, CorneliusNepos. aesop's Fables compared with those of La Fontaine. Geography commenced.Jewish and Christian morals. Sacred history. History commenced.Writing and arithmetic continued. Natural history once a week.The classics and French occupy five lessons in the morning and three in theafternoon, per week. One afternoon lesson is devoted to geography and mythology.Fifth Class. New Testament, the Acts of the Apostles. Selects 6 Profanes.Phaedrus' Fables. Greek roots. Extracts from Lucian's Dialogues, ^lian.Isocrates. Themes. Ancient history one afternoon per week. Geography.Telemachus. Writing and arithmetic continued. Natural history.French and the classics occupy, per week, five morning and three afternoonlessons. History and geography one lesson. Natural history one afternoon classand an extra morning class.Fourth Class. New Testament in Greek. Quintus Curtis. Caesar.Cicero de Amiciti^ et de Senectute. Greek roots. Xenophon's Cyropsedia.Plutarch's Lives. Selections from Ovid and from Virgil's Bucolics and Georgicss.Latin prosody. Latin versification commenced. Selections from Felon.Charles Nil History, by a special professor, once a week. Roman history.m484 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.Arithmetic. Linear drawing, and drawing of tfaie Human figure commenced, andcontinued in the other classes.The morning hours, and three of the afternoon lessons, are devoted to theclassics and to French, one afternoon, besides an extra morning lesson, to geographyand history, and one to arithmetic.Third Class. New Testament, Saint Luke (Greek text). Cicero's Orations.Virgil. Latin versification. Plutarch (morals). Homer. Selections from Pavilion,Buffon, and Boileau. History, by a special professor, twice a week. Historyof the Middle Ages. Age of Louis XIV., by Voltaire.All the morning and two of the afternoon lessons are occupied with French,Latin, and Greek. One afternoon, and one extra morning lesson, are devoted tohistory. Two to geometry.Second Class. New Testament (Greek text). Livy. Cicero de Officiis et deOrator e. Tacitus. Virgil. Horace's Odes. Philippics of Demosthenes. Plato.Homer. A tragedy of Sophocles or Euripides. Oration of Chrysostom. TheRise and Fall of Rome. The Universal History of Bossuet. Modern history.Rousseau. Introductory exercises to the course of rhetoric. Narratives inFrench and Latin. Arithmetic, in its various branches, two lessons per week.The morning lessons and two of the afternoon lessons are occupied in classicsand French. Two of the afternoon lessons are devoted to history and one tochemistry.Rhetoric Class. New Testament, Acts of the Apostles (Greek text). condoned6 Latins Scriptoribus Excerpt. Cicero's Orations. Tacitus. Horace.Virgil. Lucan. Demosthenes, oration for the crown. Confines Graeca. Homer.Pindar. A tragedy of Sophocles or Euripides. Rhetoric. Funeral Orations, byBossuet and Flechidre. La Bruydre. French dramatic classics. Boileau.The Henriade. Latin and Greek versification and composition. History ofFrance. Elements of Geometry. Plane Trigonometry.Five morning lessons and four of the afternoon are devoted, per week, to Frenchand classics, and one afternoon to history. One extra morning class to cosmography,preceded by a review of arithmetic and geometry.Philosophy Class. First year. Mental and moral philosophy. Writtencompositions in Latin and French, on subjects of metaphysics, logic, or morals.Geometry reviewed. Algebra to quadratic equations, with a review of therules of arithmetic. Trigonometry. Elementary ideas of the system of theworld. Physical science commenced.Four lessons are devoted to elementary mathematics, and one to elementaryphysics. Five to philosophy. Once a week there is an extra lesson on physicsand chemistry. The lectures on philosophy are given in French.Philosophy Class. Second Year. The elements of algebra completed. Applicationof algebra to geometry. Principles of descriptive geometry, five hoursper week. In the first half year the elements of physical science, and the generalprinciples of chemistry, are completed, and in the second the elements ofchemistry and mineralogy. These occupy four hours per week. Six classes ofmathematics, those of physics, and the study hours of the day are devoted tothese sciences. Alternate compositions on physical and mathematical subjects.Religious Instruction. Besides the study of the New Testament in a Latintranslation and in the original Greek version, there aro special lessons by theIrROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. 435Catholic and Protestant chaplains to the students of their respective creeds.There are prayers at rising and going to bed. Graces at meals j and a shortextract is read from a religious work before retiring, at night.The modern languages are taught in the fifth, fourth, third, and second classes.In the fifth two hours and a-half, in the other classes two hours per week areoccupied with them. A study-hall is provided for learning the lessons given bythe teachers of modern languages, and the pupils are superintended during thestudy hours by a director of studies.The English and German are the modern languages taught.In comparing these courses with the acquisitions necessaryfor the degree of bachelor of letters and of branches of sciences,it will be seen that, in general, the student must have passedthrough one year of the philosophy class to be able to standan examination upon the subjects enumerated as essential toreceiving the former, and two years of the same class for thelatter.A student who has entered at nine years of age, and goneregularly through the nine years' courses, including the firstyear of philosophy, may commence at eighteen the study oflaw or theology, and by the addition of another year in college,or by extra study, that of medicine. It appears, then, thatbesides the direction towards a general mental training, thestudies pursued in the colleges of France have a direct bearingupon the career which the student is to follow in after life.I proceed next to consider the means taken to stimulate toexertion. These consist mainly in places in the class, in examinations,and prizes.Examinations, These ought to take place, according to law,at the end of the fifth and tenth months of the courses. Thelaw further provides that all those of Paris shall be held at thesame time, or nearly so, in the different colleges, by committeesof examiners appointed by the rector of the academy, onecommittee being for each class, examining separately, andholding their sessions for five hours on two successive days.The examinations to be viva voce, the written compositionsI which have gained the highest place from the beginning of thecourse being submitted to these examiners. The committeesare directed to report to the inspector-general, and the resultof the examinations should be made known through the pro436 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.visor lo the students. The examination ait the close of the tenthmonth should determine whether the pupil may pass to a higherclass or not; and if then found deficient, he has the privilege ofre-examination at the close of the vacation, and if he havemade up the deficiency, may be permitted to rejoin his class.In fact, the law in regard to examinations is not executed, andthe pupils are regularly advanced, every year, until they reachthe fourth class, where they are obliged to pass a satisfactory Iexamination before they can enter the third. This is considereda defect, since there is no method of stopping the idle or incompetentat the threshold. The neglect of the prescribed examinations,at the end of each year, produces evils which have beenseverely censured by those most competent to judge, from theirconnexion with public instruction in France.*Prizes. The college year is closed by the distribution of prizeswhich have been gained in the various classes. These areawarded after the examination of all the compositions of thehalf year, which are valued according to a system of marks.They are given in a public meeting of the college, and withmuch ceremony. The highest prizes in philosophy and rhetoricare called prizes of honour (prix honneur), and haveattached to them the substantial privilege of exemption fromregular military service. In each class there is a first andsecond prize, which cannot be divided, and the number ofaccession" must not exceed eight. The books to be given asprizes are determined by the rector.There is, at Paris, a second distribution of prizes, resultingfrom a competition (concours) among the colleges of Paris andVersailles ; this distribution is made with much ceremony bythe grand master of the university, in presence of the officersof that body, the assembled students of the colleges, and thepublic. The pupils of the classes above the sixth compete forthese prizes, which embrace the circle of their different collegiatestudies. At the same meeting, a list of those who havegained the prizes in the colleges is read.• See M. Cousin. Sur Instruction Secondary de Prusse. Paris, 1837.ROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. 437The system of emulation is probably carried further in theseinstitutions than in any others which I visited. Indeed, it is thebasis of all exertion; the great motive which is placed beforethe student, and which he obeys. He is constantly under thisartificial stimulus during his college residence, and the resultaffects his character in after life. The present social conditionof the literary and scientific ranks in France, as a class, is producedby the results of a competition, which extends from thebeginning to the end of their career.The great stress which is laid upon composition, especiallythat in the French language, by making the prizes hinge uponit, cultivates this art to a high degree, and creates the readywriters who are constantly issuing from these colleges, andengaging in literary pursuits for a subsistence.Holidays. The vacations are for about six weeks, from theclose of the month of August until the middle of October.During these periods the students may go home, or may visitsuch families as their parents indicate. Those who remain inthe college are occupied, during part of the time, in regularstudies, under the charge of an adjunct or of a director ofstudies. They take frequent walks during these vacations.There are, beside, during term-time, days on which there areno lessons, when, however, the students, in general, do not returnhome. On New Years' day all have permission to leavethe college. On the Monday and Thursday before Lent, andthe Wednesday after Easter Monday, on Whit-monday, &c.,those who have received special permission may leave thepremises. On Sundays, and some of the other holidays, thepupils take walks, at the discretion of the proviso, weatherpermitting.Domestic economy. As the economical arrangements of theseinstitutions have been the subject of much consideration andtrial, I have thought that a brief sketch of them, as laid downin the laws, might be profitable.The expenditures of the colleges are divided into the followingsix heads: first, diet; second, repairs and washing; third,438 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.clothing; fourth, emoluments; fifth, petty expenses; sixth, miscellaneousand extra expenses. The first includes provisionsfor the supply of the students, chaplain, directors of studies,and servants, fuel, &c., for the kitchen. The second, the washingand repairs of the clothing of the pupils. The third, thepurchase of new clothes. The fourth, the emoluments of theofficers, the salaries of inferior officers, and the wages of theservants and workmen. The fifth includes the expenses oflighting and warming the college, of books for studies, of repairsof furniture, and of the infirmary, &c. The sixth needsno explanation. The amounts estimated as necessary for eachof these expenditures are submitted by the proviso to the rectorof the academy, and the councils decide in relation toauthorizing them. They also determine if proposals shall bereceived for supplying the articles required, or if they shall bepurchased by agreement, or at the market prices. In the firsttwo cases, the approbation of the council is necessary to concludethe bargain, and in the last, the authority of the provisois sufficient to enable the steward to make the purchase.The steward has charge of all the goods and chattels of thecollege, and is intrusted with the receipts and disbursements,giving bonds for the faithful discharge of his duties. He paysno bill without an order from the proviso, whose authorityentitles him, also, to use the sums which may be necessaryfor the daily expenses of the house, and to whom he must accountat least once a fortnight; the receipts constitute hisvouchers. He keeps the following books: — 1st, A register ofall moneys received, stating the purpose for which they werepaid in. 2d, A journal of receipts and disbursements. 3d, Aledger, in which the accounts are posted under the heads ofdebtor and creditor. 4th, A record of the receipts and issuesof provisions, divided into as many accounts as there are differentkinds of supplies, stating, also, the use to which eacharticle has been applied. On the last day of every quarterthe steward balances this account and makes an inventory ofthe stock on hand. The proviso and commissaries, appointedROYAL COLLEGES OF FRANCE. 439by the rector from the academic council, verify this inventoryby the accounts in the book.The proviso examines the steward's statement of thebalance on hand every eight days. At the close of the month,he inspects all his books, and ascertains that they agree, orreports any deficiency to the minister. He also verifies,monthly, the account of stock. The state of the steward'saccounts is further examined, quarterly, by the rector of theacademy to which the college belongs, or by a deputy, whoreports to the minister. At the same time, this officer ascertainsif the proviso has discharged his duties in regard to theaccounts. Every month the steward transmits to the ministera literal copy of his register of moneys received, and a statementof his receipts and expenditures, with his vouchers. Healso forwards, quarterly, his account of stock.Before the close of the month of March, the proviso furnishesto the rector of his academy, a statement of the accounts of theyear, with a report upon this department of the college service.These are referred to a committee of the academic council,who report in May, and their report, with the original documents,and the remarks of the rector upon them, are forwardedto the minister of public instruction.Every year, about the first of January, the steward preparesa statement of the receipts and disbursements, exhibiting thebalance on hand at the close of the last year; the sums receivedand expended during the year, with a statement of their purposes,and the balance on hand. Also, an account of the stockon hand at the date of the last report, the receipts and issuesduring the year, and the amount on hand. The steward certifiesthese accounts, which are examined and approved by theproviso, and forwarded to the minister.When the monthly accounts of the steward are received inthe office of the minister, they are examined, and if mistakes inthe figures, or omissions, are detected, or modifications arenecessary, the accounting officer is at once informed of it.The vouchers remain on file in the office until the close ofthe year, when they are appended to the general account.440 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The annual statements having been duly verified, are transmittedto the court of accounts.Thus there are two sets of checks, one from the academiccouncil and rector, the other from the ministerial bureau, andboth are revised by the court.NORMAL SCHOOL OF FRANCE.The "normal school," intended to furnish professors forcolleges, was established in 1794, by the same conventionwhich created the polytechnic school. The organization proposedby the Isle was upon a scale entirely beyond the wantsto be supplied, and notwithstanding the exertions of its eminentprofessors, the school had but a temporary existence, and illsuccess, mainly from the unprepared state of the pupils whohad entered it, and to whom the kind of instruction was entirelyunadapted. There were thirteen courses of lectures, and amongthe professors were Lagrange, Laplace, Hay, Songe, Ber-toilet,Volley, Bernardin St. Pierre, Picard, and Lahore.The school was suppressed by a decree of April, 1795, and itspupils dispersed. After the re-organization of the university, in1806, the expediency of reviving the normal school appears tohave been felt, and it was reorganized in 1808. The numberof pupils provided for in the new plan, was three hundred; butfrom 1810 to 1826 there were never more than fifty-eightactually in attendance. According to the plan of instruction,lectures were to be attended out of doors, and interrogationsand study to take place within the school, under the chargeof the elder pupils. The recitations of the pupils to each otherwere called conferences, a name which is still preserved, beingapplied to the lessons given by the teachers, who are calledmasters of conferences. The duration of the course of instructionwas limited at first to two years, but subsequently extendedto three. The school was a second time suppressed, in 1822,and in 1826 an institution, termed a "preparatory school** wassubstituted for it, which in its turn was abolished, and the oldnormal school revived by a decree of the lieutenant-general ofthe kingdom, on the 6th of August, 1830. A report was madeNORMAL SCHOOL AT PARIS. 441by M. Cousin, Secretary of the Council of Public Instruction,in October, 1830, the recommendations of which were adoptedsubstantially. New regulations for the course of study, thegeneral arrangements and discipline, have been gradually prepared,and the school has commenced a career of usefulnesswhich it bids fair to prosecute with increasing success.The chief purpose of the normal school is to give its pupilsample opportunities of preparation for the competition for placesof adjuncts in the colleges (cours congregation), and its arrangementsare all subordinate to this object. In this competition,however, the pupils of the school meet on an equal footing,merely, with' all other candidates.The officers, in 1837, were, the director,* who did not resideat the school, nor take part in the instruction; the director ofstudies, the resident head of the establishment;! eight mastersof conferences for the section of letters; six masters of conferences,and one for the drawing department, for the section ofsciences; two preparers (preparations) ; a sub-director, chargedwith a general superintendence of the pupils; and two assistants,called superintending masters. The masters of conferences have,in general, equivalent duties to the professors in the colleges.In 1837 there were eighty pupils in the school, of whom forty-ninewere supported entirely by the funds allowed by the government,and eighteen had half their expenses defrayed.The normal school at present occupies a part of the buildingsbelonging to the Royal College of Louis-le-Grand, andthe college furnishes the food and clothing of the pupils byagreement with the school. This connexion has advantages,and among them that of enabling the pupils to have some practicein teaching, but they are more than counterbalanced bydisadvantages, and the friends of the school are earnest in theirendeavours to procure a separate domicile for it. The accommodationsfor lodging, study, instruction, and exercise, as faras the building and its spite are concerned, are certainly of amost limited kind.M. Cousin, peer of France, secretary of the council of the university, &c.t M. Viguier.442 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.Mission, The number of pupils who may be admitted is determinedevery year by the probable number required to fill thevacancies in secondary instruction. The admissions are madeby competition, and for the most successful competitors a limitednumber of bursaries (courses), are established, divisible into halfbursaries, which are distributed to those who require assistance.The candidates enter their names at the academy nearest totheir residence, between the fifteenth of June and of July, everyyear. Each candidate deposited the following certificates, viz.of the date of birth, showing that he is over seventeen and undertwenty-three years of age; of having been vaccinated; of moralconduct; of having completed, or being about to complete, his studies,including philosophy, and if he intends to become a teacherof science, a course of special mathematics and of physics; a declarationfrom his parent or guardian, if the candidate is aminor, that he will devote himself for ten years, from the periodof admission, to public instruction. These lists are forwarded bythe rectors of the several academies, with their remarks, to thecouncil of public instruction, which returns, before the first ofAugust, a fist of those persons who may be examined for admission.This examination is made in the several academies, with aview to select the most prominent candidates, whose cases areto be ultimately decided by competition at the school in Paris.It consists of compositions upon subjects which are the same forall the academies, and of interrogations and oral explanations.For the candidates, as future instructors in letters the writtenexercises are a dissertation, in French, on some points of philosophy,an essay in Latin, an essay in French, a Latin and Greekversion, and Latin verses. The oral examinations turn uponthe classical authors read in college, and upon the elements ofphilosophy, rhetoric, and history. The candidates in sciencehave the same written exercises in philosophy and in Latinversions, and in addition, must solve one or more questionsin mathematics and physics. The oral examinations are uponsubjects of mathematics, physics, and philosophy, taught inthe philosophy class of the colleges.* All the written exertSee this Report, p. 434.NORMAL SCHOOL AT PARIS. 443cases and notes of the oral examinations are forwarded tothe minister of public instruction, and submitted severally toa committee of letters and a committee of science, takenfrom among the masters of the normal school, the directorbeing chairman of each committee. These committees decidewhether the candidates are fit to be allowed to present themselvesfor examination at the school, and those who are deemedworthy, receive a notice to report themselves on or before thefifteenth of October. Previous to this competition the candidatesare required to present their diploma of bachelor of lettersor of sciences. The masters of the normal school aredivided into two committees, one of letters and the other ofscience, for conducting these examinations, which are oral, andthe result of which determines the admission or rejection of the;candidate. On admission, the pupil makes an engagement todevote himself to public instruction for ten years.Instruction, The present arrangement of the courses of in-'traction can only be regarded as provisional, improvements.being gradually introduced, as observation shows their necessity.The principle declared by the director, M. Cousin, to bethat of the school in this respect, is worthy of all commendation."When," says M. Cousin, in his Report of 1835-6,* "experienceshows the necessity or utility of a measure which the fundamentalregulations of the school have not provided for, it isby no means proposed at once to the royal council for adoptionas an article of the regulations; authority is asked to put it tothe test of practice, and it is only when found repeatedly successfulthat it is deemed prudent to convert it into a regulation."A close observation of the merits and defects of the system isthus made to pave the way for judicious changes.The full course of the school, at present, occupies three• years. The pupils are divided into two sections, that of lettersand of science, which pursue separate courses. In thesection of letters, the first year is devoted to a revision, andthe second to an extension, of the higher courses of the cpl-Ecole Normale. Elements, programmes, et rapports. Paris, 1837.444 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.leges, and the third is especially employed in fitting the pupilsto become professors. In fulfilling this object, however, noinstruction in the science or art of teaching is given in theestablishment, nor is it obligatory upon the pupils to teach, sothat, as far as systematic practice goes, they derive no directbenefit from the school ; it is a privilege, however, which manyenjoy, to be called to give lessons in some of the royal colleges,particularly in that with which the school is now connected byits locality. When the pupil intends to devote himself to teachingin the grammar classes of the colleges, or is found not to havethe requisite ability for taking a high rank in the body of instructors,he passes at once from the first year's course to thethird, and competes, accordingly, in the examination of adjuncts(agrees). The consequences of the low esteem in whichthe grammar studies are held, have been much deplored by thepresent director of the school,* and a reform in regard to themhas been attempted, with partial success.The courses are conducted by teachers called masters ofconferences, who seldom lecture, but question the pupils uponthe lessons which have been appointed for them to learn, giveexplanations, and are present while they interrogate each other,as a kind of practice in the art of teaching. In some cases,the students themselves act as masters of conferences.The course of letters of thej^rs^ year comprised, in 1836-7,f1. Greek language and literature, three lessons per week. 2. Latin andFrench literature, three lessons. 3. Ancient history and antiquities, three lessons.4. A course of philosophy higher than that of the colleges, three lessons.5. General physics, one lesson. Chemistry, one lesson, the courses being introducedchiefly to keep up the knowledge of these subjects. 6. German andEnglish language, each one lesson.The conferences, or lessons, on general physics, chemistry,and the modern languages, are by pupils who give instructionand explanations to their comrades.Rapport sur les travaux de I'^cole normale pendant I'ann^e, 1835-6. Par M.Cousin.t The distribution of subjects is taken from a manuscript kindly furnished tomc by the director of studies, M. Viguier ; it does not agree precisely with theplan marked out in the regulations.rNORMAL SCHOOL AT PARIS. • 445At the end of the first year there are examinations, accordingto the result of which the student passes to the courses of thesecond year, or, in the case before stated, to those of the thirdyear, or leaves the school. These examinations are conductedby inspectors-general of the university, named for the purposeby the minister. Pupils who have passed, may present themselvesat the university as candidates for the degree of licentiateof letters.The second year's course of letters does not necessarily includeany scientific studies.The courses of language and philosophy go into the history of these subjects.They consist of— 1. Lectures on the history of Greek literature, three lessonsper week. 2. On the history of Roman literature, two lessons. 3. On thehistory of French literature, one lesson. 4. English language, one lesson.5. On the history of philosophy, two lessons. 6. Continuation of the historicalcourse, two lessons. The recitations are accompanied by suitable written exercises.At the end of the year the pupils are examined. Those whohave not already obtained the degree of licentiate of letters arenow required to do so, or to leave the school.The examinations for this degree consist of compositions in French and Latinprose, on different days. Latin verses and Greek themes. Explanations of selectedpassages from the second book of Herodotus, the speech of Pericles inThucydides, the Gorgias of Plato, the speech of Demosthenes against Reptiles,the chorusses of Oedipus at Colonel, the Hecuba of Euripides, the combat ofHercules and Amicus in Theocritus, the hymns of Synesius, Cicero de Oratorand de legions, the Germany of Tacitus, the Treatise of Seneca de benefices, thelast two books of Quintilian's Rhetoric, the fifth book of Lucretius de natura rerum,the first book of Horace's Epistles, the second book of Horace's Odes, theTroas of Seneca.These books are liable to be changed, from time to time, onnotice being given. The candidate is expected to answer thequestions on philosophy, literature, history, and philology, towhich the reading of the author may give rise.In the third year of letters, the courses are special, the divisionscorresponding with the courses of the royal colleges, andconsisting of grammar, humanities and rhetoric, history andphilosophy. Each pupil takes his place in one or other of these#446 GENERAL EDUCATION". Secondary PERIOD.divisions, and is not required to follow the courses of theothers.The lectures and recitations constituting the entire course of letters of thethird year were, during the second half year of 1836-7: — 1. Latin languageand grammar, three lessons. 2. Greek language, two lectures and onelesson. 3. Latin literature, two lectures and one lesson. 4. Greek literature,two lectures and one lesson. 5. Latin eloquence, two lectures. 6. Latin poetry,two lectures. 7. French literature, one lesson. 8. History of the philosophyof the ancients, two lectures. 9. Ancient geography, two lectures. 10.Philosophy, one lesson. 11. Natural history, one lesson. The lectures alludedto axe those attended by the pupils at the Sorbonne.The following were the courses of the different years in thesection of science during the same term, the lectures beingthose of the faculty of sciences of the university.First year. 1. Astronomy, two lessons per weeL 2. Descriptive Geometry,two lessons. 3. Chemistry, two lectures, one lesson, and four hours of manipulation.4. Botany, one lesson. 5. Philosophy, two lessons. 6. German language,one lesson. 7. Drawing, one lesson during the week, and one on Sunday.Second year. 1. Physics, two lectures, two lessons, and one hour of manipulation.2. Chemistry, two lectures. 3. Botany, one lesson. 4. Vegetable physiology,two lectures. 5. Calculus of probabilities, two lectures. 6. Differentialand integral calculus, two lectures and two lessons. 7. Drawing, one lesson duringthe week, and one on Sunday.Third year. 1. Mechanics, four lectures and two lessons. 2. Chemical analysis,two lectures and one hour of manipulation. 3. Chemistry, one lecture.4. Natural history, two lessons. 5. Geology, one lesson. 6. Botany, one lesson.7. Drawing, one lesson. On Sunday, the pupils make botanical and geologicalexcursions into the environs.The pupils undergo similar examinations to those of thesection of letters, and before presenting themselves as candidatesfor the place of adjunct, they must have taken at leastthe degree of licentiate of sciences. They are, however, speciallyrelieved from the necessity of matriculating in thosecourses at the university which they attend in the school, andwhich otherwise would be necessary in order to obtain the degreeof licentiate. These are, for the mathematical sciences,the differential and integral calculus and mechanics; for thephysical sciences, physics and chemistry; and for the naturalsciences, geology, botany, &c. The examination for the degreepNORMAL SCHOOL AT PARIS. 447of licentiate of mathematical science may be made at the endof the second year, by pupils of this section of the normalschool, and that for licentiate of physical science, at the close ofthe third year.The programmes of the several lessons* in both sections areprepared by the masters, and submitted to the council of publicinstruction every year before the beginning of the course.Besides these lectures and recitations, the pupils are requiredto attend such other lectures at the faculty of letters or ofsciences of the university, or any other public institution, asmay be designated to them. At the termination of the thirdyear's course, in the month of July, they are examined in theschool, and present themselves as competitors for the places ofadjuncts, according to the special studies which they have pursued.The courses of the school are arranged in reference to thecompetition for these places, an account of the examinationsfor which has already been given in the general description ofsecondary instruction in France In this competition they arebrought in contact with the best talent which has chosen adifferent road to preferment from that offered by the normalschool. Success in this trial is, of course, not always a fair criterionof the state of the school, but certainly offers, on the average,an idea of the merits of its different departments, and isso used in directing their improvement. It may be of interest,therefore, to give the results of one of these competitions, namely,that for 1836. The judges of the competition for the places ofadjuncts in philosophy report ten candidates for the six places;of these, five of the successful ones were from the normal school,but the first was from another institution. For six vacanciesin the higher classes of letters there were thirty candidates examined,and of these, two of the successful ones, including thefirst upon the list, were pupils of the school. For adjuncts inhe sciences there were eight places and nineteen candidates,A series of programmes is given in full in M. Cousin's work, before referredtotSee this Report, pp. 426-7.#448 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.the school furnishing six of the successful competitors, andamong them the first on the list. In history and geographythere were eight candidates for five places; the institutions fromwhich they came are, however, not stated. In grammar, therewere forty-one candidates for eight places; of the successfulcompetitors the school sent five, and among them the first onthe listThe keen nature of this competition, while it excites the pupilsof the school to great exertion, produces a most deleteriouseffect upon the health of the more feeble. Indeed, their generalappearance, when compared with those of other young men ofthe same age, is far from favourable. It is part of a systemwhich is considered adapted to the national character, butwhich is certainly by no means a necessity for men in general,since the teachers of the German gymnasia are prepared withoutits severe pressure.The collections subsidiary to the instruction are: — 1st. Alibrary of works relating to education and to the courses ofstudy, which is open for two hours every day, and from whichthe students may receive books. This library is under thecharge of the sub-director of studies. The students are, besides,furnished with the books which they use in their classesat the expense of the school, and which, unless injured, arereturned by them after use. 2d. A small collection of physicalapparatus. 3d. A collection of chemical apparatus connectedwith a laboratory, for practice in manipulation. Thecourses of manipulation are not, however, carried out to theirdue extent, and the study-rooms are common to many individuals.The pupils are divided into two sections for study, eachof which is in charge of one of the superintending masters.Discipline. Though there are minute regulations for discipline,the age of the pupils and the character of their pursuitsand expectations render the exercise of severity but little necessary.At the time of my visit to the school, in 1837, the youngestpupil was seventeen years of age, and there were but four ofbetween eighteen and nineteen connected with it.Much difference of opinion exists as to whether the frequentNORMAL SCHOOL AT PARIS. 449permissions to individuals to leave the premises should not bereplaced by excursions made by the whole of the pupils, underthe supervision of an officer. At present, Sunday is a day ofgeneral leave of absence, and on Thursday afternoon individualpermissions are freely granted by the director of studies.This institution occupies the same rank with those attachedto some of the Prussian universities, and intended to preparemasters for the gymnasia. It has an advantage over them inthe spirit produced by the greater numbers of its pupils, andby the closer connexion with the school, which result fromtheir studying and residing within its walls. It is, in turn, inferiorto the seminaries for secondary teachers at Berlin, in theabsence of arrangements for practical teaching, and in even amore important respect, namely, the want of that religious motiveof action, which forms the characteristic of the Prussiansystem. The deficiencies of this great school, in regard to bothreligious and practical education, struck me, I must confess, veryforcibly.*• In the general tenour of the foregoing remarks, I have the sanction of M.Cousin, in the preface to his account of the normal school, already referred to.400 GENERAL EDUCATION.' SECONDARY PERIOD.CHAPTER XII.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA.It is usual to confine the title of secondary schools to thosewhich prepare for the learned professions, and in this view theonly secondary instruction in Prussia is given in the gymnasia.But there is another class of institutions, which, accordingto the opinion already expressed, are as much entitled tobe considered establishments for secondary instruction as thelearned schools. These are the " real schools" (realschulen),of which the classes are parallel with those of the gymnasia inregard to age and attainment, and which prepare their pupilsto engage in the business of life, in commerce or trade, or topass to the special schools of architecture, engineering, manufactures,&c.* The institution at Berlin, known as the tradeschool (gewerbschule), will, I think, be admitted to belong tothe same class, and to present, in its own peculiar line, a developmentquite as much above that afforded by the primaryschools, as is furnished by the gymnasia. These institutionscan by no means be classed with the higher burgher schools,which have been already described, differing from them essentiallyin the extent of their courses and the age of their pupils.It is important not to confound the trade school just mentionedwith other establishments, bearing the same name, in the provincesof Prussia, and connected with the special school ofmechanic arts and manufactures, called the trade institute(gewerbinstitut), at Berlin.M. Guizot, in his reasons for the ministerial project of a law on secondaryinstruction in France, supports the view which is taken above, that secondaryinstruction is not confined to preparation for the learned professions, while M.Cousin, in his Memoir on Secondary Instruction in Prussia, docs not admit the•* real schools" into the secondary class.SECONDARY Instruction IN PRUSSIA. 451DIVISION FIRST.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA.The public educational establishments of Prussia, though ingeneral regulated by law, are not reduced to uniformity by it,the spirit of system not being allowed to check the growth ofwhat is good. Thus it appears to me out of the question toconsider secondary instruction as uniform, either as regulatedby law or as existing in fact ; and a very imperfect view wouldbe given of even one branch of it, that which prepares forthe learned professions, by attempting thus to present it. Thevery fact that the gymnasia are made provincial institutions,and not immediately dependant on the cental authority, impliesvarieties in the interior organization, as contemplated by thelaw itself. After a sketch of the general system of secondaryinstruction, I shall, therefore, give examples of different gymnasia,which represent fairly the range of variety in these schools,and then establish a comparison between them and others ofthe same grade, which have been under discussion. Proceedingto the second division of this period of instruction, I shall furnishan example of the real school, and of the secondary trade school.The immediate authority superintending secondary instructionis the school-board (schul-collegium) of the province inwhich the gymnasium is situated. It will be recollected, thatthis school-board is a branch of the provincial consistory, ofwhich the chief magistrate of the province, the higher president(over-president), is the head. One of the councillors ofthe ministry of public instruction, at Berlin, is specially chargedwith the concerns of all the gymnasia,* and is the channelthrough which the provincial authorities communicate with theministry. The school-board consists of the president and vicepresident of the provincial government, and of two school-councillors,and holds its meetings in the chief town of the province.They regulate the details of instruction and disciplineTo this gentleman, Counsellor John Schulze, I am indebted for introductionsto the schools of Berlin.453 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.in the gymnasia, correspond with the directors, appoint theteachers, except the director, who is appointed by the minister,make visits of inspection, and attend the examinations,especially those for passing to the university, and authorizethe booKs to be used in the school and placed in the library.The inspection of religious instruction belongs to the ecclesiasticalfunctionaries of the Protestant and Catholic churchesseverally.* The royal gymnasia are supported from the fundsof the state and the payments of their pupils, and their receiptsand expenditures, are under the charge of a special officer, orof the director. The funds of those which are otherwise endowed,are usually under the direction of a committee, or ofone of the officers. In 1834 there were one hundred andtwenty-four gymnasia in Prussia, attended, during the summerterm, by twenty-four thousand four hundred and sixty-one students;seven hundred and thirty-eight students passed from theirclasses to the universities, twenty-three hundred and twenty-sixto other occupations. There were thirteen hundred and thirty-fourteachers in these establishments, or one teacher for abouteighteen pupils. Although private institutions of this kind areallowed, they do not exist. The wants of the community arewell supplied by the public establishments, some of which, asin the cities, are day, and others boarding-schools. Privatesecondary instruction is also permitted, the admission to theuniversity depending upon qualifications shown on examination,and not on certificates of attendance at particular schools.Certain strictures upon the system pursued in the Prussiangymnasia induced a close inquiry by the ministry of publicinstruction into its effects upon mental, moral, and physical development,the result of which was a series of regulations,transmitted in 1837t to the provincial authorities, accompaniedby remarks on the existing system. By following the currentof the regulations and remarks, a good idea may be obtained• Statistisches Handbuch der deutsche Gymnasien herausgegeben, von Prof.Dr. Brains und Dr. Theobald.t I am indebted for this recent document, obtained in MS. while at Berlin,to the kindness of the Honourable Henry Wheaton, Minister of the United State*to Prussia.mGYMNASIA OF PRUSSIA. 453of the spirit in which the former are framed, of the arrangementswhich they are designed to effect, and of the objectionsreally existing, or urged unnecessarily, against the systemof the gymnasia. This document embodies the experienceof this class of schools, and when accompanied by anaccount of the regulations for the final examinations at thegymnasia, and of the means for providing teachers, it furnishesa good idea of the general organization of secondary instruction.The regulations embrace the following heads: — 1. Admissionof pupils. 2. Subjects of instruction. 3. Distributionof the teachers and of the subjects of the lessons. 4. Thenumber of hours of teaching. 5. Studies out of school hours.6. Duration of the courses. 7. Remarks on the regulations forthe examinations. 8. Remarks on the supposed defects ofteachers, methods of instruction, &c. 9. Physical education.10. Religious instruction. The following is an abstract of theremarks upon these subjects:1. Admission. Experience has fully proved that the admissionof pupils at a very early age into the gymnasia is prejudicial tothe individuals themselves, as well as to the institutions. Neitherthe mental nor physical development, nor the attainment, at anearly age, are adequate to the pursuit of the courses appropriateto a gymnasium, and hence the admission of very youngpupils induces an improper lowering of the standard of instructionin these establishments. The ministry, therefore, recommendsthat pupils be not admitted at an earlier age than tenyears, and that the following qualifications be required: 1. Facilityin logical and rhythmical reading, both in German andRoman text, and the rudiments of grammar and orthographicwriting. 2. Writing from dictation. 3. Practice in the fourground rules of arithmetic, with abstract numbers, and firstprinciples of fractions. 4. Elements of geography, particularlythat of Europe. 5. Stories of the Old Testament, andlife of Christ. 6. Elementary notions of drawing and of form.Two errors on the part of parents are pointed out by theministry, the influence of whose advice is directed againstthem: — The first is, that children of feeble bodily constitutionsshould be devoted to literary pursuits; the second, that young454 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.men who have passed the appropriate age for instruction maybeadvantageously pushed into one of the .learned professions,even if they are required to teach in order to obtain the needfuleducation.2. Subjects of instruction. As the ground-v^^ork of higher instruction,the following subjects are recommended to be pursuedin the gymnasia: — 1. Religious instruction. 2. German.3. Latin. 4. Greek. 5. Mathematics. 6. Physics. 7. Natural history.8. Geography. 9. History. 10. Writing. 11. Drawing.12. Vocal music. Experience has shown that these subjectsare particularly calculated to developed the intellectual powers,and to give a systematic and practical preparation for thehigher studies. The same cannot be said of the Hebrew, thestudy of which is specially appropriate only to theologians. Aknowledge of the French is not considered essential to the truepurpose of a gymnasium. This language has been made asubject of public instruction on account of its usefulness inafter life, and not of its correctness or purity. With the exceptionof these two languages, the subjects enumerated abovehave always been taught in the gymnasia, though in variableproportions. No one of them could, with propriety, be omitted,and propositions to that effect will receive no countenance.The ministry does not fear that injury will result to the mentalor physical development of the pupils, by pursuing all thebranches in their appropriate degree, but teachers are cautionedagainst attempts to push one subject at the expense ofanother; being reminded that the course should be viewed as awhole, which must suffer by the unequal forcing of its parts.The directors of gymnasia are especially required to attend tothis point, and the school-boards are requested to relieve themfrom teaching, as far as may be necessary to the inspectionthus required.If the subjects of instruction, as here laid down, be comparedwith those of the secondary schools of England, it will befound that what is there regarded as innovation, has been successfullyused as the course of grammar school instruction inGermany. That the efficiency of the course is confirmed bylong experience, and that the subjects are recommended, anew,GYMNASIA OP PRUSSIA. 455the future course of those institutions. While ancient letterstre successfully cultivated, other subjects are not neglected, butheir equal importance with the former is clearly asserted, andclearly proved by results. While the Germans have lost)thing in general literary culture by this system, they havelined much in other departments of knowledge.The scholastic year is divided into two terms, or half years,the close of each of which there is an examination. Atle end of the second half-year, the examinations for passing)m one class to another are held. The usual vacations are^o weeks at Easter, one at Whitsuntide, three in August, oneIt Michaelmas, and two at Christmas.3. Distribution of the teachers and of the subjects of instructiveare, in general, six classes in a gymnasium, ofwhich the lowest is called sixth, and the highest first. To producea harmony in the methods and degree of instruction,notwithstanding the variety of subjects taught, it has, for somele, been the custom in the Prussian gymnasia to assignseveral subjects of instruction to the same teacher, in the sameThis arrangement is confirmed in the document underdiscussion. It is recommended that similar subjects of instructbe classed together, to constitute a department, as, for[ample, German and Latin; history, geography and naturalhistory; and mathematics and physics. That then the instructionof one or more classes, in one department, be consigned tometeacher: as the instruction of the lower classes in Germanmd Latin; of the two middle classes in Latin, Greek, andFrench ; of the two higher in German, Greek, and French ; ofle lower and middle classes in history and geography ; of thehigher classes in mathematics, physics, and mental philosophy,'he number of teachers would thus be, in general, in a gymnasiumof six classes, two for the two lower classes, three forle two middle, and four for the two higher classes.The ministry further recommended that kindred subjects betaught in different parts of the same term, rather than on differentdays of the same week, as geography at the beginningof a term, and history at the close ; a Latin and Greek prose456 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.author at the beginning of a term, "and a poetical author at theclose of the term, &c.With a view to induce teachers to take upon themselvesthe arduous duties of a department, or class teacher, as justexplained, the school-board are recommended to promoteteachers according to merit, not confining their promotion tothe institution in which they may be, but taking the entirerange of the province. A promise is made by the ministry topay strict attention to this rule, in promoting to vacant situationsof directors of gymnasia. The class teachers are to havethe title of " upper teachers" (ober-lehrer), the others beingdesignated simply as " teachers."It is obvious that very varied attainments are thus required ofthe regular, or class teachers, and that the difficulty of finding personscompetent to discharge these duties increases very muchas the grade of instruction becomes more elevated. Hence thepractice in , the gymnasia varies very materially from thisrecommendation. It is so desirable, in the higher classes, thatthe teacher should devote much time to his own improvementin the knowledge of his branch of instruction, and that heshould have a strong taste for its cultivation, that in general itis found advisable to confine his attention to a single subject,or to subjects much nearer akin than those which are classedtogether in the enumeration just made. This is particularlythe case in the mathematics, beyond the mere elements, thephysics and physical geography, the natural history, the lesselementary parts of drawing, and vocal music. In the case ofthe French language, a special teacher, from the very beginning,is absolutely necessary, if the instruction in it is to be anythingmore than a matter of form.4. Number of hours of recitation. This is fixed at thirty-twoper week ; a number which experience has shown maywith propriety be exacted of students, and which is requisite tocomplete the course of studies. In the French colleges thereare but twenty hours of regular obligatory instruction perweek. This difference alone would go far to explain the reasonfor the fact, that in the gymnasia, the written course ofGymnasia OF PRUSSIA, 457studies is closely followed in all its departments, while in theroyal colleges it is but partially carried out. That in the former,all branches are deemed worthy of attention, while in thelatter, in practice, some are treated as if they were not appropriateparts of a regular course of studies. The Prussianministry asserts, very justly, that four hours every morning, andtwo hours in the afternoon, four times a week, may be passedin a well ventilated school-room, without injury to health. Thecondition in regard to ventilation is, however, essential to thetruth of the proposition ; it is easily realized in the gymnasia,on account of the small number constituting each class. I found,in fact, generally, but little objection to the arrangements, in thisrespect, in these institutions.I had reason to remark, in the city gymnasia of Prussia,in general, that the appearance of the upper classes betokeneda higher state of health than that of the lower, which wouldnot have been the case had they been overworked. The mentallabour, on the part of the student, indicated by thirty-twohours per week spent in school, is less than it would be from thesame time in an English grammar school, or in one of ourown establishments of the same grade, from the mode of teaching.Much of the instruction is communicated by conversationand by lecture, during the school hours, which are thusdevoted to acquiring knowledge as well as to reciting what hasbeen learned by study at other times. The school-boards arerequested not to allow this time of thirty-two hours per weekto be exceeded, and a general plan for the distribution of time,which will be given below, is appended to the instructions. Thisplan, however, may be modified according to the circumstancesof the institution to which it is to be adapted, preserving,however, the number of hours devoted to religious instruction,to the languages and mathematics, as cardinal points inthe system. It is deemed unnecessary to begin the Frenchearlier than in the third class, which would postpone it as late asthirteen years of age. Natural history may be substituted forphysics in the second class, and a general review of that branch,as studied in the previous years, is recommended. DrawingGENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.and vocal music are intended to be carried so far as that thepupil may follow them to advantage if his tastes incline that way.The ministry recommends that where several hours perweek ere devoted to a subject, more than one each day shouldbe given to it, so as to concentrate the attention upon a fewbranches every day.Plan of studies arranged for the Gymnasia of Prussia by the Ministry of PublicInstruction, October 24th, 1837.SUBJECTS OF STUDY, &c.NUMBER OF HOURS PER WEEK.P-i be^Latin, .Greek, - -German, -. . .French,Religious Instruction,Mathematics, -Arithmetic and Elements of Form,Physics, -Philosophy, .History and Geography, .Natural History,Drawing,Writing,Vocal Music,Hebrew for the future Theologians,GYMNASIA OF PRUSSIA. 459After tracing the particulars of the courses of some of the Germangymnasia, we shall be better able than now to make a comparisonbetween them and the institutions already described, asthe extent and distribution of the several courses, in addition tothe time devoted to each, will then be known. I may remark, inthe mean time, however, that the subjects taught are not verydifferent from those constituting the course of the French colleges,and that in reference to British schools, the amount oftime devoted to different subjects, as well as the choice of subjects,more nearly resembles the Edinburgh Institution, alreadydescribed, than one of the endowed English grammar schools.5. Study out of school hours. On this subject the ministry remarks,that while it is highly important that the pupil shouldhave preparation to make, requiring the exercise of his ownresources, it is not less so that the amount of private studyshould not be carried to an injurious extent. The regulations,therefore, provide that at the beginning of each term thereshall be a conference of the teachers, to determine the dueamount of such work in the different classes, in detail. Everyteacher should keep a book, in which the exercises actuallygiven are accurately noted, so that the director may see atany time how far the decisions of the conference have beenconformed to. The written exercises of the pupils must beregularly corrected by the teachers, and at least once a monththey must review the exercise-books, to ascertain the progressand the propriety of the exercises. German and Latin compositionsare to be especially attended to. Themes on subjectswith which the pupils are not acquainted, so that they mustlabour both for the matter and language, are forbidden. Theteacher should not only select subjects known to the pupils forthese exercises, but should also explain the manner in which heexpects them to be treated.6. Duration of the courses. The six classes should, accordingto rule, be passed through in nine years; the three lower,each, in one year, and the three higher, each, in two years; thusa pupil entering at ten would leave the gymnasium at nineteen.The provincial school-board may determine the period of the460 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.year for the examinations for passing from class to class. Inthe gymnasia, where the classes are subdivided on account ofnumbers, and the pupils pass from one section to another atthe end of six months, the arrangement is permitted to be continued.Superior excellence in a few departments is not to warrantthe promotion of the pupil to a higher class; he must be reasonablyproficient in all.7. Examination for the university. The regulations of 1834,on this subject, are confirmed by the present ; certain erroneousconstructions, which have been put upon the former, being pointedout. The first of these is, the supposition that the amountwhich the pupils are able to go over, during the time fixed forexamination, determines the character of their certificate of capacity,while, on the contrary, this is given for the general knowledgeof the subjects which they show. The fact that this examinationrequires a previous attendance of two years in the firstclass, is considered as indicating positively that the course of thatclass cannot be intended to drill for the examination. The nextrefers to the specific direction in regard to the extent of examinationon the different subjects, which being intended as ageneral guide to the examiners, has been misconstrued so faras to be supposed to furnish teachers who are preparing pupilsthe means of imparting the least amount of knowledge consistentwith their passing. The ministry considers that the qualificationsfor the final examination have stood the test of experience,having been found not too high and calculated to promotesound instruction and not hasty preparation. As, however, theexcitement of these examinations appears to act injuriously oncertain temperaments, the ministry authorizes the examiningcommissions to reduce the viva voce parts of the examination,in cases where they see cause to do so. The ministry declinesomitting the examination on the course of religious instruction.8. Supposed defects of teachers, ^c. The ministry states,as the remark of many intelligent persons, that while so muchprogress has been made within the last twenty years in theelementary schools, many of the teachers of the gymnasia, ne-gymnasiaOF PRUSSIA. 461I^m electing the progress of the science of teaching, still follow the^f old routine methods; that the teachers overrate the importanceof their special branches, and thus destroy the harmony of thesystem: that they imitate the style of lecturing of the universityprofessors, which renders their explanations ill adapted to theage and state of progress of their pupils, and when, in consequence,their pupils get on slowly, instead of seeing in this factthe necessity for a change of method, they charge the fault uponthe classes. The ministry remarks that it has not the meansof judging personally whether such criticisms are well foundedor not, but that the provincial school-boards, to whom they havebeen submitted, are of opinion that, in general, they are toosevere. They are made public, however, that the teachers ofthe gymnasia may reflect upon them.No specific method of instruction, it is remarked, applicableto all varieties of age, preparation, and subjects of study, canbe pointed out. Every teacher should observe, closely, theresults of his instruction, and adopt freely the advice or exampleof teachers of known ability in their art. The directors ofgymnasia are especially enjoined to visit the classes of theirteachers frequently, and to make such suggestions as may seemto be required ; they are further expected to set an examplethemselves of thorough teaching. The ministry considers thatthe system of class teachers, already described, facilitates thecourse of observation recommended, by giving the teacher athorough acquaintance with all the members of his class. Theimportance of making the science of teaching one of observationis thus directly inculcated.The probation of a year, required by the decree of September26th, 1836, before the admission of a teacher to full standing,being intended to prevent the admission of incompetent teachers,the provincial school-boards are enjoined to give effect tothe provision, by promoting to the situations of ordinary orclass teachers (ordinarii), those only who have shown decidedcapability in their art. The ministry promises to give such anextension to the normal schools for teachers of gymnasia, asshall insure an adequate supply from them.462 GENERAL Education. Secondary PERIOD.The provincial boards are enjoined to see that suitable booksare provided for the gymnasia, and to attend to regulatingthe details of the programmes of the different classes. Thisauthority obviously leaves the most essential points of instructionwithin their power.9. Physical education. On this subject, the document fromthe ministry states that representations have been made frommany of the directors and teachers of gymnasia, that physicaleducation should be introduced as an essential part of theirsystems. The necessity for due physical development is admitted; but it is argued, that in the gymnasia which receiveday scholars alone, an attention to it forms no part of the dutyof the teacher, who is merely bound to furnish the requisitetime for recreation, and to take care that the health of thepupils is not injured during the hours of recitation by causesdepending upon the school. In the boarding gymnasia the caseis admitted to be different. A continuance of gymnastic exercisesin these establishments, when they have been tried andfound beneficial, is allowed, but the compulsory attendanceof day scholars upon them is not permitted. When regulargymnastic exercises are introduced, it is made the duty of theschool-board to see that a proper teacher is provided, and theexercises must be conducted under charge of the director ofthe institution.I confess, that the idea of leaving the physical education ofchildren entirely to their parents, especially in the cities andtowns where the day gymnasia are usually established, seemsto me very unwise; particularly so in Prussia, where all elseis regulated, and where the youth are always glad to engagein gymnastic exercises, when the means are furnished to them.10. Religious education. It is enjoined that this contain thewhole doctrine of Christian faith, and that the instruction begiven according to a regular plan.The provincial authorities are charged with the communicationof the foregoing regulations to the directors and teachersof the gymnasia, and with the superintendence of their execution.GYMNASIA OF PRUSSIA. 463The circular, of which I have just given an abstract, is silentin regard to the subject of the discipline of the gymnasia, probablybecause it was considered by all as in a Satisfactory state.In general it is very mild. Each instructor manages his classin his own way, subject to the advice of the director, andhence, of course, there is considerable variety. Harsh punishments,and personal violence, are discountenanced in all theclasses. Appeals to the moral sentiments and feelings, andadmonitions, are the favourite methods of discipline. I no wheresaw the discipline in better condition than in these schools, theyouth of the upper class, especially, going through their dutieswithout the necessity for more than occasional admonition, andexhibiting the decorum of gentlemen in whatever situation Imet them. The director is the supreme resort when a teacherfails in being able to produce proper conduct on the part of apupil, and he may dismiss from the institution. This, however,I was informed, is rarely necessary.From the remarks on the part which the director of a gymnasiumtakes in the discipline, and the references made to hisrelation to the teachers in their several departments, the organizationof the institution may be inferred. The director, in.fact, represents the central authority, from which his appointmentemanates, and the teachers are directly responsible tohim, holding meetings only for specific purposes in regard tothe regulation of the course of studies. The system of organizationof the school resembles that of the government.The means of securing attention to study do not differ fromthose in other countries, and already often alluded to. Thesystem of excitement is carried to a far less extent, in general,than in the French colleges. Emulation is encouraged,but not stimulated into ambition. In the lower classes, thepupils change places during the daily recitations; afterwards,they are arranged by monthly trials of composition, and at theexaminations; and in the higher classes, from the same compositions,and from the results of their marks for daily recitation,and at the half yearly examinations. Prizes are not464 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.given as a general rule, though there are some special ones incertaingymnasia.This outline of the system of the gymnasia, as regulated bythe central authority, requires, as already stated, to completeit, some account of the regulations for the final examinationprior to passing to the university (abiturienten-priifung), and ofthe means of providing teachers. The regulations for the finalexamination occupy fifty sections, and enter into very minutedetails; it will be sufficient for the present purpose to present anabstract of the more important of them under the followingheads : — 1. The persons to be examined, the object, place, andtime of the examination. 2. The authorities by whom, andunder whose direction, the examination is to be conducted.3. The character and subjects of the examination. 4. Thekind of certificate obtained on passing the examination satisfactorily,and the privileges attached to it.First. The persons to be examined, &c. Those who intendto embrace one of the professions requiring a course ofthree or four years at a university, must, before matriculatingat the university, pass the ordeal of this examination; the objectbeing to ascertain whether the candidate has made himselfduly master of the subjects required for successful entranceupon his university career. The examination must be made inaregular gymnasium, and in some part of the last two monthsof the scholastic year.To be admitted to the examination, a pupil of a gymnasiummust have been in its first class at least three terms of half ayear each, except in cases where pupils have especially distinguishedthemselves during a year in this class. Three months*notice of their intention to stand this examination is to be givenby the pupils to the director of the gymnasium, who adviseswith them on their intention, but has no right to prevent anypupil of three terms' standing in the first class from comingforward.Persons who are educated in private undergo this same examinationin any gymnasium which their parents may selectThey are required to present beforehand the certificate of theirGYMNASIA OF PRUSSIA. 465masters as to moral conduct and proficiency, and are examinedat a different time from the regular students.Second. By whom the examination is conducted. There isa committee for each gymnasium, consisting of the director, themasters who have charge of the higher classes, a member ofthe ecclesiastical authority of the place, and a member of theprovincial consistory. This latter member presides, and hisappointment must be approved by the ministry of public instruction.The ecclesiastical member must be approved by theprovincial consistory. Besides these, there is a royal commissionappointed by the ministry, and consisting of professors ofthe university and others, who are present as inspectors at theexamination. The teachers of the gymnasium and the localauthorities of the school are also present at the oral examinations.Third, Character and subjects of examination. The examinationsare of two kinds, written and oral. The subjects are, theGerman, Latin, Greek, and French languages,* for students ingeneral, and in addition, the Hebrew for those who intend tostudy theology. Religion, history and geography, mathematics,physics, natural history, and the elements of mental philosophy.The subjects of the written examination are chosen by theroyal commissary present, from a list furnished by the directorof the gymnasium. These subjects must be such as havenever been treated specially in the class-room, but not beyondthe sphere of instruction of the pupils. All the candidates receivethe same subjects for composition, which are given out atthe beginning of the examination. The candidates are assembledin one of the halls of the gymnasium, and remain thereduring the period allotted for their exercises under the chargeof one or other of the examining teachers, who relieve eachother. The only books allowed them are dictionaries and mathematicaltables. The written exercises consist, first, in aGerman prose composition, the object of which is to discernthe degree of intellectual development, and the style of com-In the grand duchy of Posen, the Polish language is also one of tee subjects.466 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.position of the candidate. Second: of a Latin extempore* anda Latin composition on some subject which has been treated inthe course, the special reference in this exercise being to the correctnessof the style. Third ; a translation from a Greek author,which has not been read in the course, and from Latin intoGreek. Fourth: a translation from the German into the French.Fifth: the solution of two questions in geometry, and of two inanalysis, taken from the courses in those subjects. Candidateswho desire it, may be examined further than is required forpassing.Those who intend to study theology or philology, translatea portion of one of the historical books of the Old Testament,or a psalm, into Latin, adding a grammatical analysis. Thetime allowed for the several written exercises is as follows: —For the German, five hours; Latin composition, five hours;Latin extempore, one hour; Greek translation, three hours;translation from Latin into Greek, two hours; French composition,four hours y mathematical exercises, five hours; Hebrewexercises, when required, two hours. Four days are allowedfor the examination in these subjects, and they must not immediatelyfollow each other. The viva voce examination is conductedby the masters who have given instruction in the firstclass on the subjects of examination, unless the royal commissarydirects otherwise. The subjects are, first, the generalgrammar and prosody of the German language, the chiefepochs of national history and literature, and the national classics.Second: the translation, and analysis of extracts fromCicero, Sallust, Livy, Virgil, and Horace; the ability of thecandidates to render the author with judgment and taste beingput to the test, as well as their grammatical and archeologicalacquirements; parts of the examination are conducted in theLatin language. Third: the translation and analysis of Greekprose and of portions of Homer, with questions upon Greekgrammar, Grecian history, arts, and mythology. Fourth:• An exercise in which the master speaks in German to the pupil, who mustsender the German into Latin, in writing.rGYMNASIA or PRUSSIA. 467translations from the French classics, during which an opportunityis given to the pupil to show how far he can speak thelanguage. Fifth: questions upon the Christian doctrines, dogmasand morals, the principal epochs in the history of the Christianchurch, and the Bible. Sixth: arithmetic, the elements ofalgebra and geometry, the binomial theorem, simple and quadraticequations, logarithms and plane trigonometry. Seventh:in history and geography, on ancient history, especially that ofGreece and Rome, and modern history, especially that of thecountry, on physical, mathematical, and political geography.Eighth: in natural history, on the general classification of itssubjects. Ninth: in such portions of physics as can be treatedby elementary mathematics, and on the laws of heat, light,magnetism, and electricity. Tenth; on the elements of moralphilosophy, psychology, and logic. The future theological studentmust, besides, translate and analyse a portion of one ofthe historical books of the Old Testament.Fourth, The kind of certificate obtained, and the privileges attachedto it. When the examination is closed, the board alreadyalluded to as conducting and superintending it, deliberates uponthe notes which have been taken during its course, each memberhaving a vote. Those students who are deemed to havepassed a satisfactory examination, receive a certificate called a"certificate of maturity" (maturitats-zeugniss), the others areremanded to their class, and may present themselves, after aninterval of six months, for another examination, unless theyare deemed entirely incompetent to continue a literary career.Proficiency in all the subjects of examination is, in general, requiredto entitle a candidate to a certificate, but exception issometimes made in favour of those who show great attainmentsin the languages or mathematics; and in the case of students ofa somewhat advanced age, the direct bearing of the differentsubjects upon the profession which they intend to embrace isconsidered. The daily records of the class-rooms are presentedby the director of the gymnasium to the examiners, as showingthe character of the candidates in regard to progress and conduct,these points being»specially noted in the certificate. TheGeneral Education. Secondary PERIOD.certificate of maturity contains, besides, the name and address ofthe pupil, and of his parent or guardian; the time during whichhe has been at the gymnasium, and in its first class; the conductof the pupil towards his fellows and masters, and hismoral deportment in general; his character for industry, andhis acquirements, as shown at the examination, specifying theresult in each branch, and adding a statement from the mastersof drawing and music of his proficiency in their respectivedepartments ; the studies which he proposes to prosecute at theuniversity, and to commence which he leaves the gymnasium.These certificates are delivered in an assemblage of the studentsof the gymnasium with suitable remarks. The certificateof maturity is necessary to enable a youth to be matriculatedin either of the faculties of theology, law, medicine, and philology,in one of the national universities, to be admitted toexamination for an academic degree, to be appointed to officein state or church, or to obtain one of the royal bursaries atthe universities. Special exception in regard to matriculationmay be made by authority of the minister of public instruction.Students who have not passed a satisfactory examination, andwhose parents demand it, are entitled to a certificate, statingthe branches in which they are deficient; they may enter theuniversity with this, and are registered accordingly. Thisregistry enables them, if they subsequently obtain a certificateof maturity, and the special permission of the minister of publicinstruction, to have their matriculation dated from the time ofinscription. Pupils who have passed through the third class ofa gymnasium are entitled to claim one year of voluntary militaryservice, provided they report themselves at a specifiedtime during their twentieth year.There are two kinds of schools devoted to the preparation ofteachers for the gymnasia, called respectively philological andpedagogical seminaries (philologists seminary, padagogischeseminary). One of the first kind is attached to the universitiesof Begin, Bonn, Breslau, Halle, Konigsberg, and Greifswalde,and one of the second is placed at Berlin, Stettin, Breslau,Halle, Konigsberg, and Minster. Besides these, there is aGYMNASIA or PRUSSIA. 469binary for teachers of natural philosophy and the naturalsciences, at Bonn.* The number of students in these seminariesis limited, not exceeding eight in general, and as theirorganization will doubtless be much changed when the promisecontained in the circular to the provincial authorities,with an abstract of which this article begins, is performed, Ihave concluded to omit any special description of them. Candidates,as instructors in the gymnasia, are examined by a royalscientific commission, in behalf of the provincial school-board.This commission is composed of professors of the universities.The examinations are of different grades, but of these only thefirst is obligatory; the teacher being thus enabled to enter thecareer of instruction, in which he shows his powers quite aswell as by examination. First, for license to teach (pro facilitatedocendi), the teacher being attached or unattached. This,when complete, includes an examination in the German language,Greek, Latin, French, Hebrew, mathematics, physicsand natural history, history and geography, philosophy, pedagogyand theology, with specimens of reading. The grade ofexamination differs according to whether the candidate wishesauthority to teach in the lower, middle, or higher classes.After passing this examination, a year's trial is necessary beforethe teacher can be confirmed in any place. This year ofprobation may dispense with the following or second examination,which, however, cannot take place before its expiration.The second examination is for a place (pro loco), in whichthe fitness of the candidate for a particular situation is tried.The third is for promotion (pro ascension), and consistsusually in a conference with the members of the commission.The fourth is for the directorship (colloquium pro rectoratu).These three examinations may be necessary, in certain cases,to protect the schools on the one hand, and individual teacherson the other, but it is easy to see that in general they may bedispensed with, and this, in fact, is usually done.Statistisches Handbuch der deutsche Gymnasien, von Prof. Dr. Brains undDr. Theobald, 1837, p. 46.470 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.The latitude allowed by the Prussian regulations to the interiororganization of the gymnasia, produces varieties which willbe illustrated by describing the courses of three gymnasia, ofwhich one (the gymnasium at Pforta), leans very far towardsthe strict classical system ; a second (the Frederick Williamgymnasium at Berlin), represents the average system of thePrussian institutions of this grade, and a third (the real gymnasiumof Berlin), is the opposite of the first. The FrederickWilliam gymnasium of Berlin is the representative of a classcontaining no less than five individuals in the capital itself,while the real gymnasium stands, thus far, alone in its arrangements.Both these gymnasia are day-schools, while that ofSchulpforta, one of the old Saxon " prince schools," is a ,and will afford some useful hints in regard to internalorganization.Some of the philologists of Germany, especially of southernGermany, consider that injurious changes have been made inthe pure classical system of the gymnasia by the Prussianschools, while some of the reformers consider them as notgoing far enough in their changes. Reason will be found, asusual, between the extremes of party opinions, and sustains theplan of the Prussian schools.Frederick William Gymnasium of Berlin. — This institutiondates from 1797, and was at first an appendage to the "realschool" of Mr. Hecker. It is now a royal institution, andis independent of the real school, except so far that it hasthe same director,* and that the preparatory classes are inthe real school, in which, or in other equivalent schools, thepupils are taught until ten years of age. The qualificationsfor admission are those contained in the general account ofthe gymnasia. This gymnasium had, in 1837, four hundredand thirty-seven pupils, divided into six classes, and instructedby fourteen teachers and six assistants. The second andthird classes are subdivided into two parts, called upper andDirector Spilled, to whom I am indebted for opportunities of visitingMh institutions, and for printed and MS. documents relating to them.FREDERICK WILLIAM GYMNASIUM OF BERLIN* 471lower, pursuing different courses, and both divisions of thethird class are again subdivided into two others, for the convenienceof instruction. The course in each class occupies ayear, except in the first, which is of two years. Pupils whoenter in the lowest class, and go regularly through the studies,will thus remain nine years in the gymnasium. Th numbersof the several classes rn 1837 were, in the first, fifty-four; inthe upper second, thirty-two ; lower second, forty-seven ; upperthird division, first, or A, thirty-six; second division, or B^thirty-six ; lower third, division first, or A, thirty-eight; divisionsecond, or B, thirty-two; fourth class, fifty-five; fifth, fifty-seven; and sixth, fifty. Each division averages, therefore, nearlyforty four pupils, who are at one time under the charge ofone teacher. One hundred and eight were admitted duringthe year, and the same number left the gymnasium; of these,twenty-one received the certificate of maturity to pass to theuniversity, viz., ten who intended tp study law, three medicine,five theology, one theology and philology, one philosophy, andone political economy, finance, &c., (cabalistic). Of these allbut five were two years in the first class; out of this number twowere two years and a-half in the first class, and three more hadbeen in the gymnasium less than two years, having entered it inthe first class. The average age at leaving the gymnasiumwas nearly nineteen years, and the greatest and least, respectively,twenty-two and between sixteen and seventeen years. Itappears, thus, that on the average, the pupils actually enter atten, and remain nine years, as required by rule.The Cologne Real Gymnasium. — This name is explained,the former part by the quarter of the city of Berlin in which theinstitution is placed, and the term "real" from the introductionof a greater amount of the scientific branches, called " real,"than is contained in the courses of the gymnasia in general.This institution was placed upon its present footing in 1824,and received its full development in 1829.*It was founded by Professor Fischer, well known by his work on physics,and is now directed by his son-in-law, Dr. August, who has followed in the stepsof Fischer in matters both of science and education.472 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The admission of pupils takes place twice a-year, namely,at Easter and in October. The limits of .age beyond which ayouth cannot enter are eight and thirteen years. The qualificationsare nearly those already referred to.There were, in 1836-7, three hundred and ninety-nine pupilsin this institution, divided into six classes, and instructed byeleven teachers and ten assistants. The second, third, andfourth classes are divided into two parts, forming, in fact, likethe divisions in the other gymnasium, distinct classes. Thenumber of the several classes are: first class, twenty-one; uppersecond class, twenty-three; lower second class, fourteen; upperthird class, forty; lower third, sixty-six; fourth class, division A,sixty-nine; fourth class, division B, sixty-four; fifth class, fifty-nine; sixth class, forty-three. There is the mark of a rising institutionin the large numbers of the lower classes. In 1835,eight pupils passed to the university, and in 1836 four, andat the same time, the same number went to other avocationswith certificates.The Gymnasium of Pforta originated in the sequestration ofthe funds of a monastery, by the electoral Prince Maurice ofSaxony, to the purposes of education. The first pupils wereadmitted in 1543. In 1815 the school passed under the authorityof the Prussian government, and the courses were assimilatedto those of the other gymnasia of Prussia.* The foundationyields a revenue of about thirty thousand dollars per annum.The number of pupils, in 1838, was one hundred andeighty, to which it is restricted. Of these one hundred and \sixty-nine are in part or entirely beneficiaries. These are Icalled "alumni," or "intruders," while the others, termed "ex ;traders," receive their education free, but lodge in the housesof the professors |Pupils are admitted by the provincial school-board at Mag i• To the present rector, Dr. Kirchner, I am indebted for a very kind receptlion at this school, the more acceptable that, during the winter, at which timemy visit was made, the village near is quite out of the way of ordinary travel,and but scantily provided with accommodation adapted to the season.t Paying one hundred ad seventy-five dollars per annum for lodging, &,cGYMNASIUM AT SCHULPFORTA. 473deborah, in part on direct application, and in part on the presentationof certain communes of the province of Saxony, whohave a right to the places. The rules of application havingbeen fulfilled, and the claim of the applicant found valid, he issent by the school-board to Pforta for examination. This requiresthe qualifications for the third class of an ordinary gymnasium,only the three upper classes existing in this school, andis very rigid.The two lower classes of the school are subdivided in thesame manner as the second and third in the gymnasia generally.The instructors are a rector, an inspector, six professors,and four adjuncts, besides four masters for vocal music, writing,drawing, and dancing. The course in each entire class is twoyears, so that in six years an intelligent and industrious pupilmay pass through the gymnasium. The numbers of theseclasses and divisions were, in 1837, after the Easter examination— first class, thirty-five; second class. A, twenty-one; secondclass, B, thirty-one; third class. A, forty-two; third class, B,forty-four; total, one hundred and seventy-three. In the sameyear there were twenty-two graduates; of these, seven passedto the university to study medicine, four to study law, four lawand political economy, three theology, one law and philosophy,one philology, one philology and natural philosophy, and onephilology and mathematics.To give the pupils of the highest class an opportunity toreview the minutiae of their grammar studies in the classics, aswell as to relieve the professors, six hours of special recitationare made by each of the two divisions of the third class, fourin Latin and two in Greek to members of the first class. Fornine days before the half-yearly examinations there are norecitations, the pupils being employed in preparation in theirstudy-rooms.The collection of models for the course of drawing and ofphysical apparatus is small, but is increased annually by meansof a special appropriation.The pupils are divided for study into twelve groups, each474 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.one of which occupies a room. The study-rooms contain,in proportion to their size, a number of tables, conveniently arrangedfor the books and papers of the pupils, each table havingseats at it for four. One of the first class sits at each study-table,and has charge of the others at his table, his duty beingto assist them in their lessons, as well as to keep order; in theseoffices he is aided by a member of the second class. The othertwo seats are occupied by members of the lower-second and ofthe two divisions of the third class. A pupil of the first classisselected to superintend each room, under the direction of aprofessor, who, in weekly turn, from which the director andecclesiastical inspector are excepted, has special charge of thediscipline and studies, and who occupies, during this week ofduty, a room in the building with the pupils. The selectedpupils, called inspectors, have a right to punish so far as toconfine a pupil to the study-room during play-hours, but arerequired, in grave cases, to report to the professor on duty(hebdomedarius), or to the director. No violence is allowedfrom thei to the other pupils. They are chosen every sixmonths by the professors. The professor on duty conducts theprayers in the morning, and visits the dormitories and study-roomsafter the pupils have risen and after they retire, presidesat the table, and superintends the special recitations made bythe younger to the elder pupils.In the dormitories, the pupils are divided into six sections,each one composed of two study-divisions, and occupying adormitory. The two inspectors of studies have charge of theserooms, one of them alternately superintending the rising andretiring of the pupils. Both sleep in the room with their divisions,and one retires with them. The same arrangement isfollowed in washing. The pupils bring water for their rooms,but other menial offices are done by servants. The pupilswho board in the institution (intruders, or alumni) are so arrangedat meals as to intermingle the different classes; thus,one from the first class, then one from the second, then onefrom the third, are next to each other, and so on, throughout theGYMNASIUM AT SCHULPFORTA. 475school, as far as the unequal numbers of the classes permit.The first class pupils carve, and distribute the Sunday's allowanceof wine.Simple cases of discipline are disposed of by the inspectors,or the professor on duty (hebdomedarius), or the rector, or, ifoccurring in the recitation-room, by the professor in whoseroom it occurs. More difficult ones are reported to the boardof professors, which meets for this purpose, and to discuss thegeneral concerns of the institution, once a week. The highestpunishment, consistent with retaining the pupil, is solitary confinement,with a regimen of bread and water; for offences requiringgreat severity, dismission is applied. The inspectors ofstudies are allowed to be present at the weekly meetings of theprofessors. The rector presides at them, and reports are receivedfrom the hebdomedarius and inspectors, and instructionsare issued to them. The following provision of discipline hasbeen found highly beneficial. Every pupil, on his admission,is assigned to the guardianship of a professor, who is expectedto look to his well-being in every respect, to keep hisaccounts, and correspond with his parents. The extraneousdwell entirely with the professors, having study-rooms in theirhouses.The physical education of the pupils receives much attention.A fine garden is attached to the school, in which gymnasticsare practised. Frequent walks are taken, when the weatherpermits, under the charge of a teacher, and the pupils bathe inaneighbouring stream. Twice in the course of the summerlong excursions are made to the mountains in the neighbourhood,with the professors and their families.The domestic economy of the establishment is controlled by asteward, who is directly responsible to, and whose accounts areinspected by, an agent from the ministry of finance of the kingdom.The farm is rented to an individual, who takes chargeof the supply of the common table.The order of the day in winter is as follows. Rise at 6iA. M., have prayers at 6^, and breakfast. Instruction beginsat 7. Study from 8 to 9. Recitation from 9 to 10. Study476 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.from 10 to 11. Recitation from ll to 12. At 12 dine, andhave recreation until 2 P. M. Recitation from 2 to 4. Studyand teaching of the third class by the first, from 4 to 5. Studyfrom 5yto 7. Supper at 7, and prayers. Study until 9. Theunder classes retire, and the first class study until 10. In summerthe pupils rise an hour earlier, and have gymnastic exertcases, and go to bathe betv^^een 5 and 7, instead of studying. jIn this arrangement the study and recitation hours succeedeach other in turn, and such is the general rule, which is, however,broken in upon by the voluntary courses, and also bythose of the higher mathematics and Hebrew, which are notattended by all the pupils.Courses of instruction in the three foregoing gymnasia. Thesubjects of instruction are nearly the same in all three of thesegymnasia, viz., Latin, Greek, German, French, religious instruction,mathematics (including arithmetic, algebra, andgeometry), natural philosophy and natural history, history,geography, writing, drawing, vocal music, and Hebrew fortheologians. In the Frederick William gymnasium there is acourse of the elements of philosophy. In the real gymnasiumthere are courses of English, of technology, and of chemistry. jAt Pforta, dancing is taught as the means of giving an easy |carriage, and with gymnastics and swimming, in their appro Iprivate seasons, as a means of health. So different are the ideas |which prevail in Germany from those which have the ascend |any among us, that in this institution, directed by a clergy 'man, and under clerical authority in its minuter regulations,occasional balls are given, in which the first class are allowedto take a part.For the sake of giving a full view of the differences in thecourses of instruction in these institutions, I have placed theirdetails* in parallel columns upon the same page, reserving remarksupon them until the close of this exposition. This abstractof the courses will be followed by a comparison of theTake from the programmes for the summer term of 1836, and the winterof 1836-7, kindly furnished me on my visits to the several schools, by thedirectors Spilled, August, and Kirchncr.COMPARISON OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA. 477time occupied in each branch during the entire course of instruction.The numbers attached to the names of the differentclasses show the number of hours of study per week in theregular branches in which the division of classes takes place.In like manner, the numbers attached to the several subjects ofstudy show how many hours are occupied per week in eachof the subjects by the several classes. The course of the Pfortaschool begins only with the third class, and hence the righthand column is vacant in the lower classes. The four lowerclasses of the real gymnasium may be taken as equivalents tothe three of the Frederick William gymnasium; the classes donot precisely correspond, but the leading features of the coursesof all above the lower third are similar.The extemporary spoken of in the courses of language, consistof written translations made on the spot by the pupils intoa foreign language, of sentences spoken in the vernacular bythe teacher. These sentences are, of course, adapted to theprogress of the pupil, and are prepared beforehand by theteacher who renders them, especially in the early parts of thecourse, the application of the rules of grammar on which thepupil is engaged, or of peculiarities of idiom to which his attentionis called.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium. Gymnasium ofGymnasium. Schulpforta.Sixth Class, thirty hours. Sixth Class, thirty hours.Latin ten hours. Latin four hours.Inflections of nouns, Inflections of the parts&,c. Comparisons. Con of speech preceding thepurgation of the indicative regular verbs in Ottomoods of regular and of Schulz's school grammar,some irregular verbs. A written exercise once aTranslation from Blume's week,elementary book. Exercisesfrom Blume. Ex-temporal.German, four hours. Germany four hours.Etymology and syn Grammar. Syntax,tax. Exercises in writing Reading exercises in Au ,GENERAL Education. Secondary PERIOD.Frederick WilliamGymnasium.upon subjects previously-narrated.Exercises inorthography, reading, anddeclaiming.French three hours.Etymology, to includethe auxiliary verbs, inHerrmann's grammar.Oral and written exercises.Reading and translation.Exercises on therules from the grammar.Religion two hours.Bible history of theOld Testament. Committingto memory selectedverses.Geography two hours.Delineation of the outlinesof Europe, Africa,Asia, and America, fromdeterminate points given.Divisions of the countries,with their principalcities, rivers, and mountains.Arithmetic four hours.The four ground rules,with denominate wholenumbers. Their applications.Writings three hours.Elements of round andrunning hand. Dictation.Writing from copy-slips.Drawings two hours.Exercises in drawinglines.Real Gymnasium.gust's reader. Narrationof stories told by theteacher. Declamation.French four hours.Elements of grammarto the regular verbs. Readingand translation inHecker's Reader.Religion two hours.Bible history. Explanationof Luther's Catechism.Committing to memoryBible stories and verses.Geography four hours.General geography, accordingto A. Herscheloutline.History, two hours.Biographies from generalhistory.Arithmetic, five hours.The elementary ruleswith whole numbers.Writing, three hours.Elements of forms ofwriting. Writing fromcopy-slips.Drawing, two hours.Drawing of lines andother exercises of thehand. Drawing from engravings.Gymnasium opSchulpforta.COMPARISON OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.Frederick WilliamGymnasium.Fifth Class, twenty-ninehours.Lately ten hours.Etymology. Use of theprepositions. The accusativebefore an infinitive,practised orally andin writing, and extempore,and in exercises.Translations fromBlume's Reader.German, four hours.Parsing, reading, anddeclamation. Exerciseson narrations.French, three hours.Etymology, by oraland written exercises.Easier stories from Herr-mann'sReader.Religion, two hours.Explanation of the gospels,according to St.Matthew and St. Luke.Committing to memorythe principal facts.Geography, two hours.Review of the lastyear's course. Rivers andmountains of Europe,and chief towns, in connexion.Real Gymnasium. Gymnasium opschulpforta.Fifth Class, thirty hours.Latin, six hours.Inflections of words, includingthe verbs, fromSchulz's grammar. Translationsin August's andGedike's Reader.German, four hours.Syntax. Weekly writtenexercises. Orthography.Declamation.French, three hours.Irregular verbs. Translationsfrom German intoFrench, and vice-versa.Religion, two hours.Explanation of Luther'sCatechism. Excerpts fromthe New Testament. Committingto memory factsand verses.Geography, one hour.Review of the last year'scourse.History, three hours.Extracts from Cottager'sGeneral History, relatingto ancient history and themiddle ages.Arithmetic, four hours. Arithmetic, three hours.Review of the precede Review of fractions,ing. Fractions. Loss and gain. Easy examplesof interest andGENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.Frederick WilliamGymnasium.Writings two hours.Running-hand fromcopy-ships.Drawings two hours.Drawing from bodies,terminated by planes andstraight lines.Fourth Class, twenty-eighthours.Latin ten hours.Review of etymology.The principal rules enforcedby oral and writtenexercises and extemporary.Translation fromJacob's Reader and Corn.Nepos.German three hours.Compositions on subjectspreviously read. Declamation.Reading fromKalisch's Reader. Parsing.French two hours.Review of etymology.Irregular verbs. Reciprocalverbs. Anecdotesand narrations fromHerrmann's Grammar,and committing the principalto memory.Real Gymnasium.practice. Mentes arithmetic,the four ground rulesin whole numbers andfractions. Solution of easyquestions.Geometry two hours.Introductory exercises.Writings two hours.As in the sixth class.Drawings two hours.As in the sixth class.Singing two hours.Knowledge of notes.Lower Fourth, thirty-twohours.Lately six hours.Exercises, from August'sPractical Exercises,in inflections. Syntax fromAugust's Guide to Translation.Written exercises,extemporalia. Translationof the more difficult partsof Blume's Reader. Irregularinflections.German, three hours.Grammar, with oraland written exercises.French, three hours.Irregular declensions.Translation from Hccker'sReader. Translations fromDuvinago. Rules fromKnebel's Grammar.Gymnasium ofschulpforta.COMPARISON or PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium. Gymnasium opGymnasium. Schulpfgrta.Religion, two hours.Gospel, according toSt. Matthew, explained.Verses and psalms committedto memory.Geography, three hours.Political geography ofGermany, and of the restof Europe. Review ofthe geography of theother parts of the world.Arithmetic, three hours.Review of fractions.Simple and compoundproportion. Partnership.Simple interest.Geometry, one hour.Knowledge of forms,treated inductively.Writing, two hours.Running-hand, fromcopy-slips.Drawing, two hours.From bodies boundedby curved lines.Religion, one hour.Bible history of the OldTestament. Exercises.Verses learned by heart.Geography, one hour.Germany in particular.Asia, Africa, America, andAustralia.History, two hours.General history. Modernhistory, with specialreference to German history.Arithmetic, two hours.Loss and gain. Interest.August's Complete Manualof Mathematics, parts 1to 7.Geometry, four hours.Parts 1 to 7 of August'sManual of Mathematics.Natural History, fourhours.General view of thethree kingdoms of nature.Natural history of themammalia, with demonstrationsat the royal museum.Writing, one hour.As in the sixth class.Drawing, two hours.From drawings by theteacher.Singing, two hours.Two and three parts.489- GENERAL EDUCATION. Secondary PERIOD.Frederick William Real Gymnasium. Gymnasium ofGymnasium. Schulpforta.Upper Fourth Class,thirty hours.\ Latin six hours.Declensions. Translationfrom Gedike's Chrcs-timothy. Exercises fromAugust's Guide. Extemporary.German three hours.Particles. Synonyms.Exercises of style. Oralexpositions.French three hours. |Translation from the IFrench of Drainage's ^Guide. From the Germanof Beauvais. Firstpart of Knebel's Gramsmar. Exercises and ' temporal.Religion one hour.Chief truths of Christianityand morals. Exercises.History of the New i'Testament. Exercises. |Geography, two hours. |The Germanic Confer. ^The Austrian states. ^History J two hours. tHistory of Germany,and sketch of the Frenchrevolution. ^Arithmetic two hours.Partnership. Interest.Exchange.Geometry, four hours.Parts 5 to 9 of August'sManual.Natural History, fourhours.Terminology of botany,COMPARISON OP PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.FkederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.Natural history of birds,with demonstrations at theroyal museum.Writings one hour.As in the sixth class.Drawings two hours.As in the sixth class.Singing two hours.This class is voluntary.Gymnasium ofschulpforta.Lower Third, thirtyhours.Latin, eight hours.Syntax. Rules of casesfrom Zumpt. Exercisesand extern portia. Inflectionsformerly learnedreviewed. CorneliusNepos.Greek, six hours.Etymology, from Butt-mann'sGrammar to regularverbs, inch. Translationfrom Greek intoGerman from Jacob's,from German into Greekfrom Hess's Exercises.German, two hours.Compositions in narrationand description. Declamation.French, two hours.Repetition of inflections,and exercises byextemporary and in writing.Translation of thefables from Herrmann'sReading Book, 2d course.Lower Third, thirty-onehours.Latin, seven hours.Gcdike's Chrestomathy.Grammar, from August'sGuide. Exercises and ex-temporal.O. Schulz'sLatin Astrology.Greek, four hours.Inflections to the verbsin fxt. Translation fromButtmann's Compendium.German, three hours.Principles of versification,from Wakkernagel'scollection of the Germanpoets. Selections from thegrammar. Essays.French, three hour's.Ancient and modernGreece of Drainage.Grammar. Exercises andextemporary.Lower Third, thirtyhours.Latin, fourteen hours.Cffisar B. Gall, book 5and book 1. Corn. Nep.Attics. Preface. MiltTheistic. Ovid's Metamorphoses,books 8and 2, expurg. Prosody.Zumpt's Grammar. Exercisesand extemporary.Greek, five hours.Translation from Jacob'sElements. Geographicaldivision of Europeand Africa. Inflectionsto irregular verbs, fromButtmann's Exercises.German, two hours.Written and oral exercises.Declamation.French.See remarks at theclose, the class divisionsin this course not correspondingwith those of theothers.GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.Frederick William Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.Religion two hours.Morals and Christianfaith.Religion, one hour.Catechization on thegospel according to St.Luke.Geography, two hours.Physical geography.Europe and the otherparts of the world.History, two hours.General view of ancientand modern history.Mathematics, four hours.Legendre's Geometry,book 1. Decimals. Algebra.Square and cuberootDrawing, two hours.Introduction to landscapedrawing.Geography, one hour.General geography ofEurope.History, three hours.Roman history. Ancientgeography fromSchmidt. Ancient historyfrom Schmidt.Mathematics, five hours.August's Geometry,parts 10 and 11. Algebra.Powers. Square root.Simple equations. Solutionof examples.Gymnasium opschulpforta.Religion, two hours.History of David, partlyfrom the Old Testament,partly related. Gospelaccording to St. Lukeread and explained. Committingto memory versesfrom the Bible. Examinationon the sermon.Geography, three hours.General Exposition.America and northernand middle Asia. SouthernAsia and Africa.Mathematics, four hours.Vulgar and decimalfractions. Similarity oftriangles, and propositionsdepending uponthese properties.Natural Philosophy, twohours.Elements of physics andof chemistry.Natural History, twohours.Amphibia and fishes.Linnaean system. Excursions.Besides these regular studies in the real gymnasium, occupying thirty-onehours per week, there are those which may be substituted for Greek, or assumedvoluntarily, viz. — English, two hours. Inflections of different parts of speech.Irregular verbs. Reading from Sort's Reader and from Heussi's New EnglishiCOMPARISON OP PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.Reader. Writing and drawings two hours each, for those pupils who do nottake a part in the singing lessons of two hours, which will be more fully spokenof at the close. The same exercises are continued in the following class.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.Upper Third Class,thirty hours.Latin, ten hours.Division I. Syntax,from Zumpt. Review ofthe preceding course.Oral exercises in constructionof sentences.Written exercises and ex-temporal.Caesar Bell.Gall., books 1, 2, and 7,in part Ovid's Metamorphoses,extracts frombooks 7 and 8. Prosody,rules from Zumpt.Greek, six hours.Division I. Etymology,from Bateman's Grammar.Oral and writtenexercises and extemporary.Jacob's Reader.German, two hours.Examination of exerciseson historical subjects.Poetical selectionsfor declamation.French, two hours.Exercises in translation.Written exercises.Extemporary.Religion, two hours.Principal passages fromUpper Third Class,thirty-one hours.Latin, seven hours.August's Ligaments.Courses, three and four.Syntax. Exercises and ex-temporal.Ovid's Metamorphoses,books 1, 2, 3,and 4, excerpts. Writtentranslations. Committingto memory remarkablepassages. Prosody.Theory of hexameter.Greek, four hours.Review and extensionof the preceding course.Matthias's Greek Reader.German, three hours.Reading and commentingon the German classics.Exercises, with rules forstyle. Free delivery.French, three hours.Selections from Signet,Tiers, &c., and fromHerrmann and Biichner'sManual. Exercises inspeaking and writing.Extemporary.Religion, one hour.Gospel, according to St.Gymnasium opschulpforta.Upper Third Class,thirty hours.Latin, fourteen hours.Cicero, Melius, Catomajor. Caesar, Bell. Civ.,books 2 and 3, in partOvid's Metamorphoses,books 4, 5, and 6, excerpt.Zumpt's Grammar. Inflections.Syntax. Exercisesand extemporary.Exercises in prosody.Greek, five hours.Xenophon, Crop., extractsfrom books 2 and3. Buttmann's Grammar.Irregular verbs, &c.Ditfurt's Vocal. GreekExercises.German, two hours.Correction of exercises.Declamation. Prosody,from Hesse. Rules forformation of sentences.French,See close of this listReligion, two hours.History of the Old andLiteral EDUOATlOrr. SECONDARY PERIOD.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.the gospels gone over.General view of the OldTestament writings.\History and Geographyfour hours.Roman history, fromthe Punic Wars to thedestruction of the westernempire. History ofthe middle ages, threehours. Review of thefive general divisions ofthe world, one hour.Mathematics four hours.Geometry. Legendre,books 1 and 2, and partof 3. Algebra, with exercisesfrom Meyer Hirsch.Mark, with catechizationupon it.History and Geographythree hours.History of the middleages. Review of geographyLower Second Class,thirty-one hours.Latin, eight hours.Extracts from Livy andCaesar de Bell. Civ. Reviewof Bell. Gall., books2 and 3. Syntax. Exercisesand extemporary.Committing to memoryexercises from Livy andCtBsar. Ovid's Metamorphoses,books 11 to 14.Mathematics, six hours.Simple and quadraticequations. Theorems fromgeneral theory of equations.Mensuration of regularpolygons and circles.Natural History, fourhours.Botany, according to thenatural system. Naturalhistory of worms.Lower Second Class,thirty hours.Latin, seven hours.Half the year with upperthird. The other half :Sallust, Bell. Jug., book 1.Virgil's ^neid, books 1and 2. Exercises and ex-temporal.Gymnasium ofschulpforta.New Covenants, with referencesto the Bible.Geography and Historythree hours.Geography and historyof European states, particularlyof the GermanConfederation, from 'sInstructor.Mathematics, four hours.Algebra. Simple equations.Equality of planerectilinear figures, fromSweden. Exercises.Lower Second Class,thirty hours.Latin, twelve hours.Cicero Orations inCat., pro lege Mail., proArchie. Cic. Selectedepistles from Matthias,Exercises from Ovid, fastis, and Terence Delphi. Zumpt's GrammarParticles. Syntax BornExercises. ExtemporaryLatin verses.Greek, six hours. Greek, four hours. Greek, five hours.Homer's Odys., 11, 12, As in the upper third Xenophon's Arab., 1,13, and 14. Exercises class. 2, and part of 3. Homer'son tho dialects. Xcno- Odys., 21 to 21. ExertAnno. 1, 2, and cisos.COMPARISON OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.part of 3. Excerpts fromthe grammar reviewed.Exercises and cxtcmpo-alia. Syntax.Hereto, two hours.Grammar, ending withirregular verbs. Easierparts of historical booksof Scripture translated.Vocabulary learned byrote. Exercises on regularand irregular verbsout of the recitation room.Gymnasium opschulpforta.German two hours.Correction of writtenexercises and essays.Exercises of delivery.French two hours.Voltaire's Charles XII.Exercises and extemporary.Religion two hours.Explanation of theprincipal parts of theEpistles of St. Paul, withhistorical sketches, and aview of the life of earlyChristian communities.History three hours.Roman history, fromIhe Punic Wars. Historyof the middle ages concluded.General view ofhistory.OertnaUy three hours.In summer combinedwith upper third class. Inwinter, reading Germanclassics. Delivery. Essays.French three hours.In summer, with upperthird. Selections fromBriichner's Reader. Grammaticalexercises, andtranslation from Knebel'sGrammar. Extemporary.Religion, one hour.In summer, with upperthird. In winter, Christiansystem of morals.Geography and History,three hours.In summer, with upperthird. In winter, withupper second. Modernhistory, from IG60 to 1815,General geography of Europe,Hebrew, two hours.Elements of grammarfrom Gesenius. Exercisesin reading and writing.Parodies. Vocabularylearned.German, two hours.View of the principalepochs in the history ofthe German language.Principles of inflection.Essays.French.See close of this list.Religion, two hours.Gospel according to St.Mark, with suitable illustrations.Acts of theApostles, in part.History, three hours.History of the Eastand of the Greeks, withancient geography fromliorcntz's work.GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.FkederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.Mathematics four hours.Gem. to proportionsand simple figures. Elementsof algebra. Logarithms.Natural History twohours.Mineralogy. Botany,especially of native plants.Gymnasium opschulpforta.Mathematics four hours.Proportions. Powersand roots. Similarity offigures. Circles, fromSweden. Exercises.Mathematics five hours.Simple and quadraticequations. Powers. Roots.Logarithms. Review ofplanimetry. Stereometry.Algebraic exercises.Natural History, twohours.Cryptogamic plants.Propagation of the principalcultivated plants. Mineralogy.Physics, two hours.General properties ofbodies. Solids, from Fischer'sNatural Philosophy.The courses of English, of writing, and drawing, are as in the upper thirdclass. Besides these, two hours are set apart for conversation in the French language,and exercises in extempore writing.Upper Second Class,thirty-two hours.Latin, nine hours.Cicero's Orations, proRose. Amer., de Amie,de Senectute. Livy, books22 to 25, inclusive. Virgil'saeneid, books 1 and2. Some eclogues andexcerpts from Georgicss.Exercises and extemporary.Greek, six hours.Homer's Iliad, books 4to 11, inclusive. ArrianAlex, expedition, books 1and 2. Buttmann's Grammar,with exercises andextemporary.Upper Second Class,thirty-two hours.Latin, seven hours.Livy, books 29, 30, 31,and 32. Terence, Andrea.Virgil's ^neid, books 7,8, 9, and 10. Cicero deAmie. Grammatical exercisesand extemporary.Greek, four hours.Homer's Odys., books9 to 11. Arrian expect.Alex., books 2 and 3.Grammatical exercisesand extemporary.Upper Second Class,twenty-nine hours.Latin, eleven hours.Cicero, in Verres, Actii. book 4. Excerpts.Livy, parts of books 22and 23. Tacitus. Germaniaexcerpts. Virgil'saeneid, books 9, 11, and12. Exercises and ex-temporal.Creek, six hours.Herodotus, parts ofbooks 6 and 7. Plutarch.Excerpts from Alexander.Homer's Iliad, books 4and 5. Exercises and ex-temporal.ICOMPARISON OP PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.Hebrew, two hours.Books of Judges andof Ruth, with exercisesof syntax. Easy exercises,and committingvocabulary to memoryout of the class-room.German, two hours.Essays. Delivery.French, two hours.Excerpts from Herr-mannand Brttchner'sManual of the more recentFrench literature.Religion, two hours.Christian faith and morals.History, three hours.Review of ancient historyand geography, usingthe Latin language.Mathematics, four hours.Arithmetical geometryand plane trigonometry.Algebraic exercises. Polygons.Stereometry.Simple and quadraticequations.Physics, two hours.General physics. Electricityand magnetism.Hebrew, two hours.*Historical pieces fromGesenius's Reader. Bookof Genesis. Exercises invowels from Hantschke'sReader. Syntax.German, three hours.Varieties of prose andpoetry, with examples.History of National Literature.Essays. Delivery.French, three hours,Parts of the Manual ofIdeler and Nolte, viz. — extractsfrom Robin, Le Sage,Moliere, Delavigne, &c.Exercises and extemporary.Religion, one hour.Christian system of religionand morals.History, three hours.Modern history, from1500 to 1815. Generalgeography of Europe.Mathematics, six hours.Plane trigonometry fromLegendre. Theory of thecircle. Logarithms. Stereometryfrom Legendre.Binomial. Powers.Physics, three hours.Electricity and magnetism.Heat, light, and sound,from Fischer's Physics.Gymnasium opschulpforta.Hebrew, two hours.Gesenius's Reader,parts 1 and 2. Vocabulary.Gesenius's Grammar.Verbs and adverbs.Writing of Hebrew characters.German, two hours.Elements of versification,with essays andpoetical exercises.French.See at the close of thislist.Religion, two hours.Acquaintance with thesacred writings, andbooks of the evangelicalchurch. Essays.History, two hours.History of Rome to themonarchy, with a geographicalintroductionfrom Lorenzo.Mathematics, four hours.Progressions and logarithms,with applications.Stereometry and planetrigonometry. Exercises.Voluntary.GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.\FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium. Gymnasium ofGymnasium. . Schulpforta.Chemistry ^ two hours.Metallic, acids, alkalis,earths, from Weller'sPrinciples. Two hours ofvoluntary practice in thelaboratory.The course of English in the real gymnasium, in this class, is continued byreading the Vicar of Wakefield, and by exercises from the grammar of Burckhardtand Lost. There is a voluntary course of technology, in the same institution, inthis class, two hours per week, including a discussion of the uses of animal andvegetable products in the arts, oils, resins, starch, sugar, &c. Methods of makingacids, salts, glass, earthenware, &c. This class is attended by those who do notstudy Greek. The courses of writing, drawing, &c. are continued as in the lowerthird class.First Class, thirty-onehours.Latin eight hours.Horace's Odes, books3 and 4. Cicero againstVerres. Tacitus, Annals,books 11 and 12, and extractsfrom 3 to 6. Cicero,Tusc. quest. Extemporetranslations fromGerman into Latin. Exercises.Declamation.Greek, six hours.Homer's Iliad, book1 6, Odyssey, books 9 to16, inclusive. PippinsMajor, Charades, andGorgias of Plato (excerpts).Sophocles' Edit.tyr. and Antigone. Grammaticalexercises. Butt-mann'sGrammar.Hebrew, two hours.Second Book of Kings.Genesis. Psalms, 61 to100. Grammatical criticismsof historical excerpts,or of psalms, as anexercise at home.First Class, thirty-twohours.Latin, six hours.Horace's Odes, frombooks 2 and 3. Cicero deOfficiis. Tacitus, Annals,books 1, 2, and 3. Extemporary.Written translationsfrom German intoLatin. Disputations.Greek, four hours.Homer's Iliad, books 5to 9 and 10 to 14. Thucydides,book 2. Sophocles'sdip. tyr. Plato,apology. Grammatical exercises.Hebrew, two hours.Exodus, and selectionsfrom the other historicalbooks read. The Psalms.Exercises from Hantschko.Selections from the NewTestament in Greek intoFirst Class, twenty-ninehours.Latin, ten hours.Horace's Odes, book 4.Care. Sae. Exist, book1. Cicero Tusc. dispute.,books 1 and 4. Tacitus,Annals, book 1., Plautuscaptive. Extemporary.Written translations fromGerman into Latin. Latindisputations.Greek, six hours.Homer's Iliad, books7 and 8. Sophocles' Philoctetesand Ajax. Demosthenes'Orations, Phil.1, Olynth. 1, 2, 3, forpeace. Greek exercisesand extemporary.Hebrew, two hours.Psalms, 46 to 51. Booksecond of Samuel. Grammar(Gesenius) and exercises.COMPARISON OP PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.FrederickWilliam Real Gymnasium.Gymnasium.German one hour.Criticism of compositions.General grammar,and history of the GermanGrammar and literature.French two hours.Selections from Scribeand Delavigne. Exercisesand extcmporalia.Religion two hours.History of the ChristianChurch, to the timesof Gregory VII.History three hours.Modern history, andreview.Mathematics four hours.Plane trigonometryand application of algebrato geometry. Algebra.Mensuration andconic sections. Binomialtheorem. Exponentialand triton. functions.Physics, two hours.Physical geography.Mechanics.Philosophy, one hour.Propaedeutics. Logic.Hebrew. Written translationsof Psalms.German three hours.Composition and criticismof German authors.French, three hours.Selections from Moliere,Scribe, Delavigne, andPascal. Written and oraltranslations from Germaninto French, from Rabe.ner's Letters, Wieland,and Schiller. Extcmpo-alia.Religion, one hour.The religions of antiquity.The Bible.History, three hours.Ancient and modernhistory, from Schmidt.Mathematics, five hours.Review of plane trigonometry.Spherical trigonometry.Geometry, constructions,equations of thethird and fourth degrees.Numerical equations ofhigher degrees.Physics, three hours.Properties of the gases.Electricity. Light. Colours.Chemistry, two hours.The metals.Gymnasium opschulpforta.German, two hours.General history of Germanliterature, from themiddle of the fourteenthto the second quarter ofthe eighteenth century.Ballads fromGcthe. Compositions.French.See the close of thislist.Religion, two hours.Vogel's Instructor inChristian Knowledge.History, two hours.Of the middle ages,from Gregory VII. to theReformation.Mathematics, four hours.Conic sections. Permutationsand combinations.Elephantine analysis.Exercises in trigonometryand geometry.Physics, one hour.General physics. Generalproperties of bodies.Magnetism.492 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.The course of English in the real gymnasium" includes the reading of Shakspeare'sCaesar and Hamlet, exercises, extemporary, and conversation. That oftechnology is the same as described for the upper second class. Those of drawing,&c. are the same as for the lower third, and are continued or not, at the optionof the student.The instruction in vocal music in the Frederick William gymnasium has notbeen inserted in the list, because the classes do not correspond precisely withthose in the other branches, especially the upper classes. There are five classesfor vocal music, the fifth receiving two hours of instruction in musical notationand singing by ear. The fourth, time and cliffs, &c. Exercises in the naturalscale, and harmony. Songs and chorals with one part. The third, two hours,formation of the scale of sharps, running the gamut with difficult intervals, combinedwith the practical exercises of the last class. The second, two hours, repetitionof tones; sharps, and flats. Formation of the scale of flats. Exercises ofsongs and chorals, in two parts. The first class is an application of what hasbeen learned, as well as a continuation of the science and art, and all the pupilsdo not, of course, take part in this stage of the instruction. The course is of fourhours per week, two for soprano and alto, one for tenor and bass, and one for theunion of the four parts. The proficiency is indicated by the fact, that the pupilsperform very creditably such compositions as Haydn's " Creation," and Handel'sMessiah."In the real gymnasium there are four singing-classes, in the fourth of whichall the members of the fifth class of the gymnasium must enter for elementaryinstruction. In the first or higher class, the Missa of Mozart, Te Deem of Haydn,Hymn of Mozart, Sampson of Handel, De Profundity of Luke, and the Storm ofHaydn, are practised. Opportunities are also afforded of learning instrumentalmusic.In the gymnasium of Pforta there are five classes, which have six regular hoursof instruction and several extra hours every week, besides practising of particularparts by individuals and in the choir.The course of drawing in the Frederick William gymnasium is similar tothat in the real school, which I shall describe hereafter as to the method of teaching.At Pforta there are three classes, formed from the upper and lower secondclasses, pursuing the same general method. The upper and lower third classesof this same school are subdivided into four sections, each having one hour'sinstruction per week. All the pupils receive dancing lessons, and are dividedfor this purpose into twelve or thirteen sections, each of which has an hour ofinstruction per week. The same teacher assists in the charge of the gymnasticexercises.The courses of writing, drawing, and music, are classed in the real gymnasiumunder the head of dexterity in art (KunstfUhigkeiten), and in that of Pfortaas arts (Kinsmen).The course of French language at Pforta is confined to the three upper classes,which are divided into five sections for this instruction. In the fifth class the courseconsists of inflections of the different parts of speech from Hirzel's Grammar, andiComparison OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA. 493reading two hours. In the fourth class, inflections continued, and pronouns fromHirzel. Charles XII. begun. Exercises, two hours. In the third class, CharlesXII. continued ; syntax ; grammar continued ; exercises, two hours. In the secondclass grammatical exercises from Hirzel, and correction of written exercises;selections from Ideler & Nolte's Reader, two hours. In the first class writtenexercises and extemporary; poetical part of Ideler & Nolte's Reader.In a review of the courses, as laid down in the foregoingabstract, the guiding principle of each of the three schoolsshows itself completely by characteristic differences in theinstruction, while their subordination to a general scheme appearsby their never diverging from each other beyond certainlimits. To permit this variety is, to my apprehension,more judicious than to require strict uniformity in the differentschools. It allows a latitude for youth of different tastesand powers of mind to choose, without departing from a professionalcareer. The advocates of an exclusively classicalsystem would find too much of innovation even in the schoolat Pforta, while those who take a more moderate view wouldconsider it as presenting an example of a close classical training,with accessaries from the modern languages and sciences.The real gymnasium is the other extreme of this class of secondaryschools; the modern languages and sciences are broughtmore prominently forward, but with a sincere desire on thepart of its founder and director to effect what they consider adue equilibrium ; hence the classical course differs principallyin quantity from that of the other schools, following them closelyin the authors read and in the quality of the instruction. Thecharacter of these schools, which their programmes thus indicate,is borne out by inspection. There is no disposition toneglect science at Pforta, nor to neglect the ancient languagesat the real gymnasium. At the former the lessons in mathematicsare most admirable, and at the latter the classics of thehighest class which I heard were excellent. This spirit of toleration,if it may be so called, is fully manifested also in theFrederick William gymnasium. It constitutes a peculiar partof the excellence of the Prussian gymnasia, and is one sourceof the superior mental training which they afford.#4d4 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The courses themselves presenting this variety in these schools,the same may be naturally expected in regard to the methods ofinstruction. In fact, the methods of teaching the same subjectvain even in the same school, each teacher being allowedto pursue his own plan, under advice of the director. Thepower of a method depends so much upon the peculiar mannerof applying it by the teacher, that this latitude is favourable toprogress; the regular conferences which take place among theteachers, and the supervision of the director, keeping the diversitywithin reasonable bounds.In the classical course, the oral and written exercises arevaried in their relative proportions to each other. The translationfrom Latin or Greek into German, and vice versa, thegrammatical exercises, Latin compositions or essays, the ex-temporalbefore explained, the practice in versification, &c.,are varied in amount in the different classes, according to theviews of the instructor. At Pforta, the exercises of the first,or highest class, are carried on chiefly in Latin, and the amountof reading in the classics is greater than in the other schools.The Greek is begun in the lower third class of all of these schools,but while it is obligatory in the others, may be omitted in thereal gymnasium, an omission which, however, supposes a destinationdifferent from that of the other pupils. One characteristicdifference between the classical instruction in the higherclasses and in those of similar schools in England and ourcountry, is that, in general, it supposes the grammatical minutiaeto have been fully impressed in the lower classes, and discussesphilological questions, varieties of reading and collateral subjectsof antiquities, history, biography, and geography. Thestudents receive much oral instruction, which they are requiredto record. The same is the practice to even a greaterextent in the other departments of instruction, and the studentsthus acquire a facility in taking notes which they turn to goodaccount in the university lectures, and which strikes a strangerwith surprise on first witnessing it. None of the higher authorsare read at Pforta without these oral expositions being given regularly,and usually extempore, by the professors, at stated hours.COMPARISON OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA. 495In general, I believe the plan of instruction is sufficiently apparentfrom the programme, but in the case of the Latin, inthe lowest class of the Frederick William gymnasium, whichstruck me as particularly appropriate, does not appear to bethere developed. The inflections of the nouns of the firs* declensionis first taught, then of adjectives of one termination,then of verbs of the first conjugation ; these are then illustratedby a variety of written and oral exercises, consisting of sentencesmade up of them. The knowledge of the pupil is thus renderedat once available, and the application is close to the theory,which, at the age of pupils of the sixth class, is especially desirable.Most of the pupils in all these schools begin their classicalcourse at nine or ten years of age, and yet, judging by theprogress shown in the programme of the first class, and by thescholars which the universities of northern Germany turn out,and which are, in fact, formed in the gymnasia, the proficiencyis all that can be desired. It is what a youth of nineteen issueing from one of our colleges would be proud of, and clearlyproves that the classics are not begun too late.The mother tongue and French are both taught in theseinstitutions, in combination with the classical studies. Theselanguages are not merely entered upon the programme, butare actually more or less thoroughly taught, according tothe time which is allotted and the skill of the teacher. Thecourse of German would seem calculated to make both writersand speakers, and, probably, if the demand for the latter wereequal to that of the former, this would prove true in the lattercase, as it does in the former. The French is treated essentiallyin a different way from the ancient languages, and it isconsidered no objection that the two different methods shouldbe practised in the same school. The best instruction which Isaw was given by a native teacher, who more than made upfor the want of perfect accuracy of pronunciation by the thoroughknowledge of the vernacular idiom, which enabled himto anticipate and remove the difficulties of his pupils. In regardto usefulness in common life, and to affording a varietyof structure for comparison, the French ranks before the Eng-496 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.wish for the purposes of the German' "scholar. The latter languageis pursued, however, by many pupils of the real gymnasium,and, with other modern languages, may be studied privatelyat the other gymnasiaj'generally.The religious characteristic of these schools is a striking one,and important in its effects. The Bible is taught rather than aparticular creed, though from the fact that the pupils are nearlyall of one creed, this forbearance is not essential, and is notalways exercised. The separation of religious from otherinstruction can but have a most injurious tendency, and theirconnexion, as in these schools, on the contrary, a happy influence.Religious knowledge is classed with the sciences in theformal division of the subjects of study.The courses of geography and history in the three schoolsselected as examples, are all thorough, but differ in arrangementand method. The constant reference to the black-boardfor the delineation of maps, which occurs in the geographicalcourse of the Frederick William gymnasium, is productive ofthe best results. The student is interested and furnished withan additional means of impressing the facts upon his memory.A similar course, in regard to history, is only partially in use,and would be a decided improvement. The introduction ofbiography, as the foundation for history, is practised in the realgymnasium with great success.The mathematical course of all these schools is of a highlyrespectable character, and is executed to the extent whichappears in the programme. That of the real gymnasium isvery thorough, as the time devoted to the different parts shows,while, as far as the same subjects are studied in the FrederickWilliam gymnasium, it is scarcely behind the former institution.The instruction is much more thorough than that given in thesimilar courses of the French and English schools of this grade.The courses of physics and natural history are much moreextended in the real gymnasium than in either the FrederickWilliam or Pforta gymnasium, the latter course, perhaps, toomuch so. The course of physics at Schulpforta is very meagre,and natural history is not taught at all, an omission which itsComparison OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA. 497country locality renders the more remarkable. The elementsof chemistry are taught regularly in the real gymnasium, andpractice in the laboratory may be had by those who have timefor it from their other studies. The students have also anopportunity to attend a course of lectures on technology. Thecourses of physics of the real gymnasium and of the FrederickWilliam gymnasium are exceedingly well calculated to fulfiltheir object, to give general ideas of natural phenomena, withoutgoing into what may be considered technical minutiae; inthe latter school physics is connected with an excellent course afphysical geography. It seems to me doubtful whether, in thenatural history course, more than a general outline of the subject,is necessary, with the prosecution, practically, of suchbranches as the locality of the institution may render applicablefor improving the habits of observation and discrimination.The scientific details of the different branches belong rather tospecial purposes of study than to general education. The experienceof these institutions may, however, be appealed to asproving the entire compatibility of such instruction with anotherwise sound system, and the entire possibility of accomplishingit without neglecting other more important branches.Drawing and vocal music, which form parts of the regularcourses of all these institutions, have not yet found their wayinto the systems of other nations on the same footing with theregular studies. As a part of physical training, they are important,and as offering a relief from severer pursuits, furtherrecommend themselves in this connexion. In the system ofdrawing especially recommended by the Prussian ministry,models alone are used; this method, however, is not fully carriedout in many schools. The old system of copying from drawingsor engravings having obtained a foothold, cannot be veryeasily displaced by the new one, which requires, besides a changein the method of the master, an expenditure for a new set ofapparatus. The Frederick William gymnasium has a course onthe elements of philosophy and logic, which is wanting in theothers, but it occupies a very small share of attention.It will be my object next to compare the time considered498 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.necessary for the several courses in these three schools, and asthe Pforta gymnasium has no classes below the third, this willrequire a comparison between all the classes of the othersabove the third and those of Pforta, while between the twoother schools the comparison of the entire course drill be mostsatisfactory.The following table contains the numbers for these comparisons.In the first column the subjects of study are stated; inthe second and third columns the number of hours devoted tothese subjects respectively, during the whole course, at theFrederick William and real gymnasia. Those exercises whichare voluntary, or where one hour of a particular subject maybeexchanged for an hour of some other, at the option of thestudent, or of his parents, are marked. The following threecolumns contain the sum total of the hours of study in thefive classes above the third of the Frederick William and ofthe real gymnasium, and the total in the five classes of that ofSchulpforta.COMPARISON OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA.imperative Table of the time occupied by the classes in three PrussianGymnasia.SUBJECTS OF STUDY, &c.Latin,Greek, - - - .Hebrew,* - . -German, .French,English, .Religion, . - -Geography, . -History,Mathematics, . .Physics, - - - .Chemistry, .Practical Chemistry,Technology, . .Natural History, .Philosophy, . .Writing, - . -Drawing, .Singing, .Dancing, .Sum of allthe hours perweek.^.26t4t2t8tSum of thehours of thefive upperclasses.Si6t4t2t««-■ CO«*- O^O m ugig?gOHFor theological students.t Voluntary studies, or exchangeable for the same number of hours of theGreek course.t Besides eight hours of voluntary or exchangeable lessons.§ Besides three voluntary hours.II Besides eight hours of voluntary, or exchangeable instruction.General EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The annexed diagram represents these results, and enablesthe eye to take in the proportion of the several courses in thesesame five classes. The lengths of the vertical lines from themarks F, it, and P, to the horizontal line, 00, beloved, at v^^hichthey all end, shows the proportion of time occupied in fiveclasses of the Frederick William and real gymnasia, and atPforta respectively. For example, the proportion of the Latinin the three institutions is expressed in the left hand column bythe lengths from P to 0, from F to 0, and from R to 0, respectively,and similarly for the other courses in the other columnsor upright lines.*Hours 65'60-55-50-45-40-35-30-25-20-15-10-0.BnF-P-W^=^36=iPmm;fyf1:ecx.65 hours.b ' ' ' ' 'g i-slHl.s |llf.f ^fC ntThe respective characters of these schools appear even inhigher relief, from an examination of the foregoing table, thanthey did from the programme of studies, for though the sameworks may be read, the amount of Latin which it is possible toread thoroughly in seventy-five hours must be very differentfrom that in forty-nine, and the proportions of forty-three, thirty-three,and sixty-one, cannot express equal degrees of attainment• The voluntary studies in the real gymnasium are omitted, and the proportionsof writing, drawing, &c., include all the hours devoted to these branches.COMPARISON OF PRUSSIAN GYMNASIA. 501in that language, though, as already shown in a former part ofthis Report, the proportional proficiencies are not accurately indicatedby similar numbers. The figures in the columns for theFrederick William and Pforta gymnasia will be found to bemuch more nearly equal to each other than those for either ofthe others. The same result appears from inspecting the diagram,where the letters F and P are quite near to each other.In general, F is between the two others, substantiating the remarkalready made of the average position taken in regard to thelanguages and sciences by the Frederick William gymnasium. -In the comparison of the department entitled " arts," beginningwith writing, and including also drawing, music, anddancing, the whole of the regular hours of instruction in all theclasses of the three schools are compared with each other;this being the most accurate mode of comparison, since theseexercises may be taught to nearly the same advantage at anyperiod of the course, and are, in fact, introduced into the lowerclasses of the two schools which begin with the sixth class.Considering the studies of the five upper classes of the threeschools, and omitting the voluntary exercises, there are devotedto the ancient languages, in the first courses noted in the table,eighty-one hours, in the second, fifty-seven hours, in the third,ninety-five hours. To the modern languages in the first, nineteenhours, in the second, thirty hours, and in the third, sixteenhours. To both ancient and modern languages, in the first, onehundred hours, in the second, eighty-seven hours, and in the third,one hundred and eleven hours ; showing that, notwithstandingthe minor variations of opinion as to the relative importance ofthe modern and ancient languages, the average of attention tothe entire department of language approaches to an equality inall. The time devoted to the mathematical and natural sciences,including physics and chemistry in the courses given in the firstcolumn, is twenty-six hours, in that of the second, forty-ninehours, and in that of the third, twenty-one hours. To the religiousinstruction, geography, history, and philosophy, rankedwith mathematics and physics as sciences, in the courses of thefirst column, twenty-eight hours, of the second, twenty-one hours,GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.and of the third, twenty-five hours. To the whole group ofsciences in the first, fifty-four hours, in the second, seventy hours,in the third, forty-six hours. In all the classes of the arts, thetime devoted to the courses in the Frederick William and realgymnasia, compared with that given to the same courses atPforta, is, in the first, twenty-seven hours, in the second, twentyhours, in the third, seventeen hours. The total number of hoursof study thus compared is nearly the same, being for the firstmentioned school, one hundred and eighty-one, for the second,one hundred and seventy-seven, and for the third, one hundredand seventy-four.It is plain, from inspecting the number of hours of recitationin the different classes of these schools, that they have not beenarranged with any reference to the supposed capability of thepupils to receive instruction of one kind more appropriately ata particular age than at another, but with reference to a nearlyequal distribution of the whole time allotted to each particularstudy, in as nearly equal proportions among the different classesas the requirements of preliminary information for the particularbranch, and other points of detail, would permit. It maywell be doubted whether this is not a defect, but the point is adelicate one to touch theoretically. As far as I have seen thetrial made elsewhere, there is, however, a real advantage insuch a distribution, whether we have regard to general intellectualculture, or to the most advantageous mode of communicatingpositive knowledge.By comparing the number of hours of instruction in the differentclasses in these three schools with that recommendedin the ministerial circular already presented,* it will be foundthat, in general, the Frederick William gymnasium presentsthe nearest coincidence of arrangement in its courses. This istrue in relation to the Latin, the Greek, the German, the French,the religious instruction, the mathematics, the physics, and thephilosophy. The time devoted to the historical and geographicalcourses at Pforta approaches the nearest to the new model.While the time devoted to natural history and to writing,Page 458 of this Report.GENERAL REMARKS AND COMPARISONS. 503drawing and vocal music, in the real gymnasium, is almostprecisely equal to that recommended: we may infer from thisthat experience has shown no considerable want of balance inthe studies as now arranged at the Frederick William gymnasium,but that, notwithstanding, an increased attention to naturalhistory and to philosophy is judged advisable. It should beremarked, that the attention to be paid to the French language,according to the new scheme, is much less than according tothe plan of either of these gymnasia, the study being confinedto the three upper classes and their divisions. If this changeshould be introduced generally, the result must be, in time, thatthe French will cease to be generally spoken by liberally educatedpersons in Prussia. The recommendation proceeds, mostprobably, from political considerations, which it would be outof place here to do more than merely to suggest. I cannotbelieve that it depends upon a true want of intrinsic usefulnessin the acquisition.GENERAL REMARKS ON SECONDARY INSTRUCTION, PreparatoryTO THE PROFESSIONS.The variable nature of the circumstances bearing upon thesecondary instruction of different countries, renders comparison,except in a general way, very difficult. A single examplewill serve to illustrate this position. The school into whichthe pupil is to be introduced, preparatory to professional life,though called by the same name, is essentially different in differentcountries. An English university, in its objects andaims, and consequently in its organization, is very unlike thefaculties of France, or a university of Germany, and the secondaryschools, which serve as feeders to these institutions,must be modified accordingly.There are, however, high general purposes to be served in themental training of youth, on the more or less successful modes ofapplying which, comparison will throw the light of experience.If a satisfactory intellectual education at Berlin requires thestudy of Latin, Greek, the vernacular, French, geography andhistory, mathematics, physics, natural history, and intellectual504 General EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.philosophy, it is not likely that the same can be accomplishedelsewhere by the study of Latin, Greek, geography, a smallportion of history, and less of arithmetic and geometry.* Ifit is possible at Berlin to devote sufficient time to the branchesenumerated in the Prussian programme, to make them reallysources of mental culture and of positive knowledge, consistentlywith a thorough knowledge of the classics, it must be sointhe same interval of time any where else. Hence thereneed be no apprehension even on the part of those who considerthe attainment of classical knowledge for itself as the greatend of instruction, in regard to the effects of an increased attentionto other branches of knowledge, unless it can be shownthat the German youth are inferior in these attainments, whichhas never, I believe, been even attempted, or unless it can beproved that they are naturally of higher intellectual powers thanthose of other countries.To turn the details already given of secondary instruction toaccount, and to compare, in as brief a manner as possible, thePrussian gymnasia just described with the institutions for secondaryinstruction in the two other countries, some of the schoolsof which have been noticed, the Frederick William gymnasiummay be assumed as representing an average of the Prussiangymnasia. There being nothing which can be consideredas a system of secondary instruction in Great Britain, it isonly by the comparison of single instances that an appreciationof the whole can be made. This comparison is renderedeasy, and, in fact, reduced to ascertaining which ofthe schools of Great Britain most nearly resembles the Prussiangymnasium, by the detailed comparison already made ofthe several schools with each other. After completing thecourse just marked out, it will be my object to compare someof the features of the Prussian and French systems of secondaryinstruction, and a Prussian gymnasium with a Frenchcollege. I would gladly have preceded this view by a comparisonof the gymnasia of Prussia with those of some ofSee the programme of tho Harrow school, pp. 380, 381 of this Report.GENERAL REMARKS AND COMPARISONS. 505the other German states, as Nuremberg or Bavaria, andAustria, and that of the free town of Frankfort on the Maine, andeven, subsequently, have extended the comparison to the Latinschools of Holland, and the colleges or gymnasia of Switzerland,but it would have been in vain to attempt this within thelimits of the present Report. In the documents and notes whichmy tour has furnished, I have ample means for such a purpose,which I may at a future day accomplish, as it would throw thelight of further experience on our operations.Among the British institutions which I have described in moreor less detail, no one approaches so closely to the Prussiangymnasia, in the outline of its course of studies, and in the timedevoted to the different subjects, as the Hill-street Institution ofEdinburgh. There are, it is true, strongly marked differencesin the two courses, but not so great as between those of thePrussian institutions and of the more exclusively classical schools.It is certainly remarkable, that what is an established systemin one country, should by many be considered as an innovationof doubtful expediency in the other. The pupils enter and leavethe Scottish institution earlier than the Prussian, hence thecourses must be forced, and the mature knowledge, the regularand progressive development which marks the pupils of thePrussian schools, cannot be acquired. The crowning coursesof language are wanting, and the mathematics and physics areimperfectly learned, in general, from the too early youth ofthe pupil of the Scottish school. The two years between seventeenand nineteen spent in a Prussian gymnasium, are invaluableto both master and pupil. It must be observed, also, thatone being a private school, and of recent establishment, laboursunder disadvantages in regard to procuring teachers whichthe public, long tried, and assured existence of the other, preventstheir being subject to. With the advantages which theEnglish grammar schools have in the age of their pupils, andthe duration of their courses, over any private school, the introductionof the branches of knowledge considered essentialin Germany, might be effected with comparative ease in them.I am convinced that, as soon as teachers were trained up for"506 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.the change, and the pupils had become accustomed to it, theresult would be most striking, and I do not. consider the partialfailure of the attempt, to which I have alluded, at Rugby, asat all conclusive. An experienced teacher in England made theremark to me, as a justification of the tendency to exclusivelyclassical instruction in the secondary schools of Great Britain,that the nation having naturally a disposition to advance inmaterial subjects, should be drawn away from them, and towardsthe ideal, by education; this was equivalent to sayingthat a nation should be educated against its nature and tendencies,which remark, it seems to me, need only be applied to theindividuals forming the nation to show its fallacy.In support of my inference as to the character of the classicalinstruction in the Prussian schools, it may not be amiss toobserve, that if the nearly exclusively classical example whichI have given in Harrow school, be compared as to its courseof studies in classics with a Prussian gymnasium, it will befound that, except in the article of Greek and Latin verse,which is in little or no repute in most of the gymnasia, theclassical studies of these latter are fully equivalent to those ofthe former. I take it for granted that at Harrow the course isthoroughly acquired, and know that such is really the case inthe gymnasia which I visited.In regard to the methods of the British and Prussian schoolsin general, the recitation upon a lesson which has beenstudied from a text-book out of the school, used in the former,tends to foster habits of self-reliance, while that of minglingmuch oral instruction with the recitations used in the latter,renders the instruction more interesting to the pupils*When the latter method is employed, much less artificial stimulusfrom hope of reward or fear of punishment is necessary,and, if I may be permitted to judge from the examples whichcame under my notice in both countries, there is, on the average,more exertion on the part of a class in Prussia than inGreat Britain. The prizes held out at the English grammarschools, in the way of scholarships at the universities, to thosewho distinguish themselves especially, insure a great amount ofGENERAL REMARKS AND COMPARISONS.exertion on the part of young men of talent, whose subsequentsuccess is appealed to as an evidence of the soundness of thesystem of instruction, with which it has little or nothing to do.The students find a similar stimulus at the university; a scholarshipmay, if the time be duly improved, lead to a fellowship,and thus to an honourable provision for life. With such strongmotives to great individual exertion, a youth of talent mightsucceed in educating himself even without aid, or were theschool system ever so bad.In relation to the discipline in the similar secondary schoolsof Prussia and Great Britain, I would venture the remark, thatin the former, it is generally much more advanced in its method,motives, and results, than in the latter. There are, ofcourse, exceptions to this remark. The kind of relation existinghabitually, especially in boarding-gymnasia, between thepupil and the teacher, in Prussia, is not unknown in GreatBritain, but is an exception, and not the rule. In this respect,no doubt, a change is taking place, which will accelerate as itadvances, and ultimately the principle will prevail, that the bestinterest of both pupil and teacher is to be found in the cultivationof mutual regard.The organization of the systems of public instruction inPrussia and in France propagates a central influence throughall parts of each, but by different means. Theoretically, theuniversity of France is an empire within itself, with the grandmaster,actually the minister of public instruction, as the head,assisted by the university council. The academies, presidedover by their rectors and councils, constitute the divisionsof this empire. The execution of the university law, as regardsthe establishments of secondary instruction, is vested directlyin the governments of the academies, who legislate merely incertainmatters of detail. The minister of public instruction isalso the central authority in Prussia, but the legislative, as wellas the executive power, belong to the school-board emanatingfrom the consistory of each province. It is true, that generallaws made by the central authority cannot be contravened,but the very general nature of these laws leaves much for508 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.regulation by the local authorities, as has been seen in thediverse plans of the different gymnasia which have been presentedin this Report.Th institutions introductory to the universities may, accordingto law, in either country, be public or private; but in Prussia,the private institutions have been obliterated by the publicones, and in France, are held in a miserable state of dependanceupon them. Great efforts have been made, and are making, inthe latter country, to free private secondary instruction from itstrammels, and to enable it so far to compete with public instruction,as to keep this latter in a sound state. There are twogrades of public institutions in France, namely, the royal andcommunal colleges, and only one in Prussia, the gymnasia; theformer plan leading, according to the best authorities, to therecognition of establishments entirely incompetent to fulfil theobjects of this kind of instruction.The arrangement of academic degrees in Prussia and inFrance differs essentially, producing peculiarities in the introductoryinstitutions. The academic grades in the faculty ofletters and of sciences, after the lowest grade, or bachelor, areentirely distinct in the university of France. The bachelor ofsciences must have a sufficient knowledge of letters to qualifyhim for the lowest degree in that department, but this degreeonce taken by a member of the highest class of a college, heneed never enter the faculty of letters of the university. Thequalifications of the literary man in science, and of the scientificman in letters, are not necessarily so high in the French arrangementas in the Prussian, where there is but one set of degreesfor both. The plan of degrees in the university of France hasthe advantage which the variation allowed in the courses inthe Prussian secondary schools supplies, in part, of allowingminds of different complexions to choose their career. As it isnot incumbent on the man of science to pursue the course ofletters in a faculty, the courses of rhetoric and philosophywould, in general, be lost to him, if they were not placed in thecollege course: the close study of these branches in the colleges,and their entire omission, or the little attention paid to them inGEPfERAL REMARKS AND COMPARISONS. 509the gymnasia, are striking differences in the two systems ofinstruction. The academic degrees of Prussia can only betakenby study in the faculties of the university, of which thesecondary schools form no part: the corresponding ones inFrance are accessible to the youth leaving the colleges. iThe examinations, which in Prussia must precede the matriculationat the university, are made in the gymnasia themselves,but under the direction of a special committee, while those forthe degrees obtainable on leaving a French college are madein the university itself, and entirely by its authorities. ThePrussian examinations are conducted in such a way as to renderthe system of manuals, by which pupils may be worked uptothe precise minimum of attainment, almost impossible. Thecandidates are known to at least a part of the examiners,their former teachers, and their attainments have been accuratelyascertained by them in the class-rooms, before comingto this test. The actual examining bodies having, in general,only the pupils of one gymnasium before them, are physicallyable to make the examination a thorough one. On the contrary,the examination for degrees in France, correspondingto those for the matriculation certificate in Prussia, are madein the university, by persons who are usually strangers to thepupils and their attainments, who have the arduous task of conductingthe examination of all the candidates, and who are fromthese causes reduced to the necessity of rendering the examinationless thorough, and more formal, and hence of allowing theopportunity for superficial preparation by manuals. The modeadopted in Prussia would undoubtedly give the public institutionsa great advantage over private ones, did any such existas independent establishments.The use of written examinations in mathematics is adoptedin the Prussian system, and not in the French, and with anoriginally strong prepossession in favour of the oral method. Inow believe, from the facts which inquiry has brought beforeme, that the written form is a most valuable one, and that thetwo must be combined to give a thorough examination.The subjects of secondary instruction in France and Prussia610 GENERAL Education. SECONDARY PERIOD.are essentially the same, but the manner of introducing themdiffers in most important particulars. The branches taught inaPrussian gymnasium are all obligatory; only the degree ofstudy in some minor ones is left to the student, and the Hebrewlanguage is reserved for those who intend to study theology;the Latin, Greek, German, French, religious instruction, geography,history, mathematics, physics, natural history, writing,drawing, and vocal music, are all studies to be regularly followed.While these branches are equally component parts ofthe course of the French colleges, with the exception of vocalmusic, and with the addition of chemistry, the modern foreignlanguage, drawing, and writing, do not enter into the regularcourse, but are voluntary, being, however, furnished at the expenseof the college. The branches which are not thus furnishedcan hardly be considered as parts of the instruction,being, as it were, merely tolerated.The manner in which the same materials of instruction arecombined in the programme of a French college and of a Germangymnasium is so different, that it appears like attemptingto compare things not homogeneous with each other, to bringthem together for such a purpose. A glance at the arrangementsof any one class in the two cases will show better whatI mean than any description of this peculiarity. The Germanprogramme appears to have been carefully studied, the proportionof its parts to have been carefully elaborated, the arrangementsas to order of study and time of study to have beencarefully considered, and the whole presents a better maturedand more finished system than that of the French college. Itdoes not appear in the recent annals of this kind of instructionin Prussia, to have been doubtful whether letters and scienceshall be taught simultaneously or successively, or whether naturalhistory shall be taught in the beginning, middle, or end ofthe course. The entire arrangement appears to me to be morecompact and better ordered. It will not require a lengtheneddiscussion to substantiate these views; attention need be calledonly to a few points in illustration of them. The Prussian systemlays down for the regular studies thirty to thirty-two hoursgeneral remarks and comparisons. 611per week for each class; the French includes but twenty-twohours. If from the thirty-two hours be taken the tonne allottedto studies considered voluntary in a French college, namely,six hours per week, the remainder, twenty-six hours, will stillexceed by four hours the time occupied in the college recitationsor lectures. The greater number of hours thus occupiedis a real advantage in favour of the Prussian schools, sinceexperience shows that thirty-two hours per week may be devotedto recitation, and the private study requisite for preparationbe made by the student, without injury to his health. Itcannot be doubted, from this comparison, that the branchescomposing the course of a gymnasium are more closely examinedthan those of a college. The details of the distribution oftime in the separate classes confirm this deduction; for example,the time occupied per week by Latin, Greek, and German, inthe upper third class of a Prussian gymnasium, is eighteenhours, and in the lower third and upper second class, each,seventeen hours, while in the parallel classes of a French college,in Latin, Greek, and French, but fourteen hours per weekare employed. Further, the classical course is dropped entirelyafter the rhetoric class in the college, while in the gymnasiumit extends to the close of the student's career. In regard to thescientific courses of the French colleges, the following pointsappear particularly worthy of notice. No instruction is givenin mathematics higher than arithmetic, except two hours aweek of geometry in the third class, until the pupil has reachedthe second class, in which, if he entered college at nine years ofage, he arrives in his sixteenth year; and then all that he learnshigher than this, if he follow the career of letters, is compressedinto two years. Physics and chemistry for the student in thissame career are taught in two lessons per week in the philosophyclass. Natural history is thrown into the course of the sixthand fifth classes. A comparison of these defective arrangementswith the regular instruction of the same branches, in theirappropriate places in a Prussian gymnasium, fully justify theremarks with which this paragraph commenced. Having attendedthe examination for the degree of bachelor of sciences612 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.at Paris, and heard recitations in the Prussian gymnasia, I amsatisfied that the conclusions in regard to the superiority of thePrussian instruction in science are entirely just. The subjectof religious instruction is one of such peculiar delicacy, that Iam most happy to be able to submit the views of a high authorityin public instruction in France, instead of my own, inregard to it, merely observing that I coincide, on this point, entirelyin opinion with the authority to which I refer. M. Cousinsays: — " There is no class in the Prussian gymnasium which hasnot a course of religious instruction, as it has of classical or ofmathematical instruction. I have before said, and now repeat,that worship, with its ceremonies, can never be sufficient foryoung men who reflect, and who are imbued with the spiritof the times. A true religious instruction is indispensable, andno subject is better adapted to a regular, full, and varied instructionthan Christianity, with a history which goes back tothe beginning of the world, and is connected with all the greatevents in that of the human race, with its dogmas, whichbreathe a sublime metaphysics, its morality, which combinesseverity with indulgence, with its general literary monuments,from Genesis to the universal history"* Such an instructionM. Cousin demands for the colleges of his country, declaringthat, though established by law, it does not now exist in them.The courses of rhetoric and philosophy, to which a considerableportion of time is given for the last two years of the student ofletters, and an introduction to which begins even in the secondclass, are the chief ornaments of the course of the Frenchcolleges, and the sacrifices required by their introduction areamply compensated by their effect. The Prussian system postponesthese courses to the university period, and requires everystudent who wishes to matriculate in other faculties, to gothrough them. The bachelor of letters, on leaving a Frenchcollege, may begin at once the study of theology or of law,and the bachelor of sciences that of medicine. The GermanCousin. Memoire sur Instruction secondary dans lo royaume do Prusse.Paris, 1837, p. 143.GENERAL REMARKS AND COMPARISONS. 513Student must pass through the faculty of philosophy before hecan begin the study of either of these professions. In regardto modern languages, the new recommendations for the Prussiangymnasia appear to me to place the French on a worsefooting than before, but still a better one than that occupied byEnglish and German in the French colleges. I cannot helphoping that this movement will not be followed up, and that thereasons for retaining the modern languages, as parts of a liberaleducation, will be found too strong to admit of their being soeasily disposed of as appears to be assumed in the circular fromthe Prussian ministry, which does not appear to have put forthits strength upon this question.The methods of instruction in the French colleges, in thelower classes, resemble those of the English schools, with theadvantage, that the pupils have the directors of studies to aidthem when necessary. There are lectures, as well as recitations,in the higher classes, as in the gymnasia. In both theFrench and Prussian institutions there is a want of apparatusfor illustration. In the courses of physics and natural history,it having once been determined that such instruction is essential,the implements necessary to teach to the best advantage shouldnot be left wanting.The government of the French colleges differs essentiallyfrom that of the boarding-gymnasia of Prussia. The question,whether it is advantageous to establish a boarding system inthe midst of the residences of the parents of pupils, as in France,or to establish day-schools, as the Russian gymnasia, is onethat depends much upon national manners. My own convictionsare, in the general, in favour of the Prussian system inthis respect, and of encouraging the means of strengthening domesticties, by leaving youth under parental control. The chiefofficer of the Prussian gymnasia, boarding as well as others, thedirector, or rector, is a teacher as well as a governor, whilethe proviso of the French college does not teach. The formerarrangement has the advantage of bringing the director intocontact with the pupils more closely; the latter allows a morethorough superintendence of instruction, discipline, and police.514 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD*When the number of pupils is not very great, the formerarrangement is, I believe, the more advantageous. It is, however,a matter almost of necessity, in institutions having such anumerous body of students as the Parisian colleges in general,that the presiding officer should have no other charge than thatof superintendence, and it may further be desirable that heshould be assisted by a censor, the second officer of the Frenchcollege. There are no equivalent officers in the boarding-gymnasiaof Prussia to the directors of studies, who havecharge of the pupils during the study hours in the French colleges.One of the teachers, as at Schulpforta, takes a weeklyturn to superintend the pupils, dwelling near them during theperiod of duty. This arrangement answers well, with the aidof the pupils selected to superintend sections, for a small numberof students, but would be entirely inefficient in a Parisiancollege. The directors of studies are most important officers inthese institutions, especially as they are required to be competentto teach as well as to superintend, and the selection ofthem from among the adjuncts (agrees), who are expectantsof promotion, is an excellent arrangement. The professorsand teachers in the French colleges, in Paris, are on the footingof the instructors in the Prussian day-gymnasia, livingout of the institution, and having nothing to do with the disciplineout of the recitation hours. This system has, nodoubt, advantages, but the controlling disadvantage is the diminutionof the moral influence of the teacher over the pupil.It is especially necessary, in establishments where youngmen are crowded together, and separated from the wholesomerestraints of home and domestic discipline, to foster, byall means, the moral influence of the teacher, and to bringthe pupil as near to him as possible. This is not done whenthe professor merely meets the student in the recitation or lec-ture-room for a few hours every day, and during the remainderof the time has no active care oi*, or interest in, his welfare. Theexistence of directors of studies is by no means incompatiblewith such a supervision by the professors. In both the Frenchand Prussian institutions the highest officer, the proviso orGENERAL REMARKS AND COMPARISONS.director, administers the discipline, and the tone of it dependsupon his character. The superintendence by pupils of sectionsof their fellows, is not allowed to degenerate into the "faggingsystem," the pupils being selected for the office, and constantlysuperintended by the teachers. From the location of the Parisiancolleges, the details of their arrangements are not comparablewith those of a Prussian country gymnasium.The inducements to study are of a much more exciting kindin the French colleges than in the Prussian gymnasia. Bothhave a system of places in the class, differently arranged forthe higher and lower classes, and both grade the pupils on leavingthe institution. But in the French college there is a mostpowerful, I may say an excessive, stimulus from prizes, not onlyin the establishment, but from a comparison with others, andpublic attention is called to the successful youth, who is rewardedunder the notice of the community of scholars, the university,and the public at large: his career depends upon successful competitionfrom one step to another, until he has reached the higherplaces of society, and his selfish feelings are constantly anddirectly stimulated. It is more easy to feel than to describethe influence of the minute particulars which constitute publicscholastic sentiment, and which produce a very different atmospherein the two classes of institutions. Emulation is not discouragedin the gymnasia, and intellectual and moral qualities areheld In due esteem; but the development of mind is controlled bythat of the moral sentiments, and there is in consequence less ofstrong personal rivalry than in the colleges. The reciprocal actionof national character and education is so powerful, that itwould be rash, without a much deeper examination than I canprofess to have made, to say how far these differences are effectsor causes. It is my duty to note them, and to comment freelyupon them for our advantage, leaving the judgment to morecompetent minds.With all the stimulus of the French colleges, there is one precautionneglected, which strikes at the root of the competencyof the mass of students. The law in regard to stated half-yearlyexaminations is not executed. Incompetent students, unless516 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.grossly so, pass regularly forward with the competent into thehigher classes. There is one period, in passing from the fourthto the third class, at which an examination has been applied,and with advantage; but there are three classes before thefourth, through which the students pass as a matter of course.It is obvious, that with so loose a system, the examinations fordegrees must be relaxed, or the examiners take upon themselvesa heavy responsibility. The regular examinations of the Prussiangymnasia afford the means of discovering the incompetentyear by year, a result favourable both to the youths who arethus thrown into other careers, and to those who remain connectedwith these institutions.The means for supplying teachers for secondary instructionmust, I think, be admitted, so far as the normal school is concerned,to be superior in France to those of Prussia. Thecentral normal school of Paris is certainly more advantageousthan the detached philological and pedagogical seminaries ofPrussia. This school is kept in vigour by competition fromwithout, which, while it opens the career of instruction tothose young men who may not be able from circumstancesto avail themselves of the advantages of the normal school,reacts favourably upon the school itself. The candidate forthe normal school must be at least a bachelor of letters, andmust compete for his place. After going through its courses,he again passes through the severe ordeal of a competition forthe place of adjunct (agr^g^), in which he may be attached tosome particular institution or not. In this place the powersof a young man are developed, and from it, if meritorious, hemay rise in his career. The equivalent plan in Prussia securescompetent instructors, but does not offer to them the advantagesof the normal school.In both France and Prussia, teachers are exempted fromregular military service, and are entitled to retiring pensionsin proportion to their services.*I do not speak of the relative compensation of the officers of colleges andgymnasia, because, as before stated, tiioy are most fallacious tests, unless examinedin connexion with a variety of statistical matters, which make the unitof compensation of different values in ditfcrcnt countries.REAL SCHOOLS OF BERLIN-divisionSECOND.SECONDARY INSTRUCTION IN PRUSSIA.In continuation, I propose to give an account of two schoolsat Berlin, which furnish secondary instruction of a kind intendedto prepare youth for professions not included in the listof those called learned, and for other occupations requiring aconsiderable intellectual training, with the acquisition of specialpreparatory knowledge.ROYAL REAL SCHOOL OF BERLIN.The first of these, in point of date, is the Royal Real Schoolof Berlin. It was founded as early as 1747, by CounsellorHecker, whose name has already been used in connexion withsome of the education reforms by Frederick the Great. At theperiod in which this school was founded, Latin and Greekwere the exclusive objects of study in the learned schools, andthe avowed purpose of this establishment was that " not merewords should be taught to the pupils, but realities, explanationsbeing made to them from nature, from models and plans, andof subjects calculated to be useful in after life." Hence theschool was called a " real school," and preserves this name,indicative of the great educational reform which it was intendedto promote, and the success of which has been, thoughslow, most certain.The successor of Hecker, in 1769, divided this flourishingschool into three departments, the pedagogue, or learnedschool, the school of arts, and the German school: the wholeestablishment still retaining the title of real school. The firstnamed department was subsequently separated from the others,constituting the Frederick William gymnasium; the school ofarts, and the German, or elementary school, remain combinedunder the title of the roya real school. The same director,however, still presides over the gymnasium and the real school.The question has been much agitated, whether the modern5i6 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.languages should be considered in these schools as the substitutesfor the ancient in intellectual education, or whether mathematicsand its kindred branches should be regarded in thislight. Whether the original principle of the "realities" onwhich the schools were founded, was to be adhered to, or thestill older of verbal knowledge, only with a change of languages,to be substituted for it. In this school the languages will befound at present to occupy a large share of attention, while inthe similar institution, a description of which follows this, thesciences have the preponderance.In the royal real school the branches of instruction are — religion,Latin, French, English, German, physics, natural history,chemistry, history, geography, drawing, writing, and vocalmusic. The Latin is retained as practically useful in somebranches of trade, as in pharmacy, as aiding in the nomenclatureof natural history, and as preventing a separation in the classes ofthis school and that of the gymnasium, which would debar thepupils from passing from the former to the latter in the upperclasses. It must be admitted that, for all purposes but the last,it occupies an unnecessary degree of attention, especially in themiddle classes.The following table shows the distribution of time among thecourses. There are seven classes in numerical order, but ten,in fact, the third, fourth, and fifth being divided into two ; thelower fourth is again, on account of its numbers, subdividedinto two parallel sections. Of these, the seventh, sixth, andfifth are elementary classes, the pupils entering the seventh atbetween five and seven years of age. In the annexed table thenumber of hours of recitation per week of each class in theseveral subjects is stated, and the vertical column separating theelementary classes from the others, contains the sum of the hoursdevoted to each branch in the higher classes, excluding thelower section of the fourth class, which has not a distinct coursefrom that of the other division.A REAL SCHOOL OF BERLIN.Table, showing the number of hours of recitation per week, of each class, in thesubjects taught in the Royal Real School of Berlin.SUBJECTSOFSTUDY.iias-aciocdoo.2 g§ «ii<amKCoiProportion ofother studies toGerman in themm« edIfHso3.7Latin,1.42.9French,1.10.70.9English, . - - -0.3German,1.00.60.80.61.00.8Religion, . - . -Mathematics,* . -1.71.11.6Natural History,0.40.1 10.1Physics,0.40.2t0.2Chemistry, . - -0.4Geography, . - .OA0.50.5History,0.70.60.30.40.70.4Drawing,Writing,4 60.20.30.3Singing,Total, .0.70.60.6Including arithmetic, geometry, algebra, and trigonometry,t These numbers include the entire course.^:mGENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.Pupils who enter this school between five and seven years ofage, and go regularly through the elementary classes, are preparedat ten to pass to its higher classes, or to enter the lowestof the gymnasium. It is thus after the fifth class that a comparisonof the two institutions must begin. The studies of thereal school proper, and of the gymnasium, have exactly the sameelementary basis, and they remain so far parallel to each otherthat a pupil, by taking extra instruction in Greek, may pass fromthe lower third class of the former to the lower third of the latter.This fact alone is sufficient to show that the real schools mustbe institutions for secondary instruction, since their pupils haveyet three classes to pass through after reaching the point justreferred to. It serves also to separate the real schools fromthe higher burgher schools, since the extreme limit of the coursesof the latter, with the same assistance in regard to Greek,only enables the pupil to reach the lower third class of thegymnasium. In general, a pupil would terminate his studiesin the real school at between sixteen and eighteen years ofage. The difference between the subjects of instruction in thereal school and the Frederick William gymnasium, consists inthe omission in the former of Greek, Hebrew, and philosophy,and the introduction of English and chemistry. The relativeproportions of time occupied in the same subjects in the twoschools, will be seen by comparing the two columns next onthe right of the numbers for the seventh class, in the table justgiven. The first of these columns contains the proportion ofthe number of hours per week devoted to the different subjectsin the six classes of the real school above the elementary, thenumber of hours devoted to the German being taken as unity;and the second, the same proportion for six classes of the gymnasium,beginning with the lowest, the same number of hoursbeing taken as the unit, as in the preceding column. To bringthe natural history and physics into comparison, I have takenthe numbers for the upper classes of the gymnasium in whichthese branches are taught. Of the courses common to the twoschools, those to which nearly equal attention is paid in bothA REAL SCHOOL OF BtlRLlN.institutions are — the religious instruction, the German, geographyand history, writing, and vocal music. The French, mathematics,physics, and natural history, predominate in the realschool, the Latin in the gymnasium. The effect of reckoningthe first, second, and upper third classes of the gymnasium doesnot materially change the proportionate numbers for the courseswhich are common to the two schools, except as to Latin andmathematics. To show this, the column on the extreme rightof the table is introduced, containing the proportions for all thenine classes of the Frederick William gymnasium.There were, in 1838, five hundred and ten pupils in this realschool, under the charge of fourteen regular or class masters,teaching several subjects in the lower classes, and of six otherteachers. Each of the eleven class divisions thus averagesabout forty-six, who are under the charge of one teacher at atime.The elementary course in the real school is similar to thatdescribed in the burgher schools, beginning with the phonicmethod of reading, the explanations of all the words and sentencesbeing required at the same time that the mechanical partof reading is learned. Written and mental arithmetic are taughttogether in the lowest class. The religious instruction consistsof Bible stories adapted to their age; and verses are committedto improve the memory of words. The exercises of inductionare practised, but in a way not equal to that with objects, introducedby Dr. Mayo in England. Some of the pupils are ableto enter the gymnasium after going through the two lowestclasses.In regard to the real classes proper, as I propose to enterinto the particulars of the course of study of the trade school, Ishall here merely make a few remarks upon two of the branchesstudied in them namely, French and drawing. The remarks inregard to the French will serve to show how great a latitude ateacher is allowed in the arrangement of his methods, the result ofwhich is, that those who have talent are interested in improvingtheir art by observation and experiment. The French teacher toS22 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.whom I allude* had been able to secure the speaking, as wellas the reading, of French from his pupils. From the verybeginning of the course this had been a point attended to, andtranslation from French into German had been accompanied bythat from German into French: the conversation on the businessof the class-room was in French. The pupils were exercisedespecially in the idioms of the language in short extempore sentences,and the differences of structure of the French and theirown language were often brought before them, and the difficultiesresulting from them anticipated. Difficult words andsentences were noted by the pupils. Declamation was practisedto encourage a habit of distinct and deliberate speaking,and to secure a correct pronunciation. The chief burthen ofthe instruction was oral. Without the stimulus of change ofplaces, the classes under this gentleman's instruction were entirelyalive to the instruction, and apparently earnestly engagedin the performance of a duty which interested them. If suchmethods should fail in communicating a greater amount ofknowledge than less lively ones, which I believe cannot be thecase, they will serve, at least, to break down habits of intellectualsloth and to promote mental activity, the great aim ofintellectual education.The drawing department of this school is superintended by ateacher who has introduced a new method of instruction, particularlyadapted to the purpose for which drawing is to beapplied in common life and in the arts; a method which isfound to enable a much larger proportion of the pupils to makeadequate progress than the ordinary one of copying from drawingsIn this method the pupil begins by drawing from simplegeometrical forms, those selected being obtained from modelsin wood or plaster, of a square pillars a niche, and a lowcylinder (the form of a mill-stone). The square pillar separatesMr. Herrmann.+ Mr. Peter Schmidt, who now, in his old age, has received from the governmenta pension in return for the introduction of his method, and the instructionin it of a certain number of teachers.t Seven and a-half inches high, and one inch and a-half in its square section.CITY TRADE SCHOOL OF Berlin.in joints, affording a cube and parallelopipeds of different heights.The hemisphere which caps the niche nay be removed, leavingthe concave surface of its cylindrical part. The exercisesof the pupil run thus: — First, to place upon a board, or upon hispaper or slate, a point vertically above another, or so that thelines joining the two shall be parallel to the right or left handedge of the board, paper, or slate. Second, to join them. Third,to place a point horizontally from the second, and at a distanceequal to that between the first and second points. Fourth, toplace one vertically over the third, and at a distance equal tothat below the first, and to join the third and fourth. The firstand fourth being then joined, a square is formed. After practicein this, the simple elevation of the cube is drawn. Next, aperspective, by the use of a small frame and silk threads, suchas is common in teaching the elements of this subject, and bymeans of which the pupil acquires readily a knowledge of thepractice. The drawing of lines in various positions, and withvarious proportions, terminates this division of the subject. Theniche and cylinder afford a similarly graduated series of lessonson the drawing of curved lines, and the drawing of lines of differentdegrees of strength and of shadows is introduced. Thisis accompanied with some of the more simple rules of shadowand shade. More difficult exercises of perspective follow fromnatural objects and from works of art or mechanism, accordingto the direction to be given to the pupil's attainments andthe amount of taste which he displays. This method of teachinghas been introduced quite generally in Prussia, and withthe best results as to the formation of accuracy of eye and ofhand.CITY TRADE SCHOOL OF BERLIN.This school was founded to give a more appropriate educationfor the mechanic arts and higher trades than can be hadthrough the courses of classical schools. It is a great pointgained when the principle is admitted, that different kinds ofeducation are suited to different objects in life; and such an524 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.admission belongs to an advanced stage of education. As aconsequence of a general sentiment of this kind, numerousschools for the appropriate instruction of those not intended forthe learned professions grow up by the side of the others. Theyouth is thus secured a suitable education, no matter what maybehis intended calling, and is not forced to accept a trainingnecessarily imperfect, from the time which he can devote to it,and furnishing him with but little of the knowledge which herequires in his pursuits. This sentiment prevails extensively inPrussia, and, indeed, throughout Germany, and as a consequenceof it, there are better opportunities for the instruction ofyoung men, not intended for the learned professions, than inany other part of Europe.The city of Berlin is the patron of the trade school which Iam about to notice, as the king is of the real school, alreadyspoken of. Its stability is thus secured, and the means of furnishingit with the necessary materials for instruction areliberally provided.* The trade school is a day-school, andconsists of five classes, of which the lowest is on the samegrade as to age and qualification at admission as the fourthclass of a gymnasium. It is assumed that at twelve years ofage it will have been decided whether a youth is to enter oneof the learned professions, or to follow a mechanical employment,or to engage in trade, but the higher classes are notclosed against pupils. Of the five classes, four are considerednecessary or desirable for certain pursuits, and the wholefive for others; the courses of all but the first class last oneyear, that of the first, two years — a youth leaving the schoolat from sixteen to seventeen or eighteen years of age, accordingto circumstances. During the year 1836-7, the numberof pupils in the several classes were — in the first class,eleven; in the second, twenty-nine; in the upper third, forty-three;in the lower third, fifty-two; in the fourth, fifty; total oneThe present director of this school, Mr. KlOden.was formerly director of thehigher burgher school at Potsdam, and is one of the most distinguished teachersin his line in Prussia.City TRADE SCHOOL OF BERLIN.hundred and eighty-five; from which numbers it appears that aconsiderable proportion of the pupils leave the school withoutentering the first class. The number of teachers is nineteen,five being regular or class teachers, and fourteen assistants.The director gives instruction.The following list of the callings to which pupils from thisschool have gone on leaving it, will show that it is really whatit professes to be, a school for the instruction of those whointend to follow occupations connected with "commerce, theuseful arts, higher trades, building, mining, forestry, agriculture,and military life;" and further, that its advantages are appreciatedby the class for whom it is intended. The list includesthe pupils who have left the school from the first and secondclasses in the years 1830, 1832, 1833, and 1837. From thefirst class, two teachers, five architects, one chemist, twenty-sixmerchants, one machinist, two calico-printers, two glass-workers,one cloth-manufacturer, one silk-manufacturer, one miner,thirteen agriculturalists, eight apothecaries, two gardeners, onepainter, one mason, one carpenter, one tanner, one miller, onebaker, one potter, one saddler, one soap-boiler, one cabinetmaker,two soldiers, one musician, five to public offices, one tothe trade institution, six to a gymnasium. From the secondclass, forty-one merchants, one teacher, one chemist, one machinist,one ship-carpenter, nine agriculturalists, one sugar-refiner,three dyers, one tanner, one brewer, two distillers, oneminer, two biographers, one die-sinker, three apothecaries,one dentist, two painters, two gardeners, three masons, fivecarpenters, one miller, four bakers, one butcher, one to thetrade institution, three to public offices, two to a gymnasium,one musician, one veterinary surgeon, one soldier — being ninetyfrom the first class, and ninety-seven from the second, in theperiod of four years.In the course of instruction the sciences and kindred branchesare made the basis, and the modern languages are employedas auxiliaries, the ancient languages being entirely omitted.The subjects embraced in it are — religious instruction, German,GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.French, English, geography, history, mathematics, physics,chemistry, technology, natural history, writing, drawing, andvocal music.The time apportioned to each of these subjects in the fiveclasses will be seen in the following table, which contains besides,a comparison of the time devoted to the different branchesin this school, with five classes nearly corresponding to them,of the real school, and the same number of the Frederick Williamgymnasium. In this comparison the number of hours ofreligious instruction, which is nearly the same in the three, isassumed as the unit of the proportion. In other respects thetable is arranged as the foregoing, and the headings of theseveral columns indicate the nature of the numbers containedin them.CITY TRADE SCHOOL OF BERLIN.Table of the distribution of studies in the City Trade School of Berlin,with a comparison with the Royal Real School and the Frederick WilliamGymnasium.NO. OF HOURS PER WEEK.Proportion of thereligious instructionin the TradeSUBJECTSOfINSTRUCTION.JPiosiiSchool, as unity.(4-aGIn five classes of theFrederick WilliamGymnasium.Religion,1.01.11.1German, - - - - -2.01.81.2French,2.22.01.1English,0.40.7Arithmetic, - . . -2.0V3.3V2.1Geometry, - - - .1.6sJGeography0.90.70.7History,0.41.41.1Natural History, - -1.41.00.2*Physics,1.00.90.4*Chemistry, - - - -0.9Technology, - - -0.4Writing,0.70.20.2Drawing, - - . -1.61.10.4Vocal Music, - - -Total, -1.11.41.1♦ The entire course.528 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.The courses of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and philosophy, of thegymnasium, are replaced in this school by English, chemistry,and technology, with an increased attention to the kindredbranches. Thus the French occupies double the time devotedin the parallel classes of the gymnasia; and if the whole of theeight gymnasia classes be reckoned, the proportion will stillbe as twenty to eighteen in favour of the trade school. Mathematics,in like manner, occupies more time in the trade school,in the parallel classes, in the proportion of 3.6 to 2.1 ; naturalhistory, in that of 1.4 to 0.2; physics, of 1.0 to 0.4; drawing,of 1.6 to 0.4.The courses are fully laid down in the following hist,* beginningwith the studies of the lowest, or fourth class.Fourth Class.Religious Instruction. f The Gospel according to St. Luke and the Acts of theApostles explained, with a catechetical development of the truths of religion andethical applications. Two hours per week.German. Grammatical exercises in writing. Recital of poetical pieces.French. Grammatical exercises. Regular and irregular verbs. Reading fromLaurels' Reader. One hour of conversation. Four hoursArithmetic. Mental and written, including proportions and fractions, with thetheory of the operations. Four hours.Geometry. Introductory course of forms. Two hours.Geography. Elementary, mathematical, and physical geography. Two hours.Natural History. In the summer term, elements of botany, with excursions.In the winter, the external characters of animals. Two hours.Physics. Introductory instruction. General properties of bodies. Forms ofcrystals, specific gravity, &,c. Two hours.Writing. Two hours.Drawing. Outline drawing and shadows, from models and copy-boards. Twohours.Vocal Music. Two hours.Lower Third Class.Religious Instruction. The Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles read andexplained. Two hours.Taken from the programme for 1836-7, for which, with other documentsmentioned in the Appendix, and a full opportunity to visit this interesting school, Iam indebted to director KlOden.+ Roman Catholic pupils are not required to take part in this instruction,which is communicated by a Protestant clergyman.\ The same teacher instructs this class to whose course I have referred in thenotice of the Royal Real School.CITY TRADE SCHOOL OF BERLIN. 529German. Grammar, with special reference to orthography and etymology.Written exercises upon narrations made by the teacher. Delivery of poeticalpieces. Four hours.French. Translation from French into German, from Gedike's Chrestomathy.Grammar; irregular verbs. Extemporary, and translations from German intoFrench. Four hours.Arithmetic. Partly abstract, partly practical, from Diesterweg's Instructor.Four hours.Geometry. Determination of angles in triangles and polygons. Equality oftriangles. Dependance of angles and sides of triangles. Constructions. Threehours.Geography. Physical description of the parts of the earth, except Europe. Twohours.Natural History. Mineralogy. In summer, botany, the class making excursionsfor practical exercise. Man. Three hours.Physics. General properties of bodies and solids in particular. Doctrines ofheat, and their application to natural phenomena and the arts. Two hours.Chemistry. Introduction. Atmospheric air. Experimental illustrations ofchemistry, applied to the arts. Two hours.Writing. Two hours. Architectural and topographical drawing. Two hours.Drawing by hand, for those who do not take part in the other. Two hours.Vocal Music. Two hours.Upper Third Class.Religious Instruction. Christian morals, from Luther's Catechism. Twohours.German. Simple and complex sentences. Compositions on special subjects.Poems explained and committed. Four hours.French. Translation from Gedike's Chrestomathy, oral and in writing.Written translations from Beauvais' Introduction, from German into French.Grammar, examples treated extempore. Four hours.Arithmetic. Properties of numbers. Powers. Roots. Decimal fractions.Practical arithmetic from Diesterweg. Four hours.Geometry. Similar figures. Geometrical proportion. Exercises. Mensurationof rectilinear figures. Three hours.Geography. Physical geography of Europe, and in particular of Germany andPrussia. Two hours.Natural History. Continuation of the mineralogy of the lower third class.Review in outline of zoology and the natural history of man in particular. Botany,with excursions in summer. Three hours.Physics. Electricity and magnetism, with experiments. Two hours.Chemistry. Water and non-metallic bodies, with experiments. Two hours.Writing. Two hours. Architectural and topographical drawing. Twohours. Some of the pupils, during this time, are engaged in ornamental drawing.Vocal Music. Two hours.Second Class,Religious Instruction. Explanation of the first three Gospels. History of theChristian religion and church, to the Reformation. Two hours.630 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.German. Correction of exercises written at home, upon subjects assigned bythe teacher. Oral and written exercises. Introduction to the history of Germanpoetry. Three hours.French. Grammar ; extemporary for the application of the rules. Writtenand oral translations from German into French, from Beauvais' Manual, and viceversa,from Ideler and Nolte's Manual. Four hours.English. Exercises in reading and speaking. Translation into German, fromfiurkhardt. Dictation. Verbs. Two hours.Arithmetic. Commercial arithmetic. Algebra, to include simple and quadraticequations. Logarithms. Three hours.Geometry. Circles. Analytical and plane trigonometry. Three hours.Geography. The States of Europe, with special reference to their population,manufactures, and commerce. Two hours.History. Principal events of the history of the middle ages and of later times,as an introduction to recent history. One hour.Natural History. Mineralogy. Physiology of plants. Three hours.Chemistry. Metallic bodies and their compounds, with experiments. Threehours.Architectural topographical and plan drawing. Drawing with instruments.Introduction to India ink drawing. Beginning of the science of constructions.Two hours.Drawing. From copies, and from plaster and other models. Two hours.This kind of drawing may be learned instead of the above.Vocal Music. Two hours.First Class.Religious Instruction. History of the Christian religion and church continued.References to the Bible. One hour.German. History of German literature to recent times. Essays. Exercisesof delivery. Three hours.French. Reading from the manual of Biichner and Herrmann, with abstracts.Classic authors read. Review of Grammar. Exercises at home and extemporary.Free delivery. Correction of exercises. Four hours.English. Syntax, with written and extempore exercises from Burkhardt.Reading of classic authors. Writing of letters. Exercises in speaking.Arithmetic. Algebra. Simple and quadratic equations. Binomial and poly-nominaltheorems. Higher equations. Commercial arithmetic continued. Threehours.Geometry. Plane trigonometry and its applications. Conic sections. Descriptivegeometry. Three hours.History. History of the middle ages. Modern history, with special referenceto the progress of civilization, of inventions, discoveries, and of commerce andindustry. Three hours.Natural History. In summer, botany, the principal families, according to thenatural system. In winter, zoology. The pupils are taken, for the purpose ofexamining specimens, to the Royal Museum.Physics. In summer, optics with experiments. In winter, the system of theworld. Three hours.CITY TRADE SCHOOL OP Berlin,Technology. Chemical and mechanical arts and trades described and illustratedby models. Excursions to visit the principal work-shops. Four hours.Architectural and machine drawing. Two hours. Those pupils who do nottake part in this, receive lessons in ornamental drawing from plaster models.Vocal Music. Two hours.The pupils of this class are, besides, engaged in manipulating in the laboratoryof the institution several hours each week.The courses require a good collection of apparatus and specimensto carry them out, and this school is, in fact, betterfurnished than any other of its grade which I saw in Prussia,besides which, its collections are on the increase. The facilitiesfor the courses are furnished by a collection of mathematicaland physical apparatus, a laboratory, with a tolerably completechemical apparatus and series of tests, a collection of specimensof the arts and manufactures (or technological collection),a collection of dried plants, and of engravings for the botanicalcourse, with a small garden for the same use, a collection ofminerals, a collection of insects, a collection in comparativeanatomy, a series of engravings for the drawing course, and ofplaster models, a set of maps, and other apparatus for geography,some astronomical instruments, and a library. Thepupils are taken, from time to time, to the admirable museumattached to the university of Berlin, for the examination of zoologicalspecimens especially.That this school is as a preparation for the higher occupations,and for professions not ranking among the learned, theequivalent of the gymnasium is clearly shown by the subjectsand scope of its courses, and by the age of its pupils. Some ofthese occupations require no higher instruction, others that thepupils shall pass to the special schools introductory to them. So,also, many of the pupils of the gymnasia pass at once intoactive life, others enter the university.The class of schools to which the two last described belong,are most important in their influence. In many countries,an elementary education is the limit beyond which thoseintending to enter the lower grades of the occupations enumeratedin connexion with the City Trade School of Berlin, donot pass; and if they are inclined to have a better education,532 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.or if intending to embrace a higher occupation, they desire to bebetter instructed, they must seek instruction in the classicalschools. The training of these schools is, however, essentiallydifferent from that required by the tradesman and mechanic,the verbal character of the instruction is not calculatedto produce the habits of mind in which he should be broughtup, and the knowledge which is made the basis of mental trainingis not that which he has chiefly occasion to use. Besides,were the course ever so well adapted to his object, the time atwhich he must leave school only permits him to follow a partof it, and he is exposed to the serious evils which must flowfrom being, as it were, but half taught.In fact, however, he requires a very different school, one inwhich the subjects of instruction are adapted to his destination,while they give him an adequate intellectual culture ; where thecharacter of the instruction will train him to the habits whichmust, in a very considerable degree, determine his future usefulness;and where the course which he pursues will be thorough,as far as it goes, and will have reached before he leavesthe school the standard at which it aims. Such establishmentsare furnished by the real schools of Germany, and as the wantswhich gave rise to them there are strongly felt every where, thisclass of institutions must spread extensively. In Germany theyare, as has been seen, no new experiment, but have stood thetest of experience, and with various modifications to adapt themto differences of circumstances or of views in education, theyare spreading in that country. As they become more diffused,and have employed a greater number of minds in their organization,their plans will, no doubt, be more fully developed.It is certainly highly creditable to Germany that its " gymnasia,"on the one hand, and its " real schools" on the other, offersuch excellent models of secondary instruction in its two departments.The toleration which allows these dissimilar establishmentsto grow up side by side, admitting that each, thoughgood for its object, is not a substitute for the other, belongs toan enlightened state of sentiment in regard to education, and isworthy of the highest commendation.TITZTHUM GYMNASIUM.1^33FITZTHUM GYMNASIUM AND Blackman SCHOOL ATDRESDEN.It is not my intention to go into a description of the secondaryinstruction in Saxony, but merely to give a brief notice ofone of its institutions which ranks among the first in Germany,and which combines within itself a classical and a " real gymnasium,"and a preparatory school, or "progymnasium."*This institution partakes both of a public and private character,being, on the one hand, under the direction of the governmentauthorities as a public school, and on the other, a privatefoundation of the Fitzthum family. It is also both a boardingand day school.Pupils are received into the pro gymnasium at nine or tenyears of age, and with the attainments of the elementaryperiod. In this school, which has two classes, they remainuntil from thirteen to fourteen. Its courses are the following: —Bible history and religion, the German language, the Latin,French, history, arithmetic, knowledge of forms, geography,natural history, drawing, and writing. From the upper classof the pro gymnasium, the pupils pass to the gymnasium, in whichthere are four classes. The courses are of religion, Latin,Greek, German language and literature, French, mathematics,history, geography, natural philosophy, natural history, music,and drawing. From the fourth or lowest class of the gymnasium,the pupil who is not intended to go to the university entersthe " real gymnasium," or scientific school, in which thereare two classes, and the duration of the studies of which is oneyear less than that of the classical gymnasium. In this theFrench and English, and the scientific studies, replace the classics,except a portion of Latin, which is still kept up. The» Dr. Blackman, who established this institution, in 1827, was a collaboratorwith Pestalozzi in the palmy days of his establishment at Yverdun, and is deeplyimbued with his method. Though ill when I visited Dresden, he was mostkind and cordial, and opened every part of his interesting school to my examination.534 GENERAL EDUCATION. SECONDARY PERIOD.courses consist of religion, German language and literature,Latin, French, English, mathematics, physics, chemistry, naturalhistory, mechanics, history, geography, drawing, and music.The distribution of the time of study in the principal branchesagrees entirely with that of the two upper classes of the RoyalReal School at Berlin, already described.The arrangements for the superintendence of the pupils inthis institution are, in the main, like those of Pforta. Pupilscalled inspectors are selected, and superintend their fellowswhen in the play-ground and at study, and there are two mastersalways on duty as superintendents. The physical educationof the pupils is very well attended to, and the alternationsof exercise and study have a very good effect. These alternationswill appear by the following order of the day :The boarders rise at six o'clock, and breakfast at a quarter toseven. From a quarter to seven to a quarter to eight, study underthe superintendence of the two teachers on duty. Pupils livingout of the house join in this study hour. Prayers. From eight toa quarter to ten, instruction. Quarter to ten to quarter after ten,play in the garden, and a light second breakfast. Quarter afterten to twelve, instruction. Twelve to one, instruction in instrumentaland vocal music, gymnastic exercises, dancing, or freeto play in the grounds under the charge of the two superintendents.At one, the day scholars leave the institution. Quarterafter one to two, dinner. Two to three, play under chargeof the inspectors. Three to quarter of five, instruction. OnWednesday and Saturday, walks. Quarter to five to quarterafter five, lunch and recreation. Quarter after five to eight,study under charge and aided by the inspectors. Eight, supper.At nine the younger pupils retire, the older ones study until ten.The mathematical instruction in this school is continued, evenin the higher branches, upon the inductive plan, and is the mosteffective which I have ever seen. It consists of a mixture of explanationand question, and of oral and written exercises in theclass-room. The recitations are upon the previous lessons,and upon questions given to be solved out of the class-room,and the written exercises are solutions of questions and notesriTZTHUM Gymnasium.of the explanation of the previous lesson. The collections innatural history are superior to those possessed by any othergymnasium which I visited. Both this and the physical apparatusafford very considerable means of illustration in these departments.The chemical laboratory, in a building apart fromthe house, is very conveniently arranged, both for instructionand experiments by the pupils.GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.CHAPTER XiiSUPERIOR INSTRUCTION.In a regular system of education, primary and secondarylead to superior instruction, with which the student's career isterminated. The period of life usually embraced by it abroad,is from seventeen or eighteen to twenty or twenty-one. Theschools which furnish it are of two classes, those qualifying forentrance into the learned professions, and those preparing foroccupations requiring a considerable extent of special knowledgefor their successful prosecution. The universities constitutethe first class of these special schools ; the second havevarious names, as schools of arts, manufactures and commerce,trade institutes, and polytechnic institutions; the last mentionedtitle may be conveniently used as referring to the entire class.The special schools of architecture, engineering, mining, &c.,and the military and naval schools, also belong to this class.The universities not only serve as special schools for the learnedprofessions, but are also intended to give the highest grade ofintellectual culture, to form the scholar and man of letters, orof science. They had their origin in the wants of an earlyperiod of civilization, and have continued to be as necessary inits progress, requiring great changes, however, to enable themto keep pace with the times. Schools of arts, or polytechnicschools, have originated in the requirements of modern times, inwhich occupations have risen in standing and importance, orhave been actually created, by the progress of science and thearts. Considered as special schools, the universities have verydifferent objects from those which the founder of the GirardCollege intended as the aim of his institution, while the purposesof the polytechnic schools are strictly in accordance withINTRODUCTORY REMARKS.those which his will points out for the highest department ofhis college. This being the case, a description of foreign universitieswould, I conceive, be out of its place in this Report.From the character of my associations, before leaving home,which naturally led to similar associations while abroad, I felthighly interested in this class of institutions, and it is with reluctanceI have come to the conclusion not to give some descriptionof them in my Report. While it is exceedingly difficultto judge of the results of university systems of different countries,especially so from the amount of talent arrayed in favour of,and even positively against, different systems, and I should makeno pretensions to offer such a judgment, the institutions are byno means difficult to describe, so that a reader may conceivethe form of the system, and endow that form with spirit, in proportionto the force of his own natural powers and his experience.The differences between the university systems of GreatBritain, France, and Germany, afford interesting subjects ofreflection to those whose pursuits and dispositions lead them toefforts for the improvement of "superior education." Consideringthese different systems as so many experiments madeunder different circumstances, the study of their results, and themodifying effect of circumstances, is no less interesting thanuseful. The field is, however, vast; the varieties in Great Britainalone would require much space for due description, asafew words will suffice to show. The Scotch and Englishuniversities differ very much in their organization, discipline,and instruction, and even the several Scotch universities are notalike. At Glasgow, and the academical institution at Belfast,founded upon its model, the pupils enter, in general, in very earlyyouth. The lectures are, therefore, mixed with recitations heldby the professors, which, however, the large classes at Glasgowprevent from being efficacious. The students do not residein either of these institutions. At Edinburgh, the average ageof the student is greater, and the medical department assumes,relatively to that of letters, an importance which modifies thecharacter of the school. The lesser universities of St. Andrews53iB GENERAL EDUCATION. Superior Perron.and Aberdeen differ more from the others in the arrangement of discipline, resulting from the residence of a part of thestudents in the colleges composing them, than in the characterof the instruction. In the larger English universities of cambridgeand Oxford, composed of colleges and halls, in the buildingsof which the students generally reside, the discipline ofeach college may be said to be its own with a general conformityto that of the university.* The same is true in regardto the instruction, with this difference, that as all the coursestend towards the preparation for university degrees and universityhonours, there is a general conformity in the severalcolleges in the subjects taught and methods of teaching. Theinstruction given by the tutors in the colleges is upon the samegeneral plan a mixture of lecture and recitation; and as theattendance upon the lectures of the university professors is notobligatory, forms the real basis of the intellectual part of theuniversity education. The inducements held out to exertion inthese schools by the rewards which the fellowships and thestations to which they may lead hold forth, and which bringinto them the greater part of the best talent of England, produceresults which are of the highest order, but which cannotfairly be considered as depending mainly upon the system ofinstruction and discipline. It must require a very accurateknowledge of facts, with an entire absence of prejudice, to reasonas to the general results of the various parts of the complexsystem, which has grown with the growth of these institutionsthemselves, and is, therefore, now very deeply rooted.I consider the opportunity which I enjoyed of witnessingsome of the written examinations at Cambridge as of the highestvalue, and am no longer surprised at the attachment to thismethod which is there felt. It is accurate and expeditious in itsresults, removes all possibility of, or temptation to, show, and eventhe suspicion of partiality, in the distribution of important places.• A very accurate account of the universities of Cambridge and Oxford is tobe found in the report to the Board of Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania,by Philip II. Macklin, Esq., one of its members.I INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.While I am not yet persuaded that it can supersede the vivavoce method, or be employed to such an extent as to sink theuse of the latter into comparative insignificance, yet, if thechoice lay be: ween the use of the one or other method extensively,I should now prefer the former.At the university of Dublin trinity College), the advantagesof the tutorial system are combined with that of the lectures byprofessors, which the students are enjoined to attend, and thesame is the case at the recently erected university of Durham.This university has set the example of adding instruction incivil engineering to its literary courses, and has admitted themodern languages into the latter. King's College and LondonUniversity College have hardly yet taken the form which timemust impress upon them in their new connexion with the LondonUniversity; the enactments of this recent corporation, in regardto the requirements for degrees, must ultimately regulate thehigher studies of these and other institutions, presenting candidatesfor them. This bare enumeration will serve to show, thatto give any thing like an idea of institutions so various in theircharacter, would require much time and more space than couldproperly be bestowed in a report, to the purpose of which thegreater part of the particulars would be found inappropriate.No doubt useful hints might be gathered, but by far the greaterpart of the matter would be entirely inapplicable to our purpose.For example, the system of university degrees, by which encouragementis given to general effort, and of the privilege toteach, or of stations without actual duty, by which, in manyestablishments, individual exertion is stimulated and rewarded,are entirely inapplicable to the circumstances of our institution.Again; the tone and modes of discipline, both in those institutionswhere the pupils reside and in those where they merelycome at stated times to receive instruction, are inapplicable toour case, and the general organization and government are notless so. Further, the instruction, as far as it is of a special character,qualifying for admission to the learned professions, asin the continental system, has, of course, no bearing upon ourarrangements, and loaves for profitable study the subjects of at>540 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.most two faculties. In these the tithes of the branches themselveswould be all that could serve us; for the mode of lecturingbeing universally adopted, the treatment of the subject dependsupon the individual professor.In regard to the institutions of the class preparatory to highertrades, to the arts, manufactures, mining, engineering, commerce,navigation, &c., as they furnish examples of schoolsspecially intended to prepare for the pursuits of life, towardswhich our founder has plainly signified his wish that the pupilsof the Girard College should be directed, I shall devote thechief part of the remainder of my Report to describing suchexamples of them as are most highly approved, having best fulfilledthe objects for which they were founded. I shall describein turn, more or less minutely, the Polytechnic School of Paris,which, originally, as the Central School of Public Works, wasthe parent of this class of institutions ; the School of Arts andManufactures of Paris, one of the most flourishing establishments,originating in private enterprize; the Institute of Arts atBerlin, and the Polytechnic Institution at Vienna, both supportedby government, and the two most successful institutions of theirclass in Germany; and the School of Mines at Freyburgh, inSaxony, which, though specially devoted to one branch of practicallife, belongs to the same class in its studies. I shall alsobriefly notice, in connexion with the Polytechnic School ofFrance, the civil schools of application to which it leads, namely,those of mines, and of roads and bridges; in connexion with theInstitute of Arts at Berlin, the Industrial Schools of Prussia generally;and further, after the School of Arts and Manufactures ofParis, the private Industrial and Commercial Boarding Instituteat Charonnene. As our founder has intimated that the professionof a navigator is one of those towards which he wishes thepupils to be directed, I annex the programme of the studies ofone of the best naval schools in Europe, that of Venice. Theofficers of the Austrian navy, though they have limited opportunitiesof practice, are distinguished as well instructed in thescience of their profession, and in all its collateral branches.There are special schools, which, after some consideration.INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.I have referred to other branches of this Report. Althoughthey educate youth for particular callings, and correspond ingeneral in regard to age with the superior period, yet, as theybelong essentially in their grade of instruction to the primaryor secondary classes, and have an important bearing upon theschools composing them, I have thought it better to rank themaccordingly. In this view the rural schools of Switzerland,which may be considered as special, in so far as they train theirpupils as farmers, and the age of the pupils of which extendsbeyond the usual primary period; the Agricultural School atTemplemoyle, in Ireland, the Rural School of Ealing, and the LaMartiniere Industrial School of Lyons, have been placed underthe head of primary instruction. The primary normal schools*of Weissenfels, Berlin, Versailles, Dijon, Haarlem, and Zurich,have been ranked under the same general division, though theyare special schools so far as they prepare for the profession ofa teacher, and belong to the secondary and superior periods inthe age of their pupils. The Normal School of Paris has, inlike manner, been ranked with secondary schools, in referenceto the grade of its instruction. I refer to them here, lest itmight be inferred, from their not appearing in what at firstmay appear their natural place, that no account is given ofthem. The School of Agriculture and Forestry at Hohenheim,in Nuremberg, is a true agricultural university, at least in itsprincipal departments, and I have therefore retained it in thischapter.With these remarks I proceed to the description of the specialschools above enumerated, merely adding, that if there isless of general inference and comparison found connectedwith these institutions than with others, it results from thefact that the schools are special in their nature, and whentheir objects are not entirely different, so as absolutely to preventany comparison of their plans, they are usually sufficientlyso to make comparison of little value. I have endeavoured topoint out these objects, and especially in cases where characteristicmodifications in the plans result from them.642 GENERAL Education. SUPERIOR PERIOD.POLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF FRANCE.This celebrated institution was organized in 1794, during theexistence of the republic of France, by a decree of the convention,under the anne of central school of public works; thistitle was subsequently changed, in 1795, to that of polytechnicschool, which, with the prefixes of imperial in 1806, and ofroyal since 1814, the institution has since borne, and underwhich it has acquired its celebrity. Among the first professorsof the school were Lagrange, Songe, Hachette, Hassenfratz,and Guyton de Moreau. The way for the school was openedby a preparatory school, in which a certain number of pupilswere trained to act as assistants, under the charge of the professorsalready appointed. The organization of the school witha large number of pupils was thus rendered possible, and wastiegun in May, 1795.*At first the school was chiefly intended to supply officersfor certain branches of the military and civil services. Thereport, however, of M. Fourcroy to the convention, and thelaw organizing the school adopted in consequence of it, recognisethe principle that the institution has a more general purpose,namely, the diffusion of mathematical, physical, and chemicalscience, and of the "graphic arts." This important principleis now adopted as its basis, and its pupils are not obliged toenter any branch of the government service. While the recognitionof the principle is important, it happens, in point of fact,that few young men who enter the school do not take service,either military, naval, or civil. The branches of service amongwhich the graduates have a right of choice to fill vacanciesare, in the department of the minister of war, the artillery, theNotwithstanding this piece of foresight, which was, however, carried nofurther than the preparation of pupils to take part in the instruction and discipline,the expenses incident to the sudden reception of numerous untrained studentswith the untried organization, amounted the first year to nearly three timesthe sum to which they were reduced after an experience of two years; the numberof pupils having been reduced in the mean time only in the proportion of 391to 296. The expenses include, however, those for individuals employed uponthe coll ctionii of models, apparatus, and drawings.POLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF FRANCE.engineers, the staff, the manufacture of saltpetre and powder,and, under certain circumstances, the infantry; in the navy department,the naval artillery, naval engineers or the generalnaval service, and the hydrographical engineers; in the departmentof the interior, the corps of roads and bridges, and ofmines; in that of finance, the administration of tobacco. Thepupils have also a right of admission to the school of forestry,and to attend the courses of other public special schools.Government. From 1795 to 1830 this school was in the departmentof the minister of the interior, and since that time hasbeen under the charge of the war department. The ministerof war has always had, however, a certain share of patronageand influence in the institution, owing to the military formof the interior organization; from 1804 to 1816 this wasstrictly military, the pupils having been enrolled, armed, andequipped. >tThe details of interior organization have been so often varied,that if the reasons of the changes not resulting from politicalcauses could be understood, they would prove no doubt mostvaluable as guides. While, however, the changes are chronicledwith care, the motives for them do not appear, and the minuterecord of them is not followed by its highest appropriate result.The eighth organization of this institution took place in 1832,and was in general in full force when I visited it in 1837. Thespecial regulations of the school are subordinate to, and in conformitywith, the decree of 1832.The immediate control of the institution is vested in a militarycommandant, a general officer, who must have been a pupil ofthe school. He is responsible for the execution of the rules andregulations relating to instruction, police, and administration,and reports directly to the minister of war. He is assisted inhis duties by the second commandant, who has special chargeof the police and discipline. The commandant is president, andthe second in command a member of all boards or councils.The other members of the military staff are four captains, havingthe title of inspectors of studies and military exercises, andcommanding the pupils when under arms; one captain, called544 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.instructor, who has the immediate direction of the military exercises,and the clothing, arms, and quarters; and four adjutants,who have charge of the details of the internal police of the institutionand of the military exercises. The king appoints thetwo commandants on the nomination of the minister of war;the other officers are appointed by the minister directly. Thearrangements for the superintendence of instruction, of the domesticeconomy &c., will be noticed under their appropriateheads.Admission, The number of pupils admitted each year dependsupon the probable vacancies in the several corps suppliedby the school, and is stated at the time of the annual publicationof the conditions of admission. The average numberadmitted yearly, from 1796 to 1837, was about one hundredand thirty-four, and the number in 1836 was one hundred andtwenty-six. The total number in the two classes of the schoolhas fluctuated considerably, but, since 1831, has averagedrather more than three hundred and one. Every native ofFrance, between the ages of sixteen and seventeen, may be acandidate for admission, and special exceptions are made, untiltwenty-five years of age, in favour of those who belong to themilitary service. Each applicant registers his name at the prefectureof the department in which he resides, and is examinedfor admission in the district to which he belongs, or where heis under instruction. With this registry is deposited the certificateof the date and circumstances of birth, a certificate of vaccinationor of having had the small-pox, and of general health,and an obligation on the part of the parent or guardian to paythe sum of one thousand francs (about two hundred dollars)yearly to the school, in case of admission.The subjects upon which a candidate is examined are — LArithmetic, in all its branches. 2. Elementary geometry. 3.Algebra. 4. Plane trigonometry. 5. Statics treated synthetically.6. Elements of analytical geometry. 7. The use of thelogarithmic tables. 8. Latin, as far as it is taught in the rhetoricclass of the colleges, and French composition. 9. Drawing,with the crayon and with instruments. If the candidate pos-polytechnicSCHOOL OF France.^45senses, in addition, a knowledge of physics, chemistry, German,and of India ink drawing, they are taken into the account.From the great excess in the number of applicationsover the numbers of places, the competition is necessarily verysevere, and it appears from the register of applications andadmissions, that since 1796, fourteen thousand one hundred andsixty-four candidates have been examined, and only five thousandfive hundred and two admitted. The proportion is evensmaller in later years; in 1836, of six hundred and eighteenpupils examined, one hundred and twenty-six, or only aboutone-fifth, were admitted. All who apply do not come forwardto these examinations: in 1836, seven hundred and forty-sixnames were inscribed, and but six hundred and eighteen candidatespresented themselves, so that the number of original applicants,in 1836, was actually six times that of the places to be filled.There are four examiners appointed annually by the ministerof war, on the nomination of the council of instruction of theschool. These divide between them the different districts inwhich the examinations are to be held, and repair, at a statedtime, between the first of August and tenth of October, to theplace appointed. The performance of the candidates is registeredaccording to a scale of marks, as nearly uniform asthe judgment of different individuals allows; these registersbeing compared, the candidates are admitted in the orderof merit, thus determined, as far as the number of vacanciespermits, the admission being made by the decision of a board,the composition of which will be presently stated. Thus thistruly national institution is thrown open to all of suitable age,and their admission depends solely upon their talents and acquirements.The successful candidates are informed of theresult of their examination, and join the school early in November.They are received by a board (jury) of examiners,who subject them to a second examination, intended to verifythe first, and to the inspection of a surgeon. This board consistsof the two commandants, the director of studies, the twopermanent examiners attached to the school, and the four examinersfor admission.69 '546 GENERAL Education. SUPERIOR PERIOD.While pupils are admissible to this school as early as sixteenyears of age, they are usually older on entering; of one hundredand twenty-six pupils admitted in 1836, seventy-four weretwenty years, and thirty-six nineteen years of age. There aretwenty-four gratuitous places for pupils whose families are inneedy circumstances ; of these, twelve are at the disposal of theminister of war, eight of the minister of commerce, and four ofthe minister of marine. These bursaries may be halved. Nopupil who is lower than two-thirds from the head of the list, inthe order of merit at admission, is eligible to a bursary or halfbursary.Besides the students thus regularly entering the school, acertain number of youths are permitted to attend the lectures(auditeurs libres). The majority of these are foreigners. Therewere thirty-three such "auditeurs" in 1835-6, and forty-five in1836-7. Among these were Englishmen, Belgians, Germans,Poles, Italians, Greeks, Wallachia, Turks, Egyptians, Mexicans,and Brazilians. Not one citizen of the United Stateswas enjoying this privilege.Instruction, The highest executive authority in matters of instruction,is the director of studies.* This office was createdin 1804, previous to which time the council of instruction haddischarged its duties. The director of studies oversees thedetails of instruction, being immediately responsible to the commandantof the school. He is appointed by the king, on thejoint nomination of the council of instruction of the schooland of the Academy of Sciences, and is a member of allboards convened in relation to its affairs. A council, termedthe council of instruction (conseil instruction), and composedof the two commandants, the director of studies, the professorsof the school, one master, appointed annually by the teachersfrom among their number, and the librarian, who acts as secretary,meets once a month for the discussion of business relatingto instruction. When changes are required in the courses• To the director of studies, the eminent philosopher M. Dulong, whose losshas since been so deeply deplored by the scientific world, I am indebted for anopportunity of visiting the school, and of being present at its examinations.POLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF FRANCE.or in the examinations, they are discussed in this council andreferred to a second, which may be considered as the chieflegislative body, in regard to the subjects composing the instruction.This council, termed the council of improvement (conseilde perfectionnement), consists of the tv^ro commandants, thedirector of studies, the five examiners in the school, one examinerfor admission, three members of the Academy ofSciences, three professors in the school, and a member fromeach of the branches of the public service into which the graduatesenter.The officers directly concerned in instruction are, the professorsand the repeaters (repetitions). The professors andmasters are appointed by the minister of war on the joint nominationof the council of instruction and of the particular Academyof the Institute in which the subject of instruction isclassed. The professors communicate instruction by lectureand by general interrogations of the pupils. The repeatersconduct the special interrogations, and give aid to the pupilswhile engaged in study. The title of "repeater" is, no doubt,derived from the original duty of these teachers having been togo over the lessons of the professors. The repeaters do themore laborious work of instruction, and since their substitutionfor the pupil teachers, who were employed in the earlier periodof the existence of the school, have been considered most importantofficers. There were attached to the institution, in 1837,ten professors, five masters, and twelve repeaters. Some ofthe most distinguished professors have risen from the rank ofrepeaters. 'There are two divisions of the pupils for instruction, correspondingto the two years' duration of the courses. No pupilis allowed to remain in one of these divisions more than twoyears, nor in the school more than three. To proceed fromthe first division to the second, or to graduate, an examinationmust be passed upon the studies of the year then just elapsed.Until 1798, these examinations were conducted by the professors,but now there are examiners, who are not connected with548 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.the school. Two of these are permanent, and appointed by theminister of war on the joint nomination of the Council of Instructionand of the Academy of Sciences, and three are appointedannually on the recommendation of the council. Theexaminations on mathematics and analytical mechanics, andof members of the graduating class, which I attended, weredecidedly superior to any which I saw abroad, except in asingle instance. The courses of the first year are — analysis,geometry, mechanics, descriptive geometry, application of analysisto geometry, physics, chemistry, French composition,topographical drawing, drawing of the human figure, landscapedrawing, and India ink drawing. Those of the secondyear are — a continuation of the analysis, geometry, mechanics,physics, chemistry, and drawing of the first year, besides machines,geodesy and social arithmetic, architecture, and theGerman language. Up to 1814, there were courses of civilengineering, fortification, and the science and art of war, butthese were then transferred to the special school of applicationto which they appropriately belong. The different branchesare not all taught at the same time, and, therefore, do not allextend throughout the whole of the year. Instruction is givenin physics and chemistry, in both classes, from early in Novemberto the middle or end of June, or the beginning of July,and in topographical drawing, from November to the beginningof June. In the first year's courses of architecture andFrench, and in the second year's course of German, from thesame date to the close of June or the first week in July. Thecourses of analysis and geometry, and of statics and dynamics,in the first year, follow each other in succession, as alsothose of descriptive geometry and the application of analysis.The same is the case in the second year with the courses ofanalysis and geometry, of mechanics and machines, and ofgeodesy and social arithmetic. The lectures are followed byrevisions and general interrogations, to which the closing portionof the period of the course is devoted. The number of lecturesin each course is stated in the following table :POLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF FRANCE.Table of the number of lessons in the different departments of study in the PolytechnicSchool.SUBJECTS OF STUDY.Analysis and Geometry,Mechanics,Machines,Descriptive Geometry,Analytical Geometry,Geodesy,Social Arithmetic,Physics,Chemistry,Architecture, -. .French Composition, - -German Language,Topographical Drawing,Drawing of Human Figures & Landscapes,India Ink Drawing,Second division,or first year..2 ^SO52*44*33*41*22t29t6tThe lessons of analysis and of mechanics include lectures, revisions, andgeneral interrogations of the whole class. These courses belonging to the samedepartment, the lectures on analysis and interrogations upon them occupy onepart of the year, and the statics and dynamics the other. The courses of lecturesare followed by a general review, consisting of interrogations by the professorand repeaters.t The courses of machines, geodesy, and social arithmetic, in the second year,belong to the same department, and the remark just made in relation to the coursesof analysis and mechanics applies also to them.560 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.There are two professors of mechanics and four repeatersfor the course of analysis and mechanics, and two professorsand two repeaters for that of chemistry. The courses of geodesyand topography, machines, and social arithmetic, are underthe same professor, who has a repeater as an assistant.There are four masters for the drawing department, comprisingthat of the human figure, of landscapes, and in India ink. Eachof the other subjects have a professor or master in charge ofthem, and each, except the master of topographical drawing,has a repeater.1 fear that even a sketch of the ample programme of thisschool may be considered as leading into too much detail, butwill endeavour, as briefly as possible, to give some idea of thenature of the courses, since I cannot omit what are justly consideredas models in their several ways.Analysis.First Year. Differential and integral calculus, to include the rectification andquadrature of plane curves, and of curved surfaces, and the creature of solids.Second Year. Differential and integral calculus continued. Elements of thecalculus of variations and of finite differences. Formulae of interpolation, &c.Mechanics.First Year. Statics. — Composition, and equilibrium of forces. Theory of parallelforces. Of the centre of gravity. Attraction of a point by a homogeneoussphere. Dynamics. — General formulae of motion. The pendulum. Projectiles.Problems in physical astronomy.Second Year. Statics continued. Forces applied to an invariable system.Principle of virtual velocities. Application to simple mechanics. Dynamics.D'Alembert's principle. Collision. Moment of inertia, &c. Hydrostatics.Hydrodynamics.Every lecture of analysis or mechanics is preceded or followed by interrogationsby the professor. Problems are given out for solution. The repeatersinterrogate the pupils three times per week. After the completion of the course,general interrogations take place, upon the whole subject, by the professors andrepeaters.Descriptive Geometry.Problems relating to the right line and plane (twelve problems). Tangentplanes and normals to curved surfaces (four problems). Intersections of surfaces(seven problems). Miscellaneous problems (seven).Applications of Descriptive Geometry. Problems with a single plane of pro-polytechnicSCHOOL OP FRANCE.section, and a scale of declivity. Linear perspective (three problems). ShadowsStone cutting (seven problems). Carpentry (four problems).Elements in four examples.(three problems). „„India ink drawing.Analytical Geometry.The right line and plane. Curved surfaces.The professor may precede or follow his lectures by interrogations. Duringthe course the class is examined by the repeaters, and at the close of the studiesof Analytical Geometry there is a general review.Machines, Astronomy, Geodesy, and Social Arithmetic.Elements of machines. Machines for transporting burthens and for pressure.For raising liquids. Moved by air, by water, by steam. Useful effect of machines.Astronomy and Geodesy. Formulae of spherical trigonometry. Measurementofspacc and time. Of the celestial bodies. Of the earth. Elements of physicalgeography and hydrography. Geodesy. Instruments. Figure of the earth.Projection of maps and charts.Elements of the calculation of probabilities. Tables. Insurances. Life insurance,&c.Interrogations by the professor accompany the lessons. Those by the repeatermust be at least as frequent as those by the professor. At the close of the principalcourses there is a general review, in the way of interrogation, by the professorand repeater.Physics.First Year. 1. General properties of bodies. Falling bodies. Principle ofequilibrium of fluids. Specific gravities. 2. Heat. Radiation, conduction, &,c.Vapours. Latent heat. 3. General constitution of the atmosphere. Hygrometer.4. Molecular attraction. Capillary action. 5. Electricity. Laws of attraction,repulsion, distribution, &c. Atmospheric electricity. Modes of developingelectricity.Second Year. 6. Magnetism. Phenomena and laws of magnetism. Instruments.Reciprocal action of magnets and electrical currents. Electro-dynamics.Mutual actions of electrical currents. Thermo-electric phenomena. 7. Acoustics.Of the production, propagation, velocity, &c., of sound. Acoustic instruments.8. Optics. Mathematical and physical optics. Optical instruments.During the whole course the repeaters interrogate each division twice everyweek; they go through the study-rooms, and give any explanations which mayberequired by the pupils.Chemistry.First Year. General principles. Division of the course. Examination of theprincipal simple substances. Mixtures and binary compounds. Laws of definiteproportions, &c. Hydraulics. Acids and oxides. Bases. Neutral binarycompounds. Salts. Principal metals.Second Year. Reciprocal action of acids and oxides. Action of water uponsalts. Laws of Berthollet discussed. General properties of the carbonates, andspecial study of some of the more important. Borates and silicates. Glass and552 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.%pottery. Nitrates. Gunpowder. Phosphates, &c. Sulphates. Chlorates.Chromates and other classes of salts, with details as to the more important. Extractionof the metals from their ores, methods of refining, &c. Organic chemistry.Vegetable substances. Animal substances.This course is accompanied by manipulations in the laboratory of the institution,in which the most useful preparations of the course are made by the pupilsthemselves. They are also taught the principles of analysis, both mineral andorganic, practically.Architecture.Component parts of edifices. General principles. Materials. Foundations.Strength. Forms and proportions of the parts of buildings. Floors. Roofs,arches, &c. General principles of the compositions of parts of edifices. Illustrationsof the different varieties of parts, as porticos, porches, vestibules, halls, &c.Composition of an edifice. Varieties of buildings—as colleges, hospitals, prisons,barracks, &c.The pupils copy from the board the sketches of the professor, and draw themcarefully when required. At the close of the lectures there are four different subjectsassigned, upon each of which there is a competition. The pupils are classifiedaccording to the result of these competitions, and of the marks for their graphicexercises during the course. The best designs are exhibited. Three Indiaink drawings are made on architectural subjects during this course.French Composition.The course consists principally in the writing of essays and compositions bythe pupils, which are subsequently criticised during the recitations.German Language.Elements of the language. Grammar reading. Themes and versions. Everylecture is followed by an examination of an hour and a-half in duration, by theprofessor or repeater. There are, besides, exercises of pronunciation and commonconversation.Topography.Exercises in topographical drawing. Different modes of representing theground by horizontal curves, the projections of lines of greatest declivity, and byshading. Conventional signs. Lettering. The exercises of the second divisionare preceded by lessons from the professor of geodesy, explanatory of the theory.Drawing of the Human Figure and Landscape Drawing.In the first branch the pupils are divided into two classes, one of which copiesengravings, and the other draws from models. On entering the school the pupilsare classified according to the drawings which they made at the examination foradmission. They are then divided into two sections, of as nearly equal strengthas possible, and assigned, each one, to a master, with whom they remain duringtheir course. One of the drawing-masters is specially charged with the course ofdrawing from casts and from nature. At the beginning of the second year, thehighest third of the pupils of each section of the former first division go to thePOLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF FRANCE.teacher of drawing in water colours, and remain for two months. They returnto their sections, and are replaced by the next division, each pupil occupying athird of the second year in this kind of drawing. The merits of the drawingsare judged every two months. After the first of May the ordinary drawing lessonsare replaced by those in water colours.Besides these regular studies, there are from twelve to fifteen lectures on anatomyand physiology, given towards the close of the second year, during hoursnot devoted to the regular branches, and which it is optional with the pupils toattend or not. Fencing, music, and dancing lessons, are also given.During the interrogations by the professors and repeaters,notes are taken of the merit of the answers of the pupils, accordingto a uniform scale of marks. These are communicatedwith the subjects of each lecture or recitation to the director ofstudies, and placed upon record, as assisting in determining themerit of the pupils. The examiners mark according to thesame scale. The pupils are classified after the examinations inthe several departments, and in taking the average for the standingin general merit, a different weight is allowed to the differentcourses. Mathematics counts most, and then the graphic exercises,descriptive geometry and geodesy united, and the conductof the pupils, count the same — then physics and chemistry.The graphic exercises of the course occupy a very considerablepart of the time of the pupils; indeed, by some intelligent individuals,friends of the school and of its general arrangements,this portion of the course is thought to have received too greatan extension.The examinations at the end of each of the two years of studyare divided into four; the first, on the courses of the first year,including analysis, part of analytical geometry, and mechanics;the second, on chemistry; the third, on physics; the fourth, ondescriptive geometry and its applications, and part of analyticalgeometry. The examination at the close of the second year isdivided as follows: — First, analysis, analytical geometry, mechanics,effects of machines and social arithmetic. Second,chemistry. Third, physics. Fourth, geodesy, description ofmachines, and architecture. The examinations on analysisand its applications, and mechanics, are conducted by the twopermanent examiners. The pupils are examined singly and554 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.without the presence of their comrades, and each examineroccupies a separate room. Where the branches admit of it,the examinations are viva voce, the student using the blackboardwhen required.After the examinations are completed, the results are reportedto a Board, who, with all the materials before them from theexaminers and from the school, decide whether the pupils maypass to the higher division, or are admissible into the publicservice, according to the division to which they belong. Thisboard (jury") consists of the two commandants, the director ofstudies, the two permanent and three temporary examiners.Few of the pupils do not pass these examinations, severe asthey are, which is attributable to the closeness of the examinationsfor admission. In 1836, of one hundred and thirty-onepupils examined in each of the divisions, only eight in the higherand five in the lower were required to go over their courses.This is a great gain to the institution in every respect, on thescore of moral and intellectual progress, as well as of disciplineand economy.The arrangement of the time allotted to study, like the similarpoints in regard to instruction, is a matter of very minuteregulation. The pupils study in large rooms, conveniently fittedup for the purpose, and where they receive by lot, at entrance,places which they retain, in general, during the course. Theinterrogations or recitations take place in rooms adapted to thatpurpose, separate from the larger lecture halls. These recitation-roomsare also open to the pupils in winter, during recreationhours, and after supper; and in summer, whenever the weather isbad, so as to prevent them from spending the time in the open air,besides at certain stated periods before the examinations. Thesuperintendence of studies, so far as entrusted to the pupils, willbe described under the head of discipline. The repeaters arepresent during the periods devoted to the studies of their severaldepartments, and, except in the cases of the graphic exercises,where it is not allowed, are expected to give assistanceto the pupils who ask for it.The order of the day in the institution is arranged with aPOLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF FRANCE.view to bring the lectures, recitations, and studies of particularbranches, together. Besides this, there are study-hours, calledfree, in which the student may employ himself as he pleases,otherwise than in drawing of any kind (graphic exercises).The following table, which contains the order of the day forthe lower class during the first half of the year, with the subsequentremarks giving the variation from it in the second period,will show sufficiently the principle of arrangement. Thedotted lines in the vertical columns signify that the duties arenot necessarily according to the order of time as laid down inthe table, but that one may take the place of the other.GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.^^^^^|!t^5a.<5^Rise at six. Roll call in the study-rooms at half past six.6to6io'clock.Free study in the study-rooms.6^0 8Breakfast.8io8il iPolice.IP|l|IIIgip'^S^Bg rt ^2 rt "4Hi1=1nS5'III"^ P SIIsp1 1If§?-5^?1?gos>^-?= -5-S.«5f« 'mss5 n.^ ^c-•? § a p.iso,« CLbgliogbec» uP"^2-25 c^Ifffi f5elisiJ?fi.?:??f 7« 5! S'^» 2 f^ 2fillillinIfJl»-.0fitlis7P.IfJl"2.ISsi 111 IIItoDinner.2^ to 3.Recreation1. Exercise. Fencirig. MusicI)dancing.Library.3 to 5.mg3 o »illene^SrJTls&^=^§§sr?§II?PT=E-3?less1^2,^11-5^;s■^&•«-isCOSlipper atir1 =???Dine. Loll-call inthe dormitories at half past nine.To bed9 to 10iind hghn out at ttn. or on Sunday at half past ten.o'clock.ooaB.csCOIPolytechnic SCHOOL OP FRANCE.The alterations in this programme, between the first of Mayand the end of the scholastic year, are very trifling. Thecourses of analysis have been completed, as well as that ofanalytical geometry, and hence are no longer to be found in the(list of duties. The study-hours, from five to seven on Tuesdayland Friday, are transferred to from seven to nine, and the twohours, from five to seven, are occupied in water-colour drawings.There is probably no school richer than this in the means ofillustrating the various courses which are taught in it. It hasextensive collections of physical and chemical apparatus, of[models of machines, of mathematical instruments, of drawings[and models in descriptive geometry and its applications, andtopography, and of drawings, engravings, and casts for thecourses of drawing. The cabinets of apparatus and modelsfare under the charge of three curators (conservators), whopre expected not only to keep in order the existing collections,out to add to them, under the direction of the professors.While such ample provisions are made for the intellectuallocation of the pupils, and their physical education is attended[to in at least a reasonable degree, I am not aware that any provisionis made for moral or religious instruction within therails of the institution, or for regular attendance upon such daleswithout the walls.Discipline, The discipline of the school is thoroughly military,[and the means of carrying it out in all its strictness are provided.[The regulations are very minute, and fix, in detail, the punishmentconsidered equivalent to each offence, as well for[those against morals as transgressions of the regulations themselves.The punishments are^l. Private admonition by the)commandant or vice-commandant. 2. Public reprimand beforethe corps of pupils. 3. Confinement to the walls of the institution,or stoppage of leave. 4. Confinement to the house. 5.Imprisonment within the walls. 6. Military imprisonment. 7.Dismission. The usual punishment for trivial offences is thestoppage (sortie), one of which is equivalent to a deprivationof the general leave of absence for half a-day. This may be558 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.awarded by an officer as low as an adjutant. It follows certainspecified offences, as overstaying a leave, when the numberof stoppages is in proportion to the time of overstaying theleave, and is even assigned for a failure in recitation. Imprisonmentwithin the walls can only be awarded by the commandant,vice-commandant, or director of studies, and excludesthe student from the recitation-room. Confinement in the militaryprison requires the order of the commandant, who reportsthe case at once to the minister of war. Dismission cannottake place without the sanction of the minister. Cases of discipline,supposed to involve dismission or the loss of a bursary,are referred to a board called the council of discipline, andcomposed of the two commandants, the director of studies,two professors, two captain inspectors, the captain instructor,and one administrator*.For military exercises, and the general furtherance of discipline,the pupils form a battalion, divided into four companies,each division of the school forming two companies. Fromeach company eight petty officers, called sergeants, are taken,according to the order of the merit-roll of the division, makingthirty-two in the whole battalion. These sergeants are distinguishedby appropriate military badges. The sergeants havecharge of the other pupils in the study-rooms, halls, recitation-rooms,refectory, laboratories, and lecture-rooms, and two ofthem in turn are joined with a higher officer, an adjutant, in theinspection of the food. They have charge in general of the detailsof police. The second sergeants are entrusted with the collectionof the money due by their comrades for letters and otherauthorized expenses. These officers are appointed once a-year.On Wednesday, from half past two in the afternoon to halfpast eight, in the summer, and to nine in the winter, and onSunday, from after inspection to ten at night, the pupils areallowed to be absent from the institution. They are requiredto wear their uniform when abroad. On their return they signtheir name to a list kept by the porter, who marks and reportsthe time of their return. A certain number of stoppages is assignedfor a breach of punctuality, according to its extent.POLYTECHNIC SCHOOL OF TRANCE.On certain afternoons the parents and relations of pupils arepermitted to see them in the parlour, from three to a quarter tofour. The pupils do not perform any duties of police; theirarms are cleaned and kept by an armourer, and barrack-keepersare appointed for the police of the quarters — provisions whichI look upon as defects.Graduation. As already stated, the board of examination(decide formally upon the claims of the pupils of the second yearto be graduated, and arrange the rolls in the order of merit.The pupils then, in turn, choose the department of the publicservice which they wish to enter, and in case there is no vacancyin this department, are still entitled to priority of choicein other branches over those below them. The school hassupplied, between the years 1795 and 1836, four thousand andthirty-six members to the public service, or an average of morethan ninety-six annually. Of these, the following numbers haveentered the different branches of the military service, namely:the artillery, sixteen hundred and ninety-six; engineers, ninehundred and seventeen; staff, twenty-five; geographical engineers,one hundred and eight; the manufacture of saltpetre andpowder, nineteen: the infantry, or line of the army, one hundredsand nineteen ; total, two thousand seven hundred and seventy-six.Besides these, there have entered the naval service: in theartillery, fifty-five; engineers, one hundred and eighteen; typographicalengineers, thirteen; navy proper, one hundred andfive; total, two hundred and ninety-one. Also the civil service:in the corps of mines, one hundred and thirty-six; roads andbridges, seven hundred and eighteen; tobacco, seven; total, eight[hundred and sixty-one.There are at least one hundred of the graduates of the schoolin the higher branches of public instruction, but as they haveleft the services just enumerated for these stations, they are[included in the list just given. In 1836, of one hundred andtwenty-one graduates, nine only did not enter the public service.fAs an additional means of making the school useful to thecountry, it has been proposed that a corps of architects shouldife formed, to be supplied from the school, and further to exempt560 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.those graduates who wish to enter the career of scientific instructionfrom the examination for the baccalaureate of sciences.On entering these several services, the graduates pass to theschools of application, or special schools, intended to give thetechnical preparation necessary; a notice of those which preparefor civil pursuits will be found at the close of this article.Madame Laplace has recently founded a prize, to be givento the first on the list of graduates from the school every year,and designed to testify the great interest which her deceasedhusband took in its welfare. Laplace was one of the first examinersof the candidates for graduation, in 1796.Domestic Economy. The administration of the fiscal affairsof the school is committed to a board consisting of the commandantand vice-commandant, the director of studies, tv^^oprofessors, designated by the council of instruction, two inspectorsof studies in turn, according to rank, the administrator orsteward as reporter (rapporteur), the treasurer as secretary.The last two named agents are consulting members only. Thisboard meets twice every month. It prepares the estimates forthe expenses of the school, which are submitted to the ministerof war. The form of these and, indeed, of all the accounts,is laid down minutely in regulations.The payment made by parents for the maintenance of thepupils does not go into the treasury of the institution, but intothe general central treasury of the country. The school furnishesthe pupil, for a stipulated sum, with his board, lodging,clothing, and petty expenses. For repairs of clothing and pettyexpenses, a special sum is set aside, of which the student receivesan account. Parts of the supply of clothing, 6z;c., at entrance,may be furnished by the parents, but the rest is suppliedby the school at the parents* expense.The steward (administrator) is the executive officer of thedomestic economy of the school — prepares all matters of businessfor the consideration of the council of administration, andthe estimates of every kind, regular and contingent; presentsthe plans and estimates of the architect of the school for repairsor new buildings, and superintends their execution whenSCHOOL OF ROADS AND BRIDGES OP FRANCE.authorized; makes contracts and receives the articles contractedfor; has charge of the issue of all articles, of the storehouses,and of the servants ; superintends the infirmary : he nominatesthe subordinate persons employed in his department, and is responsibledirectly to the council, in virtue of the authority ofwhich he is supposed to act.Under this officer are the treasurer of the school, who alsoacts as secretary to the council of administration, and the storekeeper.The librarian and curators are responsible also forthe several collections under their charge. A physician, attachedto the school, makes a regular daily visit, and is calledin whenever required. He has two health officers under him,for the service of the infirmary, and the sisters of charity actas nurses.Schools of Practice into which the Graduates of thePolytechnic School pass.It will be recollected that the services into which the graduatesare received are the military, naval, and civil. There arespecial schools of practice for the land artillery and engineers,and for the staff or topographical engineers. The officers whohave charge of the manufacture of powder are sent to the differentgovernment establishments for practice. The graduatesintended for the naval artillery go to the school of practice forthe land artillery at Metz; those for the naval engineers, to aspecial school at Orient. The hydrographical engineers enterat once upon the actual discharge of their duties in subordinatesituations. The courses in these schools, or the apprenticeshipto the duties of the service, vary from two to three years, accordingto the branch. The civil services have the schools ofpractice for the corps of roads and bridges, and of mines, andfor the manufacture of tobacco.SCHOOL OF ROADS AND BRIDGES.The corps of civil engineers, entitled Corps of Roads andBridges (corps de ponts et chaussees), have in charge all theSIB GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.works of this class, for the construction and repair of whichethe government is responsible. Their special school at Pariswas founded as early as 1747, and embraced some of the acquisitionsnow made at the polytechnic school. Its organization,however, appears to have been exceedingly imperfect, thepupils being admitted without examination, and receiving partof their instruction out of the school. At present, the regularpupils are admitted from the polytechnic school, and go througha course of three years. The branches taught consist of appliedmechanics, civil architecture, constructions, mineralogy ,-geology, administrative jurisprudence, drawing, and the English,German, and Italian languages. There are examinations at theclose of each year. The lectures occupy the period from the20th of November to the 1st of May. During the interveningtime, from May to November, the students of the second andthird years are sent into the field for practice, under the departmentalengineers. The pupils receive pay, as aspirants(aspirant), from the government while at the school, and mayrise to the rank of engineer of the second class in three year*from the period of leaving it.SCHOOL OF MINES.The corps of mines is charged with the execution of all lawsrelating to mines, miners, quarries, and furnaces, and with thepromotion, by advice or personal exertion, of the branches ofthe arts connected with mining. They superintend the workingof mines, and are responsible for the safety of the workmenthe due preservation of the soil, and the economy of the work.They also have the special superintendence of the execution ofthe laws relating to the safety of the steam-engine. They havetwo schools of practice, one at Paris, called the school ofmines, the other at St. Guienne, called the school of miners. Theduties of instruction in both these schools are confided to membersof the corps. That at Paris is considered to rank amongthe first of the special schools of France.The regular pupils of the school of mines are divided intoSCHOOL OF ARTS AND MAlfUrACTURES OP PARIS.two classes, according to the pay received from the government.The pupils from the polytechnic school enter the secondof these classes. They remain at the school not less thantwo nor more than four years. During the winter there arecourses of mineralogy, geology, the working, refining, andassaying of metals, the working of mines, drawing, and theEnglish and German languages. At the close of these coursesthe pupils are examined.The students of the first year are employed during the summerin chemical manipulation in the laboratories of the school,which are admirably provided for this purpose, in making geologicalexcursions in the neighbourhood of Paris, and in the useof surveying instruments. During the similar periods of the followingyears, the students are sent into the departments, andsometimes abroad, to make particular examinations in relationto their profession, and on their return are expected to presenta memoir descriptive of their investigations.The students of the first, or highest class, are present at the sittingsof the general council of mines, to familiarise them with thebusiness of the corps. After their final examination they are classedin the order of merit, and receive their first promotion accordingly.The scientific collections of this school are of the highestinterest. Those made by the members of the corps of mines,and specially applicable to their service, could not be replaced.CENTRAL SCHOOL OF ARTS AND MANUFACTURES OF PARIS.*This school was founded in 1829, for the purpose of providingsuitable instruction for young men intending to become civilengineers, superintendents of manufactories and work-shops,architects, machinists, &c. It is intended to afford instructionof a character similar to that of the polytechnic school, butapplicable to the arts in general. The school has, since itsM. Lavallee, director, to whose kindness I am indebted for an opportunityto examine the school. MM. Dumas, Pellet, Payer, and Milne Edwards, areamong the professors of this institution.564 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.establishment, been recognised by the government, who havesupplied funds for the admission of pupils from different partsof France; in 1836-7, twenty-eight pupils were thus admitted,whose expenses were defrayed entirely, or in part, from a specificappropriation by the chamber. The society for the encouragementof national industry, in France, has also giventheir sanction to the school, by establishing six half bursaries,to be filled every three years.Government of the school This is vested in a general directorand council of studies, who delegate a portion of their authorityto a director of studies. The director has the general administrationof the establishment, residing in it; conducts the correspondence,and appoints the officers, the higher ones being nominatedby the council. The council of studies is composed of the directorof studies and of a certain number of professors. Theyregulate every thing relating to the courses of instruction, toadmissions, to examinations, and certificates on leaving theinstitution. They elect their president and secretary, and holdmonthly meetings. During the recess of this council they arereplaced by a council of order, consisting of the director ofstudies and at least one professor, who meet weekly.The officers of the school, besides the general director andthe director of studies, are the professors and masters, repeaters(repetitions), and preparers (preparations). The repeatershear the recitation upon the subjects on which the professorshave lectured; the preparers get ready the experimental partof the lectures on chemistry and physics. There are thirteenprofessors, two masters, and six repeaters, besides the two directorsand other officers.General arrangements. The school is for day-scholars only,but when requested, the director recommends a place of residencefor the pupil, and there is, in fact, a boarding-house inthe neighbourhood especially established for the reception ofpupils of the school and of candidates for admission. The institutionis open every day, except Sunday and Thursday, fromeight until four o'clock; on Thursday, from eight until one.SCHOOL OF ARTS AND MANUFACTURES OP PARIS.Parents who reside out of Paris are required to designate afriend residing there as guardian to their son at his entranceinto the school. Implicit obedience to the regulations and to theorders which they may receive is required of the pupils, who,if they consider themselves aggrieved, have recourse to thecouncil of studies.Admission. Pupils may be admitted at sixteen years of age,if they have the necessary attainments, but as a general rule,it is found that youths at this early period have not sufficientmaturity of intellect to follow the courses of the school to thebest advantage. The examinations for admission are both vivavoce and in writing. Those at Paris are made by a special examiner,designated by the council of studies: in other parts ofFrance they may be made by a professor of mathematics in aroyal or communal college, and in other countries by a professorof mathematics in a university. In these latter cases theexaminers must forward certain statements ; among these mustbe a certificate that at least twelve questions from the programmeof the school have been answered by the candidatein the oral examinations, the questions being specified, and anumber appended to each to designate the character of the answer;another, that three questions from the same source havebeen answered in the written examination, without the aid ofbooks, except only logarithmic tables, if required. There mustfurther be a certificate of the moral character of the candidate.These examinations should be made in time to transmitthe result to Paris before the twenty-fifth of October. Theapplicants are informed of the result at their residence, and ifadmitted, must join the school before the tenth of November.The qualifications for admission are given in detail, to meetthe requisition above stated; they may be stated, generally, asfollows :Arithmetic. The four ground rules. The general theory ofnumbers. Vulgar and decimal fractions. Theory of fractions.Decimals. System of weights and measures.Algebra. The ground rules. Simple and quadratic equations.Resolution of problems. Proportions. The extraction of roots666 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.and raising of powers. The binomial theorem. Powers androot of polynomials. Logarithms. Progressions.Geometry. The principal propositions of plane, superficial,and solid geometry. The application of algebra to geometry.Mensuration.Besides these necessary qualifications, the council of theschool recommend to candidates the further study of the elementsof descriptive geometry, of plane trigonometry, and ofanalytical geometry, and to acquire some general ideas of physicsand chemistry. They are particularly advised, also, toprosecute drawing, and especially ornamental drawing.Instruction, The full course at the central school lasts threeyears, as at the polytechnic school. " The instruction is composedof lectures, of daily interrogations, of graphic exercisesor drawing (travaux graphite), of manipulations in chemistry,stone-cutting, carpentry, physics and mechanics, ofconstructions, problems, plans, partial competitions, or trialsof skill by the pupils, and of general examinations."The studies and exercises of the first year, as well as the lecturesof the succeeding years, are obligatory upon all the pupils.They are intended to lay the foundation upon which the specialcourses are to rest, conveying principles applicable to all arts.The drawings and manipulations, and the projects or plans forwork, are divided into two sections, one general, the other special.The four sections of the special division are, first, theconstruction of machines and the mechanic arts; second, engineering,building, the physical arts, as warming, lighting, &c.;third, chemistry applied to the arts ; fourth, mining and metallurgy,or the working of metals. The pupil decides at the endof the first half year of the second course to which of these sectionshe means to attach himself.There are three divisions, or classes, corresponding to thethree years of study, to proceed from one to the other of whichthe pupil must pass a satisfactory examination on the subject ofthe preceding year.The following is an outline of the courses of the threeyears.SCHOOL OF ARtS AND MAIfUFACTURES OF PARIS.First Year.Descriptive Geometry. Theory, and applications to perspective, shades andshadows, stone-cutting and carpentry. The pupils reduce the demonstrations towriting, and sketch the diagrams. A few selected problems only are drawnwith instruments.Analytical Geometry and Rational (theoretical) Mechanics. Trigonometry,analytical geometry. Statics. Dynamics, hydrostatics, hydrodynamics.Theory of Machines.General Physics. General discussions. Solid, liquid, and gaseous bodies.Heat. Electricity. Magnetism. Light.The pupils are exercised in determining specific gravities, in the constructionof the thermometer, the use of the hygrometer, and in the determination ofheights by the barometer.General Chemistry. General doctrines. Simple non-metallic substances.Selections from their compounds, with oxygen. Compounds with hydrogen.The metals. General properties of chlorides, &c. The salts. Organic chemistry.Vegetable and animal substances.Hygiene and Natural History applied to the Arts. The first part of theCourse is composed of the principles of physiology and hygiene. The second,of the natural history of organized beings which yield substances useful in thearts.Second and Third Years.Descriptive Geometry. Explanations by the professors, and modelling processin stone-cutting in plaster.Rational Mechanics. Conclusion of the course begun in the first year, withnumerous applications, and the solution of problems.Theory of Machines. This course is divided into two parts, which are taughtalternately every two years, to the united first and second classes. Section A.Elementary machines. Animal power. Hydraulic machines. Section B. Applicationof theory to the machines for raising water or transmitting pressure-windmillsand blowing machines. Strength of materials.Students of the second class submit elementary plans for machinery as applicationsof the course, and those of the first class more enlarged projects, withdrawings, calculations, estimates, and descriptions.Construction of Machines. Section A. On the materials used in the constructionof machines. On the composition of machines and their elementaryparts. Section B. On the erection of machines.The students present plans, as in the course just described.Physics applied to the Arts. Section A. Strength of materials. Balances.Heating. Motion of air in pines, &c. Vaporization. Construction of lightning-rods.Section B. Distillation. Evaporation. Dyeing. Heating of gases andliquids. Cooling of bodies. Lighting.These lectures occupy the first half of each year in these two classes. Theplans, drawings, and descriptive memoirs of the kind before referred to arediscussed by the professor, with sections of the class, who meet twice a week forthe purpose. The pupils also construct models of the chimneys and furnace*668 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.described in the course, with prisms of plaster, of one-fourth the size of ordinarybricks. These are executed under the superintendence of the professor andrepeater.Analytical Chemistry. The course consists of twenty lessons in mineral analysis,and sixteen in organic analysis. During the course, special laboratories areopen, in which the pupils, in turn, practice the processes most useful in their intendedcallings.Chemistry applied to the Arts. Each section of the course occupies a year,and consists of twelve lectures. Section A. The materials drawn from the earthand applicable to all the arts ; the manufacture of mineral preparations ; the preparationof plaster, lime, and mortar; the manufacture of pottery, enamel, andglass; the extraction of metals; the composition of alloys; the different applicationsof raw or residual matters in the arts, agriculture, and domestic economy.The same method of requiring plans and memoirs, as above described, is followedin this course.Architecture and Civil Engineering. Section A. Architecture, elements ofarchitectural forms. Discussion of different buildings, public and private, masonry,carpentry, joiner's work, lock-smith's work, roofing, foundations, estimates,plans. The students visit different works in the course of erection, andare exercised in drawing plans and in taking levels. Section B. Roads ; bridgesof stone and wood; suspension bridges; movable bridges; river navigation; canalnavigation; supply and distribution of water.Geognosy and Mining. Section A. Geography, physical geography, mineralogy,geology. The principal mineral and geological species are presented to thestudents, and excursions are made in summer, in the neighbourhood of Paris,for practice. Section B. 1. Mining. General principles. Means of excavation.Working of Mines. Details of working. Mining jurisprudence. 2. Generalmetallurgy. Mechanical preparation of the ores. Reduction and refining of thedifferent metals.Special Metallurgy of Iron. Section A. Smelting furnaces and foundries.Treatment of ores to obtain cast iron. Refining of iron. Section B. Manufactureof iron and steel.Special Courses for the Third Year.The Steam-engines with the details of its construction, varieties, and applications.Rail-roads. Their construction, and the means of locomotion upon them.The students are examined daily upon the subjects of theirlectures, by the professors and repeaters. The utility of thislatter class of teachers is well established in France, and theyare found in every institution in which lecturing is practisedto a great extent as a means of instruction; they prevent theburthen of teaching from falling upon professors, whose dutyit is to be engaged in advancing, as well as in propagatingscience, and who would be prevented from following one orSCHOOL OF ARTS AND MANUFACTURES OF PARIS.other of these honourable and useful careers, by having theduty of teaching superadded to that of lecturing. So wellis the necessity of relieving the professor understood, thatin all courses requiring preparation, special persons are appointed,called preparers, v^^ho take off this burthen also fromthe professor. The result is, that many men of high eminenceare thus enabled to diffuse their knowledge among students bylecturing, and are willing to do so, though they have other andmore profitable employments, to which they would exclusivelyconfine themselves, if this were connected with teaching byinterrogation and the task of preparing experimental illustrations.The pupil is thus greatly the gainer, and has at thesame time the special examination upon the lectures which isso necessary to complete the instruction, and to which a repeateris entirely competent. Young men of talent seek thesituations of repeaters as the best method of showing theirparticular qualifications, and the most certain road to a professorship.For each recitation the pupil receives a mark, andthe roll of the class with these marks being preserved, its indicationsare combined with the results of the examination,to decide upon the fitness of a pupil when he comes forwardfor a diploma.The graphic exercises consist in the drawing of ornamentalwork, in India ink drawing, in drawing with the steel pen andinstruments, and in sketching the diagrams of the lectures to ascale. Great importance is attached to this part of the course,and much time spent in it. The rooms for these exercises areconveniently arranged, and the pupils are superintended duringthem by a professor or a repeater, and visited occasionally bythe director of studies or his deputies. The drawing-tables areso arranged that the pupils stand while at work, which at theirage is very desirable.The arrangements for chemical manipulation by the studentsare very complete; they have access not only to the laboratoriesof the two professors, but to others which are devoted tospecial branches. During the first year every student is employedin laboratory duty once a week, and has also the oppor-570 GENERAL Education. SUPERIOR PERIOD.unity of performing some of the principal physical experiments.They are superintended, while thus occupied, by repeaters.During the first half year of the second course the students arecalled, in turn, to general duty in the laboratory; and duringthe second half of the same year, and the whole of the third,the two sections who follow the courses of chemistry appliedto the arts and metallurgy, are employed in manipulations connectedwith them. There is an officer for their superintendence,called the director (chef) of the chemical exercises, who issubordinate to the professor of chemical analysis. The opportunitiesthus afforded of acquiring a general practice under theguidance of the distinguished professors of this school are invaluable,and form one of the most important features of theestablishment.The materials for constructing models of some of the moreuseful works, and apparatus relating to the arts, are furnishedto the pupils, and used under the direction of their instructors.The collections of mathematical and physical apparatus, andin technology, are very respectable, and are increasing, it beingclearly understood by those who control the school, that theseand similar collections are of essential importance to the successof the courses. There is a library of works relatingto the arts, which is open to students of the first and secondclasses on stated days, and during particular hours, for consultation.The practical application of the subjects taught is early introducedto the students by problems, requiring more or less ingenuityin their solution; from these the next step is to require thedetailed plan of some simple work, and from this the exerciserises to the drawings, estimates, and descriptive memoir accompanyingthe supposed arrangement of some complex establishmentfor manufacturing or other purpose of the arts.No attempt is made to connect practice in the use of mechanicaltools with that in general manipulation, even as a specialcourse, a point to which I shall have occasion to recur,as one of the questions of most doubtful solution relating to thisclass of schools.SCllbOL or ARTS AND MANUFACTURES OP PARIS.At the close of each year the pupils are examined, and fromIhe results of this trial, combined with their marks for the year,and the graphic exercises which they present, is determinedaccording to the class to which the pupils belong, whether theyshall be allowed to pass on to the next higher class, or to receivetheir diploma. The course begins on the tenth of November,and terminates in July. The examinations are completedbefore the tenth of August.Graduation of the pupils. The student who goes through thecourses of the school satisfactorily, and passes a final examinationupon all the matters required of him, receives the diplomaof civil engineer. One who docs not come up to the requirementsin all the branches may, nevertheless, receive a certificateof capacity in those where his attainments are sufficient.Students of the third class, who are candidates for graduation,begin the exercises for that purpose on the fifteenth ofJune, and have forty days to prepare them. Each of the foursections into which the pupils are divided, namely, mechanicians,constructors, chemists, and metallurgists, are expectedto complete a different exercise, consisting of a plan or projectof an establishment, the drawings in relation to which must bemade in the school, and which must be accompanied by a descriptivememoir. Every student is examined upon his work,and must explain and defend it. The drawings and memoirsthus executed become the property of the school, and are frequentlyvery useful in the instruction.The strictness of the council of studies, in exacting high qualificationsfor diplomas, has had the effect of placing the characterof this school in so fair a point of view, that its graduateshave no difficulty in finding places ; on the contrary, indeed,they are in request for the employments which the institutioncertifies that they are able to fill. An abstract from the list of theemployments of students who had left the school with diplomas orcertificates, within the six years preceding 1837-8, will serve toshow that the pupils are engaged in occupations for which thecourses were intended to qualify them, and that thus the institutionactually accomplishes what it professes. The record does572 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD,not, however, include all those who have left the school withits diploma or certificate, there being some whose occupationshave not been reported to the authorities. The number includedin the list is ninety, of which twenty-four are civilengineers, eleven manufacturers, eleven machinists and constructorsof manufactories of various kinds, nine miners, eightconstructors of iron work, seven engaged in iron works, six.professors of chemistry, mathematics and mechanics, fourmanufacturing chemists, three preparers and repeaters in chemicalcourses, two architects, one engineer of a gas-works, oneassay er, three officers connected with civil and military serviceand trade.This institution, though in the beginning only a private enterprise,has been entirely successful, and supplies to youngmen who are out of the government civil service, facilities foracquiring knowledge, similar to those which the PolytechnicSchool, and the Schools of Mines and Roads and Bridges, do inthat service.SCHOOL OF COMMERCE AND THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS, AT Charon.*This institution is a private boarding-school, furnishing instructionin the usual literary branches, as well as those preparatoryto commerce, the mechanic arts, and manufactures.The pupils are divided into three sections, corresponding tothese three purposes. The peculiarity of the school, which isworthy of especial notice, is the establishment of a generalmachinist's shop on the premises, and in which the pupils belongingto the division of the arts, and others, whose parents desireit, are employed a certain number of hours of the day. As thisis a private undertaking, not aided by government funds, economyin this last feature is of course particularly desirable. Ontrial, it has been found only attainable by leasing the machine-shopsto a skilful mechanic, who in return binds himself to takeand instruct the pupils, under certain regulations. This arrangesM. Pine Grandchild, director.SCHOOLS or ARTS OF PRUSSIA.ment has the disadvantage that, instead of seeing a variety ofwork, the pupils are frequently confined to one kind, accordingto the description of orders taken by the lessee of the shops.The plan of varied v^^ork, in which the pupils were employedduring certain hours of the day, as apprentices, was found tooexpensive. The difficulties of practical education in thesebranches, out of the regular work-shops, will be referred to again.SCHOOLS OF ARTS OF PRUSSIA.In Prussia, every trade in which a want of skill may jeopardhuman life, is regulated by law; and before its exercise can becommenced, a license is required, to obtain which an examinationmust be passed. This requisition of the law is consideredto involve a reciprocal obligation on the part of the governmentto afford the opportunity of obtaining the necessaryknowledge, and schools have accordingly been established forthe purpose. Twenty of the regencies of the kingdom alreadyhave technical schools established in them, where instruction is,in general, given at the expense of the state, or province, or foravery trifling remuneration; and it is the intention that eachregency shall have at least one such school within its limits.When there is a burgher school in the place intended as the localityfor one of these technical schools, the two schools areconnected as already described: at Potsdam, the special technicalcourse alone being given in a separate department. Inall cases the government supplies the apparatus for the coursesof mechanics, physics, and chemistry; furnishes the requisite engravingsfor the courses of drawing; and supplies works for thelibrary and for instruction. The courses are intended to reachthe grade of the lower class of the Berlin Institute of Arts, to besubsequently described, a purpose which is actually accomplishedin a part of the schools. Some of the communes haveerected schools similar to these, at their own expense, or haveaided in establishing or improving the provincial schools. Thecost of these twenty schools, annually, is between seven andten thousand dollars.The most promising pupils from the provincial schools usually574 GENERAL Education. SUPERIOR PERIOD.find places at the central Institute at Berlin, which is in factthe university of arts.There is a special school for ship-builders at Stettin, in Pomerania.INSTITUTE OF ARTS OF BERLIN.*This institution is intended to impart the theoretical knowledgeessential to improvement in the arts, and such practicalknowledge as can be acquired to advantage in a school. It issupported by the government, and has also a legacy, to be expendedin bursaries at the school, from Baron Von Seydlitz.The institution is under the charge of a directors who has theentire control of the funds, of the admissions and dismission,and the superintendence of the instruction. The professors andpupils do not reside in the establishment, so that the superintendenceis confined to study-hours. There are assistant professors,who prepare the lectures, and conduct a part of the exercises,in some cases reviewing the lessons of the professors withthe pupils. Besides these officers there are others, who havecharge of the admirable collections of the institution, and of thework-shops, offices, &c. The number of professors is eight, andof repeaters, two. The discipline is of the most simple character,for no pupil is allowed to remain in connexion with theinstitution unless his conduct and progress are satisfactory.There is but one punishment recognised, namely, dismission;and even a want of punctuality is visited thus severely.In the spring of every year the regencies advertise that applicationswill be received for admission into the institute, and the• Gewerbinstitut, literally, trade institute. I am indebted to the director,privy counsellor Beuth, for a lithographic outline and programme of this institution,and to the Hon. Henry Wheaton, minister of the United States at Berlin,for an account of the industrial schools of Prussia, by Captain Beauties, Belgiancharge d'affaires at Berlin. M. Beuth gave me every facility in visiting theinstitution.t The director, M. Beuth, is also president of the Royal Technical Commissionof Prussia, and has the distribution of the funds for the encouragement ofindustry, amounting to about seventy-five thousand dollars annually. M. Beuthis also a privy counsellor, and is president of the Society for the Encouragementof National Industry in Prussia.INSTITUTE OF ARTS AT Berlin.testimonials of the candidates who present the best claims areforwarded to the director at Berlin, who decides finally upon theseveral nominations. The pupils from the provincial schoolshave, in general, the preference over other applicants. At thesame time notice is given by the president of the Society forthe Promotion of National Industry, in relation to the bursariesvacant upon the Seydlitz foundation. The qualifications essentialto admission are — to read and write the Germanlanguage with correctness and facility, and to be thoroughlyacquainted with arithmetic in all its branches. The candidatemust, besides, be at least seventeen years of age. Certain ofthe pupils, as will be hereafter more fully stated, require to haveserved an apprenticeship to a trade. The Seydlitz bursars must,in addition, show — 1st. That their parents were not artisans,*relatives of the founder having the preference over otherapplicants. 2d. That they have been apprenticed to a trade,if they intend to follow one not taught in the institution. 3d.They must enter into an engagement that if they leave the mechanicalcareer they will pay back the amount of their bursaries.There are sixty or seventy gratuitous pupils in the school,of whom eighteen are upon the Seydlitz foundation. Forty areadmitted annually, this number having been adopted because itis found that, in the course of the first month, about a fourth ofthe newly admitted pupils fall away from the institution. Eachbursar receives two hundred and twenty-five dollars per annumfor maintenance. The education is gratuitous. The regularpupils enter on the first of October, but the director is authorizedto admit, at his pleasure, applicants who do not desire to becomebursars, but who support themselves, receiving gratuitously,however, the instruction afforded by the institution.The education of the pupils is either solely theoretical, orcombines theory and practice, according to the calling whichthey intend to follow. The first division is composed of students,The object of M. Von Seydlitz appears to have been to counteract, to the extentof his power, the tendency to the increase of the learned professions, at th?expense of the mechanic arts, by an inducement to a course exactly contrary tothe usual one.676 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.who receive theoretical instruction only, and who are preparingto become masons, carpenters, and joiners. They are supposedto have become acquainted with the practice of their trade beforeentering the institution, being required to have served, previously,a part of their apprenticeship. An excellent reason isassigned for this rule, namely, that on leaving the school suchpupils are too old to begin their apprenticeship to these callings,and would, if they attempted to do so, find the first beginningsso irksome as to induce them to seek other employments, andthus their special education would be lost, and the object of theschool defeated. The second division embraces both theoreticaland practical instruction, and consists of three classes. First,the stone-cutters, engravers, lapidaries, glass-cutters, carvers inwood and ivory, and brass-founders. Second, dyers and manufacturesof chemical products. Third. Machine-makers andmechanicians. The practical instruction is different for eachof these three classes.The general course of studies last two years, and the pupilsare divided into two corresponding classes. The first class is,besides, subdivided into two sections. The lower or secondclass is taught first; mechanical drawing, subdivided into decorativedrawing, including designs for architectural ornaments,utensils, vases, patterns for weaving, &c., and linear drawing,applied to civil works, to handicrafts, and to machines. Second,modelling in clay, plaster, and wax. Third, practical arithmetic.Fourth, geometry. Fifth, natural philosophy. Sixth, chemistry.Seventh, technology, or a knowledge of the materials,processes, and products of the arts. The studies of the lowersection of the first class are general, while those of the first sectionturn more particularly upon the applications of science tothe arts. In the lower section, the drawing, modelling, naturalphilosophy, and chemistry, of the first year, are continued; and,in addition, descriptive geometry, trigonometry, stereometry,mixed mathematics, mineralogy, and the art of construction arestudied. In the upper or first section, perspective, stone-cutting,carpentry, and mechanics applied to the arts, are taught, andthe making of plans and estimates for buildings, work-shops,INSTITUTE OF ARTS AT BERLIN.manufactories, machines, (fee. These courses are common toall pupils, whatever may be their future destination; but besidehenri, the machinists study, during the latter part of their stay atthe institution, a continuation of the course of mechanics andmathematical analysis. The examples accompanying the instructionin regard to plans and estimates are adapted to theintended pursuits of the pupils.The courses of practice are begun by the pupils already enumeratedas taking part in them, at different periods of their stayin the institution. The future chemists and mechanics musthave completed the whole range of studies above mentioned,as common to all the pupils, while the others begin their practiceafter having completed the first year's course. There are workshopsfor each class of pupils, where they are taught the practiceof their proposed calling, under competent workmen. There aretwo foundries for bronze castings, one for small, the other forlarge castings, and the work turned out of both bears a highcharacter. A specimen of this work is retained by the institutionin a beautiful fountain, which ornaments one of the courtsof the building. The models for castings are made in the establishment.In the first division of pupils, in reference to theircallings, there are usually some whose art is connected with thefine arts in some of its branches, and these have an opportunityduring part of the week to attend the courses of the Berlin Academy.The future chemists work for half the year in the laboratory.They are chiefly employed in chemical analysis, beingfurnished with the requisite materials for practice by the institution.In the shops for the instruction of mechanics are machinesfor working in wood and the metals, a steam-engine of four horses'power, a forge, tools in great variety, lathes, &c. The pupilshave the use of all necessary implements, according to theirprogress, and are gradually taught, as if serving a regular apprenticeship.When capable, they are enabled to construct machineswhich may be useful to them subsequently, as a lathe, ormachine for cutting screws, or the teeth of wheels, &c., andare furnished with all the materials for the purpose, the machinebecoming their own property. In these work-shops, also, the'"^■- 73678 GENERAL EDUCATfOST. SUPERIOR PERIOD.models for the cabinet of the school are made. This is by farthe most complete establishment for practice which I met withinany institution, and I believe the practice is both real andeffectual. It involves, however, an expenditure which in othercases it has not been practicable to command. The scale of thewhole institution is, in the particular of expenditure, most generous.This is one specimen of the various plans which have beendevised to give practical knowledge of an art in connexionwith theory in a school. It is first most judiciously laid downthat certain trades cannot be taught to advantage in a similarconnexion, but that the practical knowledge must be acquiredby an apprenticeship antecedent to the theoretical studies. Thereare besides, however, a large number of trades, the practiceof which is to be taught in the institution, and requiring a veryconsiderable expenditure to carry out the design properly.This could not be attempted in a school fess munificently endowed,and requires very strict regulations to carry ft througheven here. The habits of a school work-shop are, in general, notthose of a real manufactory, where the same articles are madeto be sold as a source of profit; hence, though the practicalknowledge may be acquired, the habits of work are not, andthe mechanic may be well taught but not well trained. At theprivate school of Charonnene, work-shops were established, givinga variety of occupation to the pupils; but the disposition to playrather than to work, rendered these establishments too costly tobe supported by a private institution, and the plan adoptedinstead of this, was to make the pupils enter a regular workshopfor a stated number of hours, to work for the proprietoror lessee. This plan remedies one evil, but introduces another,that as the machinist takes orders, with a view to profit, thework may have so little variety as only to benefit a small classof the pupils. The pupils at Charonnene are, however, underdifferent circumstances from those at Berlin ; they are generallyyounger, and, being independent of the school, where theypay for their education, are not under the same restraint as inthe other institution; hence the experience of the one schoolINSTITUTE OF ARtS AT BERLIN.does not apply in full force to the other. At Dresden, in aschool somewhat similar to that of Berlin, a different mode fromeither of those just mentioned has been adopted. An arrangementis made with a number of mechanics, of different occupations,to receive pupils from the schools as apprentices, allowingthem the privilege of attending, during certain specified hours ofthe day, upon the theoretical exercises of the institution. Wheresuch an arrangement can be made, the results are unexceptionable,and the advantages likely to accrue to the mechanic arts,from the union of theory with practice, will offer a strong inducementto liberally disposed mechanics to take apprenticesupon these terms. Small work-shops, connected with an institution,must necessarily offer inferior advantages, even if closelyregulated, so as to procure the greatest possible amount of workfrom the pupils ; this should not be done for the sake of theprofit, but to give him genuinely good habits.The difficulties in giving practical instruction in the chemicalarts are not to be compared with those under discussion, andwill be found to have been satisfactorily obviated in severalschools. This subject will receive its more appropriate discussionin connexion with the polytechnic institution of Vienna,where the chemical department, at least as far as manufacturingchemistry is concerned, is generally recognised as having producedthe best results of any yet established.Returning to the subject of the theoretical instruction in theBerlin institute of arts, the following statement will serve toshow the succession of the courses, with the time devoted toeach: —WINTER COURSE.Monday. First Class. First division — drawing and sketching machines, eightA. M. to twelve o'clock. Discussion of machines, estimates ofpower, &c., two P. M. to five P. M. Second division— machinedrawing, eight to ten. Modelling in clay, ten to twelve. Physics,two to five.Second Class. Machine-drawing, eight to ten. Modelling, ten totwelve. Elements of geometry, two to four. Repetition of thelecture, four to five.Tuesday. First Class. First division— architectural plans and estimates, eightto twelve. Practical instruction in machinery, two to five. SecondGENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.division — ornamental and architectural drawing, eight to twelve.Trigonometry, two to five.Second Class. Ornamental and architectural drawing, eight totwelve. Physics, two to four. Repetition of the lecture, four tofive.Wednesday. First Class. First division — original designs, eight to twelve. Discussionof machinery. Second division — mineralogy, eight tonine. Machine-drawing, nine to twelve. Trigonometry, two tofive.Second Class. Machine-drawing, eight to twelve. Practical arithmetic,two to five.Thursday. First Class. First division — Drawing and sketching machines,eight to twelve. Architectural instruction, estimates, two to five.Second division — decorative and architectural drawing, eightto ten. Modelling in clay, ten to twelve. Trigonometry, twoto five.Second Class. Decorative and architectural drawing, eight toten. Modelling in clay, ten to twelve. Physics, two to four.Repetition of the lecture, four to five.Friday. First Class. First division — architectural plans, eight to twelve.Practical instruction in machinery, two to five. Second division— machine-drawing, eight to twelve. Physics, two to five.Second Class. Machine-drawing, eight to twelve. Elementary mathematics,two to four. Repetition of the lesson, four to five.Saturday. First Class. First division — perspective and stone-cutting, eight totwelve. Original designs, two to five. Second division — mineralogy,eight to nine. Decorative and architectural drawing,nine to twelve. Trigonometry, two to five.Second Class. Decorative and architectural drawing, eight to twelve.Practical arithmetic, two to five.The summer term, which follows this, embraces the practicalinstruction.SUMMER TERM.Monday. First Class. First division— in the work-shops from seven A. M. totwelve, and from one until seven P. M. Second division — machine-drawing,eight to twelve. Applied mathematics, two to five.Second Class. Machine-drawing, eight to ten. Modelling, ten totwelve. Chemistry, two to four. Repetition, four to five.Tuesday. First Class. First division — analytical dynamics, eight to nine.Drawing of machines from original designs, nine to twelve.Machinery, two to five. Second division — decorative and architecturaldrawing, eight to twelve. Chemistry two to five.Second Class. Decorative and architectural drawing, eight totwelve. Elementary mathematics, two to four. Repetition, fourto five.Wednesday. First Class. First division — in the workshops from seven to twelve,and from one to seven. Second division — machine-drawing,INSTITUTE OF ARTS AT BERLIN".eight to ten. Modelling, ten to twelve. Applied mathematics,two to five.Second Class. Machine-drawing, eight to twelve. Practical arithmetic,two to four. Materials used in the arts, four to five.Thursday. First Class. First division — in the work-shops from seven totwelve, and from one to seven. Second division — machine-drawing,eight to ten. Modelling, ten to twelve. Applied mathematics,two to five.Second Class. Decorative and architectural drawing, eight to ten.Modelling, ten to twelve. Chemistry, two to four. Repetitionof the lesson, four to five.Friday. First Class. First division — analytical dynamics, eight to nine.Drawing of a machine for an original design, nine to twelve.Machinery, two to five. Second division — chemistry, eight tonine. Applied mathematics, nine to twelve. Chemistry, two tofive.Second Class. Machine-drawing, eight to twelve. Elementarymathematics, two to four. Repetition of the lesson, four to five.Saturday. First Class. First division — in the work-shops from seven to twelve,and from one to seven. Second division — decorative and architecturaldrawing, eight to twelve. Applied mathematics, two tofive.Second Class. Decorative and architectural drawing, eight totwelve. Practical arithmetic, two to four. Materials used inthe arts, four to five.The chemical division of the practical classes is engaged every day in thelaboratory. On Tuesday and Wednesday the library is open for reading fromfive to eight, P. M.The collections for carrying out the various branches of instructionare upon the same liberal scale with the other partsof the institution. There is a library of works on architecture,mechanics, technology, the various arts, archeology, &c., inGerman, French and English. This library is open twice aweek, from five to eight in the evening, to the pupils of the firstclass of the school, and to such mechanics as apply for the useof it.There is a rich collection of drawings of new and useful machines,and of illustrations of the different courses, belonging tothe institution. Among them is a splendid work, publishedunder the direction of Mr. Beuth, entitled Models for Manufacturersand Artisans (Vorlegeblatter fur Fabric ante undWanderer), containing engravings by the best artists of Germany,and some even from France and England, applicable to582 GENERAL Education. SUPERIOR PERIOD.the different arts and to architecture and engineering. Amongthe drawings are many from original designs by Shenckel, ofBerlin.* There is a second useful but more ordinary series ofengravings, on similar subjects, also executed for the use of theschool. These works are distributed to the provincial tradeschools, and presented to such of the mechanics of Prussia ashave especially distinguished themselves in their vocations.The collection of models of machinery belonging to the schoolprobably ranks next in extent and value to that at the Conservatoryof Arts of Paris. It contains models of such machinesas are not readily comprehended by drawings. Most of themare working models, and many were made in the work-shopsof the school. They are constructed, as far as possible, to auniform scale, and the parts of the models are of the same materialsas in the actual machine. There is an extensive collectionof casts, consisting of copies of statues, basso-relievos, utensils,bronzes, and vases of the museums of Naples, Rome, and Florence,and of the British Museum, and of the models of architecturalmonuments of Greece, Rome, Pompeii, &c., and copiesof models, cameos, and similar objects ; those specimens onlyhave been selected which are not in the collection of the Academyof Fine Arts of Berlin, to which the pupils of the Instituteof Arts have access. There are good collections of physicaland chemical apparatus, of minerals, of geological and technologicalspecimens.The instruction is afforded in part by the lectures of the professors,aided by text-books specially intended for the school,and in part by the interrogations of the professors and of theassistants and repeaters. At the close of the first year thereis an examination to determine which of the pupils shall be permittedto go forward, and at the close of the second year todetermine which shall receive the certificate of the institute.Although the pupils who come from the provinces are admittedA copy of tills work has been most liberally presented to the Girard Collegeby the Technical Commission, of which Mr. Beuth is president. The work havingbeen published by the government, is not sold.POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE Or VIENNA.to the first class of the institute, upon their presenting a testimonialthat they have gone through the courses of the provincialschools satisfactorily, it frequently happens that they are obligedto retire to the second, especially from defective knowledge ofchemistry.The cost of this school to the government is about tvi^elvethousand dollars annually, exclusive of the amount expendedupon the practical courses and upon the collections — a verytrifling sum, if the good which it is calculated to do throughoutthe country is considered. The comparatively recent existenceof the institution does not admit of appealing to decided resultswhich have flowed to the mechanic arts in Prussia from itsestablishment, but there can be no doubt of its tendency, andits pupils are already known to be making their way successfully,in consequence of the advantages which they have hereenjoyed.POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE OF VIENNA.This is one of the most flourishing polytechnic institutions ofGermany, and its characteristics are so different from those ofthe institute at Berlin, that there is little danger of repetition indescribing this school also.The whole institution is intended to fulfil a threefold purpose —as a school for the mechanic arts, manufactures, and commerceas a conservatory of arts and manufactures, and as an institutefor the promotion of national industry. The last named object iseffected by public exhibitions, from time to time, of the productsof manufactures, under the direction of the institute. For thebetter execution of this object, a spacious building is now erectingon the premises, adapted to the occasional display and permanentdeposite of specimens of the mechanic arts. The collectionswhich form the conservatory of arts are also used forinstruction in the school, and will be described in connexionwith it.The whole institution is under the control of a director,* whatM. J. J. Prcchtel, formerly professor of chemistry.664 GEPfERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.is responsible to the higher authorities of public instruction, andof trade and manufactures. The director is the general superintendentof the business of the institute and of the instruction,but does not teach. He regulates the admission of pupils andthe discipline. The money concerns are under the chargeof a treasurer, who is responsible to the director. The inferiorofficers are responsible to the same authority. The disciplineof the scholastic department is simple but rigid, nopupil being allowed to remain connected with it whose deportmentis not proper. The courses are gratuitous, except a smallentrance fee, and this is considered as warranting prompt removalwhen the pupil does not perform the duties prescribedby the institution.The department of instruction is composed of three schools,a technical, a commercial, and a " real school." The last namedis a preparatory school for the two others, and may be enteredas early as thirteen years of age. Its courses are of religiousinstruction, of German language, elementary mathematics, geography,history, natural history, elocution, calligraphy, anddrawing, and are obligatory upon the pupils. Italian and Frenchmay be studied if the pupil desires it. As these courses lead inthree years to the other departments of the institution, the candidatesfor admission are required to possess the elementary attainmentsnecessary to their successful prosecution. Thereare five professors and four teachers connected with this school,which is superintended by the vice-director of the institute.The instructors rank by regulation with those in the gymnasiaor classical schools of the empire. The course of instructionis not as comprehensive as that in the Prussian realschools, but is an adequate preparation for the next higher divisions,which supply in part these deficiencies.The technical and commercial schools furnish special instructionaccording to the intended pursuits of the pupil, though hemay, in fact, select the courses which he wishes to attend, notbeing limited as to the number or character of the branches.The director advises with the pupil, on admission, as to thestudies most appropriate to be followed, if his intended callingPOLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE AT VIENNA. 585is fixed, and he is not allowed to join the classes, the coursesof which require preparation, without presenting a certificatefrom the school at which he has been instructed, or being examined,to ascertain his proficiency. In regard to other courses,there is no such restriction. The age for admission is sixteenyears.The instruction is given in the technical school by eight professorsand two assistants; the professors lecturing, and in someof the courses, interrogating the pupils. Certain lectures arealso gone over by the assistants with the classes. The courseswhich combine practice with teaching will be pointed out inenumerating the subjects of study. The division of these subjects,and the time devoted to them during the week, are asfollows: ,./. General Chemistry, applied to the arts, five hours.//. Special Technical Chemistry, ten hours. This course gives a particularaccount of all the processes of the arts of which the principles were developed inthe general lectures. There is a special laboratory devoted to the course, where,under the superintendence of the professor or of his assistants, the pupils gothrough the processes on a small scale. Those who have a particular objectin view, as dyeing, bleaching, printing upon stuffs, or the manufacture ofchemical preparations or metallurgy, are directed in their investigations especiallyto the parts of chemistry which they will have to apply. Practice and theoryare thus combined. ///. Physics, with special reference to its applications, fivehours. IV. Elementary Mathematics, including arithmetic, algebra, geometry,and mensuration, ten hours. This course is intended for those who have notpassed through the real school. V, Higher Mathematics, five hours. There is arepetition by an assistant, also of five hours. VI. Mechanics, including thedescription and calculation of machines, five hours. This subject is founded upona course of machines, considered as an application of descriptive geometry anddrawing, superintended by an assistant. VII. Practical Geometry, includingland and topographical surveying, levelling, «Slc., five hours. The lectures are accompaniedby practice in the use of instruments in the field. VIII. Civil andHydraulic Architecture, ten hours. This includes a complete course of engineering,in its various branches. It is accompanied by exercises in drawing.IX. Technology, or a general discussion of arts and trades, five hours. Thesubjects which come under the head of special chemistry are omitted in thelectures of this division. X. The assistant professor of chemistry delivers anextra lecture, daily, on the methods of measuring Specific Gravities, during partof the course. XL Elementary Drawing for those who have not passed throughthe real school, five hours. There are extra courses in the Latin, Bohemian, andEnglish languages, for those who wish to follow them.The time devoted to drawing depends upon the student, but586 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.it is obvious that his knowledge must be very incomplete, andthat he will carry away from the school but an imperfect recordof descriptive geometry and its applications, unless hedevotes a great deal of time to this branch. In this respect thearrangement of the school is entirely different from that atBerlin, where the drawings accompanying the courses aremade as much a matter of regular duty as the attendance uponthe lectures themselves. This is certainly the proper plan, andwhile it appeared to me that the time spent in the graphicexercises at Berlin was even beyond the measure of their importance,I am decidedly of opinion that a strict attention tothis department is essential.The collections, by the aid of which these courses are carriedout, are — 1. An extensive collection of chemical preparationsfor both special and general chemistry. The pupils inspecial chemistry, as already stated, make preparations in thedepartments of the art which they intend to follow, and someof these are left behind them as specimens of their skill. Inthe department of the dyer there is quite a large series ofspecimens collected in this way. The laboratories for bothspecial and general chemistry are admirably adapted to theirpurpose.* 2. A cabinet of instruments for the course ofpractical geometry. 3. A considerable collection of physicalapparatus. 4. A collection of models of machines, and inengineering. 5. A technological cabinet of a most completecharacter, and admirably arranged; it contains many of thebest specimens of Austrian arts and manufactures. All thesecollections are under the care of the professor in whose departmentthey find a place ; there being, besides, curators forthe immediate charge of them, and for keeping them in repair.The cabinet of physical apparatus, and of models and machinery,were in the main supplied from the work-shops of theinstitution. These shops have long been celebrated for theThe laboratory of the professor of general chemistry, Professor Meissner,^. kone of the best arranged which I saw abroad. The furnace operations, andothers likely to incommode the class, are performed behind a screen, with largeglass windows, which allow a perfect view : the space behind is provided with,the means of carrying off the fumes.POLYTECHNIC INSTITUTE OF VIENNA.astronomical and geodesic instruments furnished from them.They are still kept up, though on a reduced scale, their chiefobject having been accomplished. They were never intended,like those of Berlin, to afford practical instruction to the pupils.The institution, indeed, does not recognise the principle thatthis can be done to advantage in the mechanical departmentIt is certain, as already stated, that great care is required torender such establishments of any avail beyond the point ofgiving to the pupil a general readiness with his hands, and thateven when well conducted they are expensive. Success inpractical chemistry requires essentially a very considerableknowledge of theory; the processes on a small scale represent,in general, fairly those upon the large, and experimentsthus made frequently save the outlay which is required to makethem in the large way. The practice in the laboratory ofa school is, besides, very nearly of the kind required for themanufactory. These, among other circumstances, render theproblem in regard to successful preparation for the arts dependingupon chemistry, different from that relating to the artof the machinist. It is in this department that the polytechnicschool of Vienna is particularly strong. There can be no doubtthat Austrian manufactures in general have received a greatimpulse through the medium of this institution, and particularlyof its scholastic department, but while praise is yielded to thedifferent courses, the arrangements for teaching chemistry mustbe considered as having a preference over the others.The lessons in the commercial school embrace the followingsubjects: — I. Commercial correspondence, three hours perweek. II. The science of trade (Handelswissenschaft), threehours. III. Austrian laws relating to trade and exchange,three hours. IV. Commercial arithmetic, six hours. V. Bookkeeping,by single and double entry, four hours. VI. Accountof the materials of trade (Waarenkunde), their sources, uses,properties, kinds, adulteration to which they are subject, &c.,four hours. VII. Commercial geography, three hours. VIII.History of commerce, three hours. There are five professorsin this school.688 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.Once a week the professors of the institute meet, under thepresidency of the director, to confer on the business of the institution.Saturday is appropriated in part to this purpose, andthere are no exercises for the students on that day. One ofthe professors is secretary of the Board. The professors rankby regulation with those of the universities.The lectures last from October to August of every year. Atthe close of them, a pupil who wishes a certificate in anybranch, presents himself, and is examined by a professor, inpresence of the director and of two members of the imperialcommission of studies. A student who has attended the lectures,and does not wish to be examined, may receive a certificateof attendance.To supply the place of a regular division of studies for differentcallings, one of the earlier programmes contained a recommendationof certain courses of study as preparatory toparticular occupations. The recommendations were the following:— For tradesmen, the two years of the real school, and oneyear of the commercial school; or for a more complete education,an additional year, embracing the courses of chemistry,physics, and technology of the technical school. For dyers,printers in stuffs, bleachers, manufacturers of chemical products,of sal, of saltpetre, for miners, metallurgists, brewers, &c. —special chemistry, physics, and technology, with some of thecourses of the commercial school. For machinists, hydraulicengineers, mill-wrights, foremen in manufactories, and miningengineers — a course of two years was recommended, the firstto embrace mathematics, physics, and drawing, and the second,mechanics, machine-drawing, and technology. As a preparationfor agriculturalists and foresters — courses of mathematics,physics, practical geometry, chemistry, and book-keeping. Forminers — mathematics, physics, practical geometry, mechanics,drawing, and book-keeping. For surveyors — mathematics,physics, practical geometry, drawing, and book-keeping.There is still a regular course laid down for architects andcivil engineers, the satisfactory completion of which entitles toa diploma. The first year includes elementary mathematics,SCHOOL OF MINES OF SAXONY.technology, and drawing; the second, higher mathematics,physics, and drawing; the third, the applied mathematics, mechanics,practical geometry, and drawing; the fourth, architecture,engineering, drawing, technology, chemistry, and bookkeeping.The library of the institute is appropriated to the severaldepartments, and is used by the students, as well as by the professors.Yearly appropriations, besides the entrance and diplomafees, are devoted to its increase. The professors have theright of recommending such works to be purchased as theymay deem of use in their departments. An annual is publishedby the institute, consisting of original and selected scientificarticles, by the professors, and notices of the institution.SAXON SCHOOL OF MINES AT Orenburg.This celebrated school is in one of the richest mining districtsof Saxony, and the proximity of the mines permits an easy combinationof practice with theory. Its first object is to furnisheducated young men for the corps of mines of the kingdom,but it also admits strangers to its courses at a trifling expensefor their instruction, the pupils boarding in the town.General government. The school of mines is under the immediategovernment of the directory of mines (oberbergamt), andis thus a branch of the ministry of finance. The professorsform a Board for the execution of the general regulations, andone of them is specially charged by the directory with thesuperintendence of the instruction and discipline.Admission. Applications for free admission to the institutionare made to the directory of mines, and must be accompaniedby certificates that the applicant is between sixteen and twenty-threeyears of age, is of good moral character, in sound health,writes German correctly, and understands the grammar of thelanguage ; has made some proficiency in geography and history,can read easy Latin authors, is acquainted with arithmetic, theelements of geometry, and has made a beginning in drawing.If he understands the French or English language, it is a recommendation.The testimonials must be handed between the590 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.months of January and June, and the directory decide whichof the applicants may present themselves for examination beforethe professors of the school. Those found qualified in allthe courses enter, and others may, in particular cases, be allowedto join the classes, undergoing subsequently an examination inthe studies on which they were defective. According to an edictof the German diet, in regard to the attendance of foreignersupon the scholastic institutions of any of the German states,strangers must apply to the minister of finance for permissionto attend the school and present a testimonial of character andproficiency, and the written expression of their parents' wishthat they should attend the school. Admission is, However,freely granted. Those pupils who are in part, or entirely, supportedby the government, are divided into two classes. Thefirst division includes the regular students, called beneficiaries(beneficence), who pass through a course of four years at theschool, and become candidates for the corps of mines; the otheris composed of those who enter for places not requiring morethan one or two years of study, or who have passed a superiorexamination for admission, but cannot enter as regular students,in consequence of the want of a vacancy in the corps. Besidesthese there are two other divisions, namely, Saxons, who paytheir own expenses at the school, and foreigners. These differentdivisions are distinguished by characteristic differences in theuniform which they wear. The gratuitously educated studentscome under an obligation at entering, in event of leaving theservice of the government, to refund the pay which they mayhave received, and to pay the cost of their tuition. The regularpupils receive a pay proportioned in general to the length oftime which they have been in the school. The first class receivesfrom twenty-two to thirty dollars per annum; the second,from fifteen to twenty-two; the third, from seven to fifteen.The fourth class receive only the compensation to which theymay be entitled for their work in the mines. In 1837-8 therewere in the school nineteen regular pupils, eighteen extra pupils,and others admitted gratis, two Saxon pay pupils, and eighteenforeigners, making a total of fifty-seven. Of the foreigners, fiveSCHOOL OF MINES OF SAXONY.were Russians, two South Americans, and two Englishmen.This school is essentially different in its organization from theschool of mines of France. The latter institution is supplementaryto the polytechnic school, furnishing the special instructionrequired by the candidates for the corps of mines who havepassed through the general courses of the polytechnic school.The Saxon school begins at a lower level in attainment thanthe polytechnic school, and instructs future miners only, thespecial object being never lost sight of throughout the student'scareer. In the opportunities for practice, it resembles morenearly the miners' school of St. Guienne than the school of minesat Paris; while, then, the courses of instruction here have necessarilymany points of resemblance to those of the polytechnicschool and the school of mines of France, an acquaintancewith these institutions would not serve at all as a guide to thearrangements of the Saxon school.Instruction, The courses of instruction are divided into thosewhich are to be pursued by all the pupils, or general, and thosewhich depend upon the branch to which they intend devotingthemselves, or special. The first consist of elementary, higher,and applied or mixed mathematics, mechanics and the machineryof mines, general, analytical, and special or technicalchemistry, physics, drawing, general and topographical, ofshades, shadows, and perspective, and of mining implements, ofmining and metallurgic machines and constructions, oryctog-nosy (mineralogy), geognosy (geology), crystallography theart of mining, metallurgy, civil engineering, mining jurisprudenceand correspondence, the French language. The secondor special courses consist of the surveying of mines and landsurveying, the keeping of books, registers, &c., of fossil geology,for those who are intended as miners, and of the examinationof minerals, and analytical chemistry, with special reference tothe ores of Saxony, for those who are to serve at the furnaces.These courses are pursued by the regular students accordingto the following plan: — The first year is devoted to elementarymathematics, to physics, to geognosy, to general and topographicaldrawing, to French, and to general practical operations502 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.of mining and metallurgy. All these pupils are allowed at certaintimes to be present in the mines and at the furnaces, underthe charge of miners and smelters, who act as instructors, andwho report at the end of the year upon the character of theirpupils.During the second year, the courses pursued are — highermathematics, general chemistry, mineralogy, with practical exercises,crystallography, the art of mining, civil engineering,drawing, French, practical mining, and geological exercises.After this year the student determines whether he will devotehimself to mining or metallurgy, and receives special instructionaccordingly.The general courses of the third year are — applied pathetic,the art of mining, analytical chemistry, metallurgy, technicalchemistry, drawing, practical exercises in mining and metallurgy,geology, with practical exercises, and fossil geology.The courses of the fourth year are — machinery of mines,theory and practice, mining jurisprudence, examination of minerals,analytical chemistry, and practical exercises of miningand metallurgy. During this year, the pupils who intend devotingthemselves specially to mining attend solely to practice in thatbranch, and thus also with the metallurgists. The particularoperation in which they engage is regulated by the lectures,that the practice of each operation may be acquired at the sametime with its theory.In relation to the amount of study to be pursued, the governmentpupils are divided into three classes, those who aim atentire qualification for the corps, and who, on graduating at theschool, go to the university for one year, and those who intendto connect themselves with the department of metallurgy.Among the apparatus for carrying out these courses is anadmirable collection of models of machines and of mines. Thecollection of minerals and geological specimens is large, andbesides that of the school, the students have the use of the cabinetof the celebrated Werner, which is kept detached from theother as a memorial of that great man. The library and reading-room,the collection of physical and chemical apparatus, andSCHOOL OF MINES OF SAXONY. 593the arrangements for the study of analytical chemistry, and theassay of minerals and ores, are all suitable to their several objects.The course of assaying with the blow-pipe has becomequite celebrated.The lectures are continued from October to July, with holidaysof from one to two weeks at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide.During the summer vacations, the regular pupils makeexcursions into the other mining districts of Saxony, and eveninto foreign countries, for their improvement in mining, geology,&c., and are expected to keep a journal of their tours. Theshort vacations are employed at the school in practical exercisesand in literary composition, unless leave of absence is obtained.There is also one day of each week on which there areno lessons (Monday), to allow the pupils to take part both inthe mining and smelting operations of the district of Freyburg.There are eight professors and five teachers attached to theschool, among whom the different departments are dividedaccording to the following plan, in which the number oflectures per week is also noted: — One professor has charge ofthe three departments of general and technical chemistry andof metallurgy, lecturing on the first, five hours, on the second,three hours, and on the third, three hours. The professor oftheoretical and practical mineralogy lectures on the theory forstudents of the first and second courses, each three times aweek ; gives a repetition of one hour, and practical exercisestwo hours per week. The professor of geology and crystal-geographylectures on the first, five hours, and on the second,two hours per week. The professor of physics and fossil geology*lectures on the first, four hours, and on the second, twohours per week. The professor of the elementary and highermathematics gives instruction in the first, four hours, and inthe second, two hours per week. The professor of miningjurisprudence and correspondence gives two lessons per weekto each of his two classes. Mixed mathematics, mining ma-professorReich, to whom I am indebted for a copy in MS. of the regulationsof the school.604 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.cheery, and general surveying, are mi<kr one professor, whoteaches the first and second, four hours, and the thh*d, twohours per week. Mining surveying is taught by a surveyor ofthe corps two hours per week. Drawing and civil architectureby an instructor, the former, six hours, and the latter, threehours per week. Registry is taught by a superintendent ofmines. The assay of minerals by an overseer, five hours perweek. The teacher of French gives four hours of instructionper week.The subjects are in general taught by lectures, combined withinterrogation after each lecture, and, when the courses admit,with practical exercises. The pupils are expected to write out afair copy of their notes, and to keep a journal of their practicalexercises; these are from time to time, with the essays which theyare directed to write, submitted to the professors, and are presentedat the examinations. The subject of each recitation, thecharacter of the pupils' answers, and of the exercises, drawings,and journals, are reported to the directory of mines by the professors.At the close of each of the four years there is an examinationof the students in the several branches, and they areclassified according to its results, and the estimate of their workduring the year. Students who do not pass satisfactorily, remainan additional year in the same class, after which, if they arenot found proficient, they are dismissed. These remarks applyof course only to the regular students. There are three prizesfor proficiency in the upper classes, and two in the fourth, varyingin amount from two up to twenty florins (eighty cents to eightdollars).Graduation. Graduates of the school are candidates for thecorps of mines, and receive the pay of this grade until appointedin the corps. Permission may be obtained to go to a universityfor one year, after graduating, in which case the candidate, onhis return to duty, must show satisfactory certificates of studyand conduct. This study of one year at a university is essentialto certain situations in the corps, and hence is expected fromthose who intend to have the whole career open before them.Discipline. The discipline of the school is regulated by lawsAGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE OP Nuremberg.emanating from the directory of mines, and which are very minute.All the pupils, without distinction, are subject to theseregulations. The means of repressive discipline consist of admonitionsof various grades, report to the directory, mention inthe report to the king, obligatory work in the mines, deprivationof pay, and dismission.This school, from the character of its officers, government,instruction, and location, offers great inducements to studentswho wish to become adepts in the principles of mining and metallurgy,and the sciences introductory to them.INSTITUTE OF AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY AT HOHENHEIM,NEAR Stuttgart.This is the most complete agricultural school in Europe, andextends its usefulness not only throughout, but beyond, Nuremberg.It was established in 1817, by the Agricultural Societyof Nuremberg, under the patronage of the king, who devoteda royal seat, with extensive buildings, to the purposes of the institution.The farm includes nearly one thousand acres, exclusivelyappropriated to the support of the school, or the practicalinstruction of the pupils. In 1820 the school of forestry wasunited with this, and the pupils now follow, in part, the samecourses.The entire institution is divided into two departments, one ofwhich is intended to give a higher general and practical educationthan the other. In the higher, the object is less the acquisitionof manual dexterity in the operations of agriculture, thanthe knowledge required to superintend them ; while in the lower,the practice is the principal end. The latter department rankswith the rural schools of Switzerland and the agricultural schoolof Templemoyle, in Ireland, already described. In the higherschool, all the pupils are expected to pay for their education. Inthe lower, natives of Nuremberg are admitted gratis, if theircircumstances require it. Foreigners may be admitted to either;their payments being, however, on a much higher scale thanthose of natives.*• For the yearly courses at the higher school natives pay forty dollars, and fogGEXERAIi EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.The direction of the establishment-is-delegated by the AgriculturalSociety to a director and treasurer, the former of whomhas the general superintendence of all the concerns of the institution,while the latter is responsible for its financial state to thesociety and to the royal exchequer. The director is also aninstructor. There are, besides, four regular or ordinary professors,and four extraordinary professors, besides an overseerand steward, for the management of the farm and domestic economy.The treasurer has a book-keeper and an assistant in hisdepartment.Pupils are admitted at seventeen years of age, and are expectedto possess elementary attainments necessary to the prosecutionof the courses of the school. Between 1820 and 1836,one hundred and eighty natives and one hundred and eighty-twoforeigners have been educated in agriculture, and one hundredand forty-seven natives and one hundred and seventy-sevenforeigners in forestry, making a total of five hundred andthirty-nine in the institution. The number of pupils in the higherschool in 1836 was seventy-two. That in the lower school islimited to twenty-seven.The pupils of the lower school in general, come under obligationsto remain three years at the institution, in consideration ofwhich their payments for instruction are diminished, in part, inthe second year, and cease in the third. They are engaged inthe operations of the farm, the garden, and other parts of theestablishment, which will be hereafter enumerated, under thedirection of the workmen, and under the superintendence of thesteward, their time being so distributed that they may acquirepractice in the various operations of farming. They are alsorequired to attend certain of the lectures given to the higherclasses, and receive instruction at times when they are not engagedin agricultural labour. They receive regular wages forwork done, from which they are expected to pay for their maintenanceand clothing. Premiums are given to those who dis-reignsone hundred and twenty dollars. For instruction in forestry only, a nativepays twenty-four dollars, and a stranger seventy-two dollars. For the threeyears instruction in the lower school, natives pay forty dollars.AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE OF WURTEMBERG. 597play great skill and industry. While in the house, the youngerpupils are under the charge of the elder ones, and all are underthe general superintendence of the overseer. The same superintendenceexists in the refectory and dormitories. It subservesthe double purpose of economy, and of training the elder pupilsin the management of men, which is one object of their education.The institution undertakes to find places for those pupilswho have given satisfaction while in the school, on their completingits courses.The agricultural course of the higher school may be accomplishedin one year, if the preliminary studies of the pupil havebeen directed with a view to his entering, but in general it requirestwo years. The same period of two years is requiredfor that of forestry. Each scholastic year has two sessions, theone from the first of November to Palm-sunday, and the otherfrom two weeks after Palm-sunday to the first of October.The intermediate periods are vacations.The branches of special theoretical instruction are as follows:First: Agriculture. General principles of farming and horticulture, includingthe culture of the vine. The breeding of cattle. Growing of wool.Raising of horses. Rearing of silk-worms. Arrangement and direction of farms.Estimation of the value of farms. Book-keeping.Second : Forestry. Encyclopedia of Forestry. Botany of forests. Cultureand superintendence of forests. Guard of forests. Hunting. Taxation. Uses offorests. Technology. Laws and regulations, accounts, and technical correspondencerelating to forests.Third : Accessary branches. Veterinary art. Agricultural technology, especiallythe manufacture of beet sugar, brewing, vinegar making, and distilling.The construction of roads and hydraulic works.Besides these special branches, the following general coursesare pursued:First: The Natural Sciences. Geology. Physiology of plants. Botany, asapplied to agriculture and forestry. Natural history of animals beneficial ornoxious to plants and trees. General chemistry, and its applications to agriculture.Physics and meteorology.Second: Mathematics. Theoretical and practical. Geometry. Elements oftrigonometry. Arithmetic. Elements of algebra.GENERAL Education. SUPERIOR PERIOD.The institution possesses the most ample means for the illustrationof these courses in its farm and collections. The farmis divided into arable land, about five hundred and one acres;meadow land, two hundred and forty-two acres; fields set apartfor experiments, thirty-three acres; woodland, thirteen acres;nursery, sixty-seven acres; plantation of hops, two acres; botanicalgarden, fourteen acres; ground for exercising the pupilsin ploughing, two acres; garden, one acre; the remainder,eighty-five acres. Total, nine hundred and sixty acres. Thearable land is cultivated according to five different rotations ofcrops, that the pupils may have specimens of the varieties ofsystem. The botanical garden, nursery, and experimental farm,are prominent parts of the establishment. There is a largestock of cattle of different kinds, foreign and domestic, and ofsheep, that the pupils may acquire practical knowledge of therelative advantages of different breeds, the mode of taking careof the stock generally, and of rearing them for different purposes.Horses are kept for a riding-school, as well as for thepurposes of the farm. The institution has a large collection ofagricultural implements in use in Nuremberg, and of modelsof the varieties of foreign and new implements. These aremade in a work-shop attached to the school, and afford practicein the manufacture to the pupils, as well as instruction by theiruse or inspection, with the explanations of the professors. Thesale of these implements and models also contributes to the supportof the establishment. There are two collections of seedsand grain — one as specimens for illustrating the lectures, theother in quantities for sale. The pupils learn the mode ofpreserving them, and useful seeds are distributed through thecountry. There is a collection of soils of all kinds for the lectureson terra-culture and the analysis of soils, with specimensof the means of amelioration used in different cases. The collectionsof natural history, though small, are interesting, from theprecise adaptation of the specimens to the objects of the school.They consist of birds, beasts, and insects, and of plants, woods,and rocks. The woods are arranged in the form of a library,;«■■IAGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE OF WURTEMBERG. 599the separate specimens having the forms of books given to them,and being covered in part with the bark. The name is inscribedupon the back. Cross and longitudinal sections are usually foundin the same book, forming the covers. Between the covers isa box containing the seeds and flowers of the tree, the parasites,&c., and a description. There is a small collection of physicalapparatus, a library, and a laboratory. The following farmingand technological establishments are connected with the school,and worked by the pupils, under the charge of the teachers:namely, a cider-press and appurtenances; a beet-sugar manufactory,a brewery, a distillery, and a vinegar manufactory.Though I saw better individual collections than these, the wholesuite stands unrivalled, as far as my examination extended.Examinations take place every year, which are obligatoryupon those forestry pupils who intend to enter the service ofthe government; strangers are not required to be examined.Persons wishing to learn the details of the institution, may bereceived as visitors for a period not exceeding a month, livingwith the pupils.Each pupil in the higher school has his own sleeping-room;or, at most, two room together. They bring their supplies ofclothing, &c. at entrance. The rooms are kept in order bythe servants, who receive a small compensation from the pupil.They take their dinner and supper in a common hall, and orderwhat they please for breakfast from the steward's assistant.*This institution has supported itself for several years, which isreadily to be understood from the scale of its farming operations.The success of the farm does not depend exclusively upon theproductive manual labour of the pupils. It is analogous to thesupport of a family on a large estate, the members of the familyaiding in the work, and contributing also in money to their ownsupport, but the working of the farm not depending entirelyupon their manual exertions.The dinner and supper cost four dollars a month, which is paid in advanceto the steward.600 GENERAL EDUCATION. SUPERIOR PERIOD.NAVAL SCHOOL OF AUSTRIA, AT VENICE.This institution is for youths intending to enter the naval serviceof the empire. They are received at about fourteen yearsof age, and may pass through the five classes composing theschool in as many years. They are then appointed in the navy,as vacancies occur. The school is superintended by a navalofficer, whose rank is that of captain of a frigate. The professorsand other officers are in general from the same service,though some of the former are citizens.The general course of instruction is as followers : — Religiousinstruction, mathematics, Italian, German, French and Englishlanguages, geography, history, writing, and drawing. Thespecial courses are — of maritime law, the law of quarantine,epistolary correspondence, the science of artillery, and navaltactics and construction. There are regular exercises in navalmanoeuvres, rigging, &c., and in infantry tactics, in land andhydrographical surveying, and in fencing. The course ofmathematics includes both pure and mixed mathematics; namely,arithmetic and algebra, geometry, plane and spherical trigonometry,the application of algebra to geometry, conicsections, the differential and integral calculus, hydrographicsurveying, projections, nautical astronomy, ship-building, mechanics,and physics. The following table shows the distributionof time among the different subjects of study in the fiveclasses, of which the fifth class is the highest :NAVAL SCHOOL AT VENICE.Distribution of time at the Naval School of Austria, at Venice.SUBJECTSOFINSTRUCTION.HOURS PER WEEK.Mathematics,Italian,German,French,English,Religious Instruction, - - .Geography,History, -Maritime and Quarantine Law,Epistolary Style,Artillery,Naval Tactics, &c., - . . -Drawing, .Writing,Infantry Drill,Practical Exercises,Hydrographical Surveying, &c,Totals, .16^15J16Jm33i34^33J30J32i73 iThe following is the order of the day during the summer forsecular days, exclusive of Thursday: — The pupils rise at six,A. M. An hour is allowed for police and mass ; half an hour forbreakfast. From half past seven to half past eleven they are in602 CONCLUDING REMARKS.school. There is then an intermission of half an hour. Dinnerat twelve, and recreation until one, P. M. Study from one totwo, P. M. School from two to five. Recreation from five tosix. Prayers from six to half past six. Study from half pastsix to nine, and recreation from nine to half past nine, and retire.On Thursday they rise at half past six, are engaged in police,mass, and breakfast, until eight. The regulations are read.Study and religious instruction occupy them from nine until halfpast eleven. Recreation until twelve. Dine, and have recreationuntil two. Are occupied with religious instruction andstudy until five. The other arrangements of the day are asabove stated. On Sundays and holidays the inspector visits therooms at eight, A. M. Mass and biblical explanations occupyuntil nine. There is then a visit of inspection from the director.Study from ten to eleven. Recreation until twelve. Dinnerand recreation.CONCLUDING REMARKS.I HAVE now completed the design of giving such an accountof the state of public institutions for education as may enablethe Trustees of the Girard College to examine, by the light ofexperience, the plan which it has been made my duty, at a futuretime, to present to them for that institution. In so doing,I have endeavoured to confine my remarks and suggestionswithin the limits which a strict induction from facts would warrant.Having, however, been obliged to make a selection fromthe materials accumulated during the tour made by the directionof the trustees, I am conscious that all the facts collected areby no means presented. Indeed, a very close selection hasbeen requisite to confine this document within any reasonablelimits. Again, I am aware that the character of a report doesnot permit that entire freedom of expression which, in manycases, is desirable; and hence my impressions of many schoolshere described have a vividness which the report on them byCONCLUDING REMARKS.no means faithfully represents. To supply these defects, aswell as errors of judgment in my selections, I have made anarrangement of all the documents collected in relation to theschools visited, by which any one can be immediately found,or the whole examined. The translations of documents fromforeign languages into English have been similarly arranged,the more important ones having been transcribed, to renderthem easily legible. My private journal relating to these sameinstitutions has, generally, in like manner, been transcribed andclassed with the other sources of information. The papers soarranged will be placed in the College library, and will affordthe trustees not only the means of appealing to experiment upondoubtful points, but of comparing hereafter our own institution,or others of our country, with kindred establishments abroad.In order to enable the Board to know exactly what are thedocuments collected which bear particularly upon our objects,I intend to present a list of them* in the Appendix to this Report.This will enable me at the same time to designate thenames of those gentlemen to whom I am indebted for the documents,and to thank them for this and other kind offices, bywhich I was constantly cheered on my way. In the Appendixwill be found, also, some useful references, which could notappropriately be embodied in the Report — such as generaltables of occupation and diet in different institutions; remarksof some eminent teachers upon the science which they havecontributed to advance; lists of books used in certain schools;and other miscellaneous matter connected with the Report.I proceed to accomplish, as briefly as possible, the remainingpart of my duty, namely, to give an account of the manner ofexecuting my instructions in regard to the purchase of books andapparatus. As directed, I confined my purchases of books, withfew exceptions, to works on education, or on kindred subjects, totext-books, to such as were in use with advantage as books forthe libraries of primary schools, to school-engravings, ordinary• This list is exclusive of documents relating to the education of the deaf anddumb, of the blind, of juvenile delinquents, and to miscellaneous matters.604 Concluding REMARKS.maps, and maps in relief. In these departments I purchasedworks in different languages, that translations might be madeof those which it might be deemed expedient to introduce intothe school, selecting according to such an examination as Icould give at the time, or by the judgment of those in whom Ihad confidence. I also procured the stock-catalogues of workspublished in different countries, within a few years, or of olderworks, and made arrangements to have those of the new workstransmitted to the institution. The Board are aware that valuablepresents of engravings, maps, and books, were made to theGirard College; among them the splendid work of model engravingsfor mechanics, presented by the Royal TechnicalCommission of Prussia, through the president, M. Beuth; themaps of the survey of India, presented by the surveyor-general ofIndia, Major Jervis; the maps and school manuals, presented bythe Board of Commissioners of National Education for Ireland;the collection of school books in use in the elementary schools ofHolland, presented by Director Prince, of Haarlem ; and thebooks relating to the arts, by M. De Moleon, of Paris. I havealso placed in the library the various works relating to educationand kindred subjects, which I received from their authors,considering that they were presented to me rather as the representativeof the Girard College than as an individual; and thatthey may thus be rendered more useful than if I had retained themwith my own books. The works thus brought together formanucleus for the educational department of our library, and tothe accomplishment of such an object my views were very properlylimited by the scholastic committee. They are contributionstowards a collection which will be necessary to aid thestudies of our pupils and teachers, and which is referred to inhis Will by our founder.In regard to apparatus and models, my purchases have consisted,first, of such as must be required in the lower departmentsof the College, and which were new, or could not be so readilyprocured at home. Second, of some articles of the best apparatus,for illustrations in mechanics and physics, from differentmakers, to serve as specimens of the quality of their work, andCONCLUDING REMARKS. 606of the grade of apparatus which seemed to me suitable for thecollections of the College. In connexion with these, I have anextensive series of printed and written catalogues of apparatus,with their prices, from different parts of Europe. The specimensthemselves will, I trust, incidentally, by being open to theinspection of our instrument-makers, promote the advancementof this branch of art. Third, specimens of a collection of modelsof machines, and of a technological collection, completecabinets of which will be essential in the higher departments ofthe institution.* In the case of those procured at Paris, theBoard are already aware that I had the advantage of the kindoffices of M. Aragon, as inspector, and their acknowledgmentshave been made to him for the service rendered. Fourth, suchinstruments, of the more delicate kind, as are difficult to procurewithout personal relations with their inventors, and those whomake them. All these classes of articles but the first are expensive,and hence my purchases have been necessarily limited inextent by the funds placed at my disposal. They are, however,merely intended as specimens, and as such, will, I trust, befound to answer their purpose. The difficulty of getting togethera complete collection of books and apparatus cannot betoo plainly insisted upon. The delays incident to it are great,and, though they may be lessened, cannot be avoided.The Board of Trustees will readily see, from the tenor of thisReport, that my examination has not enabled me to select anysingle institution which fulfils at once the requisites of the Willof our founder, and of the present state of education, and whichmight, therefore, serve as a model for the Girard College for Orphans.The plan to be presented to them, as far as it is derivedfrom these materials, must be made up of fragments, to be so modifiedas to adapt them to the peculiarities of the College, and toour political and social character and institutions. According• A quotation from the Will of Mr. Girard will serve to show that these ideasconform to its express directions. Among the subjects of instruction for carryingout which, he directs " books, philosophical and experimental instrumentsand apparatus" to be provided are, — " geography, navigation, surveying, practicalmathematics, astronomy, natural, chemical, and experimental philosophy."606 CONCLUDING REMARKS.to the Will of Mr. Girard, orphan boys are to be educated in hisCollege from the age of six years to fourteen, sixteen, and eveneighteen years of age. The materials of their instruction mustbe "things rather than words," and the degree is to be such** as the capacities of the several scholars may merit or warrant."The first provision, from the early age of admissionwhich it enjoins, enables us to train as well as to instruct ;the second indicates that the tendency of our training shouldbe towards practical life. The age of our pupils embracesthe period from elementary to superior instruction, and weareexpressly called upon to developed talent. Our Collegemust, therefore, combine the primary, secondary, and specialschools The means furnished by our munificent benefactorto execute his intentions are vast, and if the benefits thenceaccruing are not in proportion, the responsibility must restwith those to whom they have been entrusted. The trusteesof the College have appealed to the experience of Europeto furnish data necessarily wanting in a new country, and itremains for them to apply the experimental deductions thus obtainedfrom the old world with the vigour characteristic of thenew. If their spirit be proportionate to the work to be accomplished,there can be little doubt of the result. Our founder hasfurnished them the means of establishing a series of modelschools for moral, intellectual, and physical education, embracingthe period of life from early youth almost to manhood, theimportance of which to our city, and even to the country atlarge, can hardly be estimated.Respectfully submitted, byA. D. BACHE,President of the Girard Collegefor Orphans,Philadelphia, May 1, 1839,APPENDIXt.APPENDIXThe following Appendix contains the titles of the documents relating to educationin general, collected during a tour of two years through some of theprincipal countries of Europe, besides miscellaneous matter, which could not beappropriately embodied in the foregoing Report, but which, nevertheless, is ofinterest, as illustrating particular parts of it. The articles of the Appendix havebeen referred to by their numbers in the course of the Report, and they willnow be preceded by a statement of the pages of the Report, where the referencesare to be found.No. I.Referred to on pages 9, 14, and 603.The titles of the different documents relating to general education will befound in the following pages, classed in the order of the countries where theywere procured. Not to make this list too long, I have been obliged to confine itto documents relating to instruction in general, omitting those from the schoolsof the deaf and dumb, and the blind, and from houses of refuge for juvenile delinquents.Works on education, or on particular departments of it, or methods, are,also, in general, not included in it. The documents are arranged in the followingorder: — first, those of Great Britain, subdivided into England, Ireland, andScotland; next, those of France, then of Switzerland, of Belgium, Holland, Germany,and Italy. The German and Italian states and Swiss cantons are classedalphabetically, and the same is the case with the different places in' the variouscountries, the documents relating to which are sufficiently numerous to requireany formal classification. In the several divisions the articles are arranged accordingto the plan adopted in the Report, namely, the eleemosynary institutionsfirst, then the infant, primary, secondary, and superior schools; institutions foradult instruction are placed last. When the documents refer to education in acountry at large, they are usually placed first on the list.The chief part of these papers were presented to me by the gentlemen whosenames are attached to them, and I beg leave here to return to them, as well asto others who were so kind as to further the objects of my journey, my mostsincere thanks.I-w610 APPENDIX,England. '1. Abstracts of the answers and returns made pursuant to an address of theHouse of Commons, May 24th, 1833. Vol. I., Bedford, Lancaster; Vol. II.,Leicester. Suffolk; Vol. III., Surrey, Radnor. 1835.2. Report from the Select Committee on the State of Education, with theMinutes of Evidence and Index. August 7th, 1834.3. Report from the Select Committee on Education in England and Wales,together with the Minutes of Evidence, Appendix, and Index. August 3d, 1835,4. Report from the Select Committee on Education of the Poorer Classes inEngland and Wales, together with the Minutes of Evidence and Index. 13 July,1838.5. A bill intituled, " An Act for Promoting Education and Regulating Charities,presented by Lord Brougham and Vaux, 2d February, 1837.** (From W.Hold, Esq.)6. Prospectus of the Central Society of Education in London.BIRMINGHAM.1. A short account of the Blue-coat Charity School in Birmingham, from itsinstitution in 1724, to 1830, and list of subscribers, &c. (From the head Master.)2. Memorandum of the diet of the children of the Blue-coat School in Birmingham,MS. (From the same.)3. List of Text-books used in the Grammar School of King Edward VI. (Fr<Mnthe Rev. Dr. Jeune.)4. Proposed changes in the system of the school of King Edward VL, 1837.5. Prospectus of the Birmingham and Edgbaston Proprietary Day School, 1837.(From Mr. J. C. Barlow.)6. Rules and Regulations of the Birmingham and Edgbaston Proprietary DaySchool, established in 1837. (From the same.)7. Report and Resolutions passed at the first annual general meeting of theProprietors of the Birmingham and Edgbaston Proprietary School, in 1838.(From the same.)8. List of the Secretaries of Proprietary Schools in England, MS. (From thesame.)BRISTOL.1. Duties of the boys of Cotton's Hospital, in Bristol, 1838. (From the Master.)2. Prospectus of Bristol Cleve, 1838.CAMBRIDGE.1 . Collections of Examination Papers, &.c. (From Professor Peacock, ProfessorMiller, Mr. Thurtell, Mr. Stokes, and Mr. Mayer.)2. List of the principal Text-books used in the colleges at Cambridge, MS.CHESTER.1. Rules to be observed by parents whose sons are admitted day-scholars orgreen-caps, in the Blue-coat Hospital, in Chester. (From the Master.)2. The Annual Report of the Blue-coat Hospital, in Chester, for 1836. (Fromthe same.)DOCUMENTS PROM GREAT BRITAIN.enDURHAM.Education of Students in Civil Engineering and Mining in the University ofDurham, 1838. (From Professor J. F. W. Johnson,)LEEDS.Prospectus of Leeds Infant School Society, 1836.LIVERPOOL.1. The Annual Report of the Blue-coat Hospital, in Liverpool, for 1835, MS.Replies to Queries, MS. Rules of Entrance. Form of Indenture. Plan of Instruction.Forms for Teachers' Reports. Weekly Consumption of Provisions,&c. (From Mr. Samuel Dickens, assistant master, and James Spinal, Esq.,honorary treasurer.)2. A full report of the Speeches and Proceedings at a meeting for the Promotionof Scriptural Education in Liverpool, held July 13, 1836.3. Plan of Instruction at Mr. Charles Voelcker's school at St. Domingo-House,Everton, near Liverpool, 1837, MS.LONDON.1. A Description of the London Orphan Asylum for the reception and educationof Destitute Orphans, particularly those descended from respectable parents,instituted July 27, 1813, 1836. (From the Rev. Mr. Reed.)2. By-laws of the London Orphan Asylum. (From the same.)3. Plan of Education of the London Orphan Asylum in Clapton. (From thesame.)4. Report of the London Orphan Asylum, read at the general annual meeting,January 23, 1837. (From the same.)5. Gross expense and average number of Children of the London OrphanAsylum, from 1831 to 1836. (From the same.)6. Election List for 23d January, 1837, of the London Orphan Asylum. (Fromthe same.)7. Description of sundry works, intended to be done for the Managers of theLondon Orphan Asylum, in building, and completely finishing the London OrphanAsylum at Clapton. (From the same.)8. History of Christ's Hospital. By the Rev. W. Trollope.9. The Second Annual Report of the Home and Colonial Infant School Society,instituted 1836, with an account of the proceedings at the opening of theSociety's house, &c. (From J. S. Reynolds, Esq., Secretary.)10. Institution for the Effective Education of Youth, and also a plan of InfantEducation for Children of the Higher and Middle Classes in the neighbourhoodof Fulham, Middlesex, 1836.11. A Compendious Report of Proceedings and Operations in the CentralSchool of the British and Foreign School Society in London, 1836 and 1837.(From the Secretary, Mr. Dunn.)12. Report of the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor onthe Principles of the Established Church, &c. 1837. (Westminster ModelSchool.) (From the Secretary.)612 APPENDIX.13. A Concise Description of the Endowed GraiUffttir Schools of England andWales. London, 1818. By Nicholas Carlisle.14. History of the Merchant Tailors' School. By the Rev. H. B. Wilson.15. Exercises at the Public Exhibition of St. Paul's School, May, 1837. (FromPetty Vaughan, Esq.)16. Charter-house Examination of the Upper School, 1837. Approved booksto be used in the Boys' School. (From the Rev. Wm. Chapman.)17. Prospectus of the University of London, (London University College,) andthe University College School, 1837.18. Address to the Proprietors of the University of London, by J. M. Morgan,Esq., 1833. (From the author.)19. Sketch of the System of Education in practice at the Schools of ,and Castlewood, near Birmingham, 1833. (From Mr. Arthur Hill.)20. Blank Forms relating to Instruction and Discipline at Dr. Bier's School,combe Wood, near London. (From Dr. Bier.)21. Regulations of the New University of London on the Subject of Examinationsfor Degrees in Arts. (From Dr. Ferrol.)22. Prospectus of the Gresham Lectures. London, 1837. (From PettyVaughan, Esq.)MANCHESTER.1. Some account of the Blue-coat Hospital and Public Library in Manchester,founded by Humphrey Chatham, Esq., in the year 1651. (From Mr. Crossley,Governor.)2. Rules of the Blue-coat Hospital in Oldham, near Manchester. Petition foradmission, &c. (From Mr. Barrett, Master.)3. Report of a Committee of the Manchester Statistical Society, on the Stateof Education in the borough of Manchester, in 1834. (From W. Langton, Esq.)4. Report of a Committee of the Manchester Statistical Society, on the Stateof Education in the Borough of Bury, Lancashire, in 1835. (From the same.)5. Report of a Committee of the Manchester Statistical Society, on the Stateof Education in the Borough of Salford, in 1835. (From the same.)6. Report of a Committee of the Manchester Statistical Society, on the Stateof Education in the Borough of Liverpool, 1835-36.7. Forms of Queries and Replies, by the Manchester Statistical Society, intheir Inquiries into the State of Education. (From W. Langton, Esq.)8. Tenth Report of the Charlton upon Wedlock Central Infants' School Society,1836. (From Mr. Bailly, Teacher.)9. Report of the Committee of the Royal Lancastrian Free School, from 1831to 1835. Specimen of writing by a pupil. (From Mr. Perkins, Teacher.)10. Report of the Committee of the Manchester and Salford New JerusalemChurch Free Day Schools, established in 1827, for the years 1835 and 1836.(From Mr. Moss, Teacher.)11. Fourteenth Annual Report of the London New Jerusalem Church FreeSchool Society, together with the Proceedings at the Annual General Meeting,held at Kennington, 1836. (From the same.)fliDOCUMENTS FROM IRELAND.12. A Description of the System of Inquiry and Examination by the Scholarsthemselves, by means of Circulating Classes; submitted as an Improvement onthe Madras System of Education, by T. Stoat, of the Islington Parochial School.(From the same.)13. A Report of the State of the Sunday Schools in Manchester and Salford,belonging to the Established Church, for the year 1834.14. Rules Adopted for the Government of Bennett Street Sunday School.Manchester, 1832. (From Mr. Lawson.)15. The Annual Report of the Stockport Sunday School, 1836. (From Mr.S. E. Cotta.)16. Prospectus of the Courses of Education to be pursued in the Dover StreetSchool.17. Plan of a University for the Town of Manchester, by H. L. Jones, M. A.(From W. Langton, Esq.)18. Syllables of Courses of Lectures on Mechanical Philosophy, Astronomy,Optics, Acoustics, Electricity, &c., the Steam-engine, Chemistry, Zoology, Botany,Vegetable Physiology, Geology, &c., the Modern Languages, &c., deliveredat the Manchester Mechanics' Institute, 1836-37. (From Mr. S. E. Cotta.)NEWCASTLE.1. The Twenty-sixth Report of the Jubilee School, and of the Improved Schoolfor Girls, in New Castle-upon-Tyne, 1836. (From Sheriff Nichols.)2. An Outline of the System of Education pursued in Mr. Bruce's Academy,in New Castle. (From Mr. Bruce.)WORKSOP.Prospectus of Mr. Heldenmaier's School, on the principles of Pestalozzi, atWorksop, Nottingham.YORK.1. Rules of the Blue-coat Boys' and Grey-coat Girls' Charity Schools, in York,1829. (From the head Master.)2. Report of the Blue-coat Boys' and Grey-coat Girls' Charity School in York,established 1708, for the year 1836. (From the same.)IRELAND.1. Reports from the Select Committees on Foundation Schools and Educationin Ireland, together with the Minutes of Evidence appended, and Index, 1835to 1838.2. Report from the Select Committee of the House of Lords, on the New Planof Education in Ireland, &c. Parts I. and II. 1837.BELFAST.1. Report of the Committee appointed to prepare a Plan of Education andGovernment for the intended Academical Institution in Belfast, 1807. (FromProfessor Steely.)614 APPENDIX.2. A View of the System of Education in the Collegiate Department of the RoyalBelfast Academical Institution, 1 832. (From the same.)3. The Act of Incorporation and Bye-laws of the Belfast Academical Institution,1810. (From Professor Steely.)4. Prospectus of the Belfast Academical Institution. (From the Rev. Dr. Montgomery.)5. Statement of the Constitution of the Belfast Academy, with an account ofthe History and Present State of the System of Education pursued in that Seminary.Founded 1785. (From the Rev. Dr. Bryce.)6. Prospectus and List of Books used in the Classical Course of the AcademicalInstitution. Questions proposed in the Mathematical Class, &c. Catalogueof the Books in the Library of the Belfast Academy. (From the same.)7. Sketch of a Plan for a System of National Education for Ireland, by Dr.R. J. Bryce. 1828.8. Outline of a Course of Lectures on the Science of Education, delivered inthe London University, by the Rev. R. J. Bryce, LL. D. 1836.DUBLIN.1. Regulations for the Establishment and Government of the Royal HibernianMilitary School for the Orphans and Children of Soldiers. Revised in 1829.(From Major Rowland, Commandant.)2. Notes on the Hibernian Society for the Care of Soldiers' Children, (MS.)3. Abstract of Officers at tl e Hibernian School, (MS.)4. Printed forms relating to the School, viz: — Form of Petition for Admission,comprising also a Register of Life at School. Certificate of School Distinction.Return of work done. Morning Report. Weekly Report and Register. Reportof Sundries, &c., of School. Form of Bill of Expenses. Certificate before bindingthe boys to service. Form of Indenture made with the Governors of theHibernian Soldiers' Society, 1836. (From Major Rowland.)5. Reports of the Committee to the Annual Meetings of the Society for Promotingthe Education of the Poor of Irela .d, for the years 1828, 1832, 1833,1834, 1835, and 1836.6. Reports of the Commissioners of National Education in Ireland, for theyears 1834, 1835, and 1836. (From the Rev. Mr. Carlisle.)7. Memorial respecting the Charity Schools connected with the Scots Church,(From the same.)LONDONDERRY.1. A copy of the last Will and Testament of the late Mr. John Gwyn, of Londonderry.(From the Master of Gwyn's Charity.)2. Committee Lists, &c. (From the same.)3. Regulations for promoting Agricultural Instruction and Agricultural Employment,and for improving the condition of the People of Lough Ash, by J. P.Kennedy. 1835. (From Captain Kennedy.)4. Report of the Agricultural Seminary at Templemoyle, County of Londonderry.Established, 1827. (From Sir R. Ferguson.)5. Sketch of Templemoyle Farm.DOCUMENTS FROM SCOTLAND. 615SCOTLAND.1. Education Inquiry. Abstract of the Answers and Returns made pursuantto an Address of the House of Commons, in 1834. Scotland, 1837.2. Report from the Select Committee on the state of Education in Scotland,together with the proceedings of the Committee, and Appendix. 1838.3. Report of the Commissioners appointed for inquiring into the state of theUniversities and Colleges of Scotland. 1832.ABERDEEN.1. Report of the Public Schools of the City of Aberdeen, 1834. (From A.Dingwall, Esq.)2. Examination of a Pamphlet entitled, "Plan of Education in the MarischalCollege and University of Aberdeen, with the reasons of it, drawn up by order ofthe faculty, 1765. 1826. (From the same.)EDINBURGH. ^1. A Historical Account of the Orphan Hospital of Edinburgh, 1833. (FromJ. G. Wood, Esq.)2. Regulations for the Orphan Hospital, 1834. (From the same.)3. Letter from J. G. Wood, Esq., in relation to the signification of the wordOrphan, &c.4. Form of Recommendation for Admission to the Orphan Hospital.5. Last Will and Testament, and Codicil thereto, of George Heriot, and theOriginal Statutes of his Hospital, by Dr. Balcanqual, 1833. (From the Rev. HectorHolme, House-governor).6. An Act to explain and extend the Powers of the Governors of George Heriot'sHospital, 1836. (From Mr. Bayly, Secretary.)7. Regulations for the internal management of George Heriot's Hospital, 1833.(From the same.)8. Regulations enacted by the Governors of George Heriot's Hospital, upon the13th October, 1834, as to the superintendence to be exercised over the boys attheir leaving the institution and afterwards. (From the same.)9. Number of boys admitted into George Heriot's Hospital, from October,1830, to October, 1836, both inclusive. (From the same.)10. Tabular View of the Hours of Employment and Exercise in George Heriot'sHospital. (From the Rev. Mr. Holme.)11. Committees of Trustees of Heriot's Hospital, January, 1837. (From thesame.)12. Tenders for the furnishing of provisions to George Heriot's Hospital.Form of Advertisement for Supplies. (From the same.)13. The Statutes and Rules of George Watson's Hospital, 1740. (From theRev. Mr. Munro, House-governor.)14. Regulations for George Watson's Hospital, 1831. (From the same.)15. Copy of a Petition for Admission into George Watson's Hospital* (Fromthe same.)616 APPENDIX.16. List of Applicants for Admission into Gceorge.>yatson'a Hospital, March,1836. (From the same.)17. Course of Study and Text-books used at George Watson's Hospital, January,1837, (MS.) (From the same.) Notes and Replies to Queries in referenceto George Watson's Hospital, (MS.) (From the same.)18. Papers relating to John Watson's Institution for Destitute Children.1. Deed of Settlement. 2. Deed of Destination of the Funds. 3. Act of Parliament.4. Regulations for Management. 5. Regulations for Master andMatron, 1830. (From the Rev. Mr. Marshall.)19. Distribution of time in John Watson's Hospital, February, 1837. (MS.)(From the same.)20. A Course of Education for the Children of John Watson's Institution, proposedto the Directors by Mr. Charles Marshall. (MS.) (From the same.)21. Expenses of John Watson's Hospital, 1836.22. Abstract of the Treasurer's Accounts with John Watson's Institution, August1st, 1836.23. List of occupations of the parents, the pupils, and a statement whetherthe parents are dead or alive. (From the Rev. Mr. Marshall.)24. Regulations for the Management of Cauvin's Hospital, 1835. (From theProvost of Edinburgh.)25. Statutes of the Maiden Hospital, founded by the Company of Merchantsof Edinburgh and Mary Erskine, and Rules for the Government and Order of theHospital, 1819. (From Mr. Jameson.)26. Regulations for the Merchant Maiden Hospital, 1731. (From the same.)27. Remarks upon a System of Education for the Girard College, by JamesSimpson, Esq. (MS.)28. Third Report of the Edinburgh Infant School Society, 1838. (From Mr.Milne.)29. Hints for Lessons on Moral Training, Grammatical Exercises, &c., for InfantSchools, (MS.) (From the same.)30. Report of the General Assembly's Education Committee, for the years1833-34-35. (From John Gordon, Esq.)31. Eleventh Report of the Directors of the Circus-Place School, 1837. (Fromthe Rev. Dr. Reid.)32. Annual Report by the Directors of the Edinburgh Academy, for the years1835-36. (From Rector Williams.)33. List of Text-books used in the High School of Edinburgh, (MS.)34. Course of Studies of the Hill Street Association for Languages, Mathematics,&c. (From Mr. Cunningham.)35. Report on Mr. Cunningham's Institution for Languages, Mathematics, &.C.1835. (From the same.)36. Prospectus of the Edinburgh Southern Academy. (From Mr. Gun.)37. Prospectus of the Scottish Institution for the Education of Young Ladies.(From Dr. D. B. Reid.)38. Course of Studies, Distribution of Time, and List of Text-books, usedin the Scottish Institution for the Education of Young Ladies. (From the same.)DOCUMENTS PROM SCOTLAND. 61739. Report of the Scottish Institution for the Education of Young Ladies, 1838.(From the same.)40. General Observations on the Principle? of Education, for the use of Mechanics'Institutions, by Sir G. S. Mckenzie, ] 836.41. Reports of the Directors of the School of Arts, from 1824 to 1836. (FromDr. D. B. Reid.)GLASGOW.1. Abstract of the Rules and Regulations by which Hutcheson's Hospital isgoverned, 18)0. (From Mr. Hill.)2. State of the Cases of Applicants for admission into Hutcheson's, Baxter's,and Blair's Schools, 1830. (From Mr. Marly.)3. State of the Cases of Applicants for admission into Miller's Charity School,1 836. (From the same.)4. Form of Indenture of pupils bound out by the Trustees of Hutcheson's Hospital.(From the same.)5. Plan of Parochial Training Schools, Infant and Juvenile, November, 1836.(From Mr. D. Stow.)6. Letters from Parents of Infant Schools. (From the same.)7. Sketch of the Building of the Highlanders' Schools, Greenock. ^8. An outline of the Studies pursued in the High School of Glasgow, with afew Introductory Remarks, 1 835. (From Mr. Dorset.)9. Proceedings at the Annual Distribution of Prizes to the pupils attending theHigh School, 1836. (From the same.)10. Glasgow University Calendar. 1834.11. Regulations respecting the Examination for Degrees in Arts, in Medicine,and Surgery. (From the Provost of the University.)12. Subjects prescribed for Prize Essays at the University, 1836. (From thesame.)13. List of Text-books used in the University of Glasgow. (MS.)14. Outline of tl.e Plan of Instruction in the Class of Practical Astronomy, inthe University of Glasgow. (From Professor Nichols.)15. Reform of the University of Glasgow, considered with reference to thepublished Report of the Royal Commissioners of Visitation, appointed by SirRobert Peel, 1833.16. Observations by the Principal and Professors of Glasgow College, on theSchemes of Reform proposed for the University of Glasgow. 1837.17. Letter of Dr. John Lee, in reply to the foregoing.18. Outlines of the Lectures on Chemistry for the Mechanical Class of theAnderson's University. lb36-37. (From Professor Graham.)19. Syllables of L cures at the Glasgow Mechanics' Institution, on Mechanics,Natural Philosophy, Chemistry, Natural History and Physiology, History,Geography, &c. 1 837. (From Mr. Hugo Reid.)20. Annual Reports of the Glasgow Mechanics' Institution, for the yearal82&,1833-34-35-36. (From Mr. Leadbetter.)21. Prizes offered in the Glasgow Mechanics' Institution, session 1836-37.618 APPENDIX.22. Prospectus of Anderson Popular Institution for the Diffusion of UsefulKnowledge.ST. ANDREWS.List of Text-books used in the English Department of the Madras College,FRANCE.GENERAL.1. Code Universitaire ou Lois, statues et r^glemens de University royale deFrance, 1835. Code of the University, or Laws, Statutes, and Regulations of theRoyal University of France, 1835.2. Almanach de University Royale de France, 1836. Almanac of the RoyalUniversity of France, 1836.3. Bulletin Universitaire. Official Bulletin of the Council of Public Instruction.4. System de University de France, ou plan d'une education nationale, parM. Rendu, 1816. System of the University of France, or plan of a NationalEducation, by M. Rendu, 1816.PRIMARY INSTRUCTION.5. Rapport au roi par le ministre de Instruction publique sur Execution de Ila loi du 28 Juin, 1833, relative h Instruction primaire. 1834. Report made tothe King by the Minister of Public Instruction on the execution of the Law ofthe 28th of June, 1833, in reference to primary instruction. 1834.6. Rapport au roi sur la situation de Instruction primary par le ministre deInstruction publique en 1837. Report to the King on the state of Primary Instruction,made by the Minister of Public Instruction, in 1837.7. Annuaire de Instruction primary, pour 1832-33-34. Annual of primaireInstruction for 1832-33-34.8. Annuaire de I'lnstituteur Primary, pour 1838. Annual for Primary Teachers,in 1838.9. Bulletin de la Societe pour Instruction Elementary, 1837. Bulletin of theSociety of Elementary Instruction.10. Compte rendu des Travaux de la Societe encouragement pour InstructionElementary, 1837. Report of the Society for the Promotion of ElementaryInstruction, 1837.11. Journal General de Instruction Publique, 1838. General Journal ofPublic Instruction.12. Manuel General de Instruction Primary : Journal Officiel. GeneralManual of Primary Instruction, an Official Journal, 1838. |13. Manuel de I'Enseignement Simulate. Manual of Simultaneous Instructtion, 1837.14. Manuel de I'Enseignement Mutual, 1837. Manual of Mutual Instruction,1837.DOCUMENTS FROM TRANCE.15. Programme de la Societe pour la Propagation de la Method Mn^moniquePolonaise, 1837. Programme of the Society for the Propagation of the PolishMnemonic Method, 1837.16. Guide de la Method Wilhelm, 1838. Guide for the Method of Wilhelm,1838.1 7. Specimen of Writing from a Primary School at Paris.18. Sur instruction Primary en France. On Primary Instruction in France.19. Manuel dos Aspirants aux brevets de capacity pour I'enseignement elementary.Manual of Candidates for the diploma of Elementary Teacher, 1837.20. Programme des Questions pour Examen des aspirants pour I'enseigne-ment primary, 1837. Programme of Questions for the Examination of Teachersfor Primary Instruction, 1837.21. De la Congregation des Ordres de la Doctrine Chretienne. Account ofthe Rules, &c., of the Christian Brotherhood (for giving gratuitous instruction.)22. Programme des etudes et divers exercises aux quels doivent se livrerlea elves de Ecole normale k Dijon, 1837. Course of Study and Distributionof Time for the pupils of the Normal School at Dijon, 1837. (From the Director.)23. De la Construction des maisons ecole primary, par Bouillon, 1834.On the Construction of School-houses for Primary Instruction, by Bouillon,1834.24. Le Visiter des ecoles par un Inspecteur d' Academic, 1830. The Visitorof Schools, by an Inspector of the Academy, 1830.25. Expose des Motifs et Projet de loi sur I'lnstruction secondary presented,par M. Guizot, k la Chambre des Deputes, 1836. Motives for the Proposed Lawon Secondary Instruction. Presented by Mr. Guizot to the Chamber of Deputies.1836.26. Rapport fait au nom de la Commission charge examiner le Projet deloi sur instruction Secondary, par M. St. Marc Girardinin. Report from theSelect Committee on the Project of Law on Secondary Instruction, made by Mr.St Marc Girardinin, in the name of the Committee.27. Memoire Presente par la Societe des Methods d'Enseignement. Memorialpresented by the Society for Methods of Teaching.28. Arret du Conseil Royal de I'lnstruction Publique, 1837; regent lessatires sur lesquelles seront interposes les aspirants aux grades de bachelier bs-sciences,&c. Decree of the Council of Public Instruction, in 1837 ; fixingthe subjects for examination for the degrees of bachelor of mathematical andphysical sciences.29. Cours et conferences suivis dans I'I'Ecole Normale k Paris, en 1836. (MS.)Course of Study at the Normal School of Paris, 1836. (From M. Viguier.)30. Elements, rapports et programme de I'I'Ecole Normale k Paris. Regulations.Reports, and Programme of the Normal School at Paris.31. Manuel des Aspirants au Baccalaureat 6s-Lettres, 1836, Manual of Candidatesfor the degree of Bachelor of Letters.32. Manuel des Aspirants au Baccalaureat ^s-Sciences, 1837. Manual of Candidatesfor the degree of Bachelor of Sciences.620 APPENDIX.33. Programmes de Penseignement de I'Ecole'RoyaTe Poly technique pour I'an-nee, 1836-37. Course of Study of the Royal Polytechnic School, for the year1836-37. (From Mr. Dulong.)34. Annuaire de I'I'Ecole Royale Polytechnique, pour 1836 et 1837. Annual ofthe Royal Polytechnic School, for the years 1836-37.35. Ecole central des Arts et Manufactures, Paris, 1837. Description of theCentral School for Arts and Manufactures. (From Mr. Lavallee, director.)36. Programme de Ecole de Commerce et des Arts industries &, Charonnene,banlieue de Paris. Prospectus of the school for Commerce and Industry at Charon,near Paris. (From Mr. Pine Grandcharap, director.)SWITZERLAND.BERNE.1. Erkenntniss derWaisenhaus-direction ansehend eine anderwartige Enrichingdes bargerlichen Knaben und Matches Waisenhauses der Start Bern, 1799.Resolution of the Managers of the Orphan-house in reference to a new Organizationof it, 1799. (From the Director.)2. Gesetz tiber den Private Unterricht, 1835. Law on Private Instruction,1835. (From Mr. Schneider, Vice President of the Council of Public Instruction.)3. Instruction fair die Schul commissaries, 1833. Instruction for School Committees,1833. (From the same.)4. Loi sur les 6coles primaires publiques. 13 Mars, 1835. Law on PrimaryPublic Schools, March 13, 1835. (From the same.)5. Beschluss des grosser Rather in Besieging auf cas Einkommen desLetters, 1837. Resolutions of the Great Council in reference to the Salary ofTeachers. (From the same.)6. Bericht tlber die Versammlung des Veins fair Christopher Volksbildung,1833, &c. Report of the Meeting of the Society for Christian Education, 1833.(From the same.)7. Brighten tiber die Erziehungs-Anstalt fair arme Kinder auf Battwyl beiBurgdorf, 1836-37. Report on the Establishment for the Education of Poor Childrenat Battwyl, near Burgdorf, 1836-37. Instituted by the Society for ChristianEducation. (From the same.)8. Reglement fair die Normalanstalt zu Mttnchenbuchsee bei Bern, 1833. Regulationsfor the Normal School at Mttnchenbuchsee, near Berne, 1833, (Fromthe same.)9. Summarischer Bericht tiber die Normalanstalt in Mttnchenbuchsee, 1837.(From the same.)10. Stundenplan der Normalanstalt und der damit overburdened ModelSchule in Mttnchenbuchsee, 1837. Plan of Instruction of the Normal School,and the Model School connected with it, at Mttnchenbuchsee, 1837. (From thesame.)11. Neunzehnter Bericht der Hauptversaramlung der allgemeinen Schulmels-DOCUMENTS FROM SWITZERLAND. 621tercasse de Cantons Bern, 1837. Nineteenth Report of the State of the Teachers'Fund of the Canton of Berne, 1837. (From the same.)12. Bericht ilher die Leistungen und den Unterricht im Progymnasium undder damit overburdened Industrie und Elementarschule, 1836. Report on the Progressand Instruction in the Progymnasium, and in the Elementary and IndustrialSchools connected therewith, 1836. (From Director Riietschi.)13. Eat provision des lemons de Ecole industria, 1837. Provisional Arrangementof Studies at the Industrial School, 1837. (From Professor Gerber.)14. Bericht tiber die Leistungen der Real Schule warren den Jahren 1833-35.Report on the Progress of the Real School during the years 1833-35. (FromCounsellor Schneider.)15. Bericht tiber die Veranderungen in der Litterarschule, 1833. Report onthe Changes of the Grammar School, 1833. (From Mr. Ruetschi.)16. Bericht ilber die Leistungen und den Unterricht in der Litterarschule, in1833-34, und 1834-35. Report on the Progress and the Instruction in the GrammarSchool, in 1833-34, and 1834-35. (From the same.)17. Annalen des Hovered Gymnasiums, 1836 and 1837. Annals of the HigherGymnasium, 1836 and 1837. (From the same.)18. Ausfilhrliche Darstellung des Unterrichts Planes fair cas Cohere Gymnasium,1835. Full description of the Plan of Instruction in the Higher Gymnasium,1835. (From Counsellor Schneider.)19. Loi sur Establishment d'un Gymnase et d'une University a Berne, 1837.Law for the Establishment of a Gymnasium and a University at Berne, 1837.(From the same.)20. Regiment filr die Hochschule, 1835. Regulations for the University,1835. (From the same.)21. Verzeichniss der Vorlesungen welche an der Hochschule gehalten woodensind warren den jahren 1834 bis 1837. List of Lectures which have been deliveredin the University during the years 1834 to 1837. (From the same.)22. Verzeichness der Beholden, Professor und SchuUehrer, Studierendenund Schiller der Burnished Academic und Schulen, von 1834 bis 1837. Listof the Authorities, Professors, Teachers, Students, and Pupils in the Universityand Schools of Berne, from 1834 to 1 837. (From the same.)23. Dekret tiber den Besuch FranzOsischer Universities, 1834. Decree inrelation to Attendance at French Universities, 1834 (From the same.)HOFWYL.1. Lettre sur la Fete c6l6br6e a Hofwyl, le 23 Mai, 1807, par M. Gauteron.Letter on the Festival which was held at Hofwyl, the 23d of May, 1807. By Mr.Gauteron.2. Coup d'oeil sur Influence a emperor des etablissemens d'Hofwyl quant auperfectionnement de Industria et des moeurs, par M. Gauteron. On the Influencewhich may be expected from the Establishments at Hofwyl, in referenceto the promotion of Industry and Morals, by Mr. Gauteron. (From Mr. Felling3. Lettre sur les etablissemens de Mr. Fellenberg, et sp^cialement sur Ecole023 APPENDIX.des pauvres k Hofwyl, 1812, par M. Charles Picket. Letter on the establishmentsof Mr. Fellenberg, and especially on the Poor School at Hofwyl, 1812. By CharlesPicket.4. Rapport sur Institut education des pauvres k Hofwyl, redig6 par M. A,Render. Report on the Institution for the Education of the Poor at Hofwyl,by Mr. A. Render, 1815.5. Notice sur les etablissemens de Hofwyl, par M. V. E. B. Crud, 1816. Noteson the Establishments at Hofwyl, by Mr. V. E. B. Crud, 1816.6. Darstellung des religion Bildungsganges der wissenschafllichen Erzieh-ungsanstalten in Hofwyl, von Emanuel von Fellenberg, 1822. Exposition ofthe Religious Instruction given in the Boarding-schools at Hofwyl, by Emanuelvon Fellenberg, 1822. (From Mr. Fellenberg.)7. Lettre sur la colonic defendants indigents, table k Meykirch pres de Hofwyl,1830, par M. de Fellenberg. Letter on the Colony for Poor Children, establishedin Maykirch, near Hofwyl, by Mr. Von Fellenberg, 1839. (From the same.)8. Extracts of a Letter from Em. Fellenberg to Lady Noel Byron, stating theobjects of his Institutions at Hofwyl, near Berne. (Translated from the German.)(From the same.)9. Trois lettres sur Hofwyl k propos de la brochure de M. St. Marc Girardininsur Instruction intermediate. Three Letters on Hofwyl, written in consequenceof Mr. St. Marc Girardinin's pamphlet on Intermediate Instruction, 1835.10. Mittheilungsblatt fair die fronde der Schulverbesserung im Kan ton Berne,1832. Journal of the Friends of Improvement in the Schools. (From the same.)Fribourg.Uber die Bethatigung des Blesses in Schulen von Girard, 1836. On the Excitementof Industry in Schools, by Girard, 1836. (From Father Girard.)GENEVA.1. Rapport au Conseil Representation sur un projet de loi relatif Ji la Direction€t k I'I'Administration des etablissemens instruction Publique, par M. leSyndic Girod, 1833. Report to the Representative Council upon a proposedLaw, in reference to the administration of establishments for Public Instruction,by Syndic Girod, 1833. (From Professor Decandolle.)2. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur le projet de loi relates a, la directionet k I'I'Administration des etablissemens instruction Publique, fait au nom dela commission nomme pour Examiner, par M. le Prof. A. de la Rive, 1833.Report to the Representative Council on the Projected Law in reference to theAdministration of Establishments for Public Instruction, made by Professor de laRive, in the name of the committee appointed for that purpose, 1833. (Fromthe same.)3. Loi sur la Direction et I'I'Administration des etablissemens instructionPublique, 1834. Law Regulating the Administration of Establishments for PublicInstruction, 1834. (From the same.)4. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur le projet de loi relates aux coles,1835, par M. le Syndic Lulling. Report to the Representative Council upon theProjected Law in relation to Schools, 1835, by Syndic Lulling. (From the same.)DOCUMENTS FROM SWITZERLAND. 6235. Rdglement sur Inspection et la Surveillance des doles primaires, 1834,Regulations for the Inspection and Superintendence of Primary Schools, 1834.(From the same.)6. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur un Projet de Loi sur les eccles primaires,1835, par M. Macaire Prinsep. Report to the Representative Councilon a Projected Law on Primary Schools, 1835, by Mr. Macaire Prinsep. (Fromthe same.)7. Loi sur les coles primaires, 1835. Law on Primary Schools, 1835. (Fromthe same.)8. Arret sur I'Enseignement Religieux dans les 6coIes primaires, 1835. Decreein reference to Religious Instruction in Primary Schools, 1835. (Fromthe same.)9. Rapports du Comte de Ecole rural de Carra, pour 1 835 et 1836. Reportsof the Committee on the Rural School of Carra, for 1835 and 1836. (Fromthe Syndic Vernet-Pictet.)10. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur Organisation des Colleges de Gen6veet deCarouge, 1835, par M. le Syndic Girod. Report to the RepresentativeCouncil on the Organization of the Colleges at Geneva and Carouge, 1835, bySyndic Girod. (From Professor Decandolle.)11. Loi sur les Colleges de Geneve et de Carouge, 1835. Law Regulating theColleges of Geneva and Carouge, 1835. (From the same.)12. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur un Projet de Loi relates aux CollegiateGen6ve et de Carouge, 1836, par M. le Professeur Macaire Prinsep. Reportto the Representative Council on a Projected Law in reference to the Colleges atGeneva and Carouge, 1836, by Professor Macaire Prinsep. (From the same.)13. Arrdte sur I'Enseignement Religieux dans les Colleges de Geneve et deCarouge, 1836. Decree in reference to Religious Instruction in the Colleges ofGeneva and Carouge, 1836. (From the same.)14. Regiment sur les Colleges de Geneve et de Carouge, 1836. Regulationsfor the Colleges of Geneva and Carouge, 1836. (From the same.)15. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur le Projet de Loi relates S, Organisationde I'Academie, 1835, par M. Ancien Syndic Ratio. Report to the RepresentativeCouncil on the Projected Law in reference to the Organization of theAcademy, 1836, by ex-Syndic Ratio. (From the same.)16. Rapport au Conseil Representatif sur le Projet de Loi sur I'Academie,1835, par M. le Docteur Voucher. Report to the Representative Council on theProjected Law on the Academy, 1835, by Dr. Voucher. (From the same.)17. Loi et Rdglement sur I'Academie de Gen6ve, 1835. Law and Regulation*of the Academy of Geneva, 1835. (From the same.)18. Cours de I'I'Ecole Industries, 1837. Course of Study at the School ofArts. (From Mr. Provost Martin.)LAUSANNE.1. Lois sur instruction Publique, 1833-34. Laws on Public Instruction,1833-34. (From Professor Chavannes.)2, Circular addressed aux Commissions charges de Inspection des coles sur624 APPENDIX.les Objets dont les coles doivent être pursues. Circular addressed to the Committeesof Inspection in reference to the articles which ought to be found in theSchools. (From the same.)3. Circular sur 1' Administration descries adress^e aux Commissions Com-muscles inspection, 1834. Circular addressed to the Committees of Inspectionin reference to the Administration of the Schools, 1834. (From the same.)4. Instructions pour les Commissions charges de Inspection des coles,1835-36-37. Instruction to the Committees charged with the Inspection ofSchools, 1835-36-37. (From the same and the Secretary of the Council of PublicInstruction.)5. Loi du 24 Janvier, 1837, sur les doles publiques primaires. Law of the24tli of June, 1837, on Public Primary Schools. (From Professor Chavannes.)6. Instruction sur les objets necessaries pour Exposition des notions elementdes sciences naturelles dans les coles primaires, 1834. Direction in referenceto the objects required for giving elementary notions of Natural Sciences inthe Primary Schools, 1837. (From the same.)7. Rapport sur les eccles primaires du Canton de Vaud pour I'annee, 1836.Report on the Primary Schools of the Canton of Vaud, for 1836, (From thesame.)8. Questions addresses aux commissions charges de Inspection des eccles.Questions (blank forms) addressed to the Committees of Inspection of the Schools*(From the same.)9. Eagles de Ecole (pour les Eccles primaires.) Rules for the Primary Schools.(From the same.)10. De Instruction publique dans le canton de Vaud par Gindroz, 1837.On Public Instruction in the Canton of Vaud, by Gindroz, 1837.11. Memoire presente d Monseigneur I'ev^que de Lausanne et Gen6ve par levenerable clergy du Canton de Fribourg, au sujet de la deride loi sur les ecclesprimaires 1830. Memorial presented to the Bishop of Lausanne and Geneva,by the Clergy of the Canton of Fribourg, in reference to the last law on PrimarySchools, in 1834.12. Rapport fait par le Comte de I'I'Ecole Normale Provision. Report madeby the Committee of the Provisional Normal School, 1835. (From Prof. Chas13. R^glement pour I'I'Ecole Normale, du 23d Septembre, 1835. Regulationsfor the Normal School, September 23d, 1835. (From Rev. Director Gautier.)14. Notice sur I'I'Ecole Normale du Canton de Vaud, par son Directeur L. F. F.Gautier, Pasteur, extrait du Journal de la Societe d'Utilite Publique, 1835. Noticeof the Normal School of the Canton of Vaud, by the Rev. Director L. F. F.Gautier, extracted from the Journal of the Society of Public Utility, 1835. (Fromthe author.)15. Regiment de I'I'Ecole Normale pour les Institutions. Regulations of theNormal School for Female Teachers. (From the same.)16. Rdglement du 7 Aodt, 1835, pour les coles Moyens. Regulations for theMiddle or Industrial Schools, August 7th, 1835. (From Professor Chavannes.)DOCUMENTS FROM SWITZERLAND. 625LUCERNE.1. Gesetz tiber cas Erziehungs und OfFentliche Schulwesen, 1830. Law onEducation and Public Instruction, 1830. (From Mr. Rietschi, director of thenormal school.)2. Gesetz aber die Wiederholungs und Fortbildungsschulen, 1833. Law onthe Schools for Repetition, 1833. (From the same.)3. VoUziehungs Bcschluss tiber cas algerine Erziehungs Gesetz in Bereftdes Primer und Secunda Schulwesens, 1830. Law on General Education inreference to Primary and Secondary Instruction, 1830. (From the same.)4. Bcschluss die Entschadigung fair cas Local der Secunda Schulen required,1831. Law regulating the locality of secondary schools, 1831. (From thesame.)'5. Schulplan fUr die cohere Central Lehranstalt so wie fair die LateinischenSchulen im Kanton, 1830. Plan of Instruction for the higher central school, andfor all the Latin Schools in the Canton, 1830. (From the same.)6. Bcschluss die Disciplina Verordnungen fair die moliere Central Lehran-salt enthaltcnd, 1830. Regulations for the discipline at the higher Central school,1830. (From the same.)7. Disziplinarvcrordnung fair die here Centrallehranstalt, &c., 1833. Regulationsof the higher Central normal school, 1833. (From the same.)8. Bcschluss die Aufstellung einer Schuldirection bey der hovered enchanted, 1831. Law for the appointment of a school direction forthe higher Central school, 1831. (From the same.)9. Organisation der Schuldirection und Disciplinarverordnung fair die Cens1836. Organization of the school direction and regulations fordiscipline at the Central school, 1836. (From the same.)10. Verordnungen und Studcnplan fair die ZZOglingee des Lehrer Instituts desCantons Luzern. Regulations and course of study for the pupils of the normalschool of the canton of Lucerne. (From the same.)NEUFCHATEL.R^glemcns pour la Maison des Orphans de Neufchatel. Regulations for theOrphan-house at Neufchatel. (From Mr. Bore, director.)THURGOVIA.1. Allgemeiner Bericht tiber den Zustand des Thurgauischen Schulwesens in1833-34-35. General report on the state of public instruction inThurgovia, in1833-34-35. (From Mr. Wehrli.)2. Unterrichtsplan fair die Elementarschulen des Kanton Thurgau, 1837.Plan of instruction for the elementary schools of the Canton of Thurgovia, 1837.(From the same.)3. Lectionsplan fair die Normalschul in Kreuzlingen, 1837. Course of studyat the normal school in Kreuzlingen, 1837, (MS.) (From the same.)Verdun.Rapport sur Institut de M. Pestalozzi k Yverdun, 1810. Report on the Institutionof Mr. Pestalozzi, at Yverdun, 1810. (From Father Girard, in Freyburg.)&2B APPENDIX.ZURICH.1. Deficit tiber cas Waisenhaus in Zurich, 183G. Report on the Orphan-horaeat Zurich, 1837. (From Burgomaster Hess.)2. Gesetz tiber die Organisation des gesammten Unterrichtswesens im cantonZurich, 1832. Law on the Organization of the general plan of instruction inthe Canton of Zurich, 1832.3. Geschaflsordnung fair die Bezirksschulpflegen, 1833. Regulations for thecommittees of school districts, 1833, (From Burgomaster Hess.)4. Geschaflsordnung fair die Gemeindsschulpflegen, 1833. Regulations forthe committees of school communities, 1833. (From the same.)5. Verordnung fair Repair und Singschulen, 1835. Regulations relating toschools for singing and repetition, 1835. (From the same.)6. Verordnung bet ref fend die Letting von Schulgemeindsversammlungen,1836. Regulations relating to the meetings of school communities, 1836.(From the same.)7. Verordnung Tiber Gr&iung und Zucht in den Volksschuleii, 1836. Regulationsfor discipline in common schools, 1836. (From the same.)8. Beschluss betreflfend die Einfiirung der Permitted fair den Gesangunter-^right, 1833. Resolution for introducing the required means of instruction insinging into the schools, 1833. (From the same.)9. Der Erziehungsrath bet ref fend die Berichterstattung tiber die VolksscEulen,von 1834-5. The councillor of education prescribing the form of report on publicschools, for the years 1834-35. (From the same.)10. Gesetz tiber die Enriching von Musterschulen, 1834. Law on the establishmentof model schools, 1834. (From the same.)11. Gesetz bet ref fend die hovered Volksschulen, 1833. Law relating to theHigher common schools, 1833. (From the same.)-12. Reglement fair cas SchuUehrer Institut, 1832. Regulations for the*Teacher's Institute, 1832. (From the same.)13. Gesetz bet ref fend die Building einer Classe von Praparanden fur denSchuUehrerstand, 1834. Reglement von 1836. Law relating to the establishmentof a preparatory class for candidates for the profession of teacher, 1834.Regulations of 1836. (From the same.)14. Verordnung tiber die Ertheilung von Ruhegehalten an Volksschullehrer,1834. Regulations relative to pensions for teachers of common schools, 1834.(From the same.)15. Reglement fill die Schullehrerconferenzen, 1835. Regulations for the"meetings of teachers, 1835. (From the same)16. Reglement tiber die Priifungen der Volksschullehrer, 1835. Regulationsfor the examination of teachers for common schools, 1835. (From the same.)17. Reglement tiber die Priifungen der Sekundarlehrer, 1835. Regulationsfor the examination of teachers for secondary schools (higher primary), 1835.-(From the same.)18. Gesetz tiber cas SchuUehrerseminar, 1836. Law on the normal school,1836. (From the same.)DOCUMENTS FROM BELGIUM. 62719. Provisorisches Reglement ftlr die AufsichtsbehOrde des Schullehrer Seminars,1837. Provisory regulations for the superintending board for the normalschool, 1836. (From the same.)20. Stundenverzeichniss des Schullehrer Seminars, 1837. Course of study atthe normal school, 1837. (From the same.)21. Gesetze und Verordnungen fill die Hochschule in Zurich, 1832. Laws andregulations for the University of Ostrich, 1832. (From the same.)22.* Ansichten tiber den Zustand des Volksschulwesens im Kanton Zurichvon Scherr, 1831. Views on the state of public instruction in the Canton ofZurich, by Scherr, 1831.23. Entwurf lines Gesetzsvorschlages sur Organisation des Volksschulwe-sens im Kanton Ostrich, 1832. Sketch of a projected law on the organization ofpublic instruction in the Canton of Zurich, 1832.24. Cher BiWungsstufen, Lehrkurse, Klasseneintheilung in der Volksschulevon Scherr, 1833. On the plan of instruction, course of studies, and division ofclasses in common schools, by Scherr, 1833.25. Entwurf lines allgemeinen Unterrichtsplanes fair die Primarschulen desCantons Zurich, 1836. Sketch of a general plan of instruction for primaryschools in the Canton of Zurich, 1836. (From Burgomaster Hess.)BELGIUM.BRUSSELS.1. Projet de loi pour I'Enseignement publique en Belgique, 1832. Projectedlaw on Public Instruction in Belgium, 1832.2. Rdglement pour I'^cole primary module de Bruxelles, 1836. Regulationsfor the Primary Model School at Brussels, 1836. (From Mr. Ducpetiaux.)3. Distribution des Occupations de Ecole primary module. Distribution ofTime in the Primary Model School, 1838, (MS.) (From the same.)4. Reglement de la Societe pour Instruction primary et populaire. Regulationsof the Society for Primary Instruction, 1837. (From the same.)LIEGE.1. Collection de Rapports sur Instruction primary dans la Province de Namur,et en general sur D'etat de cette instruction dans les diverses provincesdu Royaume, de 1825 h. 1830. Collection of Reports on Primary Instruction inthe Province of Namur, and on the condition of Primary Instruction in general,in the different provinces of the kingdom, from 1825 to 1830. (From Mr. arnold.)2. Reglement de la Societe encouragement pour Instruction Elementarydans la Province de Liege, 1829. Regulations of the Society for PromotingElementary Instruction in the Province of Liege, 1829. (From Mr. DupesThese documents are placed last, because they are not official, but drawn upby an individual : they have, however, had great influence in giving a form topublic primary instruction ia Zurich.628 APPENDIX.3. Programme des Cours de I'I'Ecole des Arts et Manufactures et des Mines,1836-37. Programme of Lectures at the School of Arts and Manufactures andof Mines, 1836-37. (From the Rector of the University, M. Dupont.)4. Programme des Cours &, University de Ledge, en 1838. Programme ofLectures at the University of Liege, 1838. (From the same.)HOLLAND.AMSTERDAM.1. Notes sur la Maison des Orphans Bourgeois k Amsterdam, 1837. Noteson the Burgher Orphan-house at Amsterdam, 1837. (MS.) (From ProfessorDen Tex.)2. Het Wijze en Weldadige der School verordeningen door's lands hodgemarten vastgesteld, in het jar 1806. On the Utility of the Regulations for theSchools, as ordered by Government in 1806.3. Verhandeling over de volstrekt noodzakelijke kundigheden welke in deopenbare en armenr,cholen beholden medegedeeld te wooden, 1820. Treatiseon the Instruction which should be given in Public and Poor Schools, 1820.(From Professor DenTex.)4. Series Lectionum et Institution quae habentur a Professor's IllustriousAtheneei Amstelaedamensis, 1838. List of Lectures delivered by the Professorsof the Athenaeum in Amsterdam, in 1838. (From the same.)5. De la Colonie de Fredericksburg, par M. de Keverberg, 1821. On the Colonyof Fredericksburg, by Mr. de Keverberg, 1821.6. Huishoudelijke Bepalingen poor de vrije Colonies volens de songster der permanente kommissie der Maatschappij van Weldadigheid, 1822.Domestic Regulations for the Free Colonies, according to the last Resolutions ofthe Committee of the Society for Public Utility, 1822.7. Scrambling van Wetter en Verordeningen der Maatschappij van Weld.sighed, 1820. Collection of Laws and Regulations of the Society for PublicUtility, 1820.THE HAGUE.1. Namen van eenige Heeren, welke roger belford leben tot de Fondatievan de Vrouwe van Renswoude, feeling 's Gravenhage, (MS.) Names of someof the pupils educated upon the Renswoude Foundations at the Hague, (with theiroccupations.) (From the Master.)2. Arret du 27 Mar, 1830, contenant des Modifications aux Dispositions existencesau sujet de I'lnstruction. Proposed Decree of the 27th March, 1830,containing Modifications to the present Regulations in regard to Instruction.(From Inspector Wynbeek.)3. Tafelcn van Werkzaamheden in te Dag en Avoid-school, 1837. Courseof Study at the Day and Evening School, 1837.4. Method pour apprendre I'art d'ecrire suivant les quatre fondness, 1837.Method of learning to Write, according to the four Fundamental Rules, 1837.5. Erecting der Classes poor de Koninklijke Muzijk School, 1837. Divisionof classes in the Royal Music School, 1837. (From Mr, Simon.)JDOCUMENTS FROM AUSTRIA. 629Harlem.1. Versa opens den start der hodge, mid del bare en latere chosen in 1835,gedaan ann de Staten General ingevolge art 226 der grondwet. Report on theState of Higher, Middle, and Lower Schools in 1835, made to the States General.(From Inspector Wynbeek.)2. List von Boeken poor de lurschool in Harlem, 1837. List of Books usedin the Normal Seminary and its Elementary School at Haarlem, 1837. (FromDirector Prince.)ROTTERDAM.De instruction Primary en Rotterdam, par Victor Cousin, 1836. On PrimaryInstruction in Rotterdam, by M. Cousin, 1836. (From the Author.)UTRECHT.1. Eleven welke sedert, 1824, de Fundatie van Renswoude verlaten leben.Voormalige Eleven, v^^clke nog in leer syn, en verdienster leben. (MS.) Listof Pupils who have left the Renswoude Foundation since 1824, and of someformer Pupils of the Foundation. (From the Director.)2. Course of Study of the five classes of the Latin School. (MS.) (From Mr.Van Bolliuis.)3. Over de tegeawoordige inviting der Latijnsche School te Utrecht, doorJ. H. Van Bolus, 1837. On the present arrangement of the Latin School atUtrecht, by J. H. Van Bolus, 1837.AUSTRIA.Lint.Einladung sur OfTentlichen Prtifung in der Normal Hauptschule, 1838. Programmefor the Public Examination of the Model High School, 1838, (From DirectorPauspertl.)PRAGUE.1. Geschichte des Waiseninstituts sum Heiligen Johann. History of the Or-playhouseof St. John, 1785. (From Director Lamps.)2. Darstellung der Verwaltung und Rechnung des Waisenhauses sum HeiligenJohann, in 1834-35, und 1835-36. Report on the Administration and Expenditureof the Orphan-house of St. John, in 1834-35, and 1835-36. (From the same.)3. Tagesordnung, Schulplan und Verhaltungs Regeln fair die ZZOglingee desWaisenhauses sum Heiligen Johann. Distribution of Time, Plan of Instruction,and Regulations of Discipline in the Orphan-house of St. John, (MS.) (From thesame.)4. Kurze tJbersicht des Schulwesens in Overreach, 1838. Short View of PublicInstruction in Austria, 1838, (MS.) (From Mr. Parti.)5. Political Verfassung der Deutsche Schulen in den K. K. Deutsche Erb-Beaten, 1828. Plan of Organization of all the German Schools in Austria, 1828.(From the Rev. Mr. Schneider.)6. Easter Jahresbericht tiber die Kleinkinderbewahr Anstalt am Hradek, 1833.First Annual Report on the Infant School at Hradek, 1 833. (From Mr. Sparshil.)630 APPENDIX.7. Einladung sur Offentlichen Prttfung der Muster Hauptschule in 1792, 1798,und 1838. Programme for the Public Examination of the Model High Schoolin 1792, 1798, and 1838. (From the director.)8. Darstellung der technischen Lehranstalt und Realschule von Baron vonHenniger, 1835. Description of the Technical Institution and Real School, byBaron von Henniger, 1835. (From Baron Henniger von Berg.)9. Ordnung der Vorlesungen in der technischen Lehranstalt und Schulplanfair die Realschule, 1837. Courses of Lectures in the Technical Institution andPlan of Instruction in the Real School, 1837. (From the same.)10. Sammlung der Verordnungen und Vorschriflen tiber die Verfassung derGymnasien, 1812. Collection of Regulations for the Organization of the Gymnasia,1812. (From Professor Swoboda.)11. Personal Stand und Vorlesungen an der Universitat in 1837 ind 1838.List of Professors and Courses of Lectures at the University in 1837-38. (FromProfessor Lesser.)Salzburg.1. Einladung sur Offentlichen Prilfung in der Normal Hauptschule, 1838.Programme for the Public Examination of the Normal High School, 1838.(From Director Maier.)2^ Ordnung der Deutsche Schulen im Stadtbezirke Salzburg, 1837-38. Planof Instruction in the Elementary Schools of Salzburg, 1837-38. (From thesame.)VIENNA.!♦ Letter from Berlin relating to the Schools and the School-books of Austria.2. Notes on the Schools of Vienna, (MS.)3. Einladung sur OfFentlichen Prtlfung in der Normal Hauptschule bei St.Anna, 1838. Programme for the Public Examination of the Model HighSchool at St. Anna, 1835. (From Director Vol.)4. Specimens of Writing and Linear Drawing, from the Model High School.(From the same.)5. Skizzirter Entwtirf der Gymnasia Studies in Overreach. Sketch of a projectedcourse of Studies for the Gymnasia of Austria, 1838. (From Vice-directorWalsh.)6. Juvenis Caesarea Regii Gymnasia Academics Vienna e Morbus et Progressin Literal cens exeunt, 1837. List of the Pupils in the Imperial Gymnasiumat Vienna, in the order of merit, 1837. (From the same.)7. Statutenn der K. K. Theresianischen Ritterakademie, 1802. Statutenns forthe Academy for Noblemen, called the Theresianum, 1802. (From Vice-DirectorBroker.)8. Verfassung des Polytechnique Instituts, 1818. Organization of the Poly-technicalInstitute, 1836. (From Director Prechtl.)9. Vorlesungen am Polytechnique Institut in 1838. Courses of Lecturesat the Poly technical Institute in 1836. (From the same.)10. Bericht tiber die Verfassung der Ingenious Academic, 1837. Report onthe Organization of the Academy for Engineers, 1837. (From the director.)DOCUMENTS FROM BADEIf, BAVARIA, &C. 631BADEN.HEIDELBERG.1. Academical Gesetze fill die Universities Heidelberg ind Freiburg. Lawsand Regulations for the Universities of Heidelberg and Freyberg, 1825.2. Personalbestand und Verzeichniss der Vorlesungen an der UniversitatHeidelberg, in 1837-38. Professors and students, and list of courses of lecturesat the University of Heidelberg, in 1837-38.BAVARIA.BAYREUTH.Dr. Graser's Erzeihung's Plan, seine Ansichten und Ideen. Dr. GrasmereSystem of Instruction, his views and ideas. (MS.)MUNICH.1. Lehrbezirk sammtlicher Gegenstande der Elementarschulen. View of theExtent of the Subjects of Instruction in the Elementary Schools 1831.2. Uber den Zustand der Werktagsschulen und Verzeichniss der Preistertheil-ung in 1837. On the Condition of the Common Schools, and a list of the Distributionof Prizes in 1837.3. Verzeichniss der verordneten Schulbtlcher. Catalogue of PrescribedSchool-books, 1836.4. Vorschriflen die Building der Schullehrer bet ref fend, 1836. Regulations inRelation to the Education of Teachers, 1836.5. Jahresbericht des K. Gymnasiums in Miinchen, 1837. Annual Report ofthe Royal Gymnasium in Munich, 1837* (From Director Hocheder.)6. Verfassung des K. Erziehungs Instituts fair Studirende, 1831. Organizationof the Royal Boarding School preparatory to the University,. 1831. (FromDirector Gear.)7. Jahresbericht der Landwirthschafl und Gewerbeschule, 1837. Annual Reportof the Agricultural and Trades' School, 1837. (From Director Pauli.)8. Program m der K. Polytechnischenschule, 1833. Programme of the RoyalPoly technical School, 1833. (From the same.)9. Verzeichniss der Vorlesungen an der Universitat, in 1836. Courses of Studiesat the University in 1838.rNUREMBERG.Jahresberichte der Handel Gewerbeschule in Niirnberg, von 1834 bis 1837.Annual Reports of the Commercial and Trade School, from 1834 to 1837. (FloraDirector Monarch.)FREE TOWNS.BREMEN.1. Anordnung der Lehrstunden in der Vorschule, 1837-38. Plan of Instructionin the Preparatory School, 1837-38. (From Prof. Struck.)2. Verzeichniss der Lehrstunden in der Handelschule, 1837-38. Plan of Instructionin the Commercial School, 1837-38. (From the same.)632 APPENDIX.Frankfort ON MAINE.1. Tagesordnung, Lectionsplan und Speiseordnung im Waisenliause, 1838.Distribution of time, plan of instruction, and table of diet in the Orphan-house,1838. (From Mr. Chafed, head master.)2. Kurze Geschichte der Musterschule in den sects ersten Jahren Hires Testes1832. Short account of the Model School during the first six years of itsexistence. (From Director Barge.)3. Einladungschriflen sur OfFentlichen Prtlfung in der Musterschule, 1833-38.Programmes for the public examination at the Model School, 1833-38. (Fromthe same.)4. Stundenplan der Musterschule, 1837-38. Plan of Instruction in the ModelSchool, 1837-38. (From the same.)5. Verzeichniss der Lectionen im Gymnasium stir dasWinter-Halbjahr, 1 837-38.Plan of Instruction in the Gymnasium for the winter term, 1837-38.HAMBURGH.1. A short account of the former and present organization of the Orphan-house,(MS.) Reply to a circular letter, addressed by the secretary of the society forElementary Instruction of Paris, (MS.) (From Dr. KrOger.)2. Rede zu seiner fiinf und zwansigjahrigen Amts-Jubelfeier, von Dr. Roger,Katecheten am Waisenhause. Speech at the celebration of the twenty-fifthanniversary of his superintendence, by Dr. KrOger, catechist of the Orphan-house.With notes relating to the establishment. (From the same.)3. Instruction fur die Aufseherinnen der hiesigen Warteschulen. Regulationsfor the superintending females of the infant schools.4. Rede und Bericht des Schul-und Erziehungs-Wesens in Hamburgh, 1835.Report upon the schools of Hamburgh, 1835. (From Dr. KrOger.)5. Darstellung und Bcurtheilung der Erziehungs system von Dr. J. C. Kr6.ger. Account and criticism of systems of Education, by Dr. KrOger. (Fromthe same.)6. Prospectus der Handelschule. Prospectus of the Commercial High School.HANOVER.Verzeichniss der Vorlesungen an der Universitat Gottingen in 1838. Coursesof Lectures at the University of Gottingen in 1838.NASSAU.WISBADEN.1. Nachricht fiber die de Laspce'sche Erzichungsanstalt, 1833. Report onthe boarding-school of dc Laspee, 1833. (From Mr. Leyendeckcr.)2. Lehrplan und Bedingungen der aufnahme fair Schuyler des de Laspee'schenInstituts, 1834. Plan of instruction and conditions of admission into trio of de Laspee. (From the same.)3. Programm der Cffentlichen Prttfung in der dc Laspee'schen Erzicbungs-instant, 1835. Programme of the public examination at dc Laspee's boarding-school,1835. (From the same.)DOCUMENTS PROM PRUSSIA. 6334. Vorschlag lines allgemeinen Erziehungshauses fur talentvolle arme KnagProject of a boarding-school for intelligent poor boys. (From CouncillorAlbrecht.)5. Die Versuchsanlagen des landwirthschafllichen Veins an die Herzogl.Nassauische Ackerbauschule in Wisbaden. Description of the agriculturalschool at Wisbaden and the trial plantations of the agricultural society. (Fromthe same.)PRUSSIA.1. Sammlung dcr auf den OfFentlichen Unterricht in Preussen such beziehen-den Gesetze und Verordnungen, 1826. Collection of laws and regulations relatingto public instruction in Prussia, 1826.2. Das Volks Schulwescn in Preussen, 1834. On public instruction in Prussia;a collection of laws in reference to elementary instruction, 1834.3. Regulations from the ministry on public instruction in regard to the Gymnasiumsin Prussia, 1837, (MS.) (Through the Hon. H. Wheaton.)ANNABURG.1. Der Unterrichtsplan fill cas Annaburger Militaire Knaben Institut wic esvon Octbr., 1834, an zu befallen list. Plan of Instruction for the Soldier'sSchool at Annaburg, as it will be carried into execution in October, 1834. (FromDr. Harnisch.)2. Tagesordnung der ZZOglingee, Misconstruction flor den Premier und Schul-inspector,till die sieben Classenlchrer und flor den Werkmeister. Distributionof Time for the Pupils, Regulations relating to the duties of the Clergyman andSchool Inspector, to the seven teachers of the different classes, and to the workmaster.(From the same.)3. Entwilrf zu den vierteljahrlichen und Jahresberichten. Sketch of Quarterlyand Yearly Reports. (From the same.)BERLIN.1. Die Wadzeck Anstalt in Berlin. Jahresberichte im Jahre, 1834-35.Statutenn der Wadzeck Anstalt, 1834. Description of the Wadzeck Institution forInfants. Yearly Reports for 1834 and 1835. Statutes of the Institution, 1834.(From the Inspector of the House.)2. Secular Fever cs Schindlcrschen Waisenhauscs, 1830. Secular Festival ofChandler's Orphan-house, 1830. (From Rev. Mr. Kloden.)3. Relation de I'I'Ecole de Charity k Berlin, en 1836. Account of the CharitySchool in Berlin, in 1836. (From the Steward of the French Orphan-house.)4. Grundsatze each welch die hiesigen Erwerbschulen eingerichtet sind,1833. Principles according to which the Schools of Industry have been established,1833. (From Mr. Neufind.)5. Studenplan der Elementarschulen, Nrn. 5, 7, und 8, in 1837. Plan of instructionin the Elementary Schools, Nos. 5, 7, and 8, in 1837, (MS.) Withspecimens of writing. (From Messrs. PfeifFer, Chants, Vogel, and Gilbert,teachers.)634 APPENDIX.6. Studenplan und Lehrbtlcher in der Dorotheenschnle. Course of study andtext-books used in the Dorothea School, in 1837, (MS.) Specimens of writing.(From Director Minnow.)7. Nachricht ilber die Einrichtung des Seminars fair Stadtschulen zu Berlin,1836. Description of the Normal School in Berlin for training teachers for theCity Schools, 1836. (From Dr. Diesterweg.)8. Zweck und Einrichtung der KOniglichen Seminarschule in Berlin, 1836.Purpose and general plan of the Royal Seminary School in Berlin, 1836. (Fromthe same.)9. Stundenplan und Lehrgegenstande am Friedrich Wilhelm Gymnasium,1837. Course of study and subjects of instruction at the Frederick WilliamGymnasium, in 1837, (MS.) (From Director Spilled.)10. Lectionsplan fair cas Schullehrer Seminar in Berlin, 1837. Course of studyat the Normal School in Berlin, 1837. (From the same.)11. Zweck, Einrichtung, und Lehrplan des Colnischen Real Gymnasium.Verzeichniss der Lehrbticher. Nachrichten tiber cas Gymnasium, 1829-30-32-33-37. Purpose, plan, and course of study at the Cologne Real Gymnasium, 1829-30-32-33-37. (From Director August.)12. tiber Zweck und Lehrgegenstande des Gewerbeschule, 1825, On the purposeand the subjects of Instruction in the Trades' School, 1825 (From DirectorKlOden.)13. Nachricht an cas Publique tiber den Zweck und die Einrichtungen derGewerbeschule. Address to the Public on the Purpose and Plan of the Trades'School, 1830. (From the same.)14. An die Eltern derjenigen Schiller welche die stadtische Gewerbeschule beechen,1830. Address to the Parents of Pupils who frequent the Trades' School,.1830. (From the same.)15. Programm sur Priifung der ZZOglingee der Gewerbeschule, 1830-32-33-37.Prospectuses of the Examination of Pupils of the Trade School, 1830-32-33-37,(From the same.)16. Uber die Forbidding der Gewerbtriebenden asser der Schule. On theContinuation of Instruction of Adult Artisans, 1827. (From the same.)17. Verzeichniss des Personals und des Studirenden auf der Koniglichen FriedrichWilhelm Universitat in 1837. List of Officers and Students at the RoyalUniversity in 1837.18. Verzeichniss der Vorlesungen welche auf der Universitat in 1837, gehal-ten warden. List of Lectures which are to be delivered at the University in1837,19. Zweck und Gegenstande des Unterrichts in dem Koniglichen Genere Institut.Purpose and Subjects of Instruction in the Royal Institute for Artsand Manufactures. (From Councillor Beuth.)20. Lectionsplan und Textbiicher in dcm K(5niglichen Genere Institut.Course of Study and Text-books used in the Royal Institute for Arts and Manufactures.(From the same.)21. Nachricht tiber die Eiselenschen Anstalten fill allgemcino Leibes undFechtabungen, 1831. Description of Eiselen's Institution for Gymnastics andFencing, 1831. (From Mr. Eisclen.)IDOCUMENTS FROM PRUSSIA. 635BUNZLAU.1. Das Waisenhaus zu Bunzlau in Schlesien in seiner Geschichte von derStifling bis sura Jahrc, 1814, dargestellt. History of the Orphan-house atBunzlau since its origin up to 1814. (From Inspector Kruger.)2. Nachricht aber cas Seminar und die Konigliche Waisen und Schulanstalt zuBunzlau. Notes on the Normal School, and the Royal Orphan-house and Schoolat Bunzlau, from the year 1830 to 1834. (From the same.)3. Geschichte der KOnigl. Waisen und Schulanstalt und des Seminars zuBunzlau nest purser Darstellung der jetzigen Einrichtung der jansen Anstalt,1837. History of the Royal Orphan-house, and the Normal and Burgher Schoolconnected with it, besides a short description of the present organization of thewhole institution, 1837. (From the same.)ERFURT.Hausordnung und Stundenplan des KonigL SchuUehrer Seminars in Erfurt,1832. Order of the House, Distribution of Time, and Course of Study in theNormal School at Erfurt, 1832.IIALLE.1. Besclweibung des Hallischen Waisenhauses und der ilbrigen damit overburdenedFranciscan Stiflungen, 1799. Description of the Orphan-house atHalle, and of all the other Foundations, by France, connected with it, 1799.2. Verzeichniss aller Anstalten unter dem Namen Francesco Stiftungen undAnzahl von Lchrern und Schiller, 1837. List of all the Institutions under thename of France's Foundations, and number of Teachers and Pupils, 1837. (MS.)(From Dr. Niemeyer, Director.)3. Stundenplan, Tagesordnung, TextbiQcher und jahrliche Ausgaben desWaisenhauses, 1 837. Course of Study, Distribution of Time, list of Text-books,and Yearly Expenses of the Orphan-house, 1837. (From the same.)4. Bclehrung fair diejenigen welche die Aufnahme von Vaterlosen in dieWaisenanstalt der Frankeschen Stiflungen nachsuchen, 1836. Instruction forthose who request the admission of Fatherless Children into the Orphan-houseof France's Foundations, 1836. (From the same.)5. Ordnungen und Gesetze fur die ZZOglingee der Waisenanstalt. Laws andRegulations for the Pupils of the Orphan-house. (From Dr. Leibmann.)6. Programm der OfFentlichen Priifung der Biirgerschule in den FranceStiflungen, 1836. Programme of the Public Examination of the BurgherSchool belonging to France's Foundations, 1836. (From Inspector Troth.)7. Nachricht Tiber die cohere Realschule welche den ten Mai, 1835, imWaisenhause zu Halle erOfFnet warden soli. Notice relating to the opening ofa higher Real School in the Orphan-house at Halle, the 4th of May, 1835. (FromDr. Niemeyer.)8. Purser Bericht von dem Einrichtung und den Rotten in der mit der LatinsSchule, und der hOhern Realschule overburdened Erziehungsanstalt imWaisenhause zu Halle. Short Description of the Organization and the Expensesof the Boarding-house connected with the Latin School and the higher RealSchool in the Orphan house at Halle, 1837. (From the same.)636 APPENDIX.9. Programm sur OfFentlichen Prtlfung im der Lateinischen Hauplschule zuHalle, 1837. Programm of the Public Examination of the Latin School (Gymnasium)belonging to France's Foundations, 1837. (From Dr. Schmidt.)10. Ordnungen und Gesetze fur die Scholar des KOniglichen Padagogiums.Laws and Regulations for the Pupils of the Royal Pedagogue, (belonging toFrance's Foundations.) (From Dr. Niemeyer.)11. Ubersicht dor Win terlectioncn im Koniglichen Padagogium, 1 837-38. Tableof the Course of Lectures during the Winter Term in the Royal Pedagogue,1837-38. (From the same.)12. Schulgesetze fur cas Kdnigliche Padagogium. Laws for the Royal Padagogium.(From the same.)13. Bericht ilber cas KOnigliche Padagogium zu Halle, 1837. Report on theRoyal Pedagogue ad Halle, 1837. (From Dr. Niemeyer.)14. Index Scholarum in University Helens per hiemem, 1837-38, habenda-rum.Courses of Lectures to be delivered during the Winter Term of 1837-38.15. Gedanken liber die jessie Gymnasia Verfassung ira KOnigreich Preussen,von Dr. H. A. Niemeyer, 1838. Thoughts in Relation to the Present Organizationof the Prussian Gymnasia, 1836, by Dr. H. A. Niemeyer. (Fromthe author.)16. tiber die Nothwendigkeit einer Reform im Gymnasia Unterricht, von Dr.M. Schmidt. On the Necessity of a Reform in the Studies of the Gymnasia, byDr. M. Schmidt. (From the author.)M(EKS.Stundenplan und Textbiicher des Seminars zu MOrs, 1837. Course of Studyand List of Text-books used in the Normal School at Moors, 1832. (From Mr.Zahn, Director.)Porta.1. Die Landesschule Pforta ihrer gegenwartigen und ehemaligen Verfassungeach dargestellt von Schmidt, 1814. Description of the School Pforta in its formerand present organization, by Schmidt, 1814.2. Bekanntmachung fill Eltern und Vormiinder die ire Kinder der Pforta tlbergeben woollen, 1832. Notice given to Parents and Guardianswho wish to send their Children to School at Pforta, 1832. (From DirectorKirchner.)3. Jahresbericht tiber die KOnigl. Landesschule Pforta, 1 837. Yearly Reporton the Royal School at Pforta, 1837. (From the same.)POTSDAM.1. Geschichte des KOniglichen Potsdamschen Militar-Waisenhauses vonseiner Entstehung bis 1824. History of the Royal Military Orphan-house inPotsdam, from its origin to 1 824. (From the War Department.)2. Hausordnung des KOniglichen grosser Militar-Waisenhauses in Potsdam,1838. Internal Regulations of the Royal Military Orphan-house at Potsdam.(From the same.)3. Kurze Darstellung der Organisation der Hohern Bttrgerschule in Potsdam,DOCUMENTS From SAXONY. 6371835. Short Description of the Organization of the Higher Burgher School inPotsdam, 1835. (From Rector Offer.)4. Programm sur Offentlichen Prtifung im Militar-Waisenhaus in 1819-22*Programme of the Public Examination in the Military Orphan-house in 1819-22. (From the Rev. Mr. Mergus.)5. Die Civil Waisen Versorgungs Anstalt zu Potsdam, 1836. Description ofthe Institution for Orphans of Civil Officers in Potsdam, 1836. (From CouncillorVon Dark.)6. Die "Waisen Versorgungs Anstalt fair die Proving Brandenburg zu KleinGlienicke bei Potsdam, 1833-35. Exemplary von Handschriflen. Statutes of theInstitution for Orphans in the Province of Brandenburg at Klein Glienicke,near Potsdam, 1833-35. Specimens of hand writing, &c. (From the same.)7. Programm der Offentlichen Prttfung in der Hohern Burgerschule, 1 836-37.Programme of the Public Examination in the Higher Burgher School, in 1836and 1837. (From Rector Offer.)8. Nachricht von der Einrichtung des Schullehrer Seminars zu Potsdam, 1835.On the Organization of the Normal School at Potsdam, 1835. (From DirectorHientsch.)WEISSENFELS.1. Description of the Normal School at Weissenfels, 1838, (MS.) (FromDr. Harnisch, Director.)2. List of Text-books used at the Normal School, (MS.) (From the same.)3. For Eltern welche ire Sonne fair den Schulstand vorbereiten lassen woollen,1837. Address to Parents who wish to have their Sons prepared for Admissioninto the Normal School, 1837. (From the same.)4. Das Weissenfelser SchuUehrer-Seminar und seine Htilfsanstalten, vondem Director Dr. W. Harnisch, 1837. The Seminary for Teachers at Weisen.felt, and the institutions connected with it, 1838, by Dr. W. Harnisch. (Fromthe same.)SAXONY.1. Elementary Volksschulgesetz fUr Sachsen, 1835. Law for Elementary Instructionin Saxony, 1835.2. Die Obliegenheiten und Geschafle der Sachsichen Volks Schullehrer. Dutiesof Elementary Teachers in Saxony. (From Inspector Lohrmann.)DRESDEN.1. Geschichte und Verfassung des Dresden Schulwesens, 1836. History andOrganization of Public Instruction in Dresden, 1836. (From Mr. Vorwerk.)2. Ubersicht aller Offentlichen Schulen in Sachsen, 1833. List of all the PublicSchools in Saxony, 1833. (From Inspector Lohrmann.)3. Bericht tiber den Padagogischen Herein zu Dresden, 1836. Report of thePedagogical Society at Dresden, 1838. (From the Society.)4. Die Pflichten der Schulgemeinden in Sachsen. Duties of the School Communesin Saxony.638 APPENDIX.5. Die Schule und cas Schullehrer Seminar zu Friedrichstadt Dresden, von1785 bis 1835. The Normal School and Elementary Schools connected with itin Dresden, from 1785 to 1835.6. Starts Handbuch fur Sachsen, 1837. State Manual for Saxony, 1837.(From Inspector Lohrmann.)7. Stundenplan fur die Katholische Gymnasialanstalt und Hauptschule.Plan of Instruction in the Roman Catholic Gymnasium and High School. (FromFather Dietrich.)8. Nachrichten tiber die Erziehungs Anstalt von Dr. Blochmann, 1837. Reportson the Bloclimann Gymnasium. (From Dr. Peters.)9. Organisationsplan und Gesetze fair Schiller der Technischen Bildungs instant,1835. Organization and Laws for Pupils of the Technical Institution, 1835.(From Inspector Lohrmann.)10. Programm sui OfFentlichen Prtifung in der Technischen Bildungs Anstalt.Programme for the Public Examination at the Technical Institution, 1836 and1837. (From the same.)11. Lehrplan der Technischen Bildungs Anstalt, 1837. Plan of Instruction atthe Technical Institution, 1837. (From the same.)12. Gesetze fur Schiller der Technischen Bildungs Anstalt zu Dresden, 1835.Laws for the Pupils of the Technical Institution at Dresden, 1835. (From thesame.)13. Regulativ und Stundenplan fair die K. S. Mihtair Bildungs Anstalt, 1838.Regulations and Plan of Instruction at the Royal Military Academy, 1838.(From Captain Oriel.)FREYBERG.1. Jahrbuch fUr den Berg und Huttenmann, fur 1831-37-38. Annual for Miners,1831-37-38, containing Reports of the School of Mines.2. Regulativ far die K. S. Berg Academic zu Freyberg, 1831. Regulations forthe Royal Academy for Miners at Freyberg, 1838, (MS.) (From Professor Reich.)3. Inscriptionsschein und Verhaltungs Regelu fair die Beneficial bey derK. S. Berg Academic zu Freyberg. Form of Inscription and Regulations for theFree Pupils of the Royal Academy for miners at Freyberg. (From the same.)LEIPSIC1. Beschreibung der Rathsfreischule in Leipzig. Description of the FreeSchool, called Rathsfreisclmle, in Leipsic. (From Director Dole.)2. Este Nachricht tiber die beabsichtigte Organisation des Btirgcr Schulwe-sens in Leipzig. Exposition of a projected Organization of Instruction for theMiddle franks of Leipsic, 1833.3. Schulerbestand und Schulbticher der Larger schule, 1838. Number of Pupilsand List of Text-books of the Burgher School, 1838, (MS.) (From DirectorVogel.)4. Regulativ far die Schule der Polytechnique Gcsellschafl. Regulationsfor the School established by the Polytechnic Society. (From the same.)5. Regulativ und Lehrplan des Offentlichen Handel Lehranstalt. Regulationsand Plan of Instruction at the Public Commercial School.DOCUMENTS FROM WEIMAR AND WURTEMBERG. 639MEISSEN.Jahresbericht tiber die K. Landesschule zu Meissen, 1837. Annual Reportof the Royal Gymnasium at Meissen. (From Consul Divines.)Stripped.Tagesordung,StundenpIan, und Speisezettelfttr die Erziehungs Anstaltverwaise-ter Soldan Kinder in Struppen bei Dresden, 1838. Distribution of Time, Planof Instruction, and Table of Diet at the School for Soldiers' Orphans in Struppennear Dresden, 1838. (From the Minister of War of Saxony.)WEIMAR.JENA.Gesetze fill die Studirenden der Universitat Jena, 1831. Laws and Regulationsfor the Students at the University of Jena, 1831.WEIMAR.1. Jahresbericht tiber den Zustand und die Leistungen des Grossherzogl.Waisen Instituts von den Jahren, 1829-33-37. Annual Report on the State andProgress of the Orphan Institution, during the years 1829-33-37. (From Dr.Kohler.)2. Form lines Lamentations Contracts abgeschlossen bei der Direction desWaisen Instituts. Form of Contract between the Direction of the Orphan Institutionat Weimar and a Foster-master. (From the same.)3. Programm sur Offentlichen Prilfung in der Biirgerschule, stir 1833-34-37.Programme for the Public Examination at the Burgher School, for 1833-34-37.(From Director Schweitzer.)4. Stundenverzeichniss des Seminars und der Biirgerschule, 1838. Exemplaryvon handschriflen. Plan of Instruction of the Normal School and Burgher School, ,1838. Specimens of hand writing. (From the same.)WURTEMBERG.Gesetz betrelFend die Volks Schulen in Wittenberg, 1837. Law in relationto Common Schools in Nuremberg, 1837.ESSLINGEN.Statutenn und Lehrgegenstande des K. Schullehrer Seminars in Esslingen, 1831.Statutes and Plan of Instruction of the R, Normal School at Esslingen, 1831,.(From Director Dense.)HOHENHEIM.1. Ubersicht tiber die K. Lehranstalt stir Land und Forstwirthschafl zu Hohen-hei, 1834. Description of the Royal Institution for Agriculture and Forestryat Hohenheim, 1834. (From Mr. Oppel.)2. Nachricht fOr diejenigen welche die K. Lehranstalt zu Hohenheim beechenwomen. Address to those who intend to become Pupils of the Institutionat Hohenheim. (From the same.)640 APPENDIX.3. Vcrzeichniss der Candidate zu Hohenheim von 1818 bis 1836. List of Pupilsat Hohenheim from the year 1818 till 1836. (From the same.)Stephen.1. Die Grinding und Erdffnung der Erziehungsanstalt in Stetten, 1831. Descriptionof the establishment of a Boarding-school at Stetten, 1831.2. Bedingungen der aufnahme von ZOglingen in die Erziehungsanstalt zuStetten. Conditions for admission of Pupils into the Boarding-school at Stetten.3. Berichte tiber die Erziehungsanstalt in Stetten, 1832 und 1838. Reportsof Boarding-school at Stetten, for the years 1832 and 1838.Stuttgart.1. Nachrichten von dem K. Waisenhause in den Jahren, 1832 bis 1836. Reportson the Orphan-house, from the year 1832 to 1836. (From Director Toller.)2. Vcrzeichniss der Unterrichtsstunden des Oberon Gymnasium, 1837. Plan ofInstruction of the Higher Gymnasium, 1837. (From Professor Reinbeck.)ITALY.BOLOGNA.1. Regolaraento sue Scuole pie. Regulations for the Elementary Schools,called Pious Schools. (From Professor Gerard.)2. Raccolta d'Istruzioni sugli Studio, Collection of Regulations in relation toInstruction, 1833. (From the same.)3. Regolamento degli Studio da observers in Roma, e in tutti lo Stato Ecclesiastic,1825. Regulations in relation to Instruction to be observed in Rome, andthroughout the States of the Church, 1825. (From the same.)FLORENCE.1. Short Account of the Orphan-house, (MS.) (From Mr. Ambrose, Consulof the United States.)2. Catalogus Scholarum Parum. Catalogue of Pious Schools, and Plan of Instructionin them, 1830. (From the same.)3. Plan of Instruction at the Scuole Pie at Florence. (From Pater George.)4. Statuti e Metodo d'Istruzione per I'Accademia delle Belle Arti'di Firenze,1813. Statutes and Method of Instruction at the Academy of Fine Arts, 1813.MILAN.1. Spes degli Asili di Carts, per I'Infanzia in Milanoo, 1838. Expenses of theInfant Schools in Milan, 1838. (From the Marquis Beccaria.)2. Discipline da observers per le sale di Custodia dei Fancifully Minorii deglianni 6. Regulations for Infant Schools. (From Mr. Radaelli.)3. Guida pei Fondatori e Director delle Scuole Infantili di CaritJu Guidefor Founders and Directors of Infant Schools, 1836. (From the same.)4. Inferno alia Fontaine ed alio Stato actual degli Asili di Critic per Pln-fannia in Milanoo. On the Foundation and Present Condition of Infant Schoolsin Man, 1837.DOCUMENTS FROM ITALY. 6415. Manual di Education ed Ammaestramento pelle Scuole Infantili, 1 833.Manual for the Education and Government in Infant Schools, 1833. (From thesame.)6. Intrusion pei Maestri e per le Maestro delle Scuole Elementari Minorii.Regulations for the Male and Female Teachers of the Lower ElementarySchools. (From the same.)7. Regolamento ed Istruzione per le Scuole Elementari. Laws and Regulationsfor the Elementary Schools. (From the same.)8. Statistics della Istruzione Elementary nelle Province! Austrian Italian.Statistics of the Elementary Instruction in the Italian Provinces of Austria.(From the Department of Public Instruction.)9. Invite al Publico Same nelly Scuole Maggiore, machine e feminine diMilanoo, e della tutti la Provincia di Lombards, indicate gli Individue impiegatibella Scuole e lord Incumbent, le Materia d'Insegnamento, ore Destinate a di esse e Numero delle Alunne nelly diverse Class, 1836-37-38. Programmeof the Public Examination of the Higher and Lower Male and FemaleElementary Schools in Milan, and in the whole Province of Lombardy, giving alist of all the Teachers, the Subjects of Instruction, the Time devoted to eachSubject, and the number of Pupils in the different Classes, 1836-37-38. (FromMr. Cherubini.)10. Notice sur Histoire de I'lnstruction Publique en Lombards. HistoricalNotice of Public Instruction in Lombardy, (MS.) (From the same.)11. Per gli Esami degli Scholar amraaestrati secondo il Metodo Normalebella Chest di Brera, 1789. Programme of the Public Examination of the Pupilsof the Model School of the Brera, 1789. (From Mr. Cherubini, Director ofthe High School at Milan.)12. Istruzione pei Maestri di Diego nelly Scuole Elementari Maggiore.Regulations for the Drawing Masters in the Higher Elementary Schools. (FromMr. Radaelli.)13. Regolamento per Institute Elementary e Ginnasiale Privilcgiato nellyContract di Brera. Regulations for the Elementary and Latin School in BreraStreet, 1838.14. Regolamento per la Scuola Elementary di Boselli. Regulations for Mr.Boselli's Elementary School.15. Norse per la Institution della Scuola Ginnasiale Privata di Boselli. Regulationsand Course of Studies of the Private Latin School of Mr. Boselli.16. Information del Ginnasio Convict, Calculi Taeggi. Regulations for theConvent, called Calculi Taeggi, 1830.17. Convict di Education Feminine di Moran. Prospectus of Miss Mo-rand'sConvent for Female Education.18. Casa di Civile Education per le Fancifully di Bellotti. Mr. Bellotti's for Girls.19. Stabilemento d'Istruzione Elementary, Ginnasiale e di Commerce di Lam-martini,1836. Prospectus of Lamartine's Elementary, Latin, and CommercialSchool.642 Appendix.NAPLES.1. Specimen of Writing from the Orphan-house of the Alberto dei Poreri.2. Kalendarium Regii Archigymnasii Neapolitan, 1838. Almanac of the RoyalUniversity at Naples, 1838. (From the President of the University.)3. Progetto di Riforrae pel regolamento della Public Istruzione, 1838. ProjectedReform in the Regulations for Public Instruction, 1838. (From the same.)PADUA.Prospect degli studs della University di Padova, 1838. Courses of Lecturesat the University of Padua in 1838.PISA.Catalogus Academies Pisans Professor, 1837. List of the Professors ofthe University of Pisa, 1837. (From Professor Barzelotti.)ROME.1. Kalendarium Collegii Romani Societatis Jesu, 1838. Almanac of the RomanCollege of the Jesuits, for 1836.2. Index Factotum Tradendarum in Romano Societatis Jesu Collegii, 1829.Course of Studies at the Roman College, 1829.3. Catalogus Universitatis Studious Romance, 1808. List of the Courses ofLectures at the University of Rome in 1838.TURIN.1. Raccolta dei Soprano Provvedimenti che region gli Studio fuori dell'Uni-version Collection of Regulations in relation to Public Instruction, independentof the University, 1834.2. Condotta delle Scuole Christian, 1834. Organization of the Schools underthe Superintendence of the Christian Brethren, 1834.3. Calendars et Libri ad Sum Scholarum Provincialium, 1835. Almanacand list of Text-Books for the Provincial Schools, 1835. (From Mr. Sober,Secretary of the University.)4. Elenchus Clarissimorum Professor Regii Archigymnasii Taurinensis etrerum quae docebunt, 1837-38. List of Professors and Courses of Studies at theRoyal University, 1837-38. (From the same.)5. Regolamento per le University, di Torino e di Geneva, 1822. Regulationsfor the Universities of Turin and Genoa, 1822. (From the same.)6. Regii Letter patent vietande di rears senza permesso in pause ester adintraprendervi od a continually gli studio, 1832. Royal Order, prohibiting to studyat foreign Universities without special permission, 1832. (From the same.)7. Manifest del Magistrate della Reform supra Study, 1822 et 1834. Regulationsmade by the Board of Reform in relation to Instruction, 1822 to 1834.(From the same.)8. Calendar io Scholastic della University, 1837-38. Almanac of the RoyalUniversity, 1837-38. (From the same.)9. Stato Numcrico degli Students inscritti sul registry della rasscgna nullaDOCUMENTS FROM ITALY. 643R. University, 1837-38. Number of Students at the Royal University in 1837-38. (From the same.)10. Tariffs dcgli Emoluments per li Grade Academics e di varia altri dritti.Tariff of Expenses for the Academical Degrees, and other Expenses. (Fromthe same.)11. Matriculation and other Certificates of the University. (From the same.)VENICE.1. Oraria della Casa degli Orfani, 1838. Distribution of Time at the Orphan-house,1838. (From Baron Pascatori.)2. Regolamento Disciplinale-Economico per Constitute degli Esposti di Venezia,1836. Regulations of the Foundling Hospital of Venice, 1836. (From thesame.)3. Regolamento per le Scuole Infantili di Carta in Venezia. Regulations forthe Infant Schools in Venice. (From the same.)4. Numero delle Scuole Maggiore et Minorii bella Villa di Venezia, 1838.Number of Higher and Lower Elementary Schools in Venice, 1838. (From thesame.)5. Tabella Generale indicate le Occupation degli AUievi della Scuola Navale,1835-36. General List of the Occupations of the Pupils of the Naval School,1835-36. (From Director Boarding.)No. II.EXTRACT FROM THE HISTORY OF THE ORPHAN HOSPITAL OFEDINBURGH.Referred to on page 12 of the Report,In regard to the original principle and inherent tendency of such an institution.« » »It is neither to be denied nor disguised, that, among the multitude of charitableestablishments which exist in this country, there may be some, which, originatingin a very sincere but short-sighted philanthropy, do actually not conduce tothe real and permanent interests of society ; by which, especially in certain instances,some of the very evils may be multiplied which they were instituted toremedy, and of which the strong description that has been given may be but tootrue — 'that they are little better than a tax upon industry for the support ofidleness.'"With such institutions, however, an establishment like the Orphan Hospital isneither to be confounded nor compared ; provided always, that the original objectbe steadily kept in view, and that it be fenced and protected by the most rigidattention to the nature of every claim which is made upon its funds. The circumstancesof misfortune and distress, which it professes to meet, are such asare involuntary, inevitable, and irremediable by other means. This statement nodoubt assumes that the persons admitted to the benefits of the institution arethose who, by any of the sudden and overwhelming visitations of Providence towhich mankind are liable, have in early life been deprived of their parents, and644 APPENDIX.precipitated into a state of entire helplessness and destitution, without a relationthat possesses the means, or an individual on whom the obligation lies of becomingtheir guardians and protectors, and of supplying them the place of parents,and for whose support and education no other provision of any kind whatever exists,or can be called into operation. And this is the real and only class for whomthe Orphan Hospital is designed. Whilst no man in possession of his senses willvoluntarily make his children orphans — while every sane man, on the contrary,will strive to ward off that event by which they would become so, it is evidentthat there exists in nature itself a certain safeguard against the extension of theevils for which such an institution is intended to provide a remedy, and againstthe spontaneous establishment of a claim to a participation in its benefits. Asin the case of life insurance, where a posthumous advantage is secured by an annualpayment, a man, from the mere love of life, and the principle of self-preservation,would wish to make the worst pecuniary bargain that is possible ; so, ingeneral, will every human being struggle to keep his children, by the interval ofas great a distance as he can, from coming within the range of the benefits of anorphan hospital."No. III.REGULATIONS OF HERIOT'S HOSPITAL.Referred to on Page 19 0/ the Report.Regulations enacted by the governors of George Heriot's Hospital, upon the13th day of October, 1834, as to the superintendence to be exercised over theboys at their leaving the institution and afterwards.1. That a list be made up and submitted to the governors in the months ofApril and October, annually, (the periods of the election of new boys,) of thoseboys that are to leave the house in the June and December following, with a reportfrom the house-governor applicable to each boy, of the progress in educationhe may have made, of his dispositions, and stating whether any and what particulartalent the boy may have shown.2. That the parents or other relations of the boys that are to leave the housein June and December, shall be required to state to the treasurer, for the informationand approval of the governors, at least one month before these respectiveperiods, what profession or trade each proposes that the boy they are connectedwith shall follow — who is the master they propose to bind him to — the termswith the master — and, in particular, whether the master is willing to maintain theboy in his family ; and no boy shall be bound apprentice, or receive any apparenttime fee, unless the governors shall previously approve of the trade or profession,the terms, and master proposed.3. Should the master not undertake the charge and maintenance of the boy inhis family, then the parents or other relations of each boy shall farther statewith whom and by whom he is to remain and be maintained during his apprenticeship;also for the information and approval of the governors.4. That annually, and before receiving payment of the apprentice fee, the mastersof the boys shall be required to give answers to the queries of which a copyheriot's hospital. \. 645is hereto annexed. First, for the information of the governors, as to the diligenceand conduct of the boy under his charge for the previous year; and if notin family with him, then the person with whom each boy stays shall, in likemanner, be called upon to give answers to queries. Second, as to the boy's conduct;and the boys themselves shall also annually be seen and examined uponthe points or queries. Third, also hereto annexed; and it shall be made a conditionin every indenture, that the master on the one hand, in the event of theboy's desertion, or being guilty of any flagrant act, and the boy on the other, inthe event of his being turned away by his master, shall, within eight days, intimatethe same to the treasurer of the hospital, otherwise each respectively shallforfeit all further allowance from the hospital.5. That a record shall be kept, by the treasurer, of the boys so bound apprentices,and with whom, and undcrf- whose care each boy is to be during his apprenticeship,in which the preceding reports, or answers to queries, and anyother facts, or circumstances which, during the course of the apprenticeship,may occur, relating either to the master or the boy, shall be engrossed; andwhich record shall, once a year at least, be laid before the governors, and at alltimes be open for their inspection.6. That the allowance of £5 for clothes, made by the governors to the boys atthe end of their apprenticeship, or any other allowance which the governors maythink proper to grant, shall be given or withheld, as the governors shall thinkproper, upon an examination of the record as above, and shall not be paid, as atpresent, upon the discharge of the indenture at its termination, by the master.7. That the indenture to be entered into under the approval of the governors,shall contain the precise terms which may have been agreed upon; and in placeof taking the master bound, as at present, to maintain the boy, where he shallnot agree to do so, then the person who is to have charge of him shall, either inthe indenture, or by a separate letter of obligation, undertake to the governorsthe proper discharge of that duty.No. IV.QUERIES BY THE GOVERNORS OF HERIOT'S HOSPITAL.Referred to on page 19 of the Reports and in the foregoing articles of the Appendix.FIRST.Queries to be answered yearly by the masters of boys educated in GeorgeHeriot's Hospital, during their apprenticeships:1. Is A. B., who went from George Heriot's Hospital to be your apprentice,still in your service; and, during the past year, has he ever deserted or beenabsent from your employment; and, if he has, when, for how long, and for whatcause?2. How many hours is he engaged in your employment, and how are his remaininghours, to the best of your knowledge, generally spent?3. Does he apply himself diligently to his business, and is he civil, faithful.APPENDIX.and obedient; and has he made such progress in his business as was fairly to beexpected of him ?4. Does he uniformly speak the truth, and are his associates proper companions?5. When you have occasion to send him out in the way of business, does hereturn without unnecessary loss of time ?6. If he resides in your family, does he submit to the order of your family,keep good hours, and regularly attend public worship, and in what church, andin other respects conduct himself properly ?7. Is he cleanly in his person, orderly in his habits, and is his behaviour ingeneral quiet and discreet, and such as you approve?SECOND.Queries to be annually answered by the persons with whom the boys reside,during the period of their apprenticeships:1 . Has A. B., who was educated in George Heriot's Hospital, been a boarderwith you, and for how long?2. Does he submit to the order of your family, and keep good hours; and howdoes he spend the hours he is not engaged in his business?3. Is he cleanly in his person, and orderly in his habits?4. Does he uniformly speak the truth, and are his associates proper companions?5. Does he regularly attend public worship, and in what church, and in otherrespects conduct himself properly, and in such a manner as you approve?THIRD.Queries to be annually put to the boys during their apprenticeships:1. How many hours are you engaged in your business daily, and how do yougenerally spend the remaining hours?2. What books have you read during the past year, and in particular, are youin the habit of reading a portion of the Scriptures daily ?3. What church do you attend, and have you been regular in your attendance?4. Have you prosecuted the studies you attended to in the hospital, and haveyou found any of these particularly useful to you in the business of life?5. With whom have you resided since leaving the hospital, and have youfound yourself comfortable with him?6. What has been the state of your health?No. V.COURSES OF INSTRUCTION AND TEXT-BOOKS.Referred to on page 42 of the Report.A Course of Education for the Children of John Watson's Institution, Edinburgh,proposed to the Directors by Mr. Charles Marshall, head-master.Sixth Year of Age. Alphabet, Lennie's Ladder. Seventh Year of Age.Readings Lennie's Ladder, Sessional Reading Book. Writings on slates. Arith-heriot's hospital. 647emetics Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division Tables. Eighth Year.Readings Sessional School Book, New Testament. Writing, on slates. ArithmeticGround Rules. Geography, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. NinthYear. Reading, New Testament, First Collection, Thomson's Catechism.Writing, in copy-books. Arithmetic, Four Compound Rules and Reduction.Geography, Great Britain and Ireland. History, Modern. Tenth Year. Reading,First Collection, Bible, Shorter Catechism. Writing, in copy-books. Arithmetic,Simple and Compound Proportion. Geography, Norway, Sweden, andRussia. History, Scotland. Drawing, on slates. Eleventh Year. Reading,Bible, Second Collection, Proof Catechism, Grammar. Writing, in copy-books.Arithmetic, Vulgar and Decimal Fractions. Geography, Prussia, Denmark, andGermany. History, England. Drawing, Sketching with black lead. GeneralKnowledge, Science of Sounds. Latin, Latin Rudiments and Delectus. TwelfthYear. Reading, Bible, M'CuUoch's Collection, Proof Catechism, Grammar,English Composition. Writing, in Account-books. Arithmetic, Practice andInterest. Geography, France, Austria, Turkey in Europe, and Palestine. History,Ireland. Drawing, in water colours. General Knowledge, Mechanics, Optics,Zoology. Mathematics, Mensuration of Surfaces. Latin, Rudiments, Delectus,Cornelius Nepos, Turner's Exercises. Thirteenth Year. Reading, Bible,M'CuUoch's Collection, Proof Catechism, Scripture, Biography, Grammar, EnglishComposition. Writing, in Account-book and Ornamental Writing. Arithmetic,Involution, Evolution, Exchange, Algebra. Geography, Italy, Switzerland,Spain, Portugal. History, France. Draining, chalk and water colours. GeneralKnowledge, Chemistry, Pneumatics, Hydrostatics. Mathematics, Geometry,Mensuration of Solids, Heights, and Distances. Latin, Rudiments, Turner's exercises,CcBsar, Ovid. Greek, Rudiments. Fourteenth Year. Reading, Bible,M'CuUoch's Collection, Proof Catechism, Scripture Biography, Grammar, EnglishComposition. Writing, Ornamental Writing and Book-keeping. Algebra.Geography, Ancient. History, Ancient. Drawing, Maps, Landscapes, Figures.General Knowledge, Chemistry, Geology, Meteorology. Mathematics, PracticalLand Surveying. Latin, Rudiments, Mair's Introduction, Ovid, Virgil, Livy.Greek, Rudiments, New Testament.APPENDIX.iWP.OCJ-C^<■>-,Qo0)nd-5GctfC-n9^Clt-irjrj■xia.x:O^o•5^^C4-10)b§^afly=!'■♦3^C3cdDT-lH^^asQ)f~!7^S3^ c^:;flmSirtf^^5^»-i jC.ssH• rHnH•si§H<^D•J2crtJSwCflQrtS>-C3u^mw0)Q&i:J.ss•l^^oj, 1«o(£>iO(£>» 1r-^i^r-i^ 1'-I^^^^ 1l^H1— 1 f— 1 t-(^ 1•^-"-'-'^ 11— tr-l .— 1 >-H^ 1^r-l rH i-«+-f•[^^oj, 1c=,^«W«*t^ 1eot^ooi^coW"mox 1Tf-sit ■«*^ 1(7? C^ (M^"c^^<M<^^-»-•FloXnwgWW-OW^^C.^•F^oj,>— 1 1— 1r-l r-! f-HwHMHOIHlMHOIr*!f•FPJ.HClHC^r^J,p-l r-< r-lHCCiTj-KlvWlTt-ecttoarMSW-^«|Ti-nltMWeci^«W«W•F^oxT-CTHM"*"!1— 1 rH r-4Ewl^cci^coi^«W«|TJ-«WE^"•'""^"'^eoKTMlTj-eslTj-■5:•F10J,10 >o »o 10 >o>o >OiO^l-H rH r-1 tFH 1— 1r-lT-HrHHI— 1 1— 1 1— < 1— 1 1— IrH I— 1 r-l^fH pH ^H I— I -HrH I— ( I— 1HI— < 1— I nH I— I retrH r-l 1—1gI— 1 I— 1 I— 1 I— 1 r-lrH rH rH1^•FIOJL1^HOtHM HMr-^B^IrHlMrHlMrHlHr^n^HWHOI rtClr^iHnrH r- I— 1s.HidrHlin HCIHIMHS'IT-4NHOHN•F;oxt- 00 CD CC OJCM r-liM rei rHrfi T* rj*^ ^ ^ Ci 1p^^<:ri m oi<xc^t-rfCO (M Ci CJ (7JC^(7J C?^Tf CO CO 01 <?? <?» 1H.-«>I >-HCI Miff■^ 00 (TJ OK?< G^l(M OJ Cs■rt< CO CO (7} (?J r-lr-««H|NHNClassificationof Children.•soSyto t>. GO 05 fel1—1 »— 1Scotti-H rH i-HSUOTSIATQSec. 1I.II.III.rII.III.Sec. 3I.II.III.I.i5•sjnojjt^COa5050i-l(7Jr-<rHI't-OOOiOSO^C^r-teoiocot-t-0000 ojrHCOiO^Ol^t-QO C30household duties,Teaching,and Play.Washing anddressing.Prayers,'catching.Breakfast,lay,Teaching,May,Teaching,)inner.1 i 11TABULAR VIEW OF THE HOURS OF EMPLOYMENT, iSz^C. 649OJC^-*CO toCO (£>CO toCO to^a a=^.2 1P-S■<->-tJ .1^■4-> -w■H-ti^-<J2 . -P-IHrHCQCJ iO<M 10<M >0(T^ »0miiCMrH^HowI— I*"•rHI-HJS.Sg £ rtwisI-HaTelHI-H^s^B•rt'^c* 100(7}-»«5 3"',g^sI-H1^2 3corHaaI-H "-^I-HOS I-HdR VIEWrise at Heriot'sc5COasrei TtCO'aaT-i COI-H"iABUid ExreirHi"^10 I-H ,ri"^H §bJo£5«£>= -1.-H ITS rTJOS^fli-H 1-H ,^T3I-H r^^ rt ^^gHHoto3 s§.*>v-w-2£hH <r> ^-bJo n1">T32 ^^-^1 iS^Jo^UISfsis^51OQJ^H (M CO Ph*m>, ^rHp4 > .§^Q 2 ^=5^+- +-<-.2'bJo«i-1*•CMtHrHI— 1-2 a«.^v-^j<x>I-HH- J 1—3>'t-H1-3I-H650 APPENDIX.LIST OF TEXT-BOOKS USED AT HERIOT'S HOSPITAL, Edinburgh.English Department. Sessional School Books, Nos. 1 and 2, National SchoolCollection, Stewart's History of Scotland, Ruddiman's Rudiments.The Grammatical Text-books are omitted as defective in the opinion of theteacher.Classical Department, Eutropius, Selected Latin, Mair's Introduction,Adams' Latin Grammar, Ovid or Virgil, Horace, Apologia, Dunbar's Greekand English Grammar, Minora.House-governors s Department. Guy's Geography, Portions' Evidences,Watts' Catechism.Mathematics. The instruction is principally oral. Euclid's Elements.LIST OF TEXT-BOOKS USED AT GEORGE WATSON'S HOSPITAL,EDINBURGH.English Department. First Class. Modern Geography of the Edinburgh Academy,Stewart's English History, Simpson's Scotland, Lennie's English Grammar.Sessional School Collection, Stewart's Stories from the History of Scotland.Classical Department. Ruddiman's Rudiments, Eutropius, or Phaedrus' Fables,CsBsar, Sallust, Virgil, Mair's Introduction, Dunbar's Greek Grammar, New Testament,Xenophon.Mathematical Department. Davidson's Arithmetic.Reid's Chemistry.TEXT-BOOKS USED IN THE ENGLISH DEPARTMENT OF THEMADRAS COLLEGE, ST. ANDREWS.Lennie's A. B. C, Parts First and Second, Lennie's Ladder, Lennie's Sequelto the Ladder, Conned's Young Scholar's Companion, M'Culloch's Introductionto his Course of Reading, Sessional School Collection, M'Culloch's Course of Readingin Sciences, Scott's Beauties of Eminent Writers, History of England, (outlinesby a Committee of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,)Campbell's (of Dundee) Collection, Thomson's (Dr. Andrew) Collection, Len-nie'sEnglish Grammar, Conned's Grammar, Parker's Elements of EnglishComposition.Illustrations. Barton's Plates of Animals, (coloured,) Small Cabinet of Specimensof Metals, Ores, &c., &c., Arrowsmith's Maps of the Four Quarters of theWorld (large,) Thomson's Map of the World, Selected Articles of the PennyMagazine.TEXT-BOOKS USED AND SUBJECTS TAUGHT IN THE HIGHSCHOOL OF EDINBURGH.Latin. Vocabulary, Sententia Select, Aurelius Victor, Cornelius, Adams'Grammar, Phaedrus, Carson on the Relative, Buchanan's Psalms, Adams' RomanAntiquities, Mythology, Apologia Latina.LIST OF BOOKS USED AT HERIOT'S HOSPITAL. 651Greek. Moor's Grammar, by Tate, Vocabulary, Dalzell's Analecta Minora,Thucydides, Demosthenes, aeschylus.Roman History, Outlines of Ancient and Modern Geography, Mental Arithmetic,Goldsmith's larger Roman History, Malkin's History of Greece, Specimensof the British Poets, Portions's Evidences, A Short General View of theThree Kingdoms of Nature. Figures of Rhetoric and Rhetorical Arrangement.No. VI.Referred to on page 48. "^FORM OF APPLICATION FOR ADMISSION INTO Calvin's Hospital,EDINBURGH.To he lodged with the Factor of the Hospital on or before the1st day of April, 183TO THE GOVERNORS OF Calvin's HOSPITAL :Edinburgh, 183 .Gentlemen : — As a general meeting of the said governors have resolved to admitinto the Hospital or Institution under their management, on or about theday of April next, boys, lawful children, who were bornbetwixt the day of April, and the day ofApril, , inclusive ; and for that purpose, that each governor, betwixt andthe first day of the said month of April, may, if so inclined, recommend to theconsideration of the governors one boy, and no more, born betwixt the datesaforesaid, L beg leave to recommend ,lawful son of , for admission into the saidinstitution.In the event of the boy now recommended being admitted into the institution,I shall at all times, when required, transmit to his relations any communicationI may receive from the governors, or their factor, regarding him.The particulars regarding this boy are set forth in the answers to the annexedschedule, and the documents in support of the application are herewith lodged.*And I certify, that the circumstances, in answer to the sixth question annexed,are stated on my own personal knowledge, or from information upon which thegovernors may rely.I am, gentlemen,Your most obedient servant,Edinburgh, 183 .It is absolutely necessary that the obligation on the next page shall be signedby a responsible person, and the whole documents lodged with the factor, atthe time of giving in the application, as without these it cannot be submitted tothe governors.652 APPENDIX.Edinburgh, 183 .I [here state fully name, designation, and residence,] engage, in the event ofthe boy now recommended, being admitted into Cauvin's Hospital,to relieve the governors of the boy upon leaving the institution, whetherthat shall take place upon the lapse of the six years from the date of his admission,or shall, in consequence of the bad health of the boy, or other cause, takeplace at an earlier period.SCHEDULE.The boys to be admitted into the institution must, in terms of the Will of thefounder, be " the sons of respectable, but poor teachers ; the sons of poor, buthonest farmers; whom failings the sons of respectable master printers or booksellers,and the sons of respectable servants in the agricultural line." They"must be descended of honest, industrious, and well-behaved parents, whose circumstancesin life do not enable them suitably to support and educate their childrenat other schools ; and no unhealthy or diseased boy shall, at any time, or onany account, be admitted into the said hospital."They must, at the period of their admission, be not less than six, nor morethan eight years of age.Questions. Answers.1. The name and date of birth of theboy, per parish register, or other satisfactoryevidence.2. Names and designations, and whetherdead or alive, in so far as known, ofthe father, mother, paternal grandfather,maternal grandfather. . '3. Present residence of the boy, withwhom, and in what parish and county.4. Number of brothers and sisters ofthe boy, under ten years of age.5. Certificate by a respectable physicianor surgeon, that the boy is in goodhealth, of sound constitution, and freefrom bodily defect, mental imbecility, orcontagious distemper.6. Certificate by the minister and twoelders of the parish where the boy and ->his parents reside, as to their characterand good behaviour, and the sound stateof the boy's health ; and that he is of oneor other of the classes of persons abovementioned,specifying which class.7. Inventory of documents herewith produced.ITABLES OF DIET.No. VII.TABLES OF DIET.Country.Institution.Kind of food.Meal whichit is intend-quantity.|Remarks.ed for.Heriot'sOatmeal.Breakfast.For each meal.For the day.Once a week8 oz.Hospital.t(Supper.sos.16 oz.potato soup,(Edin-Bread.L'chatll.2i oz.19.72 oz. pota-burgh.)at 4.2ioz.toes, and 5 oz.Dinner.2ioz.7ioz.of bread, each.Beef.Dinner.6.22 oz.6.22 oz.Once a weekPotatoes.9.86 oz.9.86 oz.pea soup, (3.66QBarley.((L38oz.L38 oz.oz. peas,) andIEdin-5 oz. of bread.Oatmeal.Breakfast.doz.burghuSupper.4 oz.sos.Orphan-bread.Dinner.5 oz.Hospital.Loch at 4.2oz.7oz.Beef.Dinner.4 oz.doz.Beef is givenVegetables3 times a weekof differentNot fixed.Not fixed.in summer,kinds.and 5 times inMilk.Morning.Afternoon.i pint,i pint.1 pint.winter.Blue-coatOatmeal.Breakfast.4 oz.Once a weekSchool.t(Supper.3 oz.7oz.rice with milk,(Liver-milk.BreakfastJ pint.8 oz. each.pool.)Meat.Supper.I pint.f pint.On Sunday evening,cheese.(Beef andDinner.6 oz.coz.4 oz., beer ^tripe.)pint each.Potatoes.Dinner.2 pounds.2 pounds.Vegetables.Bread.Not fixed.Not fixed.Suppers12^ oz.12i oz.H^gLondonOatmeal.Breakfast.2oz.2oz.Twice a weekHOrphanMilk.Breakfast.4 pint.i pint.barley brothAsylum.Bread.Breakfast.7oz.7oz.and suet pud.((Dinner.Not fixed.Not fixed.ding, quantity((Supper.7oz.7 oz.not fixed.Meat.(Beef andGreen vegetation.)Dinner.sos.sos.tables occasionallyinsummer.Cheese.Supper.Uoz.lion.Once a weekTreacle.i(Not fixed.Not fixed.300 herringsButter.(iNot fixed.Not fixed.for 350 pupils.APPENDIX.Meal whichCountry.Institution.Kind of food.It is intendedfor.Quantity.Remarks.FibersBreakfast.For each meal.For the day.Once a week4 oz.4 OZ.nanMilk.Breakfast.h pint. .they get a dishSoldier's((Supper.1 pint.1| pint.called calecan-School.Gruel.t(Not fixed.Not fixed.non. It is com-(Dublin.)Meat.posed of equalBeef.Dinner.8 oz.8 oz.quantities ofVegetablespotatoes andof differentDinner.Not fixed.Not fixed.greens pre.kinds.pared with but.Potatoes.((1| pounds.IJ pounds.ter and milk,Bread.Supper.8 oz.8 oz.to be seasonedQwith leeks andsalt.Glynn'sOatmeal.Breakfast.5 oz.5 oz.Meat is onlyCharity.Milk.^ quart.J quart.given on Sun-london.Potatoes.Dinner.3 pounds.3 pounds.days.deny.)Meat.Once a weekBeef.((6 oz.6 oz.there is brothButtermilk.((1 pint.with vegetateSupper.1 pint.1 quart.bless, and twoGruel.((4 oz.4 oz.pounds of potatoesfor each.OrphanBread.Breakfast.1 pound.House.((Supper.Meat is given(Frank.Meat.Dinner.coz.6 oz.three times amorton theVegetablesweek.Maine.)of differentkinds.Porridge.Supper.Not fixed.Not fixed.On rare occasions,roastPotatoes.((< Not fixed.Not fixed.meat and wineButter.((are given.OrphanBeer.Dinner.Not fixed.Not fixed.Milk.Breakfast.Roast meat^House.((Supper.i Not fixed.is given eight(Ham-bread.Breakfast.i As muchtimes a year.§burgh.)((Dinner.■? as theyMeat.Supper.require.Meat is giventhree times a(Beef)Dinner.4 oz.4 oz.week.MilitaryVegetables.((Not fixed.Bread.Breakfast.Herring orOrphanitDinner.other fish isHouse.(ISupper.1 pound.given once a(Pots-meat.week for din-dam.)(Beef, tripe,ner.sausage.)Dinner.5 oz.5 oz.Vegetables.((Not fixed.Flour gruel.Supper.Not fixed.TABLE OF HOURS OF RECREATION, &C.«gelsOSrHOCOI— t >— 1ci:. o■ooGOCooGOGOX)OOrHGOrHOp— Io1— 1oCMCOrHO•osioioxoITJliponO^UIGOio-4^MilchCOCOi—itrioICOHriHOIrHHOJHOICMrHHOIrHH^(MrH•jsoy2 ist-CiCOC5OSot)>•kg.3•S[T}Din ! -,pun osTOio '-^ ^-xo iCnpoa00^1-Hc>COC5HOI-I'OlCO»oHflCOCO"^loi•poqog uinlTfCO"*lO,-«>•^-^HMCOCOlOH-*CiHOICOHOICO•^pnisi-I— 1+-c*-Tt"-{-T}<(?^oh:jCMTj< |COWW-CO•dooiso lot'OSCO00 ooC5OJQO pCDHOIt-•sopujxoho<7tOT}<CioooCOHCJo(MO OMiTj-oHOIOioHOIoMWrhoSJ9iCu,IJ*00Tc*?a-CMCOrHHOICOCOHOICM•SOSIOJOXO-l[^0 JO 'soi-j1— <oH.1—4yetO(?J1-H--OOo1— 11-^^o•uoi-)-4N^Tj* CO^COCO<M■^(MHciHOICMHNrHCOCMS<<1oss::<•Jfflggsiacit-HOc"3-.2c1— 1r!-^•-5soOoioooocooo"aio"Co■fom"leioi— 1sssis,o^V— 1>iSoIIsbfCooP>hi0)odHIn making this table, I have not aimed at rigid exactness in the fractional partsof the hour employed in certain occupations, but believe that they are sufficientlyminute for the comparison intended.656 APPENDIX.No. IX.BIBLE LESSONS AT THE MODEL INFANT SCHOOL OF THEGLASGOW EDUCATION SOCIETY.Referred to on page 160.The plan of the Bible lesson is thus sketched by Mr. Stow :After a short paragraph is read, the children ought to be exercised, first onthe meaning of every word or term in the particular passage; next on the leadingpoints, and afterwards on the moral lesson which is naturally deducible fromit. If the premises are well laid and understood, the children themselves willgenerally give the lesson.The general plan pursued is not to tell or inform the pupils of any thing,which by analysis, comparison, or illustration they can be made to find out forthemselves ; in other words, they are trained, rather than taught, to think."vF Tt* Trp 7f" tP vP ^Pictures ought to be used whenever practicable, and the whole resources ofnatural science brought to assist the elucidation of Scripture ; each point oughtto be made as plain and vivid to the mind of the child as in a picture. Importantassociations and moral and religious lessons also to the young may be givenfrom them. We have for the naturalist, the lion, Daniel in the lion's den,Lion of the tribe of Judah. The lamb, and the promises regarding the lionand the lamb, lying down in peace together. The serpent, deceitfulness. Theleopard and tiger, cruelty, yet pretty skin. A dog to his vomit, and a sowthat is washed to her wallowing in the mire, bad habits. The bee, industry ;with lessons from a thousand other animate and inanimate objects. Sometimesthey are conjoined in one illustration — ' As the hart panted after the water-brooks,so panted,' &c. We have here the nature and situation of the hart —the water-brooks — the climate — the heat — the dust — the distant brooks — thepanting. What is panting ? Why pant, &c. Pant is . . . The botanist, theastronomer, the mineralogist, the moralist, may each exercise their powers of illustrationrespectively, on ' the lily of the valley,' ' rose of Sharon,' ' sun standingstill at the bidding of Joshua,' ' Orion,' ' Pleiades,' and the ' morningstar,' ' precious stones of the temple,' ' the pearl of great price,' ' Jonathan'slove for David his rival,' ' Absalom's vanity, beautiful hair, and the cause of hisdeath.' "As an example of the illustration of these principles, the following extract maysuffice. The lesson is upon the one hundredth and fiftieth Psalm.^'^Verae 1. 'The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.' Verse 2. 'Hemaketh me to lie down in green pastures, he leadeth me beside the still waters.*We shall take some of the principal words, and see if you can tell metheir meaning. ' Lord,' is the first word ; but, as our limits permit us togive an example of only one or two words, or, at most, of the two first versesof this Psalm, we shall take the second word, which is more immediatelyBIBLE EXERCISES. 657Connected with pastures'' Now, children, what is the meaning of the wordshepherd? Takes care of sheep. The shepherd takes care of. sheep. Can youtell me what a herd means ? A boy. No doubt, herds are very frequently, perhapsmost frequently, boys, but could not a girl be a herd as well as a boy ? Yes.What is meant by a herd ? The children are silent. Suppose a boy or girl or aman took care of cows or cattle, what would he be called ? Would he be calleda shepherd? No. A man that herded cattle would be called a cattle . herd. AShepherd, therefore, is one who takes care of . sheep. Now, children, can youtell me what pasture means ? No. You don't know. Well, suppose you tooka walk into the country, and saw a field with sheep or cows feeding in it, whatwould they be eating? Grass. What, then, do you think pasture means? Grass.What colour is grass ? It is green. What kind of pasture does the Psalmist saythe shepherd leads his sheep to lie down in ? He maketh them to lie down ingreen. . .pastures. Is grass always green, think you, children ? Yes. Did youever see grass any other colour than green ? No. You never saw grass anyother colour than green ? iVo. But, suppose, during a hot summer, when thesun is shining very bright for a long time, perhaps for six or eight weeks at atime, and no rain, what colour do you think the grass would be ? Brown. Thengrass is not always green ? No, sir. It sometimes is . croton. Whether do youthink that sheep would like to eat green. . .grass, which is full of. . .sap, or brown.grass, that is very . dry? Green grass. Then you think that a good shepherdwill make his sheep to lie down in the green pastures or green. . .grass, inpreference to where there is brown, dry . grass? Yes. Do you think, children,that the shepherd here spoken of will take them to a field where there will beplenty or scarcity to eat ? Let me make it a little plainer. The shepherd is saidto make his sheep to lie down in green,. pastures. If they had little to eat doyou think that the sheep would lie down there ? No, they would run about seekinggrass. Then, you think, they will have plenty when they are made to liedown in it? Yes. They ' shall not. . .want' " ******No. X.Referred to on page 168."READING DISENTANGLED," OR METHOD OF TEACHING TOREAD USED IN THE LONDON INFANT SCHOOL SOCIETY'SMODEL SCHOOL.The method of teaching to read, which is strongly recommended, after trial inthis school, is an attempt to apply the phonic method of the German schools toour language, so irregular in the sounds of the letters, and in their combinationsinto syllables and words. The consonants are taught first to be named by thesound most like that in combination, and, besides, are classified into families.Pictures of objects, the names of which begin with the different consonants, areused to impress them upon the child's memory. Next, the shapes of the consonantsare given, and so described as to recal them by association, the large andsmall printed letters being taught separately. The children are next taught to&5B APPENDIX.form words, by putting the consonants before the vowels beginning with theshort sound of a. Next, before syllables beginning with the short sounds ofe, i, 0, M, and y, when replacing i, with exercises upon the sound of vowelsindiscriminately. The short sound in syllables followed by r. The placing of sat the end of words. More than one consonant before a vowel. Silent letters.The syllables th and qu. Words ending with two consonants. The final syllables,able, Sec. Words ending with ng. The sound of eh. Long vowels followedby a consonant. Long vowels followed by r. The diphthongs ou and au. Softsound of e. Diphthongs of ow and oy, and soft sound of ^. Diphthong ei. Soundof a after m, and some irregular words. Diphthong eu, and some irregularwords.No. XLReferred to on page 307.REMARKS OF M. EMANUEL DE FELLENBERG, ON EDUCATION,VERIFIED BY HIS OBSERVATIONS AT HOFWYL.*' On the reception of a new pupil, our first object is to obtain an accurateknowledge of his individual character, with all its resources and defects, in orderto aid in its farther development, according to the apparent intention of the Creator.To this end, the individual independent activity of the pupil is of muchgreater importance than the ordinary, busy officiousness of many who assumethe office of educators and teachers. They too often render the child a meremagazine of knowledge, collected by means purely mechanical, which furnisheshim neither direction nor aid in the business of life. The more ill-digestedknowledge a man thus collects, the more oppressive will be the burden to itspossessor, and the more painful his helplessness. Instead of pursuing thiscourse, we endeavour, by bestowing the utmost care upon the cultivation of theconscience, the understanding, and the judgment, to light up a torch in the mindof every pupil, which shall enable him to observe his own character, and shallset in the clearest light all the exterior objects which claim his attention.A great variety of exercises of the body and the senses are employed to prepareour pupils for the fulfilment of their destination. It is by means of suchexercises that every man should acquire a knowledge of his physical strength,and attain confidence with regard to those efforts of which he is capable, insteadof that fool-hardiness which endangers the existence of many who have not learnedto estimate their own powers correctly.All the various relations of space should be presented to the eye, to be observedand combined in the manner best adapted to form the coup d'oeil. Instructionin design renders us important service in this respect — every one should*thus attain the power of reproducing the forms he has observed, and of delineatingthem with facility, and should learn to discover the beauty of forms, and todistinguish them from their contrasts. It is only where the talent is remarkable(hat the attempt should be made to render the pupil an artist.REMARKS or M. FELLESTBERG ON EDUCATION. 659The cultivation of the ear by means of vocal and instrumental music is notless important to complete the development of the human being. The organs ofspeech, the memory, the understanding, and the taste, should be formed in thesame manner by instruction, and a great variety of exercises in language, vocalmusic, and declamation. The same means should also be employed to cultivateand confirm devotional feelings.In the study of natural history the power of observation is developed in referenceto natural objects. In the history of mankind the same faculty is employedupon the phenomena of human nature and human relations, and the moraltaste is cultivated, at the same time the faculty of conceiving with correctness,and of employing and combining with readiness, the materials collected by themind, and especially the reasoning faculty, should be brought into exercise, bymeans of forms and numbers, exhibited in their multiplied and varied relations.The social life of our pupils contributes materially to the formation of theirmoral character. The principles developed in their experience of practical lifeamong themselves, which gradually extends with their age and the progress oftheir minds, serves as the basis of this branch of education. It presents the examplesand occasions necessary for exhibiting and illustrating the great principlesof morals. According to the example of Divine Providence, we watch overthis little world in which our pupils live and act, with an ever vigilant, but ofteninvisible care, and constantly endeavour to render it more pure and noble.** At the same time that the various improvements of science and art are appliedto the benefit of our pupils, their sound religious education should be continuallykept in view in every branch of study ; this is also the object of a distinct seriesof lessons, which generally continue through the whole course of instruction, andwhose influence is aided by the requisite exercises of devotion.By the combination of means I have described, we succeed in directing ourpupils to the best methods of pursuing their studies independently; we occupytheir attention, according to their individual necessities and capacities, with philology,the ancient send modern languages, the mathematics, and their variousmodes of application, and a course of historical studies, comprising geography,statistics, and political economy"*Moral Educations The example of the instructor is all important in moraleducation. The books which are put into the pupils hands are of great influence.The pupil must be constantly surrounded with stimulants to good actions in orderto form his habits. A new institution should be begun with so small a numberof pupils, that no one of them can escape the observation of the educator and hismoral influence. The general opinion of the pupils is of high importance, andhence should be carefully directed. Intimate intercourse between pupils and theireducators begets confidence, and is the strongest means of moral education. TheExtract from a published letter of M. de Fellenberg to Lady Byron.t The remarks in this and the succeeding sections are abstracts from the accountof Hofwyl, by our countryman W. C. Woodbridge, or from Conversationswith M. de Fellenberg.660 APPENDIX.educator must be able to command himself— his conduct must be firm and just;frequent reproofs from such are more painful to the pupil than punishment of amomentary sort.While influences tending directly to lead the pupil astray should be removedfrom the school, he must be left to the action of the ordinary circumstances oflife, that his character may be developed accordingly. The pupil should be ledas far as possible to correct his faults by perceiving the consequences of them;the good or bad opinion of his preceptor and comrades are important means ofstimulation. Exclusion from amusements, public notice of faults,* and corporalpunishment, are all admissible. Solitary confinement is efficacious as a punishment.Rewards and emulation are unnecessary as motives.Religion and morality are too intimately connected to admit of separation inthe courses inculcating them. The elementary part of such a course is equallyapplicable to all sects.No good is to be derived from employing the pupils as judges or juries, orgiving them a direct share in awarding punishment for offences. It is apt toelevate the youth too much in his own conceit.Family life is better adapted, than any artificial state of society within an institution,to developed the moral sentiments and feelings of youth.Intellectual Education. A system of prizes, or emulation, and the fear of punishment,do not afford the strongest motives to intellectual exertion. Experienceshows that places in a class may be dispensed with. It is possible to developed ataste for knowledge, a respect and attachment for teachers, and a sense of dutywhich will take the place of any lower motive in inducing the requisite amountof study.In the higher departments of instruction it is better to confine the task of theteacher to giving instruction merely, placing the pupil under the charge of a specialeducator, at times when he is not engaged in the class-room.With the other, and more usual branches of instruction, correct ideas of naturalhistory and phenomena should be communicated to children, and require,first, that they shall be duly trained to observation by calling the observing facultiesinto frequent exercise. Second, that they shall be made acquainted withthe elements of natural history, especially in reference to familiar objects. Third,that the most familiar phenomena of nature, such as thunder and lightning, therainbow, &c.; and further, the most simple principles of mechanic arts, trades,&c., should be explained to them. Fourth, they should be taught to draw, inconnexion with the other instruction. Accuracy of conception is favoured bydrawing, and it is a powerful aid to the memory. The most important principlesof physiology, and their application to the preservation of health, should form apart of the instruction.Physical Education. Pure air, a suitable diet, regular exercise and repose, anda proper distribution of time, are the principal means of physical education. ItThis, however, violates another principle, which is to allow no punishmentof a humiliating sort.REMARKS OF THE REV. DR. ARNOLD. 661is as essential that a pupil leave his studies during the time appropriated to relaxationas that he study during the hours devoted to that purpose. Voluntary exerciseis to be encouraged by providing suitable games, by affording opportunitiesfor gardening, and by excursions, and by bathing. Regular gymnastic exercisesshould be insisted on as the means of developing the body; a healthyaction of the bodily frame has an important influence on both mind and morals.Music is to be considered as a branch of physical education, having powerful moralinfluences. The succession of study, labour, musical instruction, or play,should be carefully attended to. The hours of sleep should be regulated by theage of the pupil.No. XII.Referred to on page 400 of this Report.REMARKS OF THE REV. DR. ARNOLD, ON THE STUDY OFCLASSICS AND OF HISTORY.*It may freely be confessed that the first origin of classical education affordsin itself no reasons for its being continued now. When Latin and Greek werealmost the only written languages of civilized man, it is manifest that they musthave furnished the subjects of all liberal education. The question therefore iswholly changed, since the growth of a complete literature in other languages;since France, and Italy, and Germany, and England, have each produced theirphilosophers, their poets, and their historians, worthy to be placed on the samelevel with those of Greece and Rome.But although there is not the same reason now which existed three or fourcenturies ago for the study of Greek and Roman literature, yet there is anotherno less substantial. Expel Greek and Latin from your schools and you confinethe views of the existing generation to themselves and their immediate predecessors:you will cut off" so many centuries of the world's experience, and place us inthe same state as if the human race had first come into existence in the year1500. For it is nothing to say that a few learned individuals might still studyclassical literature; the effect produced on the public mind would be no greaterthan that which has resulted from the labours of our oriental scholars ; it wouldnot spread beyond themselves, and men in general, after a few generations, wouldknow as little of Greece and Rome as they do actually of China and Hindostan.But such an ignorance would be incalculably more to be regretted. With theAsiatic mind we have no nearer connexion or sympathy than that which is derivedfrom our common humanity. But the mind of the Greek and of the Romanis in all the essential points of its constitution our own ; and not only so, but it isour own mind developed to an extraordinary degree of perfection. Wide as isthe difference between us with respect to those physical instruments which ministerto our uses or our pleasures ; although the Greeks and Romans had no• From the London Journal of Education, Vol. VII.t Of course the secondary schools are here alluded to. (A. D. B.)662 APPENDIX.Steam-engines, no printing-presses, no mariner's compass, no telescopes, no microscopes,no gunpowder, yet in our moral and political views, in those matterswhich most determine human character, there is a perfect resemblance in theserespects. Aristotle, and Plato, and Thucydides, and Cicero, and Tacitus, aremost untruly called ancient writers ; they are virtually our own countrymen andcontemporaries, but have the advantage which is enjoyed by intelligent travellers,that their observation has been exercised in a field out of the reach of commonmen; and that having thus seen in a manner with our eyes what we cannoteee for ourselves, their conclusions are such as bear upon our own circumstances,while their information has all the charm of novelty, and all the value of a massof new and pertinent facts, illustrative of the great science of the nature of civilizedman.Now when it is said, that men in manhood so often throw their Greek andLatin aside, and that this very fact shows the uselessness of their early studies,it is much more true to say that it shows how completely the literature ofGreece and Rome would be forgotten if our system of education did not keep upthe knowledge of it. But it by no means shows that system to be useless, unlessit followed, that when a man laid aside his Greek and Latin books he forgot alsoall that he had ever gained from them. This, however, is so far from being thecase, that even where the results of a classical education are least tangible, andleast appreciated, even by the individual himself, still the mind often retains muchof the effect of its early studies in the general liberality of its tastes and comparativecomprehensiveness of its views and notions.All this supposes, indeed, that classical instruction should be sensibly conducted; it requires that a classical teacher should be fully acquainted with modemhistory and modern literature, no less than with those of Greece and Rome.What is, or perhaps what used to be, called a mere scholar, cannot possibly communicateto his pupils the main advantages of a classical education. The knowledgeof the past is valuable, because without it our knowledge of the present andof the future must be scanty ; but if the knowledge of the past be confined whollyto itself, if, instead of being made to bear upon things around us, it be totally isolatedfrom them, and so disguised by vagueness and misapprehension as to appearincapable of illustrating them, then indeed it becomes little better thanlaborious trifling, and they who declaim against it may be fully forgiven."To select one instance of this perversion, what can be more absurd than thepractice of what is called construing Greek and Latin, continued as it often iseven with pupils of an advanced age? The study of Greek and Latin, consideredas mere languages, is of importance, mainly as it enables us to understandand employ well that language in which we commonly think, and speak, andwrite. It does this because Greek and Latin are specimens of language at oncehighly perfect and incapable of being understood without long and minute attention:the study of them, therefore, naturally involves that of the general principlesof grammar : while their peculiar excellences illustrate the points which renderlanguage clear, and forcible, and beautiful. But our application of thisgeneral knowledge must naturally be to our own language ; to show us what aroREMARKS OF THE REV. DR. ARNOLD. 663its peculiarities, what its beauties, what its defects; to teach us by the patterns orthe analogies offered by other languages, how the effect which we admire in themmay be produced with a somewhat different instrument. Every lesson in Greekor Latin may and ought to be made a lesson in English; the translation of everysentence in Demosthenes or Tacitus is properly an exercise in extemporaneousEnglish composition; a problem, how to express with equal brevity, clearness,and force, in our own language, the thought which the original author has soadmirably expressed in his. But the system of construing, far from assisting, ispositively injurious to our knowledge and use of English; it accustoms us to atame and involved arrangement of our words, and to the substitution of foreignidioms in the place of such as are national; it obliges us to caricature everysentence that we render, by turning what is, in its original dress, beautiful and natural,into something which is neither Greek nor English, stiff, obscure, and flat,exemplifying all the faults incident to language, and excluding every excellence.The exercise of translation, on the other hand, meaning, by translation, theexpressing of an entire sentence of a foreign language by an entire sentence ofour own, as opposed to the rendering separately into English either every separateword, or at most only parts of the sentence, whether larger or smaller, theexercise of translation is capable of furnishing improvement to students of everyage, according to the measure of their abilities and knowledge."vp ^ ^ vC" vf* ^ v^This favourite notion of filling boys with useful information is likely, wethink, to be productive of some mischief. It is a caricature of the principles ofinductive philosophy, which, while it taught the importance of a knowledge offacts, never imagined that this knowledge was of itself equivalent to wisdom.Now it is not so much our object to give boys ' useful information,' as to facilitatetheir gaining it hereafter for themselves, and to enable them to turn it toaccount when gained. The first is to be effected by supplying them on any subjectwith a skeleton which they may fill up hereafter. For instance, a real knowledgeof history in after life is highly desirable; let us see how education canbest facilitate the gaining of it. It should begin by impressing on a boy's mindthe names of the greatest men of different periods, and by giving him a notion oftheir order in point of time, and the part of the earth on which they lived. Thisis best done by a set of pictures bound up together in a volume, such, for instance,as those which illustrated Mrs. Trimmer's little histories, and to which the writerof this article is glad to acknowledge his own early obligations. Nor could betterservice be rendered to the cause of historical instruction than by publishinga volume of prints of universal history, accompanied with a very short descriptionof each. Correctness of costume in such prints, or good taste in the drawing,however desirable, if they can be easily obtained, are of very subordinateimportance : the great matter is that the print should be striking, and full enoughto excite and to gratify curiosity. By these means a lasting association is obtainedwith the greatest names in history, and the most remarkable actions oftheir lives : while their chronological arrangement is learnt at the same timefrom the order of the pictures ; a boy's memory being very apt to recollect the664 APPENDIX.place which a favourite print holds in a volume, whether it comes towards thebeginning, middle, or end, what picture comes before it, and-what follows it.Such pictures should contain as much as possible the poetry of history : the moststriking characters, and most heroic actions, whether of doing or of suffering ;but they should not embarrass themselves with its philosophy, with the causes ofrevolutions, the progress of society, or the merits of great political questions*Their use is of another kind, to make some great name, and great action of everyperiod, familiar to the mind; that so in taking up any more detailed history orbiography, (and education should never forget the importance of preparing a boyto derive benefit from his accidental reading,) he may have some association withthe subject of it, and may not feel himself to be on ground wholly unknown to him.He may thus be led to open volumes into which he would otherwise have neverthought of looking : he need not read them through — indeed, it is sad folly to requireeither man or boy to read through every book they look at, but he will seewhat is said about such and such persons or actions; and then he will learn bythe way something about other persons and other actions, and will have his stockof associations increased, so as to render more and more information acceptableto him.After this foundation, the object still being rather to create an appetite forknowledge than to satisfy it, it would be desirable to furnish a boy with historiesof one or two particular countries, Greece, Rome, and England for instance, writtenat no great length, and these also written poetically much more than philosophically,with much liveliness of style, and force of painting, so as to excite aninterest about the persons and things spoken of The absence of all instructionin politics or political economy, nay, even an absolute erroneousness of judgmenton such matters, provided always that it involves no wrong principle in morality,are comparatively of slight importance. Let the boy gain, if possible, a strongappetite for knowledge to begin with; it is a later part of education which shouldenable him to pursue it sensibly, and to make it, when obtained, wisdom."Supposing a boy to possess that outline of general history which his prints andhis abridgments will have given him, with his associations, so far as they go,strong and lively, and his desire of increased knowledge keen, the next thing tobe done is to set him to read some first-rate historian, whose mind was formed in,and bears the stamp of some period of advanced civilization, analogous to that inwhich we now live. In other words, he should read Thucydides, or Tacitus, orany writer equal to them, if such can be found, belonging to the third period offull civilization, that of modern Europe since the middle ages. The particularsubject of the history is of little moment, so long as it be taken neither from thebarbarian, nor from the romantic, but from the philosophical or civilized stage ofhuman society ; and so long as the writer be a man of commanding mind, whohas fully imbibed the influences of his age, yet without bearing its exclusive impress.And the study of such a work, under an intelligent teacher, becomes indeedthe key of knowledge and of wisdom : first, it affords an example of goodhistorical evidence, and hence the pupil may be taught to notice, from time toREMARKS OF THE REV. DR. ARNOLD. 665tunc, the various criteria of a credible narrative, and, by the rule of contraries,to observe, what are the indications of a testimony questionable, suspicious, orworthless. Undue scepticism may be repressed by showing how generally truthhas been attained when it has been honestly and judiciously sought; while credulitymay be checked by pointing out, on the other hand, how manifold are theerrors into which those are betrayed whose intellect or whose principles havebeen found wanting. Now, too, the time is come when the pupil may be introducedto that high philosophy which unfolds ' the causes of things.' The historywith which he is engaged presents a view of society in its most advanced state,when the human mind is highly developed, and the various crises which affectthe growth of the political fabric are all overcast. Let him be taught to analyzethe subject thus presented to him ; to trace back institutions, civil and religious,to their origin ; to explore the elements of the national character, as now exhibitedin maturity, in the vicissitudes of the nation's fortune, and the moral andphysical qualities of its race; to observe how the morals and the mind of the peoplehave been subject to a succession of influences, some accidental, others regular;to see and remember what critical seasons of improvement have been neglected,what besetting evils have been wantonly aggravated by wickedness orfolly. In short, the pupil may be furnished, as it were, with certain formulae,which shall enable him to read all history beneficially; which shall teach himwhat to look for in it, how to judge of it, and how to apply it.Education will thus fulfil its great business, as far as regards the intellect, toinspire it with a desire of knowledge, and to furnish it with power to obtain andto profit by what it seeks for"*No. XIII.ORPHAN STATISTICS.By the instructions of the Scholastic Committee,! I was directed to collect allthe information possible in regard to the proportion, in number, of orphans to therest of the community. On this subject I found it impossible to obtain satisfactorydata, except in a few cases. Even where statistical inquiries have been pursuedwith considerable minuteness, this subject does not appear to have formeda part of them. The information which I have to present is too meagre to permitany general inferences, other than that the proportion of destitute orphanchildren to the rest of the community, is exceedingly variable in different countries,and even in different districts of the same country.The orphan establishment of the duchy of Saxe Weimar is administered as abranch of the government, and the details in regard to it are known with greatminuteness. The report of this department for 1837, shows that there were 423It would be most desirable that a series of text-books should be preparedaccording to this plan, which is as successful in practice as consonant with soundtheory. (A. D. B.)t See p. vi. of the Preface to this Report,t For which 1 am indebted to the director, Dr, K(5hlcr.666 APPENDIX.orphan children between the ages of about six and fourteen years, receiving aid.Under this title are included children who have lost both parents, "or who havelost their father, the mother remaining a widow, and children deserted by theirfathers. Of the total number, 211 were orphan boys, 206 girls, and 6 werechildren deserted by their fathers. Of the 211 boys, 166 were fatherless, and45 had lost both parents; and of the 206 girls, 164 were fatherless, and 42 hadlost both parents. The population of the duchy of Saxe.Weimar was, in 1837,about 250,000, so that the destitute orphans of both sexes formed about .17 percent,of the population, and the destitute orphan boys about .086 per cent. Atthe same time, the number of orphans receiving aid in the town of Weimar was33, which, in a population of 12,000, was .275 per cent., or more than onceand a-half the proportion for the duchy at large.The statistics coming next to those in point of minuteness, which I was ableto procure, are from the canton of Zurich, in Switzerland.* These give, in1836, for 231,574 inhabitants, 3,731 orphans of both sexes, the term orphan beingunderstood as in Weimar, and the census including children from infancyto about sixteen years of age. The city of Zurich, with a population of 14,243,had, at the same time, 229 orphans. Thus the country communes, with a populationof 217,331, gave assistance to 2,636 orphan children, or 1.21 per cent.,and the city of Zurich to 141, or .99 per cent. I have not the means of computingexactly the number of orphans below five years and over fourteen, includedin this estimate, so as to compare it with the statement for the duchy ofSaxe-Weimar, but adopting an approximate estimate, the number of destitute orphansin the canton of Zurich to every one hundred inhabitants, appears to bebetween four and five times as great as the number, between the same years, inthe duchy of Weimar.The director of the Orphan-house at Stuttgart gave me 1600, as the numberof orphan children to be provided for in Nuremberg, from six years up tofourteen or fifteen. This number gives, in the whole population of 1,400,000,almost .115 per cent. This proportion is somewhat lower than that for Weimar.In the absence of more correct data, I endeavoured to obtain the probable numberof destitute orphan boys in Edinburgh, by summing up the numbers in thedifferent hospitals and the Charity Work-house. Edinburgh is so well providedwith educational charities, nearly all of which give a preference, in their admissions,to orphans, that it is not at all probable that many destitute orphan childrenare without this pale. The summation of the numbers obtained, as above stated,gives 272 for the number of male orphans supported by the public, using the wordorphan in the same sense as hitherto, and the age being between six and fifteenyears. The population of Edinburgh is about 176,000, which would give nearly.155 per cent, as the number of orphan boys supported in the charitable establishmentsof the city. The corresponding proportion for the town of Weimar is.137 per cent., and for the town of Zurich, .495 per cent.Kindly furnished to me by Burgomaster Hess.