NARRATIVEOFAN EXPEDITION IN H.M.S. TERROR,UNDERTAKEN WITH A VIEW TOGEOGRAPHICAL DISCOVERYONTHE ARCTIC SHORES,IN THE YEARS1836-7-BY CAPTAIN BACK, Ren.COMMANDER OF THE EXPEDITION.ILLUSTRATED BY A MAP AND PLATES.LONDON:JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.MDCCCXXXVIII,London '.Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New Street Square.TOTHE RIGHT HONOURABLELORD GLENELG,HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATEFOR THE COLONIES,&c. &c. &c.THE FOLLOWING NARRATIVEOF AN EXPEDITION TO THE ARCTIC SHORES,IS,WITH SINCERE RESPECT,DEDICATEDBY HIS LORDSHIP'S MOST OBEDIENT ANDVERY HUMBLE SERVANT,GEORGE BACK.toCONTENTS.Preliminary Chapter - Page 1CHAPTER I.Departure from England. — Cape Farewell. — Porpoises andGrills. — Driftwood with Roots and Bark. — Leave theVicinity of Cape Farewell. — Icebergs. — Course noveland interesting. — Resolution Island. — Whirlpool. —Descry Two Vessels. — Dreary Aspect of the SavageIslands. — Visited by Esquimaux. — Difficult Navigation.Vessel moored to an Iceberg. — Crew exercised atSmall-arms under its Lee. — Geological Indications. —Careen the Ship. — Progress through the Ice. — SalisburyIsland. — Ship followed by Esquimaux. — Land discovered.— Deviation in Compasses. — Trinity Isles. — Shipobliged to heave-to. — Whales seen. — Ship imbedded inIce. — Baffin and Southampton Islands. — Perilous Situation.— White W T hales. — Winter Islands. — WaterSky. 17CHAP. II.Steer for Southampton Island. — Conjectures respecting theIce. — Islands. — Pressure of the Wind. — Ship immoveable.— Cutting away the Ice. — Snow. — Driftingtowards Land. — Accident to Rudder. — Aspect of contiguousCoast. — New Moon. — Recreations of the Crew.Chase of a Bear. — Hawser carried away by Ice. — -Icebound in Sight of Land. — ■ Wind veers to South-west.Prospect of Release. — Hopes disappointed. — ShipVI CONTENTS.driven nearer Land. — Mr. Gore shoots a Fox. — Ship inextreme Peril. — Frightful Increase of Pressure. — ProvidentialDelivery. — Exploring Expedition. — A Dockcut in the Ice. — Consultation of Officers. — Rapid Destructionof the Floe. — Bow of the Ship split. — Hopesof progressing baffled. . Page 77«CHAP. III.Lane of Water discovered. — Prospect of wintering on theI ce. — Violent Concussions experienced. — Employmentof the Crew. — Erection of an Observatory. — FavourablePosition of the Ship. — Disruption by a Gale. —Expansion of open Water. — Officers build Snow Houses.Excursions to Land. — An exploring Party. — Experimentof wearing a Mask. — Survey of a Harbour. —Pass Cape Comfort. — Risk of being crushed. — Robbedby Foxes and Shrimps. — Thermometer rises. — HugeMass of Ice. — Amusements. — Thermometers tested. —Accident to the Carpenter. — School for the Crew. —Curious Phenomenon. — Register Thermometer. — Reindeerkilled. — Fearful Storm. — Floe cracks. - 119CHAP. IV.Extraordinary Disruption. — Anxieties. — Rapid Change. —Commotion. -— Masquerade. — Results of Commotion. —Temperatures, — Invalids. — Anxiety for the Floe. —Advantages of Situation. Death of a Sailor. — Reflections.— Desolation of the Land. — Curious Meteor. — LandExcursions. — Tracks of Animals. — Increase of Sick. —Precautions. — Phenomena. — Invalids. —Spirits of Crewimprove. — Weather. — Grinding of Ice. — Health. —Under-Currents. — Floe diminishes. — Phenomena of Ice.Callosity of Limbs. — Intensely cold. — Influence ofg un . More Limpers. — Death of Mr. Donaldson. — FineWeather. — The Coast. — Soundings as before. — Setof Current. — Heavy Gale. — Gale abates. — Holes ofWater. - - - - - - 177CONTENTS. VllCHAP. V.Valentine's Day. — Floe damaged. — Outline of CoastAlarming Symptoms. — Chaotic Commotion. — Tumultceases. — Clearing Deck. — Dovelike shot. — Awful Peril.Grandeur of Scene. — Expectation of Crisis. — Havocspreads. — Desolation. — Ship remains nipped. — Turmoil.Set of Ice. — Ship rights. — Ice Hills. — Bolts, &c.loosened by Pressure of Ice. — Flight of Birds. — NauticalArtists. — Divine Service. — Blows a Gale. — ImminentPeril. — St. Patrick's Day. — Ice fluctuates. — Sir J. Gordon'sBay. — Peril of Two Sailors. — Flock of Ducks,and White Bear. — Death of a Sailor. — Baffin's Observations.— Flocks of Loons. — Improvement in Crew'sHealth. — Diminution of Snow. — Mr. Gore Snow-blind.- Page 217CHAP. VI.Feast of Loons. — Mr. Vaughan's Path. — Perilous Excursion.— White Whales. — Carpenters busy underminingShip. — Result of Labours. — Polar Expeditions.Narwhal. — Report of Health. — Cannonading Floe.Cheerful Labours in sawing away the Ice. — Employmentfor Armourer. — Impediments from Calves. — NewRent discovered. — Report of the Ship's Drift. — Shipbursts her Bonds. — Novelty of Scene Stern-post shattered.— Officers' Opinion in favour of Return to England.Awkwardness of Situation. — Expedition frustrated.Ship's Draught increased. — Visited by Esquimaux. —Ship struck by a Floe. — Shattered Condition of Ship. —Sail for England. — Arrival at Chatham. - - 348Appendix - - 449NARRATIVEOF ANEXPEDITIONINHIS MAJESTY'S SHIP TERROR,IN THE YEARS 1836-7.PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.The interest which had been excited by theformer Expeditions through the interior andalong the coast of North America, and the successiveinformation gained on every trial, inducedthe Geographical Society to draw the attentionof Government to a proposed expedition forcompleting the coast line between Regent'sInlet and Point Turnagain. The project wasentertained, and I had the honour to be selectedto carry it into execution.On May 13th, 1836, I received my officialappointment to His Majesty's ship Terror,then lying alongside the Hussar hulk, atChatham. She had been recently doubled, andin every respect strengthened with the mostmassive iron and copper fastenings, for a voyageto the Polar Sea. Some alterations were nowB B9, PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.made to accommodate her to the new service onwhich she was destined, and a leak, which hadbeen discovered on a short trip which she hadmade to Hull, was effectually repaired. Shewas also provided with a warming apparatus,which however, though probably well calculatedfor more temperate climates, was notfound to answer its intended purpose in theNorth.It may be briefly described as a purely wroughtiron pipe two hundred and forty feet long, aninch in diameter, and five eighths of an inchbore, extending nearly round the ship and themidship cabins ; the solution of strong brine, withwhich it was filled by the aid of a forcing-pump,being kept hot by means of a furnace, stronglybuilt in brick within an iron tank or casing, inthe interior of which several coils of pipe woundround. To guard against accidents, there wereexpansion tubes abaft the first bend coming fromthe furnace, which, in case of an excess of heat,became filled, and so prevented the bursting ofthe apparatus.The advantage proposed to be gained over thewell-tried method adopted by Sir E. Parry, wasa diminution in the consumption of coals, abushel being considered quite enough for aday's use. How far this calculation would havebeen borne out by fact, there was no opportunityPRELIMINARY CHAPTER, 3of proving; but it is only justice to Mr. Heath,one of the firm by which the apparatus wasprovided, to state, that he himself declared, " heshould have scarcely recommended so novel ascheme on a service such as ours, where, if anaccident occurred, there would be considerabledifficulty in making the necessary reparations."Three capacious, but comparatively light,whale boats were built, and an equal number ofsledges with iron runners, so contrived as toserve also for the body of a carriage, which,when placed on wheels adapted to the contrivance,were expected, and could not fail, to bemost useful for the conveyance of stores, &c. overthe land.For food at once the most portable and substantial,upwards of three thousand pounds weightof pemmican were manufactured from the choicestmeat, with pimento and other spices mixed, tomake it more palatable. In addition to this,there was a liberal supply of preserved meats andsoups, together with a great variety of anti-scorbutic; warm clothing to provide against thecold of winter, such as fur caps, carpet or clothboots, with cork next the feet, and bear skinblankets, &c. : but as I experienced some troublein making out a list of what was actually indispensable,it may be of future use to insert ithere : —b 2PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.WARM CLOTHING.Sea boots - 130 pair.Cloth ditto, withcork soles - 132 —Ankle shoes - 130 —Pea jackets - 131Monkey jackets - 65Flushing trousers,lined with baize 130 —Red flannel shirts 130Wadmil hose - 185 pair.Swanskin drawers 1 30Comfortable - 195Welsh wigs - 130Fur caps 65Green crape - 100 yds.Bear skin blankets 70PROVISION FOR EIGHTEEN MONTHS' Consumption.Bread35,860 lbs. 1PreservedSpirits -1519 gals.vegetables1320 lbs.Brandy100 —Potatoes4480 —Wine49j —Carrots in sand -10 casks.Salt beef1634 lbs.Molasses800 lbs.Salt pork3280 —Essence ofFlour -9896 —spruce50 pots.Suet -1652 —Do. do.50 —Raisins728 —Macaroni1200 lbs.Tea613 —Rice1541 —Oatmeal82 —Pickled cabbage -125 gals.Peas145 —Walnuts50 —Chocolate1951 —Horse radish50 —Sugar3107 —Onions -50 —Do. for lime juice798 —Mixed pickles -100 —Butter337 —Cranberries100 —Cheese -450 —Salt336 lbs.Vinegar203 —Mustard375 —Concent d do.50 —Pepper60 —Soap1200 —NormandyTobacco1001 —pippins55 —Fresh beef andArrow root30 —live stock for35 daysPrepared barley24 —Lemon juice798 lbs.Portable soup -20 -—Pemmican4874 —Coals -112 tons.Candles, waxOil101 gals.and tallow3124 —Cooking apparelwithtus for boatscurrants- 1080 —completePreserved meats- 9001 —1 Pyroligneous ether 120 pts.Vegetable soups- 372 qts.PRELIMINARY CHAPTER. 5These, together with a complete set of anti-mildredtents, oiled-cloth floorings and covers,completed us in this respect, while an amplesupply of fowling-pieces, rifles, and ammunition,made our outfit of the most perfect description.The following instruments were also suppliedby the Admiralty : —Artificial horizon - 1 Magnetic intensity in-Marine barometer - 1 ; instrument - 1Azimuth compasses - 2 Sympiesometer - 1Alexander's steering do. - 1 Spirit thermometers - 8Boat compasses - 3 Six's thermometer - 1Eater's compasses - 2 Small do. in brass cases - 4Dipping needle - 1 Common mercurial ones - 6Case of instruments - 1 Transit instrument - 1Massey's logs - 3 Night telescope - 1Sounding machines - 2 Bottle of spare mercury - 1Also a variety of books andstationery.Hygrometer - 1Case of bar magnets - 1Measuring chain - 1We were also provided with Fraser's firehearth and coppers, which, besides throwing outmore heat than those commonly in use, had thedecided advantage of consuming less fuel, andwere therefore particularly desirable in a shipwith a limited quantity of coals.Most of the officers, and all the men, werevolunteers ; the whole number amounting tosixty, in the following proportions ■ —George Back - Captain.William Smyth - - - First Lieutenant.Owen Stanley - - - Second Lieutenant.Archibald M< Mundo - - Third Lieutenant.James Saunders - - Acting Master.B 3PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.James Donovan, Med.Graham GoreRobert M ' ClarePeter FisherCharles MarchandJames A. MouldWilliam LawesThomas DonaldsonJohn VaughanJohn SmithGeorge GreenSEAMEN.Captain's coxswain - 1Quarter-masters - - 3Boatswain's mate - 1Sailmaker and crew - 2Armourer - 1Armourer's mate - 1Carpenter's crew, including1 mate - -4Surgeon.Mate.Mate.Mate.Extra Mate.Assistant Surgeon.Clerk in Charge.Gunner.Boatswain.Carpenter.Ice Mate.Able seamenCaptain's stewardCaptain's cookMARINES.Serjeant John MuslinCorporal HenryPlumsteadPrivatesThe following orders were enclosed in anofficial communication from the HonourableCharles Elphinstone Fleeting, at that periodcommander-in-chief at Sheerness : —"By the Commissioners for executing theoffice of Lord High Admiral of the UnitedKingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, &c.His Majesty's Government having beenpleased to command that another attempt by theway of Wager River should be made to trace thenorthern boundary of the North AmericanContinent : We have thought fit to appoint youto the command of that expedition, and you arePRELIMINARY CHAPTER. Jhereby required and directed to put to sea inHis Majesty's ship Terror, under your command,the moment that she is in all respects ready, andto proceed with the utmost celerity in the executionof the following Instructions :If, on quitting the More, the wind should bedecidedly from the westward, you will pursuethe usual track, north about ; but if, on the contrary,the wind should appear to promise a morespeedy passage down the English Channel, youare to push out in that direction, as affording thebest chance of completing this undertaking withinthe present year, which will mainly depend onyour early arrival off Hudson's Straits, so as tobe able to take advantage of the first openingin the outer barrier of ice, provided you shouldfind it still shut up.Having once entered this strait, you will probablyfind the water comparatively free till youapproach Salisbury Island, and you will then haveto choose between the direct and obvious courseup Frozen Strait, which was performed with apparentease by the Fury and Hecla in 1821, orthe more circuitous route by the Welcome,which was unsuccessfully attempted by theGriper in 1824, but which you are left atliberty to adopt, if the state of the ice, after thelate severe winter, should render Frozen Straitimpassable. Again, though we consider Wagerb 48 PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.River will be, for many reasons, the most eligibleplace for the commencement of your operations,yet, as the same combination of wind, tide, andice, which would render that inlet difficult ofaccess, might equally facilitate your entranceinto Repulse Bay ; and as this bay would appearto be not more distant from Regent's Inletthan Wager Bay, you are further left at libertyto run for the former, instead of persisting in atedious struggle to reach Wager Bay.Into whichsoever of these inlets you may findit expedient to conduct His Majesty's ship, yourfirst object will be to place her in present safety ;and then, having previously arranged a sufficientnumber of light reconnoitering parties, and havingduly provided them with all necessary provisions,tools, and signals, you will detach them in anyand every direction that may appear most promptlyto lead to the discovery of a suitable track fortransporting the boats and stores across the landwhich intervenes between these inlets and thesea.While these parties are employed on this importantservice, a rapid examination must bemade of the character of the shores of one orother of these inlets, and of their several creeksand harbours, along with the set and rise of thetides, in order to the selection of such an anchorageas may ensure the perfect security of thePRELIMINARY CHAPTER.ship during your absence, and as may promisea ready egress to her at the close of the season,when your operations have terminated, and whenthe young ice may be expected to form. Inthis point of view, the position, and the smallcomparative depth of Repulse Bay, would appearto offer an easier and more speedy egress.The officer left in charge of the Terror is toreceive from you specific orders, not only as tohis general proceedings while you are away, butas respects his intercourse with the natives, aswell as the series of observations he is to record,and the mode in which he is to conduct a surveyof the inlet, including the neighbouring lakes,its accessory rivers, if any, a continued registerof the times and heights of the tides at high andlow water, and the elevation and geologicalcharacter of the adjacent hills. You will communicateto him the probable period of yourabsence, and you will arrange with him a fewsignals, by means of a gun fired in the stillnessof night, at a precise hour, or by rockets orflashes, some of which may eventually be of greatimportance in cases where assistance may berequired. Lastly, you will give him directionshow to act, should any misfortune befall yourselfand the other detached parties ; and in the contemplationof such an event, which may retardthe return of the parties about the period fixed10 PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.for their purpose, you will appoint some ultimateperiod in the ensuing year, beyond which he isnot to protract his stay, but peremptorily torepair with His Majesty's ship to England ;in which case it would be advisable that heshould endeavour to communicate a statement ofany accident that may have occurred to FortChurchill.Having satisfactorily settled these preliminarybut important arrangements, you will then proceedin the execution of the main objects of thevoyage. These objects are, —First, To ascertain the general form andposition of that part of the northern coast ofAmerica which extends from the point whereyou may first strike the sea shore of PrinceRegent's Inlet, as far as the western mouth ofFury and Hecla Strait; and if that service shouldbe accomplished with facility, or if no seriousobstacle should there present itself to the timelyreturn of the party, the western coast of Cock-burnIsland might be pursued as far as the CapeEater of Parry's first voyage, but forbidding theofficer of the boat whom you may detach onthis service, to penetrate far into any of theopenings by which that probable group of islandsmay be intersected ; and on no account to riskthe prolongation of the fixed period for returningto the ship ; not even to persevere in the attemptPRELIMINARY CHAPTER. 1 1to cross the Fury and Hecla Strait, provided anyvery serious difficulty should present itself.Secondly, The determination, in a similarmanner, of the continental coast line from thepoint of arrival on Prince Regent's Inlet, to themouth of the River Back, and after passing island, the continuation of the mainshore as far as the Point Turnagain of Franklin ;to cross the strait which is supposed to separatethe continent of America from the islands tothe northern end of it, tracing the shore to thefarthest point of Captain James Ross's discovery,and, if time will allow, to proceed from thenceto the spot where he determined, by observations,the position of the northern magnetic pole.You will instruct the officers in command ofthe two foregoing parties to note down as theyproceed, on each day, the state of the sea withregard to ice, the one party in a northerndirection, the other to the westward ; and also, ifany land should appear in these directions, tolike its bearings and probable distance, it beingof great importance to ascertain whether theArctic Sea, to the northward of the north coastof America, be from appearance navigable byships of considerable burden.In the event, however, of finding that thesepositions of Captain James Ross are actually onthe continent of America, the party may return12 PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.to the ship, as the second party, directing theircourse towards Point Turnagain, will, in thatcase, decide from what point the trending ofthe coast to the northward commences.To the vigorous pursuit of these interestinggeographical questions, all minor objects mustbe sacrificed ; and no halt in the progress towardsthe termination of the journeys above mentionedshould be any where permitted, for the purposeof obtaining information on any of those collateralsubjects which otherwise it would be highlydesirable to collect.Nevertheless, on the return of the parties,when they can estimate what time they have tospare, and at every nightly station, every adversegale, or impervious fog, will afford opportunitiesfor observing the magnetic dip and intensity, andfor encouraging a variety of valuable researchesin other branches of science, the necessaryinstruments for which purposes have been suppliedto you, and the opportunities for effectingwhich you will no doubt discreetly employ.In any large enterprise of this nature muchmust be left to the experience, judgment, andresponsibility of the commanding officer ; andas the general objects of this Expedition havebeen fully explained to you, so the detailedmanner of executing them is hereby committedto your own discretion and zeal, always re-PRELIMINARY CHAPTER. 13collecting our anxiety for the health, comfort,safety, and ultimate credit of yourself, yourofficers, and your crew. In like manner youwill have to repose a similar confidence onthose officers to whom you entrust the commandof the detached parties ; but you will endeavourto guide them by the most explicit instructionswhich it may be in your power to give.You will assist them by a minute expositionof all the resources which you have derivedfrom the fruits of your own experience, and youwill give them peremptory injunctions to returnto the ship at a definite fixed period."The foregoing instructions have been framedwith the intention, and in the full belief, that thisservice may be duly and faithfully performedin the course of the present season, and that thisArctic Expedition maybe distinguished from allothers by the promptitude of its execution, andby escaping from the gloomy and unprofitablewaste of eight months' detention : it is thereforeour distinct orders, that every effort shall bemade to return to England in the fall of thisyear. Difficulties may however occur, whichwe cannot foresee ; some of the detachments mayhave been detained by uncontrollable events,or may have been visited by accidents requiringassistance at a considerable distance ; and inthese cases you may find yourself compelled to14< PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.winter abroad. If such should, unfortunately, betheissue of all your best exertions to complywith our order to return home, you will endeavourto provide, in the most effectual manner,for the safety of his Majesty's ship, and forthe health and comfort of your crew, and youwill continually and sedulously employ all thescientific means at your disposal, in renderingyour long winter as beneficial as circumstanceswill permit."In the same spirit, when the days becomesufficiently long, you will, by short and well-preparedexpeditions, add as much as you can toour knowledge of the adjacent regions. In thecase supposed, when the ice opens in the ensuingsummer, you may devote a short season to suchpursuits, and in such directions as you mayconsider most conducive to the general objectscontained in these instructions, but you will takesuch timely measures as may prevent the possibilityof a second year's detention.On your arrival in England, you are immediatelyto repair to this office, to lay before us afull account of your proceedings ; and you willdemand from the officers, and from all otherpersons under your command, the logs andjournals they may have kept, together with anycharts or drawings they may have made, allwhich are to be sealed up, in order to their beingPRELIMINARY CHAPTER. 15hereafter disposed of as we may think proper todetermine."Given under our hands, this 11th day ofJune, 1836.Charles Adam.George Elliot.To George Back, Esq.,Captain of His Majesty's ship Terror,at Chatham,By command of their Lordships,"John Barrow."The kind and valuable assistance I receivedfrom the officers who preside at the head of thedifferent departments from which we were suppliedwith stores, &c. demands my warmest acknowledgments.Admiral the Hon. C, E. Fleeminglost no opportunityof facilitating my wishes in everyrespect ; while it would be difficult to expresswhat I owe to Sir James Gordon, for the interesthe evinced, and the active measures he pursuedto get the ship quickly ready for sea.Nor can I sufficiently thank Lieutenant (nowCommander) Smyth, the officers and crew ofthe Terror, for their energetic services andmost praiseworthy conduct, under trials of no16 PRELIMINARY CHAPTER.ordinary description, sustained by all with patientfortitude. From the journal of CommanderSmyth I have derived much benefit in the compilationof the following Narrative, and to him,also, I am indebted for the faithful and spiriteddrawings which embellish it. The Chart is thework of Lieutenant Stanley, to whose efficientservices I have great pleasure in bearingtestimony.CHAPTER I.Departure from England. — Cape Farewell. — Porpoises andGulls. — Driftwood with Roots and Bark. — Leave theVicinity of Cape Farewell. — Icebergs. — Course novel andinteresting. — Resolution Island. — Whirlpool. — Descrytwo Vessels. — Dreary Aspect of the Savage Islands. — Visitedby Esquimaux. — Difficult Navigation. — Vesselmoored to an Iceberg. — Crew exercised at Small-arms underits Lee. — Geological Indications. — Careen the Ship. —Progress through the Ice. — Salisbury Island. — Ship followedby Esquimaux. — Land discovered. — Deviation inCompasses Trinity Isles. — Ship obliged to heave-to. —Whales seen. — Ship imbedded in Ice Boffin and SouthamptonIslands. — Perilous Situation. — White Whales. —Winter Island. — Water Sky.The incidents of a voyage along the coasts ofGreat Britain and across the North Atlantic,however interesting to the actors, have beenrendered so familiar to the English reader, that,passing rapidly over the earlier events, I shallhasten forward to the peculiar circumstances thatdistinguish the present expedition from thosewhich have preceded it.I had requested, and obtained, from the Admiraltythe assistance of a steam vessel until weshould be clear of the shoals, and about elevena. m. of the 14th June, 1836, the Terror leftChatham, and was towed along the Medway bythe Rhadamanthus steam vessel, amidst cheersc18 PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE.from the vessels on either side of the river. AtSheerness we were compelled to wait for gunners'stores, and it was not till the 16th that wewere finally under weigh and clear of the river.Baffling head-winds prevented me from dischargingthe steamer as I had intended at FlamboroughHead, and we were towed along at a slowrate until, on the 21st, we reached the bay ofAberdeen. The wind, which for some days hadbeen squally, had now freshened to a gale, and,as it was impossible to make any advance, thevessel was brought to an anchor. The wateringwas completed, and, in accordance with a planon which I had previously determined, the remainingleisure was employed in converting theship into a barque. To nautical men, especiallythose accustomed to polar navigation, it is unnecessaryto explain the advantages of the change ;but to the uninitiated it may be proper to mention,that the difference consists in the more simplerigging of the mizen-mast, whereby several sails,in themselves of no great use, being dispensedwith, the vessel is more easily worked, and manyhands are set free for other duties essential inthe difficult navigation through the ice. Thesuperfluous spars, which would have only encumberedus, were placed on board the Rhadamanthusand returned to Chatham.Even as it was, our decks presented a singularPREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE. 19appearance : there was a large stock of coalsstowed in double rows along the quarter-deckand gangways, leaving but a very narrow spacefor the officers and men to pass. There werethree boats on the booms and two on the quarters.On the skids over the quarter-deck weretwo whale-boats, besides several immense sledges,and whatever else could be stowed there. Largespars, planks, and a hand-mast, two tons of potatoes,provender for twenty sheep and ten pigs,the sheep and pigs themselves, with sundry ducksand fowls, occupied every other disposable nook ;and though, by a little method and skilful stowing,all this mass of dead and living lumber hadbeen made to assume some degree of form andregularity, yet it may be well imagined that therewas no superfluous space.The crew, when mustered at divisions on theSunday previous, presented to the view as finea body of men as could glad the heart of a commander; and, though experience had taught meto distrust impressions of this kind, yet, when Icast my eyes over the files, and, on a subsequentinspection, saw the neatness and comfort conspicuousin the berths, I could not avoid drawinga favourable omen for the future.Early in the morning of the 22d (the windhaving shifted in the night) we left our anchorage,still towed by the Rhadamanthus, and stoodc °220 DEPARTURE FROM ENGLAND.along the shore for Buchan-ness. In the evening,the wind freshening to a stiff breeze, compelledus to cast off the tow-rope ; and witha view of saving time, as well as the risk oflowering a boat, we sent off our letters in a kegmade fast to a line veered from the Rhadamanthusfor the purpose. The next morning, beingoff the Orkneys and the wind favourable, it wasthought unnecessary to detain the Rhadamanthusany longer, and Mr. King having received hisinstructions, parted company from us, in the trueEnglish style with three hearty cheers from hiscrew.We now shaped our course for Cape Farewell.From the 24th to the 27th, we had occasionalsqualls, with a short pitching sea, and, on the27th, a strong gale from the S. W. The sailingqualities of the Terror were thus put to the test ;and it was gratifying to find that, deep and lumberedas she was, and though at every plunge thebowsprit dipped into the water, she yet pitchedso easily as scarcely to strain a rope-yarn, and,in seaman's phrase, made very good weather ofit. This sort of weather continued with littleintermission till the 30th, the sea washing overthe decks, and the men constantly employed ;but, on that day the wind moderating and becomingat the same time more favourable, theroyal and all the studding-sails were for the firsttime set, and the gallant ship in the full pride•CAPE FAREWELL. 21of her expanded plumage floated majesticallythrough the rippling water.On the 4th of July, we were distant from CapeFarewell 537 miles, in lat. 59° 59' N. and Ion.<25° 25' W. Here a remarkable change was observedin the colour of the sea, which, thoughunder a cloudy sky, assumed a sort of bottle-greentint, such as is often seen in shoal waterover a sandy bottom. On this, as on some of thepreceding days, there was a heavy swell from theS.W., the waves being estimated to range from15 to 18 feet in height. On the 6th, we foundourselves in lat. 61° N. ; and, though therewas reason to expect that from the combinedaction of the westerly winds which had so longprevailed and the southerly current, the driftice from Davis and Hudson' Straits would becarried so far to the S. E. as to leave a clearpassage to the north ; yet, apprehensive thatsome ice might still be hanging along the coasteast of Cape Farewell, I put the ship on theother tack, and stood to the southward.On the 9th, the weather was calm, and, takingadvantage of this to inspect the holds, we detectedan unusually fetid odour, which on examinationwas found to proceed from a quantityof carrots packed in casks filled with sand. Thecasks were opened, and so offensive were thecontents, that even the pigs refused to eat them.c 322 CREW S ALLOWANCE DIMINISHED.and, much to our regret, we were compelled tothrow overboard our whole stock of a vegetablewhich would have afforded us an agreeableas well as wholesome variety of winter food.The cause assigned for the accident was, thatthe sand in which the carrots were packed hadnot been thoroughly dried. On Sunday the10th, the crew being mustered as usual by divisions,I announced my intention of putting theship on two-thirds' allowance of provisions, atthe same time carefully explaining to the menthat, in so doing, I was actuated solely by a wishto provide for their comfort, in case of any ofthose disastrous contingencies to which a servicesuch as ours was peculiarly subject. Onthe following day, this resolution was carriedinto effect as to every thing but spirits and oatmeal,of which there was an abundant stock ;and it is due to the men to say, that the regulationwas submitted to with apparent cheerfulness.The wind still blew perversely from thewest, and our rate of sailing scarcely exceededthree knots an hour, much to our annoyance,who felt how the best part of the season was thus,as it were, slipping out of our grasp. The heavyswell also continued, and, for some days afterthis, the ship rolled almost helplessly on thelong waves ; sometimes even drifting bodily toleeward. After a short interval of calm weather,PORPOISES AND GULLS. 23which was gladly taken advantage of for dryingthe clothes and hammocks, the wind again blewhard from the S. W., and for some days renderedany advance impossible. On the 18th,the gale abated, and the wind getting more tothe south, enabled us to lay on our course. Onseveral occasions before this, in the intervals ofgood weather, I had observed porpoises in greatnumbers gamboling about the vessel ; and atthis time in particular, we were visited by a largeshoal, whose sportive tricks and ludicrous attitudesrelieved the monotony of the scene, andafforded us much amusement. When they leftus, a flock of gulls succeeded, and approachedwith so much boldness as to catch the bits oftallow thrown to them from the deck. It isneedless to say that they came and departed unmolested.On the 20th, a breeze from the S. S. E.sprung up, which, before noon the next day, hadincreased to a strong gale, and carried us at theunusual rate of six knots an hour to the westwardof Cape Farewell. This, however, did notlast long, for the wind again drew round to thewest, and ended in a calm.Here some drift-wood was observed, to one ofthe pieces of which the roots and bark were stillattached. It could not, therefore, have beenlong separated from the land, but from whatland it is not easy to determine. The consider424 DRIFT-WOOD.action of this subject possesses more interest thanat first sight may appear. We have the authorityof nearly every navigator for upwards ofthree centuries, that drift-wood has been invariablyseen somewhere near the parallel ofCape Farewell ; whilst, on the other hand, bythe recent voyages of Sir E. Parry and Sir J.Ross we are assured of the entire absence ofdrift-wood from the north-western parts visitedby them. Sir E. Parry, in particular, asserts thatnone was seen by him in a period of five years.Whence then does this wood come ? Egedetells us that, in some parts of Greenland, he sawa small species of pine, perhaps not unlike theswamp fir of Hudson's Bay ; but the wood observedby us was of a longer kind, more resemblingthat usually found inland on the alluvialbanks of large rivers ; and there seem to be onlytwo places whence the wind and prevailing currentcould bring wood of that description. Itmay be, that it proceeds originally from somepart of the coast of Labrador, and that the treesthere being detached from the banks of thestreams, on the breaking up of the spring ice,and carried down by the floods which usuallyaccompany the disruption, are whirled about inthe conflicting eddies along the sea-shore, untilgetting within the influence of the regular southerlycurrent, they are met by a south west gale*LEAVE CAPE FAREWELL. 25and thus driven to the part where they are generallyseen. The other, and, in my judgment, notimprobable explanation, is to be found in thewell-known fact, that vast piles of huge driftwood,consisting of balsam, poplar, larches, firs,and birch, are swept by the annual flooding ofthe Mckenzie into the Polar Sea, and are therecarried out in different directions as the tidecurrent and set of the ice may determine. Thegreater portion, we know, parts east and westof the mouth of the river, and accumulating onthe Polar shores, furnishes to the poor Esquimauxan invaluable and inexhaustible supply ofmaterial for their canoes and other rude implementsof art. But is it impossible that anotherportion may be driven out far to the north, andthere, meeting with a westerly current, be broughtinto Davis's Straits through some yet unexploredchannel ?On the 23d, we at length gave our willingadieu to Cape Farewell, under the welcome influenceof a breeze from the eastward ; but in thenight the wind shifted and blew hard, making asea, which kept the men half-leg deep on thequarter-deck. From the 25th to the 28th, wehad a pleasant run across Davis's Straits undera steady breeze from S. W. Day light on the29th exhibited to us a small iceberg, and soonafterwards several larger bergs and a heavy26 ICEBERGS.stream of ice were discerned to the westward.We advanced close to the margin of thelatter, and then tacked off: it was composed oflarge floe pieces, and ran in a direction fromN.W. to S. E. The rapid fall of the thermometerin the night had indicated the vicinityof ice, and now a thick fog coming on whichobscured the view, we were informed only bythe still greater depression of the temperature,and by the roaring of the surf distinctly heard,that we were not far from some considerable massof ice. Accordingly in the evening when theweather cleared, we observed an enormous berg,the perpendicular face of which was not lessthan 300 feet high, and other smaller bergs,nine altogether, in other directions. Preparationshad been made for avoiding or escapingthe danger of a too close acquaintance withthese gigantic neighbours, in case the fog hadcontinued ; and, among other things, the boomforesail had been bent, — a sail which, as nauticalmen will be aware, is, by reason of its quickmovement, of excellent use in narrow channelsand consequently among ice, where it is necessaryto alter course often and suddenly toavoid the floating masses. The clearing of theweather rendered these precautions for the presentunnecessary, and we proceeded on ourcourse with studding-sails set, until suddenly aCOURSE NOVEL AND INTERESTING. Tjgleam of continuous ice was seen right ahead,which threatened an interruption of our progress.But as the morning of the 30th brokewe found the heavy stream before us less compactthan had been feared, and entered the packwith confidence.The day was beautifully fine, and to thosewho were novices in this sort of navigation,nothing could exceed the interest of the scene :the tall ship with all her sails set threadingher graceful way through the masses of ice,upon a sea as smooth as an inland lake. Whata contrast from the mountain waves over whichwe had been tossing and tumbling for weekspast! Again, in the far horizon, there was theever-welcome loom of land ; and though fromour distance according to reckoning, some doubtswere at first expressed as to the reality of thisappearance, yet these were soon afterwards setat rest, and the land at eight a. m. was distinctlyvisible to the naked eye, stretching from W. totoN. W. by N. We supposed it to be Blackheadon the Labrador coast, not far from CapeChudleigh, and which our noon observationsplaced sixty miles distant. It is to be remarked,that the weather was unusually clear, with atemperature of 36°, and the wind blowing off theland, so that objects could be discerned at a greatdistance. There was a considerable quantity of28 RESOLUTION ISLAND.snow on the summits and sides of the coast,which about 11a. m. was refracted into the mosteccentric outlines, some not unlike the form ofa pagoda. The latitude to-day was 60° 17 N.and longitude by chronometer 6l°57' W., fromwhich we learnt that we had been set by the currentno less than forty-one miles south in thespace of two days. Our distance from ResolutionIsland, at noon, was sixty-nine miles.Towards evening the wind dropped, and webent our cables to be in readiness, in case weshould be carried into situations where it mightbe necessary to seek an anchorage. A thin iceformed during the night, and, on the 31st, thepack seemed to have gathered more closelyaround us. The day, however, was beautifullycalm, and a boat was sent to procure fresh waterfrom the pools formed on the surface of thelarger masses of ice. A light breeze soon afterwardssprung up, which, though scarcely raisinga ripple on the water, kept the sails full aloft,and carried us gently onward at the rate of twoknots. The nearer view now afforded us of theland presented nothing attractive. Peaked andsplintered hills, resting on a sort of shelf orledge, which again broke off perpendicularlyinto dark cliffs raised upon shelving banks coveredwith snow *, and farther off, though still, as itRESOLUTION ISLAND. 29seemed, connected with these, a ridge of heightsrounder and more regular, but all bare and desolate,without one tinge of green to relieve thesombre picture, ■ — such was the forbidding aspectof this unsocial coast. After divine service theboat was again sent for water, which was foundto be of excellent quality, and our stock was increasedto eleven runs, — a supply amply sufficient,however long our run might prove to be.Throughout the 1st of August we continuedto push our way through the yielding masses,with no further mischief than a few thumps andgrindings.We were now fast approaching Cape Chud-leigh and Button's Isles, and, not long afterwards,land was descried to the N. E., whichwe knew to be Resolution Island, and the landto the westward of it, when suddenly a delta ofice appeared in front of us, so close as to defyall attempts to penetrate it. Of the navigablelanes' at its sides one led considerably to theeast, and the other branched immediately alongthe Labrador coast beyond Button's Isles, fromthence apparently leading into open water. Mygeneral plan was to have kept the north shoreclose aboard, after the example of the ableofficers who had preceded me on these services;and, indeed, of the Hudson's Bay ships, which30 DENSE FOG.invariably take that direction in their outwardpassage ; but having a commanding breeze anda clearer space for sailing in, I did not hesitate,under the circumstances, to take the south shore,intending to follow it up until a change in thewind or ice should render it advisable to edgeover to the usual track. At 8 h p. m. ResolutionIsland was seen bearing by compass N. by E.,and we were beginning to flatter ourselves thatwe had cleared the obstacles when, aboutnoon, a dense fog came on, and the ice increasedin quantity and dimension so muchas to excite some apprehension of the practicabilityof passing it. At 2 h of the followingmorning, the fog was so dense that the 'leads' oropenings could not be distinguished, and therewas no resource but to heave-to until the weathershould be clearer. In an hour's time it didclear, and, though for a few minutes only, yetthe interval enabled us to catch a glimpse ofa passage between some large masses ahead.The breeze was quite fair, and again setting thesmall sails we ran on through very heavy ice,sometimes temporarily arrested, and at othersboring through every impediment, not, however,without receiving some violent concussions.By 7 h a. m. we had cleared this difficulty, butsoon came to a solid pack from twenty to twenty-fivefeet high, which, of course, there was noDIFFICULT NAVIGATION. 31hope of penetrating. Wishing, however, tokeep as near mid channel as I could, I coastedthe edge of the pack until a narrow stream wasseen, through which we bored our way untilwe again came to heavy sailing ice. It wasexceedingly difficult to ascertain whereabout wewere, for independently of the fog, which ofitself was bad enough, the whole of the compassesbecame so sluggish as to require tappingwith the finger every five or ten minutes to makethem traverse at all, and could not, therefore, bedepended on. There was, however, no choice,but either to run on at all hazards, or to heave-to,at the risk of being beset in the pack, whichevery moment the wind was driving closer.Rather than be detained in such a manner, atleast in this place, I determined to stretch overto the north shore, which, in fact, had now becomethe weather one, and to depend on thesharpness of our sight for discovering the land,at the same time, having every thing ready forguarding against accidents. The manner inwhich this resolution was executed was highlycreditable to the ice-mate, Mr. Green, and thegunner, Mr. Donaldson, who took upon themthe duty of piloting the ship in these situationsby turns, — a duty for which the latter, in particular,was well qualified by the experience hehad acquired under Sir E. Parry. Frequently,3:2 IMPEDED BY FOG AND ICE.while boring through the packed pieces, or endeavouringto force some mass aside, the officerswere onions: the foremost over the bows to assistin carrying out an ice-anchor with a line to warpthe ship, or, with long poles, to push the iceaway from the stern, and all seemed really to enjoythe novelty and excitement of the scene.The ice for the most part was old and rotten,consisting of portions of broken floes, with squareblocks and hummocks on them. The weatherthroughout the afternoon continued so thick,that even ice could not be discerned above twohundred yards off; and being, as we supposed,near the north shore, I was not a little anxiouslest we should be driven by some violent currentagainst it an accident which, having experiencedon a former occasion, I was by nomeans desirous of encountering a second time.Towards midnight, we found ourselves embarrassedamongst floes and very heavy jce, thedifficulty of avoiding which was much augmentedby the lightness of the breeze thenblowing from the south-west. However, in themorning of August 3d, the breeze returning toits old point of S. E. freshened a little, mostopportunely and fortunately for us, for theweather continuing equally misty, we were becomingentangled amid large masses of ice which,under the influence of a strong current, oftenWHIRLPOOL. S3struck the ship with a force that made her reel ;while the windward stream was approachingthe leeward so rapidly as to make it extremelydoubtful whether we should not be caught betweenthem, and there be beset for, perhaps,several days. Every sail that could be of theleast utility had been set, and for a short intervalwe seemed to be gaining ground, but onaltering the position of the head to clear a smallfloe directly before us, the current took the shipon the starboard beam, and sent her bodily towardsthe stream to leeward ; and whilst wewere contemplating this result as almost inevitable,one of those whirlpools which are commonin the vicinity of the Island of Resolutioncaught us, and turning the ship round againstthe helm, rendered her totally unmanageable.This seemed to decide the matter ; and we mustinfallibly have been carried into the already densepack, had not the breeze at that moment suddenlyfreshened, and forced us onwards towardsan opening a-head. About the same time(3 h a. m.), the eastern horizon cleared, so as justto enable land to be seen much nearer than,under these circumstances, was desirable ; for,in that direction, with such a confusion of crosscurrents, we had scarcely any control over theship, and the weather again thickened with rain,which, with the thermometer at 31°, froze onD34 SAVAGE ISLANDS.the rigging as it fell, and hung in icicles fromthe boats and hammock-rails.There was now no choice but to endeavourto close the shore and get to windward of thewhole body of ice, and this having succeededafter repeated trials in effecting, we continuedduring the remainder of the forenoon runningat a moderate rate through sailing pieces, whichfrom their size there was little trouble in steeringclear of. Observations could not be got,but the dead reckoning placed us in latitude61° 39' N., and some doubtful sights gave thesame latitude, and longitude 67° 7' "W«The weather, which during the day had beenhazy, cleared towards the evening, and gave us adistinct view of the bleak and snow-streakedland, with several islands, which we conjecturedto be part of the group lying between the middleand lower Savage Islands. The sea being verycalm the officers lowered a boat, and set off inquestof the seals and loons which were swimmingabout ; but a brace of the latter was theonly result of a considerable expenditure ofpowder and shot. During the night, with alight breeze heading us and the vessel closehauled, I found to my surprise that, of courseunder the influence of some current, the shiphad weathered, or, in other words, gone to thewestward so much, that I gladly kept underSaddlebags. 35weigh, passing between large pieces of ice withoutinconvenience. The same thing continuingthe next day we found ourselves at noon, bythe observations, abreast of the middle SavageIslands, and could see the extremes of landfrom S. E. to N. N. E., the nearest being six orseven miles distant. It was not, however, tillsome hours had elapsed, that the remarkableland called Saddle-back could be made out. Atthis place, every vessel having occasion to visitthe straits has invariably fallen in with Esquimaux; but, although we stood within a fewmiles of the shore, none appeared, nor did we perceiveany trace of them, from whence I inferredthey had already made their annual barter withthe Hudson's Bay ships, and were gone into theinterior to hunt. About three in the afternoonan iceberg, about forty feet high, and of very picturesqueform, suddenly, at the distance of abouta quarter of a mile from the ship, either toppledover, or parted with a large mass detached fromits summit. The splash in the water, thefoam which succeeded, and the fearful rockingof the berg before it again settled upon its base,gave us some notion of the danger of a too closeneighbourhood on such occasions. The breezewas lost as night drew on, and the usual calmsucceeded; but at ll h p.m. a light air creptalong the water from the south, and havingd 236 DESCRY TWO VESSELS.again set the studding-sails, by midnight we weremaking some progress through the water.Early on August 5th the ice, which for a briefinterval had disappeared in a manner altogetherunaccountable, was again reported to be a-head,and we shortly found ourselves beset by it on allsides, not, however, so compact as to stop usaltogether. In this we might be consideredfortunate, for, at 4 h a. m., a ship and brig, supposedto belong to the Hudson's Bay Company,were observed working through heavy-packedice to leeward, the brig considerably a-stern ofthe other. Our colours were immediately hoistedat the mast-head, but were not answered ; and,every moment being precious, I pushed on withoutfurther notice of them, until about 7 h a. m.I was arrested, in my turn, by a continuous lineof the same pack, which it was now evident runin towards, if not altogether to, the upperSavage Islands. At first, the prospect of detentionseemed inevitable, but few things aremore uncertain than the navigation among ice,and, however desperate the situation, there isgenerally room for hope. So it turned out nowin our case ; for, when measures w r ere about tobe taken to reduce sail, lanes of water were distinguishedround the deep bay or inlet formedwithin the upper Savage Islands ; and, althoughthe following of these lanes involved the ne-drearyASPECT OF THE SAVAGE ISLANDS. 37necessity of running towards a lee-shore with a windfrom the south ; yet rather than lose ground, asthe weather was extremely fine, and I had greatconfidence in our resources, I determined onmaking the attempt. In effecting this, we hadto pass within a short distance of the easternextremity of the bay, and had a distinct view ofthe hills and valleys of the shore.There were many rocks, more or less cladwith a dark and russet herbage enlivened bya single patch of green, and altogether as melancholyand repulsive as fancy could conceive.It was a place, in short, that even the sea-tiredmariner would scarcely leave his ship to visit.The ice, it was gratifying to find, was entirelyof last winter's produce ; and, though sometimesclose and thick, offered but a weak resistance aswe bored our way through it. The tide also,which was flowing, lent us its aid, dispersing theice so as to leave a clear lead almost to the farthestpoint in view. Just as we had got abreast of alarge island, on which Sir E. Parry had landedin 1821, and were looking at a cairn erected,possibly by him, on its highest hill, we were informedby the look-out man from the crowns-nest,that a number of canoes had set off from a pointof the island and were making towards us. Itwas some time before they were visible from thedeck, but fortunately for them the breeze atd 838 VISITED BY ESQUIMAUX.that moment moderating, between twenty andthirty Keiyaks and three Oomiaks came up withtheir noisy owners vociferating their accustomedTina" or " Chime," and " pilletay," till wecould scarcely hear each other's voices. Thesewere clearly apart of the Saddlebags Esquimaux,and began their traffic with the advantage ofpractised traders, determined to make the bestof the market, Accordingly, no device or cunningwas left untried by them ; and in this respect,at all events, it must fairly be confessed,that they proved their superiority. They beganby offering the most trifling articles first, such asseal-skin mittens and boots, of which many hadalready seen service, and some were actuallypatched; one pair of mittens particularly with oldblue cloth, which, however, the eager purchaser didnot perceive. When they were detected, their loudlaughter showed how greatly they enjoyed thejoke. Neither could they be prevailed upon topart with bags of oil, or any thing else of realvalue without something better in return thanthe old iron hoop, which was all that 1 wouldpermit to be offered in exchange. The women,in particular, were more outrageous than I hadever observed before, for besides disposing oftheir garments, which they never hesitated to do,more than one actually offered to barter theirchildren for a few needles. In the rest of theirCREW TRAFFIC WITH THE ESQUIMAUX. 39dealings, habits, and manners, more especially asrespects stealing, they fully verified the variousaccounts that have already appeared in print :for, though sentinels were posted at differentparts of the ship purposely to prevent pilfering,and not one of them was allowed to come onboard,yet so dextrous were they that, in spiteof all our vigilance, they contrived to cut awaytwo or three fathoms of rope from alongside theship. When the crew had purchased what theyrequired, wearied with their incessant clamours,I ordered the men on board, and bade our noisyvisitors leave us. Some, and among them thewomen, obeyed, but many, principally youngmen, lingered for some time about the ship,singing, laughing, and shouting according totheir several fancies.Having passed the island and opened theNorth Bluff, a number of smaller and lowerislands became visible above the ice, showing theplace where Baffin had been in 1665. The windfell as it had done for some days past, at the commencementof the ebb, about 3 h p. m., but theship still going slowly a-head, without losingground or being obliged to make fast to ice,cheered us with the hope of a satisfactoryprogress. The night was cloudy and calm, withsometimes a high flow of wind from differentd 440 DIFFICULT NAVIGATION.quarters of the compass, and the ship more thanonce came round against the helm and drove closeinshore. Fortunately the shore was bold and thewater deep, but an immediate effort was madeto get her round so as to be ready for .the firstair to stand farther off. At that time no leadcould be descried from the mast-head, whenceall in the direction of our course seemed to beone compact body. Nevertheless, when towardsmidnight a breeze sprung up from the southwestthe studding-sails were again set, and,though we received an occasional hard thump,we had the consolation to find that we werecreeping along the land ; a low point of which,directly a-head, we were most anxious to getround, from an impression that a clear spacewould certainly be found to the westward of it.The next day (August 6th) brought with itan increase of wind, which enabled us to borethrough some heavy masses, one of which nearlycarried away the fluke of the best bower anchor.The ship, indeed, struck with great force, breakingthe smaller impediments and thrusting thelarger ones out of the channel, so as to make alane for herself; and having, at length, succeededin rounding the low point already mentioned,and having found there, as had beenanticipated, a clearer space along shore, we followedit, though not without difficulty. TheSECOND VISIT OF THE ESQUIMAUX. 41winter line of ice was very apparent along thebeach, exactly as on the banks of lakes and broadrivers in the interior of America. The heightwas less than I should have supposed, and couldnot have exceeded thirty feet from low-watermark. It must, therefore, have been formedduring an unusually calm season ; for, even inthese inland situations, a rise of full twenty feet isby no means uncommon.We had a second visit from the Esquimaux,with the same noisy bartering, the same cupidity,and the same unnatural readiness to exchangetheir children for a few needles or a saw. Esquimaux,indeed, will give any thing to procurewhat they desire ; a laughable instance of whichwas afforded by a young woman who, observingthat one of the officers had not much hair on hishead, immediately offered to supply him withher own at the easy price of a curtain-ring. Theweather continued beautifully fine, with a temperatureof 35°, and the water 32° ; and, at noon,the latitude was 62° 39' N. longitude, 70° 50' W.For the remainder of this day and the nextwe continued beating along the shore, wherevera lane of water was to be found ; and such wasthe strength of the current which set us in thedirection of our course, that, notwithstandingthe impediments by which we were beset, and awind for the most part heading us, we made42 FALL IN THE BAROMETER.satisfactory progress. We received, it is true,some heavy thumps from the drift ice, but tothese we were now become familiarised. In theearly morning of the 8th, the wind having shiftedmore to the west, we were enabled to make aconsiderable advance ; but, about nine o'clock,the scene was materially changed. We wereabreast of the five hillocks spoken of by Sir EdwardParry, when, instead of the enlivening viewof open water, which had just before greeted us,nothing could now be discerned but one firmlyknitted pack of ice, stretching from the outerpoint of the shore as far south as the horizon,and forbidding even the hope of an opening inany available direction. The barometer, too,which of late had showed but very little variation,had fallen from 29° 8/ to 29° 54', and thesky became dark and gloomy, snow fell, and thewind blew half a gale from the N. N. W. Whatsmall sails we had up were instantly taken in,and the topsails reduced two reefs. But all ourefforts to hold on our course were unavailing ;and as there happened to be a tolerably largeberg at no great distance, I determined to makefast to it } as the only way of keeping to windward.Accordingly, having run to leeward, a boat waslowered, containing two ice-anchors and lines ;and, while the most experienced of the crewwere employed in fixing these in the berg, on itsVESSEL MOORED TO AN ICEBERG. 4.3shelving side, (for the other was perpendicular,)the ship made a tack, until, upon signal, sheagain dropped down and shot up to the veryedge of the berg. Then, sending out two stronghawsers, which were affixed to the anchors, shesoon became safely moored ; and the sails werefurled.Here we lay, snugly sheltered from the gale,which now freshened, carefully watching howeverthe slightest motion of the berg, lest, uponsome change of its equilibrium, it should toppleover, and so prove our destruction instead ofour safety. Nothing however occurred to disturbus till about two o'clock of the followingmorning, when a heavy floe drifted against theberg, on the weather-side, with a violent shock.For some minutes it seemed uncertain whetherthe ponderous mass would not turn completelyover ; but, after many oscillations, a large piecewas supposed to have broken off from the southwesternpoint, which, though it increased theagitation for a time, seemed to have restored thebalance, and the mass again became stationary.During this suspense, it will be easily believedwe were not idle ; for, not knowing how soonwe might be overwhelmed, the hawsers were instantlyveered away to eighty fathoms, and carefulhands stationed to cut the ropes in case the dangerbecame more imminent.44 CREW EXERCISED AT SMALL ARMS.As the day advanced the body of ice to windwardwas not found, as had been expected, tohave undergone any favourable alteration ; butit was consoling to find by the bearings of theland that we had rather gained than lost groundby making fast to the berg, and it was evidentthat, for the present, nothing better could bedone than to remain where we were. In themean time, as there was nothing to be apprehendedfor the safety of the ship, which layextremely easy under the lee, the crew, foroccupation, were exercised at small arms ; and,considering that many of them had never had amusket in their hands before, they acquittedthemselves very creditably. By the bearings ofa remarkable hill, N. 94° E., it was clear thatalthough we were certainly going slowly to thenorthward and westward, yet we were settingat the same time towards the shore. At 4 h p. m.,however, there was an apparent reaction in theinshore body of ice, which now began to setabout S. S. E., and, to avoid being hemmed in,it became necessary to cast off from the berg.Having done so, we went under as easy sail asthe ice would allow between south and west ;and, though we had now the mortification tobehold, from the mast-head, a continuous pack,extending from what we took to be Broken Pointto south-west, yet, by carefully watching suchSOUNDINGS. 45openings as offered themselves, and making moresail on the ship, we succeeded in reaching a holeof water; beyond this however there was nooutlet, and the ship was necessarily hove-to. Atdaylight, the wind having veered to the southwest,we bore up, and ran between the detachedice as near as we could, though not withoutmany violent shocks that made the whole frameworkof the ship tremble.We continued all that day laboriously boringour way through heavy streams of ice, or vainlyendeavouring to weather the larger masses, underthe disadvantage of a dense fog : but theship at length received so many blows, and theice closed so fast while we were continuallydrifting to leeward, that it would have been rashto have continued any longer the unequal andprofitless contest. I therefore made fast, withan ice-anchor, to an adjoining floe, and, havingfurled the sails, employed the men in making afew necessary reparations. Soundings were obtainedwith one hundred and twenty seven fathomsof line, when the bottom was found to consist ofgreen mud, the current then setting N. W. by W.,one mile an hour. Some observations for the dipmade on the ice, out of the sphere of the ship'sattraction, gave 85° 54'. At daybreak of the11th, not the slightest alteration was perceptible,except indeed that the north and west horizons46 GEOLOGICAL INDICATIONS.glared with refracted ice, now wedged into acompact body. At noon, I regretted to find wehad drifted a few miles to the southward. Soundingswere then got with one hundred and twenty-ninefathoms, and consisted of grey sand ; withone hundred and fifty fathoms of line the currentset E. S. E., at the rate of two miles an hour ;but the lead being hauled up to sixty-five fathoms,an upper set was observed to be running north,about half a mile an hour. On the floes werefound a quantity of stones and small fragmentsof rocks, with deposits of yellow mud and a fewpieces of sea-weed. Some of the former wererounded by attrition, as if they had been exposedto the action of the waves on the beach, andwere composed of sienite and limestone, withsmall crystals of quartz.Towards evening the clouds gathered in thenorth and the breeze freshened, bringing with itoccasional showers of snow, but without betokeninga favourable change for us ; and thefollowing day the appearance to windward wasmost discouraging, for not a lane of water nor anopening could be made out. Accordingly, as thechance of advancing was diminished, it becameimportant at all events not to lose ground ; and alanner floe having drifted near, we cast off fromour present holding, and made fast to it. It wasnow ascertained that the larboard bow had sustainedinjury, to the depth of three inches, fromREPAIR THE SHIP. 4<7the force with which the ship had struck againstthe ice in boring ; and having careened her, thewhole of the forenoon was employed in restoringit with plank and a sheathing of iron. At noonthe observations made us six or seven miles tothe southward of yesterday's position, but at thesame time somewhat to the westward. We endeavouredto try the different dipping-needles ;but after getting the instruments fixed, the icewas found to move too much in azimuth, andwe were obliged to relinquish the attempt, Thefloe to which we were attached, seemed to havebeen formed by the pressure of many detachedpieces together, some of which were uplifted tenorfifteen feet above the level of the general mass.Several pools of excellent fresh water were foundon it ; and this being a good opportunity to fillthe empty tanks, the ship was warped alongsideand with the assistance of the engine, the taskwas soon completed. The officers amused themselveswith shooting, and bagged two or threebrace of dovekies, which after being skinned andsteeped for a time in water, were made into seapies, and pronounced very excellent eating.They also endeavoured to kill some seals, whichcontinually popped their heads out of the waterwith apparent curiosity, gazing stupidly at thosewho were about to destroy them. But thoughit is certain they were hit, and often on the head,48 IMPEDED BY FOG AND ICE.yet in no instance could they be secured beforethey sunk.About 4 h p m., though it was still perfectlycalm, the ice began to set past the ship to thesouth-east, at an unusual rate, and then, by acounter-movement, closed in around us so quicklyas to compel us to move, by warping on theother side of the floe. A very light air thensprung up from the S.S.W., but gradually gotmore to the westward, accompanied as usual bya dense fog ; and at nightfall it was remarkedthat young ice was rapidly forming between thestationary pieces.On the 13th the fog still continued, and ithad again fallen calm ; but the floes near usbeing large and hammocks, we cast off from theice, and sending a boat a-head, along such openingsas could be found, made fast a line to projectingmasses or hummocks, and so warped theship to the north. A faint breeze from the rightquarter fortunately came to our aid, and enabledus to make sail on the vessel, and dispense withthis laborious substitute. The ice, however,was distressingly close and heavy, and no clearwatercould be seen in any direction. The weatherindeed remained continually hazy, and soprevented us from distinguishing the right, or indeedany, lead beyond the distance of two hundredyards. My object was to force a passage to theship's progress through the ice. 49north, from a conviction that, as we got nearerto the shore, the influence of the tides would bemore felt, and more open water thereby created,or at least that the ice would be lighter : for suchheavy and extensive masses as we now encounteredwere contrary to the experience of all whohad gone before us, and I could only supposethat the ice had not been broken up at all lastyear, but, having come down in a body, createdour present impediment. At noon the latitudewas obtained on a small floe, and made us withina mile of yesterday's situation. The sun shone,brightly through the mist ; and though, owingto the radiation of heat from the decks and bulwarks,there was no perceptible dampness below,yet the rigging aloft was coated with fine icyparticles, which, being viewed from the crossness,presented the appearance of a prismatichalo resting in the concavity of the fore-topsail.The wind at length freshened precisely as wewished it, and the ship, with her studding-sailsset, bored between masses often more than halfa mile in length, resisting the pressure, anddriving pieces before her in a manner perfectlysurprising, and no sooner had she made a wayfor herself than the icy portals closed firmly, and,as it seemed, impassable behind her. At lengththe entire body ahead looked like one compacthammocks field, streaked with a few dark linesE50 ship's progress through the ice,of unequal breadth ; boring through which, weseemed to be, as it were, ploughing a furrowtowards the north. Advancing in this manner,I was glad to see that there was, a few miles officeof a looser kind ; and no effort was left unpractisedto reach it. Just as we were on the verypoint of succeeding, two floes were attracted, ordriven by a current together, and effectuallyjammed us in. Happily the breeze at the samemoment freshened ; and, after some delay, inwhich the floe of last winter's formation beganto crack and yield, while that of the previousseason remained firm as a rock, the ship, breakinga large mass away and forcing it beforeher bluff bows, cleared a passage through. Itwould be a tedious repetition to relate all thetrouble and anxiety that we experienced in forcingthrough the heavy barrier, which, I am of opinion,hangs about this part of the strait fromthe influence of opposing currents issuing, theone from the north, probably through the openingformed by Broken Point, and the others frombetween the islands to the south. The influenceof the same barrier, I apprehend, aided byeasterly gales, produces the interruption occasionallymet with by the Hudson Bay ships ontheir homeward passage, and which but a shorttime ago compelled them to winter in thecountry. However this may be, we were heartilySALISBURY ISLAND. 51glad to get out of the thick of it, which, thoughstill hampered on every side by small floes anddrift masses, we now considered ourselves ashaving achieved. As we advanced to the northwest,the lanes and holes of water increased; butthe weather continuing hazy, with intermittentshowers of snow, and the night gloomy, andconsequently darker than usual, the smaller sailswere taken in, and, running securely under topgallantsails, we kept on a devious course throughthe ice.Early on the 14th, during a partial clearanceof the clouds to the west, some of the peoplefancied they saw land, which, according to thebearing, could be no other than Salisbury Island ;and, in the forenoon, the wind then blowingfresh, land was reported on the lee-bow, whichour reckoning made the north coast of thestrait, in longitude 76 5& W., to the eastward ofthe Nottingham Island of Sir E. Parry, or MillIslands of Arrowsmith. It was evident thereforethat our progress had been very favourable; and, if a passage were to be effected thisautumn, I felt assured that we were now in thebest channel for accomplishing it. Having stoodwithin three miles of the land, the ship was putround, and directions given to work to windwardalong shore. The first appearance whichthe coast presented was a round-backed hill,,e 252 SHIP FOLLOWED BY ESQUIMAUX.which, as seen through the haze, seemed isolated,but as we neared it proved to be part of a lowisland. There were several others almost in aline with it, all presenting the same sombre aspectwhich characterised the coast generally,except one, which was relieved by a light yellowcolour as of sand, but which, on inspection witha telescope, was found to be rock. The landbehind the islands was tolerably high, and bold,broken into bluffs and points, and, from its indentedshape, probably formed some good harbours.The ship was now going at the rate of fiveknots through the water, when two Esquimauxkieyaks were seen endeavouring to overtake us ;presently the wind becoming more fair the and royal were set, and the speed ofcourse increased. The poor Esquimaux neverthelesspaddled away with all their might, andfinally succeeded in coming up with us, thoughalmost in a state of exhaustion. They had littleto offer except the horn of a narwal ; and, afterreceiving a few bits of iron hoop, they went aw r aybut ill compensated for the fatigue which theyhad undergone.About 6 p. m. the weather became very thick,and snow fell so abundantly as completely tocover the decks and boats. The wind alsochanged to the north, so that we could noLAND DISCOVERED. 53longer lie our course ; and, not knowing exactlyhow near Mill Islands might be, or, fromthe amazing difference in the variation, whetherw r e might not be actually standing on them, thesmall sails were taken in and the topsails reefed,and, with the anchors ready to let go, weproceeded with the utmost caution. That wewere near to the land w r as certain, but nonecould be distinguished through the haze, eitherto windward or leeward, and we literally gropedour w r ay in much uncertainty, and not withoutsome anxiety. The wind also increased to such adegree that the ship was put under snug canvass,and, for the first time since leaving the Atlantic,there was a regular sea, and consequently nocontinuous ice. The next morning brought nochange for the better, for the wind was accompaniedby snow, and that, with the haze, so embarrassedus, that it was difficult to determinein what direction to proceed. However, whendaylight broke the ship was put about ; and wehad the pleasure of seeing that the head seawhich tumbled us about was at the same timefast reducing the ice into fragments.About 7 h A « m. land was discovered, forming asemicircle to windward, and which, guided bythe log, we conjectured to be Seahorse Point ofBaffin, on Southampton Island. The distancecertainly seemed rather more than the ship wase 3S4> PERPLEXITY OF SHIP'S COURSE.in the habit of accomplishing ; and what addedto the uncertainty was, the incomprehensiblemanner in which the islands had been passed(if passed at all) without having been seen. Themountains — for such they appeared through thehaze — were nearly covered with snow, the effectof the preceding night ; and some small islandscould be indistinctly made out. Our course washeld parallel to them, in the hope, rather thanthe persuasion, that they would terminate in thepoint which was to lead us to Frozen Strait ; but,about ll h a. m., we suddenly found ourselves embayed,and, from the still prevailing murkiness,had barely time to get the ship round ; when itwas indisputably ascertained that the coast tendedfar to the east. Under these perplexing circumstances,I determined not to incur any riskwhich might endanger the safety of the ship,and directed her to be kept, under easy sail, closeunder the lee of the high land just mentioned,until the weather should be clear enough tojustify me in acting differently. It was fortunatethat I did so ; for, having obtained thelatitude at noon, and the longitude soon afterwards,we found, much to our astonishment, thatwe were not near Southampton Island at all, buthad been deceived by great deviation in thecompasses, and a powerful current, which haddriven us along the eastern side of Mill Islands,and thence to the main shore of the strait* whereDEVIATION OF COMPASS. £>5in fact we had been embayed. However, wemust have passed between the islands during thenight, though how, or in what direction remaineda mystery ; and we were thankful, as we hadreason to be, for our happy guidance amongthem. In' the afternoon the sky became moreclear; and it was then apparent, that though undera press of sail, we could not stem the current,which at that time (7 11 p. m.) was carrying usbodily away to the south and east. The variationof the compass with the ship's head N. W. wasfound to be six and a half points, but whenNee. only three and a half. At 10 h p. m. wewere to leeward of our afternoon's position,and stood in again for the main.After beating about between Mill Islands andthe north shore all night, we found ourselves inthe morning, the 16th, still to leeward of theformer, and utterly unable to make head againstthe current. Near noon, being then within amile of the shore, we could perceive a strongrace, within which was an eddy sweeping theice about in a furious manner. At the line ofits junction with the regular tide there was a fallproduced of at least three or four feet, whichhid all but the upper surface of the ice near it.My object had been to get close in shore, froman impression that we should be less opposed bythe current there than further out j but, as eitherE 456 TRINITY ISLES.current or tide was now driving us fast towardsthe land, it became necessary to tack, and tryour fortune once more in the offing. It wasevident that no ordinary cause could thus havedetained us two days with a commanding breeze;and I began to think that nothing but a fairwind would release us, when suddenly the shiptook a start, and just as unaccountably wentaway in mid channel, hurrying us in a short timeabreast of the Trinity Isles of Fox. The northshore was partially covered with the snow thathad lately fallen ; all that could be seen consistedof solid and barren rock, entirely destitute ofherbage, or, as far as I could judge, of any thingcapable of supporting life. Not an inhabitant,nor even an animal or bird was seen.By 4 h p. m. the islands were upwards of tenmiles astern, when the breeze left us, and weobtained soundings in one hundred and twenty-threefathoms, the bottom consisting as usualof blue mud. Soon after we had snow, andthe barometer began to fall. Hardly had thenecessary reduction been made in the sails,when the wind increased to a fresh gale,which speedily brought us to the edge of someheavy ice. The whole of the night was occupiedin endeavouring to twine our way throughit; and although in the morning of the 17th,from its detached appearance hopes were excitedthat the interruption would not be of long con-shipHove-to. 57finance, yet the favourable breeze soon broughtin sight an enormous floe, the extremes of whichwere lost in the driving snow and mist. Unwillingto try the north end of it, as that wouldhave led us again to the eastward, in which directionit trended as far as could be discerned,I determined on running along its lee side. Thiswas almost in the direction of our course, but,as it turned out, conducted us into a labyrinth,that might have been of serious consequencehad the wind at all abated ; for, after sailing forsome time, we found ourselves between two floesof unknown extent ; and though if the weatherhad been clear we might perhaps have found apassage, yet with every thing dark a-head, andthe liability to be nipped by the closing of theice, no such chance could be trusted to. Notamoment therefore was lost in worming ourway back, which after some trouble and anxietywas accomplished.An attempt was then made in another * lead ',which only guided us to a solid pack ; so that,baffled at every turn, the ship was for a timehove-to. As soon as the weather cleared — whichit did with a change of wind, directly contraryto our progress, but the very best for separatingand clearing away the ice — we tookthe only course left to us, and beat to windward,towards a narrow opening, which it wasthought might possibly offer a channel. Snow58 WHALES.had fallen, which, after being partially thawed onthe decks, was there solidly frozen — a result tobe expected with a temperature of 29° + • Landwas supposed to have been seen, in the directionof Southampton Island ; but, in the absence ofgood observations, no reliance was placed onthe report. Persevering in plying to windward,amongst the heaviest drift ice I had ever beheld,it was not without great difficulty, and ata great sacrifice of distance, that the innumerablemasses surrounding vis could be steeredclear of; nor was this always the case, since, inspite of all our care, the ship would sometimesdrive on them with a concussion that made allthe bells ring, and almost threw those below fromtheir chairs. Two whales, the first seen sinceour arrival in these latitudes, excited the curiosityof the novices, but did not produce amongthe Greenland sailors the enthusiasm which Iremember to have observed with much pleasureon a former occasion. At that time they ranup the rigging, and followed every motion of thewhale with the most unequivocal symptoms ofdelight ; and one of their number, unable tocontain his joy at seeing the monstrous creatureheave its bulk partly out of the water, cried outin ecstasy, " There she goes, my boys, tail upfor Greenland." The next morning two otherwhales were seen.The remainder of the day was employed inSOUTHAMPTON ISLAND. 59the tedious manner already described ; and in thenight the ship, having little head-way, ran against,or rather dropped broadside on, a floe, fromwhich she could not be removed without the aidof a warp, which was accordingly carried out toa projecting point. The land of SouthamptonIsland was now distinctly made out, bearing bycompass N. W-g-N., but far away. Both compasseswere more than commonly sluggish, andrequired constant tapping ; a phenomenon whichwas observed to be more palpable with the ship'shead west, than on any other point.The next day (August 18.), after beating towindward slowly till noon, the ice became soclose that there was but one hole of water towork in ; nearer the land, which was now visiblefrom the deck, looking like blue hills, it appearedto be somewhat looser, but as it was not sufficientlyso to allow of our reaching it, we werecompelled to go wherever the least chance of anopening presented itself. At length we cameto a solid and unbroken pack, of such fearfulextent as to throw a sudden damp on our hopes.It looked, from the crowns-nest, as if it werejoined to the land, and stretching thence, westand north, glared in one undivided mass to theutmost limits of the sight. To the south and eastthe prospect was little better, rendering it doubtfulwhether, in a case of necessity, a passage60 COURSE OBSTRUCTED BYcould have been found in that direction. Themost experienced of the seamen (many of whomhad spent their lives in the Greenland trade)declared they had never beheld such heavy ice,and were confident that it had never been brokenup. To me, however, it seemed to consist ofnumerous floes, but so wedged together as to beutterly impassable, not only by a ship but in anyway; for so ragged and piled up was the entiresurface, that the height of the ridges frequentlyexceeded fifteen feet, and no human being could,by any exertion, have travelled over it for morethan a short distance. To those who were unaccustomedto polar navigation nothing couldbe more discouraging; for it required more thanordinary strength of mind not to be persuadedthat, in this direction at least, a limit was nowput to our progress. Those, however, who hadexperience of the singular uncertainty of thenavigation in these seas, looked forward to theaccidents of the coming night — the change ofwind, the tide or current, or some of those unaccountablecircumstances which, in a few hourseven of entire calm, create so sudden and marvellousa change in the scene. Still, it wasa situation to call forth our most active energies ;and, though resolved to persevere by this routeas long as the remotest chance was offered ofsuccess, yet I could not conceal from myself theENORMOUS RIDGES OF ICE. 61striking difference of the season which Sir E.Parry had experienced in passing through thischannel, where he speaks of the weather as fine,and even mild ; whilst we, on the contrary, wereregaled with constant snow, and had the thermometerat 28° + . We soon worked throughthe remaining part of the open space ; and allspeculations of the chance of a further progressbeing at an end, the ship was made fast to thefloe. At the same time, soundings were tried forwith three hundred fathoms, but without effect.The night was cloudy, and almost calm ; butshortly after midnight of August 19th, manylarge pieces of ice, near the pack, were observedto be drifting away to the south-west, at theestimated rate of half a mile an hour ; and at3 h 30° a. m., finding we were likely to be hemmedin, the ship was cast off from the ice, and, bymeans of lines carried out and attached to projectingmasses, warped towards the north-east,where alone there seemed to be a lane of water.In an hour the desired spot was gained ; and, asthere was every appearance, from the darknessof the sky, of a continued channel, sail was immediatelymade on the ship, and, to the surpriseand joy of all, the impediment was found to haveyielded to a greater power, and a path openedthrough what seemed an impenetrable barrier.Such are the strange incidents of polar naviesOBSTRUCTION BY THE ICE,nation, which, though less striking than the wildcommotions of the earthquake or tornado, are atall events calculated to excite equal gratitude tothat merciful Providence whose protecting careis over all his works, — in the icy waste no lessthan in the thronged city. For two or three hoursthe sun struggled in vain with the mist, whichenveloped sky and ice, still we met with nohindrance ; and, having made a few tacks to avoidthe large drift pieces, at noon we were still advancingto the north, the latitude, as obtainedon a floe, being 64° 57' N., the variation 52° W.At length however the mist dispelled, and withit the hopes in which we had been indulging.A glance satisfied us that our further progresswould be very short. The breeze had diedaway, and allowed the ice to pack afresh. Notalane, not a hole of water was to be seen inany direction but the one just passed ; and again,most reluctantly, were we compelled to securethe ship to a floe.August 20th. Though the night was generallycalm, yet a motion in the ice, and thesuspicious approach of a large floe, whichseemed to threaten a squeeze, induced us tocast off and warp a little to the south ; where weonce more made fast to the same extensivepiece of ice. The morning gave no sign of afavourable change, and the crew were exercised,VARIATION IN COMPASSES. 63on the floe, in firing at a mark. About ll h a.m.an attempt was made by hauling the ship to anouter point of the floe, and making all sail ; butthe light air was very faint, and she barelyglided through the water. Observations, atnoon, gave the latitude 65° O'V N., longitude80° 44/ W., and variation 57° W.; which wasso far satisfactory as showing that no groundhad been lost. The compasses continued to bevery sluggish ; indeed so much so, that, on oneoccasion, the larboard one showed the ship'shead to be south, while that of the starboardmade it north. The wind soon died away altogether; and none springing up, as had usuallybefore been the case, with the declining sun weagain moored to a floe for the night. The menamused themselves by a riotous game of leap-frogon the ice ; and the disaster of one of the officers,who, in crossing a point covered with snow, fellthrough and took a cold bath, excited a heartylaugh.During the night, which was perfectly calm,young ice formed entirely around us. A monthlater this circumstance might have given mesome uneasiness ; but now it was deemed of consequenceonly as adding to the delay and abridgingthe time which we hoped to employ inthe more interesting objects of the expedition.Unless, indeed, this season. were to be very diffSHIP IMBEDDED IN ICE.fervent from all others recorded of the climate, Ifelt assured that the customary westerly windswould sooner or later prevail ; and that, undertheir influence, the body of ice which now interruptedour progress would open a passage forus. None, however, were insensible to theannoyance of our position, thus hampered, andas it were fixed in a bed of ice ; and a burst of joyfollowed the announcement, from the * crossness,'of an appearance of water towards theN. N. E. By warping and hauling till we reachedthe ' lead,' and then carrying studding-sails till wehad exhausted it, some little way was gained ;and at noon, though the latitude was muchthe same as yesterday, the longitude differed.Through the remainder of the day we went onstruggling with the ice, tacking continually toweather or avoid the floes, and praying for abreeze, but praying in vain. A few whales andnarwhal alone relieved the monotony of thescene ; and night found us again attached to afloe, and lying motionless and dark on the brightbosom of the icy wilderness.About 2 h a. m., August 22d, a light air camefrom the north-west, of which immediate advantagewas taken ; and leaving the floe, we got,by the aid of warping, into a ' lead.' Studding-sailswere soon hoisted, and the ship was forcedthrough the close ice for a time, and thus soon0CHR1SH-C0L0URED ICE. ()5again obliged to have recourse to the lines, wasat last brought into comparatively open water*The conduct of both officers and men in thisarduous and irksome service deserved all praise ;and their exertions were not altogether withoutreward, for the land supposed to be Cape Comfortwas evidently further off; and, at noon, thisconjecture was confirmed by the increase of latitude,which was 65° <25' N., the longitude being81° e 8' W. Hitherto my endeavour had been tofollow the leads, in the hope of being broughtout into open water ; but now, as none was insight,I determined on steering directly towardsFrozen Strait, and, singular to say, the ice openedas we advanced, though but half an hour previousit was tightly pressed together. As theday drew in, the southern horizon became darkand cloudy, sending what had been long ardentlydesired, a south west wind. The effects of thiswere soon conspicuous in the ice ahead, whichnow began to part into holes and lanes, and encourageda hope among the more sanguine thatwe were, at length, near the edge of that vastbody which had so long detained us. It wasremarkable that the whole of the ice, whetherdetached or compact, floe or drift, was of a dirtychrist colour, totally unlike any which we hadseen before, and must therefore have been closeto the land. The middle of the night beingF66 BAFFIN AND SOUTHAMPTON ISLANDS.now dark, we necessarily ran foul of many apiece of ice, and got some violent knocks ; but,depending on the strength of the ship, I couldnot forego the pleasure of pushing on while achance remained, and we continued to threadour tortuous way as well as the faint gleam fromthe ice allowed us to pick it out.It was with considerable satisfaction that,at 4 h a. m. of the 23d, I heard the announcementof Baffin Island bearing N. N. W., andshortly afterwards that the land of SouthamptonIsland was made out to the westward. Had thereonly been a channel, even as wide as a brook,we should soon have got to the strait ; but thescene around us now presented an apparentlysolid sea of ice, thrown up in many parts to theheight of eighteen feet, and so ragged, peaked,and uneven, as to bid defiance to any attempteven to walk over it. Had it been composed ofmere drift-ice, which is invariably detached by astrong breeze, there would have been more encouragement; but the limits of the enormousfloes surrounding us could not be discerned, andit was absolutely marvellous that we should beable to penetrate it at all ; yet, at noon, we werestill moving slowly ; and the observations (forthe weather was beautifully clear) gave the latitude65° 42', longitude 82° 41' W„ variation49° 5%' W. The southerly wind now freshened,CHEERLESS PROSPECT. 67and, despite of increasing obstacles, we continuedto gain a few yards. Warping was next resortedto ; but at last all failed us, and at 3 h p. m. wewere compelled to give up the attempt as utterlyhopeless. Cheerless, indeed, was the prospect ;for, excepting within a few feet of the ship,where the black streaks of water looked likeinky lines on a fair sheet of paper, far as theeye could reach all was ice. Soundings wereobtained in one hundred and two fathoms, andshowed a muddy bottom. The tide had little or noeffect here ; but about 7 h **• M «> a large floe havingexhibited symptoms of moving round so as tonip us, the sails were again hoisted, and theship forced ahead about her own length, whenimmediately the small opening we had quitted wasclosed up. It was evident that we were equallysecure under canvass as without ; and as it waspossible that so long as the ship could be keptthe right way something might be gained, wekept the sails full, and at long intervals shemoved some twenty or thirty yards, and againstopped. As the breeze grew fainter more sailwas set and still forced her onwards ; but at daybreakof the 24th, no change taking place, wewere once more set fast, and after two hours'warping, and wedging the ship next to a largefloe, which had been seen ahead, we found ourselvesinstantly hemmed in by the surroundingf 268 YELLOW-COLOURED SNOW.masses. Baffin's Island was yet in sight, abouttwenty-four miles off; but we had drifted a littleto the north of it. I may remark here, thathaving procured some of the yellow-colouredsnow, it was found to be caused by innumerablesmall grains of earth ; a convincing proof thatthe immense quantity passed must have been inthe immediate neighbourhood of the shore, andhad, in all probability, drifted down from thenorth.No other alteration occurred during the daythan the setting of the whole body of ice to theeastward, though at too moderate a rate to carryus far away ; but about 3 h of the morning ofAugust 25th, the masses around us seemedsomething more apart ; and after some warping,which brought us to the edge of a floe, where, asis generally the case, the ice was less pressedtogether, we made sail, and " bored" throughtowards the south-west, in the hope of gettingnearer to Southampton Island. The wind, however,on which we depended, veered more tothe eastward, and at the same time becominglighter, allowed the ice to pack again ; so that,after many fruitless trials, we were forced todesist, and soon lost all traces of water. Theweather was and had been for some days pastextraordinarily fine ; the thermometer at middaybeing 42° + , in the sun, and 36° + , in thePICTURESQUE SCENE. 69shade. The hours were passed in a feverishstate of excitement, and many an upward glancewas cast at the little vane at the mast-head ; butall was calm, and the wonder was, not how wewere to get on, but how we had contrived toget here. Towards evening a light air, togetherwith a " slack " among the ice, allowed a triflingdistance to be made ; but at sunset we werestopped near to an extensive floe, where, fromthe effects of pressure, some ponderous masseshad been heaped up, like Titania ruins, to theheight of thirty feet. The land, blue from distance,and beautifully soft as contrasted with thewhite cold glare of the interminable ice around,reflecting by the setting sun the tints of the interveningmasses thrown into the most picturesquegroups and forms — spires, turrets, and pyramids,many in deep shade — presented altogether ascene sufficient for a time to cheat the imagination,and withdraw the mind from the cheerlessreality of our situation. It was past 4 h a. m. ofAugust 26th before the ship could, even by theuse of warps, be forced ahead ; and then wearisomeindeed was the task. A mile at the utmostrewarded our exertions ; and the wind havingveered round more to the north-east, the entirebody of ice swept down upon us, and the imminentperil of being nipped was only avoidedby the captivity of the officers and crew in heavy870 PERILOUS SITUATION.ing the ship into a sort of basin, formed by twoprojecting points of the nearest floe. Here wewere again set fast. A summer's day, with thethermometer at 44° + in the sun, and a brightand cloudless sky, made us deplore more thanever our mortifying detention during weatherso advantageous for work along the coast withour boats. But not the slightest improvementtook place in our condition ; though at longintervals the mournful crashing of the young ice,as yielding to the larger masses it was thrownup in solid foam, gave token that all was in motion.There was no wind, and evidently butlittle tide or current, for the bearings and distancefrom the land remained nearly as theywere yesterday ; still there was an occasionalstir, and the pressure against the ship was decidedlyincreased. About midnight, though stillcalm, this became more perceptible by additionalpieces of ice being squeezed against the bowsand between the larboard side and the floe towhich we were secured, producing thereby aheavy strain on the hawser, and threatening toforce the stern against what had hitherto beena security, a projecting point. Another stronghawser was therefore carried out and fixed to anice-anchor ahead, and being hove tight by thewindlass, materially relieved the strain upon theother. Preparations were, at the same time,WHITE WHALES. 71going on to unhand the rudder, which, in theevent of the ship's coming astern, must havestruck the floe and been carried away.Until past 1 a. m. (August 27th), we remainedin suspense, which was then relieved by the icereturning again to its former position, and givingus an opportunity to warp closer to the floe. Anattempt was made to remove some of the smallermasses from between the ship and the floe ; butnotwithstanding repeated trials with all the resourcesin our power, we were completely baffled.Strange too at this late season, the breeze oncemore came from the south-east, though theheight of the barometer indicated a totally differentresult ; and there was no hope for us untilthe faithless wind should round to the northwest.During the whole of the day and followingnight, the breeze blew freshly. Four whitewhales were seen playing about sunset in a poolahead, and remained undeterred by our cries,apparently enjoying the only breathing place formany a league around. In the night there wasa great pressure against the bows, and a severestrain upon the hawsers. In the morning ofAugust 28th this abated, but in its stead theentire body became more closely packed thanever ; and the ship, having to bear a great resistancefrom the upturned pieces against herf 472 WINTER ISLAND.sides, gradually lay over to starboard, being, inthe technical phrase, slightly nipped.I had thought it not unlikely that the forceof the wind might possibly have turned roundsome of the heavy remote ice, and thereby haveleft a little clear space for the removal of thatnear us ; but it must have been wedged againstthe coast or among the islands which werevisible (Winter Island among the rest) from thecrow's nest. Appearances, indeed, were moreunpromising than we had yet experienced ; andour devotions of that day (for it was Sunday)were tinged with an humble hope that we shouldshortly be released from our anxious situation.Rain fell occasionally, and towards evening thewind veered round to the south-west, directlyoff the floe, affording one other chance of removingthe ice along the western shore, if anyunoccupied space were left in that quarter. Theeffect on the ship was sensibly felt by her beingforced more over to starboard ; and during theearly part of the night, she was lifted up by thestern in consequence of several loose pieces ofice having got under her counter. On the followingday (the 29th), the strain on the hawserswas as much as they could bear ; and aslittle or no motion could be detected in theice, it was attributed to the tide or current,which, however* scarcely altered our position.-o■-3 ■ —.■ f .,-Z/- '"?r> J"Mr - v 'Iz-x&®I©©n-DN-a^■^vMOVEMENT OF THE ICE. 73In the forenoon the barometer had gone downunusually low ; and as on former occasions thishad been invariably followed by a southerlybreeze, the same result was apprehended now ;much to our relief, however, the wind blew withsome strength from the north-west, bringing withit a prospect of release ; and though, packedas the whole body south and east of us was supposedto be, this could only be a work of time,yet sanguine ideas were immediately entertainedof yet reaching our destination early enough todosomething this season. At noon, accordingto the observations, we were within two milesof the same spot ; but the effect of the wind wasshown by two or three partial openings nearthe ship ; and, as early as 5 o'clock, a generalmovement of the ice began. It came from thewestward, and immense quantities skirting theextremity of the larger-floe to which we weresecured, and bearing down close upon us, werethere caught within the circle of an eddy, andshortly swept away to the eastward. It is needlessto say with how much pleasure so joyful asight was hailed, and how sincerely we prayedthat both the cause and effect might continueuntil a passage should be cleared to the FrozenStrait. The night was dark, with frequent squallsand snow ; but on the morning of the 30th, theice was found to be still drifting in the same74 SEVERE PRESSURE OF ICE.direction, and the pieces were thought to beconsiderably smaller and lighter ; still there wasno continuous 'lead' of which advantage could betaken.As the day advanced, and the breeze becamemore southerly and moderate, little furthereffect was produced on the ice. At noon, the observationsmade us rather to the southward ; andas the ice appeared inclined to return from thatquarter, and the wind was drawing gradually tothe eastward, it was necessary to make sail andget as far as the openings would allow. Thiswas speedily accomplished; and, with muchtrouble from the closing of the ice, we contrivedto gain a mile or two from the floe, which hadbeen left, and found ourselves again broughtto a full stop, and in a more awkward situationthan before. Warps were immediately put intorequisition ; and with the aid of the capstan theship was wedged between the opposing masses,until finding less obstruction the sails once morepressed her onwards. The severity of the shocksas we encountered the ice, notwithstanding ourfamiliarity with them, was on this occasion absolutelystartling. But there was no help for it,nor any other chance of getting on ; for thechannel we ploughed before us closed ere theship had gone twice her length, and cut off allretreat, even had retreat been thought of.To complete the catalogue of annoyances theiSINKING OF THERMOMETER, J 5breeze veered directly east, and came chargedwith abundance of snow, which fell incessantly,and filling up the hollows and crevices of theice, baulked the sight by an appearance of uniformity.As the wind was fresh, we mightpossibly, with the advantage of daylight for selectingthe right * leads,' have got well in withthe land ; but this the night frustrated, andhaving pushed on till 10 o'clock, p. m., we wereunable to get farther ; still the topsails and foresailwere kept hoisted and set, in the hope thaton the turn of tide an opening might be made.August 31st came, but with no friendly aspect,for snow fell thick and fast, and the thermometersunk to 26° + , accelerating the formation ofyoung, and serving to cement the old ice, in analarming manner. However about 4 a. m., akind of ' slack ' was observed, and, after fourhours' labour, it was conjectured that one mileof distance had been gained. Then being againstopped, and not a pool of water in sight, thesails were partly taken in. The hour arrivedwhen it was expected that the tide might havesome beneficial effect in loosening the wedgedmasses, but arrived in vain : so the useless sailswere furled ; and in the midst of increasing snow,and the worst and dreariest weather that couldhave befallen us, we submitted in silence towhat no human power could control. At sunsWATER SKY.set the sky became clear, and Baffin Island wasseen bearing N. 87° W., and a hill on SouthamptonIsland S. 41° W. ; a water sky * too was reportedto the south-west, but scarcely succeededin again cheating us into hope. The night wasmore than ordinarily cold, for the temperatureof the air was only 19° + , and that of the water23° + : an omen as gloomy as unlooked for atthis early season, when Sir E. Parry, in thesame latitude, was enjoying almost the warmthof summer. But the startling fact could not beconcealed from ourselves, that the rigour of aprecocious winter was thrust upon us, at themoment when we were almost in sight of ourport.Produced by the dark vapour from the water, and usedin opposition to " ice-blink."CHAP. II.Steer for Southampton Island. — Conjectures respecting theIce. — Islands. — Pressure of the Wind. — Ship immoveable.— Cutting away the Ice. — Snotv. — Drifting towardsLand. — Accident to Rudder. — Aspect of contiguous Coast.New Moon. — Recreations of the Crew. — Chase of aBear. — Hawser carried away by Ice. — Icebound in sightof Land. — Wind veers to South-west. — Prospect of Release.— Hopes disappointed. — Ship driven nearer Land.Mr. Gore shoots a Fox. — Ship in extreme Peril. —Frightful Increase of Pressure. — Providential Delivery. —Exploring Expedition. — A Dock cut in the Ice. — Consultationof Officers. — Rapid Destruction of the Floe. —Bow of the Ship split. — Hopes of progressing baffled.This detention, so irksome to the officers, though,as it seemed, little regarded by the men, continuedthroughout the forenoon of the 1st September,the observations at noon showing no perceptibledifference in our situation, which, consideringthe manner that the Hecla and Fury* werewhirled about in the same place, is another proofof the capriciousness of polar navigation.The wind, however, gradually drew round tothe westward of north ; yet, though tolerablyfresh, it was long before it made the smallestimpression on the ice. At last at 5 p. m. theSee Parry's Narrative.78 STEER FOR SOUTHAMPTON ISLAND.cemented masses near us suddenly broke asunder,and disentangled the ship from the thin crustthat had surrounded her. This change, whichwas evidently the effect of the breeze, was gratifying,as showing that three days' continuationof it would, in all probability, clear the whole ofFrozen Strait, and, as it was, a clear channel onthe following day was confidently anticipated.During the first part of the night, the wind continuedto blow freshly; but early on the followingmorning it moderated, and the ice at oncereturned to its former position ; yet again, about6 a. m., with unaccountable eccentricity, theentire body half a mile round was in agitation.Prompt to seize the lucky moment, we warpedto a spot where the sails could be advantageouslyused, and, contrary to all the expectationsof but an hour before, found ourselvesmaking headway. As the day grew clearerthe same dark-bluish grey clouds were observedin precisely the same bearing as had been notedtwo days ago, strengthening the opinion alreadyexpressed that they were the certain signs ofopen water. Fortunately the * leads narrow andhampered as they were, took a direction towardsthe desired point, and allowed us to hold a coursedirectly for Southampton Island, which I was themore eager to attain, from a conviction in my ownmind that a passage existed along shore, close inCONJECTURES RESPECTING THE ICE. 79with the land. Hitherto, indeed, every attemptto approach it, since leaving Mill Islands, hadbeen thwarted by consolidated bodies of interveningice, but at the moment this was notregarded. It was the opinion of Sir E. Parry,that the ice adheres to the shores of the continentand Southampton Island, unless blown offby a strong breeze ; and in this opinion I entirelyconcur as applicable to the appearance of icethere in ordinary seasons ; but in our case itwas obvious that some other explanation was tobe looked for of the extraordinary impedimentsby which we had been beset. To me it seemedalmost certain that the great body of ice hadnot been broken up at all in the previous year1835, and that having, with the accumulationsof the following season, been detached from itsbonds by the storms of the spring, it had beendriven, probably by the combined action of thewind and current, from the bays and harboursof the north to the place where we found it.That there were two distinct kinds of ice couldnot be doubted ; since the most cursory observercould not fail to remark that the one wasmassive, old, and irregular, with huge piles tossedup in picturesque confusion — the other light,clean, and comparatively smooth. The timetoo which had been consumed amidst the labyrinthsof the old ice, with so trifling a change of80 Foot-prints OF A BEAR ON THE ICE.situation, convinced me that any further delayamong it would be fatal, and all these considerationsmade me, as I have said, most desirous toclose in with the land.With this object, and a favourable wind, webored' the whole of the forenoon through thelighter kind of ice, making occasional circuitsas the accident of shape required. Still nowater appeared, though the Greenlandmen didnot lose their faith in the dark clouds which yethung upon the skirts of the horizon, seeming torecede as we slowly approached them. Thefresh foot-prints of a bear which had crossed theice within the last twenty-four hours was thenovelty of the day ; and a goose was seen whereperhaps none but a goose would have been seen.At noon the difference in longitude amountedonly to four miles ; the latitude remaining thesame. Indeed, by the increasing closeness ofthe ice, the difficulty of advancing in any directionwas becoming hourly greater. For sometimewe were entirely stopped ; but by keeping apress of sail set, and with the aid of a fresheningN. E. breeze, we forced our way by a few hundredyards at a time, proceeding in this manner withlittle variation until midnight. The wind thenincreased considerably, compelling us to take insail ; but that which, under more favourablecircumstances, would have facilitated, now onlyISLANDS. SIserved to impede our progress, for the strongbreeze packed the ice. September 3d broughta cold and chilling day, with a temperature of25° + , and a surface of young ice on all the poolsaround. Every attempt therefore to move was asuseless as laborious ; and, after carrying away awarp in trying to change the situation fifty pacesforwards, we were obliged to yield to necessity,and desist altogether. The sails were takenin ; and our stock of fresh water being almostexhausted, the crew were employed in refillingthe tanks, a task which was completed in theforenoon. The sky, which had been dark andhazy towards the land and to the eastward, hadbecome clearer, and enabled us to see SouthamptonIsland somewhere about Cape Comfort, whichwas high and much covered with snow. Onthis side of it, and within perhaps twelve milesof the ship, Fife Rock w T as also visible ; while farawayto the eastward of North, was Baffin Island.In fact, after all our labour, we found by theobservations that we had only got twelve milesto the south.A Burgomaster, or Glaucus gull, was seen ; anda golden plover, blown off the shore by the forceof the wind, was shot. Towards sunset severalpools of water were formed, one of which, onthe lee-bow, was of some extent. That nearestG82 PRESSURE OF THE WIND.to us was, for a few minutes, an object of attraction,owing to the sudden appearance there ofthree or four white whales.It now blew a fresh gale, accompanied bysqualls, and though cold, the weather was clear.On trying an anemometer, kindly lent to me byMr. Rice of Chatham dockyard, the pressure ona square foot of canvass was found to be equal tofour pounds. The night brought no change ;but, on the morning of September 4th, we wereglad to perceive that the ship, and consequentlythe whole body in which she was beset, haddrifted much nearer to Southampton Island,which was now visible from the deck. We hadalso passed Fife Rock. The frost, however, wasso severe that a hole was obliged to be cut alongsideto draw water from. As this was Sunday,after the usual muster at divisions, Divine Servicewas read, with an appropriate sermon, whichwas listened to with becoming attention, and as Ihope and believe, with the devotion befitting theperilous uncertainty of our situation. At noon,the observations both by lunar and chronometermade us a little to the east in longitude,and the latitude showed that we had been setfifteen miles south, the distance from Fife Rockbeing west five miles, from Southampton islandabout twenty-four miles, and from Repulse BaySHIP IMMOVEABLE. 83not more than one hundred and thirty-six miles ;so that with but a moderate share of westerlywinds to open the ice from the land, there wasstill good reason to look forward to the accomplishmentof the passage before the close of theseason, though the thermometer was as low as20° + in the night, and but 27° + during thewarmer part of the day. Some hours elapsedwithout the slightest variation in the ice, butat 6 h p. m. an extraordinary movement tookplace, which with astonishing celerity dispersedit inshore so much as to leave a wide and longlane, and we were not without hope that abranch of it might even have reached us. Not,however, that we waited for such a consummationwithout putting our shoulders to thewheel ; for, besides the sails well filled with afresh breeze, our strongest hawsers were fastenedto the ice, and then hove round by thecapstan. The united force was of course verygreat, and no device was left untried to heavethe ship ahead; but so firmly had the ' sludge'been frozen quite round the bends, that all ourefforts were unavailing, and not an inch couldwe stir her. To see open water within onehundred yards, and yet be unable to reach it,was a type of the torment of poor Tantalus : butso it was, and there was nothing left but to sung284 CREW EMPLOYED INmit. The sails were furled, and the ship againthrown on the chances of what might befallThe wind decreased during the night, and atdaylight of September 5th there was a calm.We found also that we had drifted considerablynearer the land, which was high, and thinly andpartially covered with snow. Fife Rock wasjust visible to the north. Lanes of water wereseen at different points of the compass alongshore ; and, though they were rather far apart,and of no great extent, the usual trial was madeto reach them, but again without success. Thelast resource therefore was adopted. The wholeof the officers and men were despatched, underthe orders of Lieutenant Smyth, to the onlyopen water at all near ; and with axes, ice chisels,handspikes, and long poles, began the labouringprocess of cutting away the ' sludge 'that bound the pieces together, and removingthem into the clear space. In this servicethey were frequently obliged to fasten lines tothe heavier masses and haul them out \ and,though slipping and tumbling about, yet thelight-hearted fellows pulled in unison to a cheerfulsong, and laughed and joked with the unreflectingmerriment of schoolboys. Every nowand then some luckless wight broke throughthe thin ice, and plunged up to his neck ; and,todaCO-1}NCUTTING AWAY THE ICE. 85other, endeavouring to remove a piece of iceby pushing against a larger mass, would set himselfadrift with it, and every such adventure wasfollowed by shouts of laughter, and vociferousmirth. In this way considerable progress wasmade, and in the meantime the weather becamewarmer, and the wind veered to the southward.It became therefore more desirable thanever that the ship should be liberated, and, ifpossible, got closer to the shore, to avoid beingdrifted with the pack away to the north, as weknew must happen if the breeze should freshenfrom the quarter in which it now was. At noon,the latitude was something south of yesterday's,and the longitude a mile or two west. Thetemperature was 33° + . In the afternoon, thewind drew more to the eastward, and destroyedthe hope of warping the ship out in the channelwhich we had been employed in cutting ; butas it was by that process alone that we couldhope to get clear, the task was resumed withundiminished ardour in a direction immediatelyto the westward, where the ice was not quiteso tightly pressed as elsewhere.The work went on cheerily, and as the breezeincreased the sails were hoisted, and much toour satisfaction forced the head round, when theship gradually gathered way, and went slowlyg a86 snow.towards the land. There was indeed an infiniteexpanse of ice, but every dark spot of waterencouraged the hope that an off-shore windwould soon place us in a navigable channel.Accordingly as the masses separated from timeto time, the hawsers were got out, and the shiphove between them, and thus, about 10 h p. m.,we suddenly emerged into a free space. Thisproved to be nearly four miles long ; but therewas no opening beyond it, and again, in themorning of September 6th, all was closed. Thewind freshened, but brought with it snow, themost unwelcome thing which could befall us ;nevertheless the warps were tried, and with themand the sails together we managed to push,perhaps a mile altogether, towards the land. Itwas then noon, and hazy; no land in sight ; thermometer29° + • The effect of the E. S. E.breeze was shown in the slow setting of the iceupon the coast ; and, as many of the pieces wereof sufficient dimension to entitle them to thename of floes, their motion created occasionallanes, which, if we had been able to see but afew hundred yards ahead, might perhaps havebeen followed with advantage. Even with allthe uncertainty and risk, I confess the temptationto gain a single mile was almost irresistible.That the prudent course was the best was soon,APPEARANCE OF THE LAND. 87however, exemplified ; for the whole of the icewithin range of sight shortly after closed, andhemmed us in. For an hour it was doubtfulwhether we should not be nipped, but by warpinginto a bight accidentally formed by theoverlapping of one floe over the point of another,we fortunately escaped. The wind too increased,so the sails were furled, and the ship secured tothe largest floe. Soundings were struck in onehundred and twenty-nine fathoms, the bottombeing composed of sand and shells, and by theline it appeared that the ship was driftingN.byE. The night was dark and cheerless fromthe snow, which continuing to fall clogged therigging and decks. At daybreak, there was noopening in any direction, east or west ; and theice had been packed against the land, whichcould be traced from south-east to north ; FifeRock being still visible E. N. E. Our distancefrom the land was about ten or twelve miles ;but, not to speak of the icy barrier which separatedus, there was nothing which invited toa nearer approach. The soft blue tint which,twenty-four hours ago, had cheated the imagination,was gone ; and now there was the chilling 1reality of precipitous black rocks streaked withsnow, and a mantle of the same cold whitenessspread over the whole of the head land.g 488 DRIFTING TOWARDS LAND.It was now the 7th of September, and, with sopremature a winter, I could not fail to be morethan ordinarily anxious about our situation. Iwas aware that Sir E. Parry had been within afew miles of the same spot on the 17th of thesame month on his return to England ; but at thattime the temperature — the season — in short, everythingwas different; whereas we were lying powerlessas a log, and nothing was left to my choicebut to sail through the first favourable openingthat offered. So much snow had fallen, that thebetter part of the forenoon was taken up inclearing it from the decks. At noon, the windhad veered to N. E. by E., which was dead onthe land. Soundings were found with onehundred and fifty-five fathoms. Temperature29° + . Soon after, there was a perceptible movementin the ice near us. At first, I thought itwas the reaction produced by the intensity ofthe pressure ; but the blocks and pieces thrownup on the surface of resisting masses, and againstthe ship's sides, proved that some agent wasat work, and not long after a five-inch warp,which held us to the floe, suddenly broke. At4 h p. m. we were evidently drifting much nearerto the land, though no such indication was givenby the soundings, which were one hundred andfifty fathoms, with a bottom of green mud.ACCIDENT TO RUDDER. 89Indeed, it could be owing only to the amazingpressure from the north, which ground the smallerpieces into powder, and either sunk or threwup others, at various heights and angles, uponthe larger pieces, that a space was cleared forour drifting. Whatever the cause, we were settingdirectly on the shore, without the slightestmeans of averting it.Near 8 h p. m., a general hubbub, with harshgrating sounds, announced a commotion aboutthe stern, which being turned away from thefloe, among the looser ice, was more exposedthan any other part The tiller had been securedwith lashings, to confine the rudder amidships,but a steep and heavy mass coming againstit under the quarter, snapped the lashings likethreads, and forced the rudder violently on oneside, from which position it could not be relieveduntil the ice moved away. About thesame time another warp was broken, after whichwe were not much further disturbed during thenight.Sept. 8th brought no change. The same drearyweather overhung the heavens as with a veil.The coast however was dimly seen, forming,according to our position, a long bay, terminatedabruptly to the westward by a projectingbluff point, which we supposed to be that discsASPECT OF CONTIGUOUS COAST.extinguished in the chart by the, to us, mostunappropriate name of Cape Comfort. Beyondit, a low neck of land could be made out, runningto the north, which was conjectured to beCape Bylot. Fife Rock bore N. E. There wasnot, to use the ice mate's expression, " a supof water in sight." All our hopes, therefore,rested on the uncertain chance of a westerlybreeze, uncertain only in such a season as this,inasmuch as ordinarily the westerly and northwesterlywinds are the unfailing companions ofautumn in these latitudes. The barometer hadbeen for the last fortnight very steady, scarcelyvarying with any difference of wind. At noonthe latitude was 65° 09', and longitude S2°5V W.,not more, therefore, than fifty miles from Dukeof York's Bay in Frozen Strait. The temperature,which had at one time fallen to 23° + , rose againto 28° + , wind N. E.The hours which usually brought some slightalteration arrived, and passed away, leaving us aswe were, so that we were driven to infer that thepressure from seaward had now attained its maximum,and that the compact and boundless field ofice had vanquished tide and current, and was becomefixed and immoveable. A mild night succeeded,though at first overcast, yet by 10 h p. m.some stars were seen, giving indications of a clearNEW MOON. 91sky to the north-west. For an hour or two indeedthe wind did veer as far round as N. N. W., andtantalized us by vacillating between that andN. N. E. How often did we look up at themast-head vane, and how often presume to saythat it must get to the southward and westward.In the morning (9th Sept.) all was still andmotionless, though it seemed that we had drifteda little to the south along the land. At noon,a gentle air might just be felt from the southwest; and as the breeze grew stronger, the hopedeferred which had made our hearts sick wasagain doubtfully re-admitted. At night therewas no longer any pressure, for the ship, whichhad been forced over considerably to starboard,now righted ; and this joyful fact the least sanguineconstrued into an omen of a speedy release.But the next morning (September 10th)the capricious wind first drew more to the south,bringing with it snow, then veered round againto N. N. W.j and finally fell nearly calm. Theonly perceptible variation was the welcome sightof two or three streaks of water within a fewyards from the ship. The weather now becameunusually mild, the thermometer being at 35° + ,and as there was to be a new moon at midnight,we fixed on that event as the harbinger of achange. The hour arrived, but not the prognosisRECREATIONS OF THE CREW.treated wind ; and, in the still serenity of the starlitsky, yet glowing in the west with the lingeringtints of a gorgeous sunset, there was a spirit ofbeautiful repose which seemed to mock our disappointment.All was uniform and motionless,save where the fickle air aloft played with thelanguid vane, coquetting round and round fromevery point of the compass, as if, in verywaywardness, it knew not where to settle.The morning of Sept. 11th was also calm, and amist overhung the barren coast. The ice hadopened a few yards, and the ship was with difficultyhauled into the space. As the sun gainedpower the mist dispersed from the land, or lay inlong thin clouds along its dark cliffs, but nowater could be seen from aloft. Until to-day noanimals had visited us ; but now two seals andsome small fish appeared close to the stern.After service the officers collected in groups, andbasked in the sunshine of an arctic summer day,with the thermometer at 35° + . For the last threeor four evenings the people had been permitted togo on the floe alongside, where they amusedthemselves by playing at various games, andamong others the well-known game of baitingthe bear. To-day they went upon the ice forquiet exercise merely, but had not proceededmore than a hundred yards, when Mr. Green,CHASE OF A BEAR. 93the ice mate, being on the mast-head, espieda real bear, and the alarm being immediatelygiven, the men ran helter skelter to the ship,headed by a bull-dog belonging to the Serjeantof marines, which was first on board. Every onebelow, hearing the rush, flew on deck, and, learningthe cause, seized the first gun at hand toprepare for the attack. Meantime the nobleanimal (a fine polar bear) nothing startled at ahubbub which might well have frightened alegion of his kindred away, approached withdeliberate steps nearer and nearer. His gait wasloose, and rolling as if weak from hunger, for herather drew than lifted his huge limbs over therugged surface ; and still as he advanced, he nowraised his black nose and sniffed, and now paused,as appetite or fear prevailed. At length he tookcourage, and followed up the scent ; till, at thedistance of about fifty paces from the ship, hestood like a target to receive the balls whichwere soon showered on him. He fell, but recoveringhis legs, limped, with what strength wasleft, a short space off. Then, all hurry to pursue,one grasped a hand spike, another poised a lance,a third more heedless rushed on with a merestick to give the coup de grace. The more prudenthowever retained their guns, and a fewmore shots terminated the sufferings of poor94 DIMENSIONS OF BEAR.bruin. The sailors with their wonted fun hauledthe bulky carcase over the floe, and hoisted it onboard.*The condition of the teeth indicated thatit had attained to some age. It was lean, and thestomach was found to be entirely empty.The following dimensions were taken by Dr. Donovanand Mr. Mould :Ft. Inch.Length from the snout to the tail - - 6 lljCircumference round the middleFrom the snout to the shoulder jointFrom the heel of the fore-paw to the top of the back 4From the heel of the hind leg to the top of rumpCircumference of fore-paw, including clawsBreadth of the fore-paw -Length from fore middle toe to knee jointCircumference of fore-leg below the kneeCircumference of hind-paw -Circumference of hind-leg -Length of the hind-pawBreadth of the hind-paw -Length of hind middle toe to knee jointLength of tail -Circumference of head below the eyes -Circumference of neck - - - -Distance of snout from the eye -Distance between the eyes (internal angles)Length of axis of the eye (perpendicular)Depth of snout -Depth from snout to lower part of under jawBreadth of septum barium -Are elliptical -Length of ears - - - •*Breadth of aperture of ear8iSi7iu9±5+OfOiHweatherMILD AND CALM. 9«5This novelty, trifling as it was, was sufficient togive a turn to our conversation ; and the eternalinquiries about the wind, and the speculations asto the probable quarter from which it would nextcome, were for an hour or two suspended ; indeed,there was little to excite us on that subject,for the weather continued very mild and calm,though towards evening it was observed that theice had opened a little, and what was still moresingular, that the ship had a slight undulatorymotion. The thermometer during the night didnot sink below 32^° + , and early on September12th, finding there was a chance of gettingthrough some lanes in the direction of CapeComfort, the ship was with infinite troublewarped about half a mile, when the ice againNumber of front teeth in upper jaw - 6Number of canine teeth - 2Number of molar do. - 6Small teeth between the tusks and molars - 4>Front teeth in lower jaw - 6Canine (one broken) - 2Molars - - 8Two small teeth between the canine and molars 2Ft. Inch.Length of lower tusks - - - 2Length of upper tusks - - -0 2^Breadth between the tips of upper tusks - breadth(supposed) between lower tusks 2^Length of middle fore claw - - 2Length of middle hind claw - - 2T96 HAWSER CARRIED AWAY BY ICE.closed, and the breeze blew, though light, fromthe eastward, that is to say, froth quarterdirectly opposite to what we wished: againtherefore our efforts were discontinued, andthe ship secured. The thermometer at noonwas 35° + , and in a small pool of water asternthree white whales were seen. Later in theday the weather became overcast, and broughtwith it a S.E. wind, thus at once overturninghopes of a week's growth, and making the prospectof our liberation as remote as ever. Nevertheless,as the ice slacked, about 7 h p.m., wewarped a couple of hundred yards ahead, andthen, setting the sails, endeavoured to borethrough the annoying obstruction ; a little way,perhaps half a mile, we accomplished ; and eventhat little was gratifying, for our long detentionhad begun to be dispiriting. The ice then becomingcloser, the sails were furled, and on themorning of the 13th September we found ourselvesrather closer in with the coast, but owingto the thick state of the weather the precise spotcould not be ascertained. During the whole ofthe forenoon there was nothing but snow, andthe breeze blew dead on the land ; the resultshowed itself, as was to be expected, by an increasedpressure of the snow and ice, which tightenedso much, that before we were aware of itthe securing hawser was carried away. It wasMOTION" IN THE ICE. 9/'replaced by a stronger one, but we could notventure to throw a strain even on this ; and wheneverany sudden change took place among theice it was immediately slackened. The snowdid not cease until 6 h . 30 ra . p. m., and then soladen were the decks with it, that the peoplewere actively occupied more than an hour inclearing it away : the mist at the same time partiallyclearing, permitted a glimpse of the land,which was found to be considerably nearer thanany one had anticipated, and proved that we hadbeen set further than was expected to the westward.At 8 h p. m. Cape Comfort bore by compassN.N.E., and soundings were obtained with onehundred and seventy-five fathoms of line, at a distanceof not more than five miles from the nearestrocks. During the night the increased violenceof the wind, and its unwelcome constancy to theadverse quarter, had a direful effect on the shoreice in which we were embedded ; and though everypiece was so closely and firmly packed against theother that there was not a hole large enough toadmit of drawing water, yet at h .30 m . a.m. Sept.14th, an agitation motion discovered itself amongthe surrounding ice, so violent, and indeed irresistible,that what was not crushed by its enormousforce was raised up to various heights ; one ponderousmass, with several peaks, to upwards oftwenty feet.H98 ICEBOUND IN SIGHT OF LAND.Fixed as we were, we partook of the generalcommotion ; and the ship being deep and too heavyto rise w T with the rest, it had to sustain the wholepressure and became severely nipped, leaningover considerably to starboard. The breeze,too, which still blew from N. E., so far fromabating, came on attended by smart squalls.At this time we appeared to be not more thanfour miles from the land, which was broken intoexposed bays, utterly without shelter from thenorth, and blocked up with close packed ice.Not a pool of water was visible in any direction :to the mercy of Providence alone could we lookfor rescue from our perilous situation. Nonebut those who have experienced it can judgeof the weariness of heart, the blank of feeling,the feverish sickliness of taste which gets thebetter of the whole man under circumstancessuch as these. Not an incident occurred to relievefor a moment the dull monotony of our unprofitabledetention. Will the wind ever come from thewestward ? was the question fretfully asked andpeevishly answered. This one idea had takenentire possession of the mind, and whilst even adoubt remained, no occupation, no amusement,however ordinarily gratifying, had power toplease or even distract the thoughts. Not thatthis, or any part of it, was expressed in words,but the feeling was not the less easily detected,PARTIAL MOVEMENT OF THE MASSES. 99As the sun set the sky became rather morebright at N. W«, and with much satisfaction thewind was observed to veer that way. A faintaurora was also seen at S. W., and as it has beenoften considered as a sign of wind from that quarterin which it appears, even that prognostic,uncertain as it is, was eagerly caught at. Butalthough the breeze blew off or along the coast allthe night, yet on Sept. 15th not the minutestchange was visible, until near 8 h a. m., when avery partial movement took place in about adozen large masses immediately around us. Theeffect of this was so far beneficial that itreleased the ship from the heavy pressure shehad been sustaining, and as the sunken pieces,from beneath her bottom, rose to the surfacewith a bound, and others glided along the sides,she gradually righted. But when we were lookingwith eager eyes for some little space of water, themotion stopped at once, as if arrested by the handof magic, and left us again to hope and again bedisappointed. The temperature which had beenas low as 21° + , at noon rose to 23° + . The windblew fresh along the land until evening, but itwas late in the first watch before the fainteststir was heard among the ice, which then merelymoved in azimuth, causing the ship to go a fewyards astern. Yet to move at all was encouraging,since it proved that the pieces, though wedgedh 2100 WIND VEERS TO SOUTH-WEST.and heaped together, were not yet rivetted by thecontinually increasing severity of the night-frosts.Half of the month had now slipped away,and we were held still within sight of the sameland as it were in the grasp of a giant. Yetthe prospect though unpromising enough wasnot yet hopeless ; for about midnight the winddrew round to the south-west, and came with aforce which, a week before, would have fulfilledour most sanguine desires. The ice now, however,was too close wedged to yield at once to itsinfluence, though considerably loosened. Up tonoon of Sept. 16. no effectual alteration tookplace : the thermometer had once fallen as lowas 15° + , though it had now risen again to 31° + *The height of the land made our distance fromshore appear less than it really w T as ; and often aproposition was made to me that a small partyshould endeavour to make their way across theland to the westward, and satisfy themselves ifany open water was to be expected in that direction.However, being myself pretty confidentthat there was open water, and moreover notvery far away, I could not at this crisis give myconsent to it. Besides the toil and difficultywhich must necessarily be encountered in theattempt to traverse the country along the coast,broken as it was into ravines and vallies, renderedmore impassable by the snow lately fallen ;PROSPECT OF RELEASE. 101the hazard of their being separated from theship left no room for hesitation, though I promisedthat on a future occasion the propositionshould not be forgotten.The wind now got more to the southward,and after being unsettled for an hour or two,began to blow fresh from S. by W. : still the icedid not stir. However, about 4 h 30 m , it openedout a little, and though no water was visiblefrom the Crow's Nest, the breeze was so strongthat it was deemed expedient to set the sails ;and answering to their power, the ship immediatelyforged ahead, generally, of course, veryslowly, but wherever the ice w r as smaller witha speed that brightened every countenance. Itwas indeed singular to behold the vast shipgliding along without any perceptible water. Thiscould not last, and though it blew a gale of wind,yet even with warps and all appliances and meansto boot, we were at length beaten by the solidmass. The last gleam of twilight, however, hadjust brought to sight several narrow lanes ofwater precisely where they were most wanted,so that the probability of a release was greaterthan it had been for at least three weeks. Thewind veered a little to the eastward, but ratherincreased than diminished in violence, so thatmost of the sails were taken in, leaving enough topress the ship forward if the ice should give way.h 3102 HOPES DISAPPOINTED.Morning of the 17th came, and our hopeswere strongly excited. It was an auspiciousday, for it was the date of Sir E. Parry's gettingclear from nearly the same place on his returnto England ; but there was no such good fortunein store for us. We had been forced nearer toCape Comfort, which jutted out something tothe north, forming with the wind then predominatinga weather shore, under the lee ofwhich it was natural to suppose there would be alead ' of water ; but contrary to experience andthe expectation of all on board, the ice wasfound to be locked in to the very base of therocks, and presented a barrier as insuperable asthe one just before us. Still the gale from theeastward howled on, and though not a spot ofwater could be detected ahead, yet there was achannel for upwards of three miles formed in theplace we had left ; in fact, all that was wantedwas a breeze of the same kind from the west.The weather throughout the afternoon was wildand gloomy, and the evening closed in withshowers of sleet. The ice was disturbed, andthough too firmly wedged to open out, crackedand heaved as if seeking relief from the grindingpressure, but all in vain. The whole cementedmass, however, yielded to the general impulse, andice and ship were borne helplessly along beforethe violence of the gale. Much water had beenSHIP DRIVEN NEARER LAND. 103seen along the shore to the eastward, and thereseemed some likelihood of its overtaking usby daylight, if by any means we could holdon to some floe so as to let the smaller piecesdrift past. But this, however desirable, wasfound impracticable, as the whole mass movedtogether. Throughout the night the wind scarcelyabated, but towards morning of Sept. 18th itbecame moderate ; and as the heavy cloudscleared away before the rays of the rising sun, itwas discovered that we had been driven pastCape Comfort about three or four miles, and atthe same time had been set considerably nearerto the coast which, immediately abreast of us,was fearfully forbidding. To the north it presenteda towering and perpendicular front, rentinto fissures, or jagged with splintery ridges, alldeeply black ; whilst towards the south it recededfrom the summit in round backed hills, entirely(except where sharp-angled rocks peeped out)covered with snow. Farther west the land graduallydeclined with longer slopes and widervallies, and terminated in a point, either CapeBylot or Cape Welsford of Parry. Throughoutthe entire range I was unable to detect anyof those marks which indicate the track of theEsquimaux in their periodical migrations.The latitude at noon was 65° 12' N., and inhaving been drifted thus far, we had the consol4104 MR. GORE SHOOTS A FOX.tory conviction that there must be an open space ofwater somewhere to the west. We knew moreoverthat the further we advanced in that directionthe more we should be liable to the influenceof the high tides in the neighbourhood of theWelcome, where the changes among the icewould be more frequent, and our chance ofreaching Repulse Bay consequently improved.In fact, a long narrow lane had begun to formclose to the beach, reaching nearly to the extremityof the view, but the breeze fresheningfrom S.S.E. forced the seaward body of ice in,and closed it up again. Baffin Island was visiblefrom the mast-head, but there was no opening inthat direction. A raven and a little snow buntingcame near the ship. No soundings were gotwith one hundred and fifty fathoms. As thesun declined the breeze freshened still more,sending the low and light scud before it with theswiftness of an arrow. It was not however tillnear midnight that we stirred, when the ice, drivenby the wind and tide, carried us about a mile.Sept. 19th sail was set to endeavour to forcethe ship clear of some large pieces, whichground with a grating noise against the bottom,but it was to little purpose. About thistime an Arctic fox, probably allured by thescent of the skeleton of the bear which washanging to the main-stay, came so close that it■■'- ^?fc?-o-,-.^SJ*PI§1=t "*.SHIP IN EXTREME PERIL. lOowas shot by Mr. Gore. A raven, too, wheeledits flight twice round the ship. What must bethewearisome uniformity of a life in which incidentssuch as these become memorable !When the haze over the land was in somemeasure dispersed, we found that we had been setsomething further towards Cape Bylot, beyondwhich more land could be made out, and at noonBaffin Island bore N. 50° E. The temperaturecontinued 31° + , and the southerly wind stillprevailed. Four points more to the west wasall that we required. No water in sight. Inthe early part of the night a thick mist came on,and the wind gradually veered to east, bringingwith it sleet and snow. The next morning(Sept. 20th) it drew more to the northward,and, what was worse, blew fresh, thereby settingthe seaward ice down towards the land with moreforce than had yet been experienced. Shortlyafter 9 h a. m. a floe piece split in two, and theextreme violence of the pressure curled andcrumbled the windward ice up in an awful manner,forcing it against the beam fully eighteenfeet high. The ship creaked as it were in agony,and, strong as she was, must have been stove andcrushed, had not some of the smaller masses beenforced under her bottom, and so diminished thestrain, by actually lifting her bow nearly two feetout of the water. In this perilous crisis steps106 FRIGHTFUL INCREASE OF PRESSURE.were taken to have everything in readiness forhoisting ont the barge, and without creating unnecessaryalarm, the officers and men were calledon the quarter-deck, and desired, in case ofemergency, to be active in the performance oftheir duties at the respective stations then notifiedto them. It was a serious moment for all, as thepressure still continued, nor could we expectmuch, if any, abatement until the wind changed.At noon the weather and our prospects remainedthe same. The barometer was falling, andthe temperature was 26° + , with unceasing snow.Much ice had been sunk under the bottom, anda doubt existed whether it was not finding itsway beneath the lee floe also ; for the upliftedruins, within fifty paces of the weather beam,were advancing slowly towards us like an immensewave fraught with destruction. Resistancewould not, could not have been effectualbeyond a few seconds ; for what, of human construction,could withstand the impact of an icycontinent, driven onward by a furious storm ?In the mean time symptoms too unequivocal tobe misunderstood demonstrated the intensity ofthe pressure. The butt-ends began to start, andthe copper, in which the galley apparatus wasfixed, became creased, sliding doors refused toshut, and leaks found access through the bolt-headsand bulls-eyes. On sounding the well too,PROVIDENTIAL DELIVERY. 107an increase of water was reported, not sufficientto excite apprehension in itself, but such as torender hourly pumping necessary. Moved bythese indications, and to guard against the worst, Iordered the provisions and preserved meats, withvarious other necessaries to be got up from belowand stowed on deck, so as to be ready at a momentto be thrown upon the large floe along side.To add to our anxiety, night closed prematurely,when suddenly, from some unknown cause, inwhich, if Ave may so deem without presumption,the finger of Providence was manifest, the floe,which threatened instant destruction, turned soas in a great degree to protect us against an increaseof pressure, though for several hours afterwardsthe same creaking and grinding soundscontinued to annoy our ears. The barometerand other instruments fell with a regularity unprecedented,yet the gale was broken, and bymidnight had abated considerably.Sept. list. there was a lateral motion in somepieces of the surrounding ice, and after several astoundingthumps under water against the bottom,the ship which had been lifted high beyond her lineof flotation and thrown somewhat over to port, suddenlystarted up and almost righted. Still howevershe inclined more than was agreeable to port, norwas it until one mass of ponderous dimensionsburst from its imprisonment below that she PRESSURE UNEXPECTEDLY CONTINUES.gether regained her upright position. On beholdingthe walls of ice on either side betweenwhich she had been nipped, I was astonished atthe tremendous force she had sustained. Hermould was stamped as perfectly as in a die. Astonishmenthowever soon yielded to a more gratefulfeeling, an admiration of the genius and mechanicalskill by which the Terror had been so ably preparedfor this service. We had many old Greenlandseamen on board, and they were unanimouslyof opinion that no ship they had ever seen couldhave resisted such a pressure. On sounding thewell she was found not to leak, though the carpentershad employment enough in caulking theseams on deck.At last the wind got round to the westward, andthough not a pool of water was visible, still expectationwas again on the stretch ; but though a freshbreeze prevailed till the evening, and again after apartial calm blew through the night, and thoughthe effect to be anticipated from this would bethesending of the ice to the eastward, if moved atall, yet, strange to say, the very reverse took place,as the creaking of the pressed ship gave us buttoo plainly to understand.On Sept. 22d. the vessel was again sharplynipped, but without straining as before. At noonthe thermometer rose a few degrees from 15° +,the point to which it had fallen in the night, andEXPLORING EXPEDITION. 109by observations, we were at the distance of twenty-fivemiles only from Duke of York's Bay ; butwe could not possibly advance so much as twenty-fiveinches, or, with such a succession of untowardwinds, I should long ago have endeavoured toget the ship into some place of safety. Birds ofall kinds had left us, and animals too, except asolitary seal espied to-day from the mast-head :this was immediately pursued by one of theofficers, but after a fatiguing walk over the ice,he found the wary seal on the look-out and,instead of waiting to be shot at, it prudentlydisappeared through a hole in the ice. As thescene of operations was daily growing morecircumscribed, and the outward body of iceforced us further in shore, directly towards a bay,bounded at either extreme by craggy rocks ; itbecame important to get some knowledge of itsformation, in the hope of finding a shelter behindsome protruding rock or point, if circumstancesshould permit us to get there. Accordingly aparty of officers and men, under the direction ofLieutenant Smyth, having volunteered their services,the remainder of the day was taken up inmaking the requisite preparations for their departureon the following morning. Sept. 23dcame on with thick weather and snow, which,together with the quantity that had already fallen,110 A DOCK CUT IN THE ICE.hid the looser portions of ice between the floes,and thereby rendered the destined expedition toohazardous. About 9 h a. m., a relaxation in thepressure encouraged us to try to warp the shipfrom her present unsafe situation, and this beingfound impracticable, the whole crew were employedto cut a canal with axes and otherimplements, which attempt also was after a fairtrial abandoned, as the heavier masses of icesqueezed forward into each vacancy as fast as itwas made. The large floe against the larboard,which was the side nearest to the land, was muchpiled up with hummocks, and directly alongsidewas upwards of twenty feet thick; and withthe double view of employing the people, andto make an experiment which, if successful,might be found advantageous, it was determinedto cut a dock in the pure ice. Accordingly,after the dimensions were measured, the officersand men set to work, and having, in the courseof four hours, sunk a trench as many feet deep,satisfied me that, assuming the floe to be of auniform thickness, they could finish the workin ten days at the most. On this occasion, it happened,contrary to expectation, that the ice nearus, and only that near us, began at that momentto open, so that by five o'clock p. m. there was alane for two or three hundred yards, so free ofHOPES AGAIN DISAPPOINTED, 111interruption, that a whale line was made fast tothe upper part of the fore-mast, and the menactually tracked the ship along.We had now been precisely a month beset,without the option of moving in any direction butwhere the openings occurred, or where the wholebody of the ice drifted; and this at a period admittedto be the most favourable for navigating theseseas. With every thing flattering to decoy us onwithin twenty miles of Baffin Island, we therefound ourselves suddenly stopped; and saw theice close behind us in an unbroken line, cuttingoff all retreat. It will easily therefore be conceived,that the phenomenon which permittedeven this trifling advance was hailed with exultation; and though we were soon arrested,yet three or four cracks between the floesand packed body ahead, intimated that somethingfavourable might be expected from thereturning tide. The weather, too, continuedmild, and a light air blew from the west. Still,though there were occasional fluctuations in theice during the night, Sept. 24th came withoutthe consummation so eagerly anticipated. By someunaccountable caprice, scarcely had the narrowopening begun to enlarge when the ice suddenlystopped, and then with a reaction truly alarming,pressed against the ship, so as to heave herover considerably on one side to the no small riskof the part nipped, which creaked and com-1 1^2 CUTTING AWAY ICE WITH AXES.planned bitterly ; it was some hours before sherighted again.It was now an object so to place the ship,that the excessive pressure, aided as it was by thespring tide, should be received equally onevery part of her ; and as this could not beeffected without the ice saws, they were shortlymade ready, and having been fixed to large trianglesformed of three high poles, were workedby means of a pulley. With one saw and someaxes we were enabled to cut away a sharp piecewhich had already caused much annoyance, andwere about removing it, when the ship whichhad been warped there, was suddenly set by theice against it, and in a short time crushed upthe whole mass. From that moment the pressurewas very great, and after midnight of Sept.25th, the timbers were strained so severelythat there was a general creaking. Happily itdid not last, for the crack again opened out andpermitted our hauling a few yards ahead, andthereby to escape being caught by an extensivefloe which, after sinking all smaller pieces,had forced its way to us. The rudder hadborne an amazing force with scarcely any injury,but as there was no longer any reason for exposingit, it was unhung and slung under the stern.We were nearly half way between Capes Comfortand Bylot, were in sight of each side of FrozenStrait, could clearly distinguish Cape WelsfordCONSULTATION OF OFFICERS. 1 ISand the dark water sky over Duke of York's Bay,were only five or six miles from the shore, whichwould have afforded us some shelter, and yethere we were fixed, compelled to endure thefurious buffets which each successive tide broughtupon us, and at the mercy of the mighty powerthat bound us. The temperature had variedfrom 18° to 23°, and the wind had drawn roundto the east, though this was now become of triflingimportance, as the westerly wind on whichso much reliance had been placed had not evenseparated the floes, much less driven them fromthe land ; and in fact, according to our unitedopinions, had made no impression whatever.Deeply sensible as I was of the growing peril ofour situation with days contracting and the prospectof a speedy decrease of temperature, I now madean official demand on the officers of his majesty'sship, for their respective opinions in writing, uponthe probability of any further progress being madeby our own exertions in the present season, towardsRepulse Bay. Their unanimous conviction,from the experience of the thirty-fourdays in which the ship had been beset, was, thatany thing more, with that view, was utterly impracticable,and they suggested the adoption ofcertain precautions in the event of any suddencontingency obliging us to have recourse to the*boats for safety. In this opinion I entirely coin114 RAPID DESTRUCTION OF THE FLOE.tided, and considering that the period had nowarrived for taking a decisive step, had determinedto cut a dock in a favourable part of thefloe which we had quitted ; that being thelargest, and, according to the ice mate, the onlyone sufficiently strong for the purpose. I feltassured that, if this could be accomplished, theship would be protected so long as the floe heldtogether, and in short it was my only resource.The resolution thus adopted was to have been carriedinto execution, but the following night, withoutthe aid of any strong breeze, produced themost extraordinary changes yet witnessed. Therewas a general commotion; and the entire body bywhich we were hampered separating into singlef pieces, tossed into heaps or ground to powderwhatever interrupted its course, and finally, inthe early morning of the 26th, rushed violentlyto the westward, directly up Frozen Strait. Theship bore well up against the hurly burly, andwhen daylight broke, and we could distinguishobjects, we looked in vain for the floe. In thewild convulsion of the night it had been brokenand scattered with many other ponderous masses,which now lay piled in ruins around us. It wasevident, too, that the ship had been set nearer toCape Bylot, for the coast beyond it, as well asBaffin's Island, were plainly seen from the deck ;so that, for aught we knew, we might still beI5^4^h .I*'■HBOW OF THE SHIP SPLIT. 11,5carried even to the goal of our wishes withoutany effort of our own. One fact, at all events,was incontrovertible, that, now the ice, thoughheavy enough to do great injury, was not extensiveenough to shelter us as I had designed, andthat there was nothing left but to drift with ituntil Nature in her own good time shouldrelease us.The ice remained unusually tranquil thewhole of the afternoon ; but as the night advancedthe north-east wind increased, and atll h p.m., when the flood-tide made, the shipbecame sharply nipped : fortunately it did notlast long, and on Sept. 27th she was free again.The effect of the breeze which still continued,accompanied with snow, had been to drive usnearer to the land, but without any inconveniencefrom pressure ; and we were congratulating ourselveson this, when, at ll h a.m., the creakingof the beams and sides abaft the main-mast intimatedthat the ice was in motion. On lookingover the stern, a heavy piece, driven on byseveral others, was seen crashing or sinkingeverything before it, and being now checked bythe ship, which it struck under the quarter,raised her at once several feet out of the water,the bow at the same time being pressed withsuch force against a mass ahead as to split it intwo or three directions, the whole going bodilyi 2116 PREPARING FOR AN EMERGENCY.forward. In this alarming manner the icebrought up, leaving the stern elevated seven anda half feet, and the bow jammed against theponderous masses ahead. Nothing could bedone by us to relieve the ship ; and as there wereno floes of sufficient surface on which to placeboats and provisions, if driven to that necessity,I decided on hoisting out the two whale boatsfrom the skids, and hanging them up alongside,so that these with the third and the two cutters,might be lowered at a moment's notice. A furtherquantity of provision also was to be got up,with ammunition and other necessaries to supportlife in case of the worst. As for the barge,though in itself the most suitable boat, her sizeand weight would have rendered her totally unmanageableon the broken and moving ice whichsurrounded us. The day was spent in executingthese arrangements, and I waited with anxietyfor the hour when the returning flood-tideshould again act. With the wind dead on shore,it was not very likely to loosen the ice ; and if itpacked it still more, who could calculate on theresult ? As midnight drew near, an occasionalsharp crack about the counter warned us thatsomething was giving way, but it passed ; andon Sept. 28th, though the breeze had roundedmore to the eastward, the ship had not alteredher inclination. Much snow fell, and it blewANNOYANCES OF THE SITUATION. 117Fresh till the morning, when the task of completingthe requisite outfit for the boats wasresumed. The top-gallant-yards and masts werelowered on deck, that the ship might be as lightas possible about the mast-heads ; and if by anyturn of fortune a channel should still open, wecould always set the topsails and courses, whichwould be amply sufficient to take us to ananchorage. At noon the ice was stationary,and we therefore motionless. The thermometerkept up to 29° + with an easterly breeze, fromwhich I inferred that there was open water at nogreat distance in that bearing, notwithstandingwe could not see it from aloft. On the 29ththe only change was, that the wind had veeredmore to the south, and that although the thermometerwas above the freezing point (viz. 33° + )so much snow fell that the whole forenoon wasoccupied in clearing it from the decks andboats. It was a tedious and annoying situationto be placed in, not above three miles from theshore, yet unable to get the ship there — baysand harbours apparently within reach, and stillobliged to be prepared for being wrecked.The ship remained in the same inconvenientposition, the slope and slippery state of the lee sideof the deck causing many falls to those who werepassing along. Sept. 30th was calm, and a depositionof hoar-frost and small spice coated thei3118 HOPES OF PROGRESSING BAFFLED.rigging and spars. As this was to be expectedfor many months, and the consequent difficulty ofwalking the decks was to be guarded against, I setupthe housing cloth between the fore and mainmasts,and thus made an excellent shelter, and areplace along the gangways for the people to takeexercise. Not that all idea of moving had beenabandoned, for I was determined to push up theStrait whenever the slightest opportunity shouldbe given, whether now or in the middle of winter.Nor, placed as we were, was such an opportunityimprobable, since Sir E. Parry had throughoutthe whole winter, remarked more or less openwater to the south east of his anchorage at WinterIsland. About 10 h 40 m a. m. a very narrow separationof the in-shore ice was seen, proving thereasonableness of such expectations, especiallyif a westerly gale, which some were yet sanguineenough to hope for, should at last come to ourrelief. During the afternoon the same ice closedagain without in any way affecting us. Thusended a month of vexation, disappointment, andanxiety, to me personally more distressing andintolerable than the worst pressure of the worstevils which had befallen me in any other expedition.CHAP. III.Lane of Water discovered, — Prospect of wintering on the Ice.Violent Concussions experienced. — Employment of theCrew. — Erection of an Observatory. — FavourablePositionof the Ship. — Disruption by a Gale. — Expansion of openWater. — Officers build Snow Houses. — Excursions to Land.An exploring Party. — Experiment of wearing a Mash. —Survey of a Harbour. — Pass Cape Comfort. — Risk ofbeing crushed. — Robbed by Foxes and Shrimps. — Thermometerrises. — Huge Mass of Ice. — Amusements. —Thermometers tested. — Accident to the Carpenter. — Schoolfor the Crew. — Curious Phenomenon. — RegisterThermometer. — Rein-deer killed. — Fearful Storm. —Floe cracks.On the 1st of Oct. the vessel gradually righted,and from that day to the 6th not a single incidentoccurred worthy of being recorded, except thatthe ship got an awkward list to starboard.The weather was singularly calm, the temperaturedid not fall lower than 14° + , and the iceremained almost motionless, or moved, if at all,bodily towards the land without creating thesmallest noise. One faint and flitting aurora wasseen.On the 6th, a party of four, consisting oftwo officers and two men, left the ship early inthe morning, with the intention of making anexcursion on shore, whence they returned abouti 4120 A PARTY GO ON SHORE.4 h p. m. They described the walking as veryfatiguing, on account of the state of the ice,thrown as it was into a heap of peaks and ridges,with the exception of one floe about threequarters of a mile broad, the whole way to theshore, the distance of which was estimated tobe about four miles. The sludge ice betweenthe larger masses was frozen hard enough tobear them ; and though painful to the feet, wasconsidered the most favourable for travelling on.They did not perceive any open water near theshore, but found some difficulty in reaching it,on account of a chasm between the ice and thenearest rocks, which however at last they contrivedto leap over. After resting awhile, theyendeavoured to ascend the hills, but were soondiscouraged by the excessive fatigue of toilingthrough snow, already in many places two andthree feet deep. Not a single track of an animalwas seen to allure them on or cheer theirexertions ; and under these circumstances, theyvery wisely retraced their steps to the vessel,where they arrived well fagged with the trip.On landing they had fired several shots, butthe sound did not reach us, though more thanone were watching their motions. The wholeline of coast to Cape Bylot seemed to them toform a moderate bay, and the ice between theship and shore they thought decidedly moreLANE OF WATER DISCOVERED. 121packed than further to seaward. The specimensof rocks which they brought were gneiss, with aconsiderable mixture of red felspar. They hadnot seen a blade of grass, nor a symptom of vegetationof any kind. No marks w r ere observedon the rocks, indicating the rise and fall of thetide.The day was clear and fine, and the landbeyond Cape Welsford, as well as Vansittart andBaffin islands, was so much thrown up by refraction,that had we not certainly known thepassage through Frozen Strait, we might haveconcluded that we were at the entrance of somedeep bay or inlet.In the course of making some changes forthe more suitable accommodation of some ofthe warrant officers, we found the roof and sidesof the vessel so damp, as to have contracted inmany parts a deposition of blue mould, caused,in all probability, by the vapour from the cook'scopper close by. This led to a closer examinationof other parts of the ship ; and on lookingnarrowly at the heel of the bowsprit, it was discoveredto be sprung from the knight-headsinwards six feet. How or when the injury hadbeen done it was impossible to ascertain : it was,probably, the effect of the weight and strainwhich must have been thrown upon it, wheneverthe ship was hove suddenly aback with a SHIP RIGHTS.ened bobstay among heavy ice, or it mighthave been occasioned by running on and liftingagainst elevated masses. During the afternoonof the 9th the wind freshened from thewestward, and early the following morning, muchto the astonishment of those who first descried italong lane of water was formed in shore at thedistance of not more than a mile from the ship.The body in which we were beset had, in fact,separated from and moved away from that nearerthe land, leaving a perfectly clear channel to CapeBylot within fifteen miles from Duke of York'sBay, which I was most anxious to reach in orderto place the ship in safety for the winter. Thereturning ebb closed the lane in a great part,though not entirely, and we continued as firmlybeset as ever, yet not without hope that the nextthree or four days might materially improve ourprospects. The same action and reaction successivelyoccurred at each change of tide ; buton the 11th, the weather being exceedingly moderate,various transverse cracks and small openingsbegan to appear over the greater part of the ice,and at length actually reached the ship. Towardsevening, several pieces of ice slowly moved fromunder her bilge, and at ll h 30 ra p. m., the commotionhaving considerably increased, she firstforged a little ahead, and immediately righted.Had it been light enough to send the men on thePROSPECT OF WINTERING ON THE ICE. 123ice to make fast the hawsers, such was the rapidchange going on, that it is possible we mighthave gained a few hundred yards ; but amongother grievances was this also, that the mostfavourable opportunities invariably occurred whenadvantage could not be taken of them.October 12th. — At daylight the differentarticles which for convenience had been depositedon the ice alongside were brought on board, andunwilling to lose the slightest chance of advancing,an effort was made to warp, but without success.At noon we were almost in the same place asbefore ; with this difference however, that theentire body of ice was broken or separated intosingle pieces as when we first entered it. Thewind had veered to north-east, the thermometerremaining at 22°-j- ; and its unwelcome influencew T as felt at the very next flood, when it drove themoving ice dead on the land, of course inclosingus in the general pressure. But, in truth, wenow hardly knew what to hope, or what to wish. Ifthe ice separated there was danger ; if it remainedcompact, there was the recurring commotionof every spring tide, and the conjectural effectof the storms which sooner or later must comeupon us. These reflections, and the responsibilitywhich devolved on me, embittered thehours which I had fondly hoped to have passedvery differently. Plans for spending the winter,124 VIOLENT CONCUSSIONS EXPERIENCED.(supposing we were compelled to remain out)had been concerted during the passage across theAtlantic. Observatories were to be erected onshore, experiments were to be made, much inshort was to be done from which interesting resultsmight have been obtained ; and though I didnot yet altogether despair of accomplishing thesedesigns, since, by possibility, the ship might stillbe set close to some bay or other place convenientfor the purpose, yet it could not be concealedthat the probability was hourly diminishing.The night of the 13th October was rough andboisterously at the very time of the highest tide,and wedging the ice against and under the ship,occasioned many severe concussions. A little pastll h I was reading in the cabin, when I felt soviolent a shock directly under the quarter, that 1thought it must have been stove in. The attack(if I may so express myself) was repeated atregular intervals, and lasted for upwards of twohours. On the 14th October there was no otherchange than that brought by snow, and a depressionof the thermometer to 14° + . One faint aurorahad been seen, During the two succeedingdays, at the flood-tide, the same concussionswere indicated by a slight trembling of the ship.As the tides became weaker the effect ceased,and we remained thenceforth undisturbed.It was not till October 17th that the temperateXosREPAIRING HEATING APPARATUS. 1<2.5ture fell below zero. On that day, however, it was9° m — , with a clear sky and a very light air from theN. N. W. The aurora was observed at thesame time. The planking and timbers, &c. ofthe ship cracked from the contraction of thecold, and the temperature of the officers' cabinsbeing below the freezing point, the vapour frozeuntil the hatches were shut down, and when thishad been done, caused more inconvenience stillby returning to its former state, and runningdown from the beams and sides in streams, I now,therefore, gave instructions for the constant useof the warming apparatus, which on three previoustrials had answered satisfactorily. Notlong, however, after the fire had been put intothe furnace, it was discovered that the heatcirculated only along one side of the ship, andupon examination, a portion of the liquid, consistingof brine, was found to have escaped.The work of repair was forthwith commenced bytaking down the outer brickwork of the furnace,between which and the latter was the worm ofthe iron pipe that formed the heating apparatus.It was a flaw or opening in this worm that hadallowed the liquid to escape, and this imposed onusthe additional trouble of putting the forgetogether, which was accordingly done under acanvass shed on the ice alongside. Here thearmourer, who had been supplied to us from126 EMPLOYMENT OF THE CREW.Chatham Dock-yard, an industrious and activeman, set to work with seeming delight, and inafew days the worm was replaced and againbricked up. I determined, however, on a generalinspection of the whole range before the fireshould be again lighted. In the meantime thesteam and vapour on the lower deck spread overthe whole upper surface and sides, as well as onthe beams and stanchions, and then becomingcondensed and falling in every direction, actedsomething like a shower bath. Rather thansuffer this, the consequences of which on thegeneral health might soon have been felt, thehatches were again thrown open, and the cloudsof dense vapour suffered to escape. It was myintention, in case the heat generated by thewarming apparatus should not be adequate tothe absorption of the moisture, to have iron tanksplaced on the upper deck as condensers ; but theplan for the present was delayed, for being quiteignorant of what the next spring-tides mightproduce, I was more tardy in making final arrangementsfor the winter as well as in organisingoccupations for keeping up the health andspirits of the crew, than was consistent with myown wishes. Not a day, however, had been sufferedto pass without some active employment,either in the duties of the ship, or on the ice,where healthy exercise was turned to profitableERECTION OF AN OBSERVATORY. 1^7account in constructing paths and one generalroad towards the shore. The officers kept theirregular watches ; nor in the peculiar situation ofthe ship, and the uncertainty of what might happenin case of any sudden storm, were the menat present discharged from the performance ofthe like duty.The temperature had hitherto been registeredevery two hours, but on October 18th two largespirit thermometers previously tested and foundto agree, were placed on each side of a thickpost fixed on the tafrail, in a direction due northand south ; the southern thermometer having itsbulb freely exposed, and the northern one havingthe brass guard usually thrown over the bulb bythe makers. These were now to be registeredevery hour, and at 2 h p. m. October 20, with aclear sky and a light air from west, the northshewed 4° -h and the south 22°+. The followingday at 6 h p. m., wind light at N. N. E,,the temperature fell to 15° by both. An hourafter, the weather became overcast, and theyrose to 8°.The risk of the ice separating had induced meto defer the erection of an observatory, but now Iyielded to the urgency of Lieutenant Stanley, whowas eager to commence a series of astronomicalobservations, and a party of officers and men,under his directions, set about the work on a128 UNSOCIABILITY OF THE CREW.small floe, less than two hundred yards from thelarboard quarter. The site chosen had everyappearance of solidity, and yet, to my surprise,I confess, after the sharp weather of the pastfew days, they came to water on removing snow,a foot or two from the surface. At first it wasthought to be fresh, but when they had dugabout five inches through ice, the sea-waterrushed up, thus proving how great is the protectionafforded by a covering of six or eightinches of snow. The ice formed on the fire hole*in a single night but three days before was justfive inches thick.Meantime we were not unobservant of thehabits and dispositions of the crew, hastily gatheredtogether, and for the most part composedof people who had never before been out ofa collier : some half dozen, indeed, had servedin Greenland vessels, but the laxity which is therepermitted, rendered them little better than theformer. A few men-of-wars-men who were alsoon board, were worth the whole together. Thewant of discipline, and attention to personalcomfort, were most conspicuous ; and thoughthe wholesome regulations practised in HisMajesty's service were most rigidly attended toin the Terror, yet such was the unsociability,Fire hole — hole for drawing water in the event of fire.CHARACTERISTICS OF A BRITISH SAILOR. 12Qthough without any ill-will, that it was only bya steady and undeviating system pursued by thefirst lieutenant, that they were brought at alltogether with the feeling of messmates : at first,though nominally in the same mess, and eatingat the same table, many of them would secretetheir allowance, with other unmanly and practices. This was another proofadded to the many I had already witnessed,how greatly discipline improves the mind andmanners, and how much the regular service-manis to be preferred for all hazardous or difficultenterprises. Reciprocity of kindnesses, a generousand self-denying disposition, a spirit offrankness, a hearty and above-board manner —these are the true characteristics of the Britishseaman ; and the want of these is seldom compensatedby other qualities. In our case, and Imention this merely to show the difference ofolden and modern times, there were only threeor four in the ship who could not write. Allread ; some recited whole pages of poetry, otherssang French songs. Yet with all this, had theybeen left to themselves, I verily believe a moreunsociable, suspicious, and uncomfortable setof people could not have been found. Oh ! ifthe two are incompatible, give me the old" JackTar, who would stand up for his ship, and givehis life for his messmate.K130 A GENERAL MASQUERADE.Nor were the efforts of the first lieutenant confinedto the enforcement of discipline or the regulationsof the mess; for, as I felt the importanceof amusing the minds of the crew during somany hours of forced inaction by every innocentdevice, he kindly undertook and personally superintendedthe getting up of a general masquerade.The affair 'came off' on the 22d October; andif the entertainment was not of a very refined character,at all events it answered its purpose ; forthe fun was hearty and the laughter loud. Someof the devices, as well as the contrivances togive the necessary variety of costume, with thescanty means at our command, did great creditto the ingenuity of the performers ; and altogetherit was a gratifying scene, as showing howthe native elasticity of the mind can triumphover circumstances the most cheerless and discouraging.October 23d. After divine service, which waslistened to with a stillness that evinced, morethan words could have done, the devout feelingcreated by the impressive and beautiful languageof our liturgy, as the weather was very fine, thepeople, under the direction of the officers, weresent on the ice for exercise ; and I too, puttingon a pair of Chippewa snow-shoes, sallied outand made towards the land, which I reachedafter more than two hours of great fatigue.FATIGUING EXCURSION TO SHORE. 1S1There was nothing besides the novelty of havingbeen on shore, to repay me for the trouble andfalls which I met with in getting there. A barejutting or rounded piece of granite was visiblehere and there, the rest was covered with snow,steep and inaccessible, and dipping to thewater's edge. It was a desolate solitude which,from the absence of all tracks, seemed to beequally abandoned by man and animals. Atthat part, at least, there was no shelter ; andwhen I reflected on the dangers by which wewere encompassed, and the casualties whichmight befal us, I could not refrain from castingan anxious look towards the ship, whose mastsalone were in sight above the peaked hummocks,and imploring the protection of heaven.The fatigue I experienced from my walk didnot arise from the distance, which at most couldnot exceed six miles, but from the unevenness ofthe surface, which, from the smooth and in someplaces deep coating of snow that covered it, wasextremely deceitful. In stepping forward, itoften happened that my show-shoe was cantedover by some sharp piece out of sight, and Imyself thrown down ; but worse than this werethe ridges and hummocks, which being heapedup to a considerable height demanded the utmostexertion to surmount. On one occasionI slipped, and falling headlong into the snow,k 2132 FAVOURABLE POSITION OF THE SHIP.found that I was between two thick masses ofice, with my face down, and that I hung onlyby the right snow-shoe, which, fortunately forme,had turned so as to fix itself across twopieces strong enough to support me. From thisawkward situation I was eight or ten minutes inextricating myself, and congratulated myself notalittle on my escape. The fact is, that I oughtnot to have been alone ; but as I was at presentthe only person who could boast of a pair ofsnow-shoes, no one could keep pace with me.Every thing which I saw between the ship andthe shore, the heavy floes in some parts, andthe extreme pressure that must have existed inothers, served to reconcile me to the positionin which accident, or something better, hadthrown the ship, as affording a more favourablechance of getting away than if we had beennearer to the land.October 24th, being the day of the full moon,had been looked forward to with more thanordinary interest, on account of the springtide;though, from the cold we had experienced,the snow which had fallen, and the uniformcompactness of the ice in every direction, it wasthought that it might now affect us but little,if at all. The hour of change was ushered in bya fresh westerly, or off-shore breeze, whichpassed harmless over the surface of the vastDISRUPTION BY A GALE. 133body, only raising in its fury clouds of drift,particularly about the land to the east-ward of theship. Scarcely, however, had the sun crossed themeridian when a change came on for the worse,and soon settled into a downright gale, suchas a fortnight ago would most likely have taken usto Repulse Bay. Until 4 h p.m. it had not madethe faintest impression on any part of the ice, butat that time a lane of water was observed betweenus and the shore, precisely where I had walkedover yesterday. Aided by the gale, which sometimesburst in heavy squalls, the channel went ongradually expanding until night closed the view.About 8 h p. m. however, a crack directly aheadand another on the starboard quarter were heard,seeming to announce a general disruption, theeffect of which, at that hour of darkness and at solate a season, it was impossible to foresee. Sleepwas banished, at least from me, and when themorning of October 25th arrived, a continuoussheet of water was seen extending from thebefore-mentioned lane to Cape By lot, and thenceto seaward abaft our starboard beam. Two orthree other small openings were seen ; and theship unable to resist the power of the gale, hadworked a clear space of three inches along thewhole of the starboard side. By noon thecracks ahead and astern were something enlarged,and the lane of water on the starboard sidek 3134 EXPANSION OF OPEN WATER.seemed to be nearing us. The wind now beganto abate, and having caught a glimpse of theland, we found that the ship had been driventogether with the pack to the eastward. Thetemperature from 3°+ had risen to 26° + , thebreeze still prevailing from the west.During the afternoon the sky continued overcast,and the w T ind freshening up from the samequarter, the ice began to set to the northward aswell as eastward, so that after a boisterous night,we found ourselves much nearer to Cape Comfort.The water too had increased considerably, reachingnow from Cape Bylot to Cape Comfort ;a second lane had been formed which, branchingto seaward in a semicircular shape, joinedthe principal opening near its two extremes,and thus completely insulated the pack inthe centre of which the ship was fixed. Howfar the channels led, and whether, supposingwe could have entered them, serviceable usecould have been made of them, was at bestmatter of conjecture merely ; but on theother hand, it was clear, that the separation of theice, so as to admit of the trial, would haveexposed us to the irresistible crushing of theconsolidated masses around, masses very differentfrom the straggling pieces which formerlyknocked against us, and cemented into vastfloes, whose momentum the ship, strong as sheSHIP CONTINUES FIXED. 135was, could scarcely have withstood. Upon thewhole, therefore, it was gratifying to me to seetheice, forming the pack in which we were,remain firm ; for so long as that was the case,however incommodious our position, it was atleast safe. Meantime we continued to drift asbefore, until the wind getting round into theeast began to send us back again.The temperature was 27° + , and the weatherextremely gloomy. By the morning of the 27thwe had not only altered the bearing of the ship'shead from west to east, but had drifted so farout as to have a distinct sight of the land formingthe extreme point of the bay eastward of CapeComfort. There was also much more of clearwateralong shore leading directly up FrozenStrait, where, hanging over the Western Hills,were dense clouds, similar to those near us, indicating,beyond doubt, a continuation of thesame channel. That, therefore, for which wehad so long and anxiously waited — that which,in two days at the most, would have terminatedour labours by allowing a free and unobstructedpassage to our anchorage, was now before us,and we were helpless and immovable, fixed inthe solid mass as it were in a block of marble.Again, the heavy clouds to the far east showedopen water in that direction also, so that at thistime, with an offshoot breeze, a vessel might havek 4136 OFFICERS BUILD SNOW HOUSES.sailed without impediment (so far as we couldjudge) from one extremity of SouthamptonIsland to the other. In the direction of BaffinIsland indeed, and to the north, the horizon wasstill white with ice ; but the fact of our havingdrifted so far from the land proved, beyondquestion, the existence of a clear sea thereabouts:and though no immediate advantage could be expectedfrom this circumstance, yet in conjunctionwith what was daily passing near us, it affordedthe hope of a departure early enough forcarrying into effect the objects of the expeditionin the course of the following year. To beholdthe open water so near, without a possibility ofreaching it, was mortifying enough, but we madea virtue of necessity, and suppressed our feelings.The usual occupations in cleaning the holds,re-stowing and getting provisions for six months athand, with other necessary duties, were followedup on board ; whilst for the preservation of health,a moderate share of walking or rather workingexercise was taken on the ice. The officersfound employment and amusement in buildingsnow houses for various purposes, and amongothers for an observatory, instead of that whichhad been already put up with a sail covering, toovaluable to be risked upon so uncertain a foundation.My plans, as to magnetical observations,were for the present completely frustrated byWANT OF FUEL PREVENTS EXCURSIONS. 137the motion of the ice, though I did not despair ofyet doing something in that respect during thewinter. At noon the weather was very gloomy,with smoke-black clouds hanging over the water,and seeming more heavy from mingling with agreenish pale yellow which canopied the snow-cladhills beyond. The wind was from the southwardand the thermometer showed 28°-f . Thenext day the water remained still open, and inthe opinion of the ice-mate had greatly increasedtowards the upper end or western extreme ofFrozen Strait. From alongside the ship however,to the nearest edge of the pack connectedwith the water, the distance was at least a mile,the whole of which was a succession of hummocks,wedged and cemented by sludge andsnow into a mass so firm, as to defy any humanefforts to separate them. Yet so tempting wasthat channel, so doubtful its re-occurrence whenwe might be at liberty to avail ourselves of it,that had there been wood, or the means of procuringfuel around Repulse Bay, I could hardlyhave resisted an attempt with the boats, wherebyhalf the object might have been accomplished bythe time the ship could have forced her way toan anchorage. But without fire, the thing wasutterly impracticable, so I was compelled unwillinglyto submit.The warming apparatus, of the repair of which I138 FURTHER REPAIR OF HEATING APPARATUS.spoke, had again been bricked np around thefurnace, and was now to undergo another trial,which, it is painful to add, was equally unsuccessfulwith the former. This second failure wasattributable to the shortness of the nuts andthe fineness of the threads of the screws, and freshleaks in the pipes ; a combination of evils which,if not overcome by the skill of our armourer,would reduce us to three common stoves, andthese, it is scarcely necessary to say, would beutterly inadequate for warming the whole ship.The damaged parts having been repaired, andthe whole once more replaced and tilled withbrine, the furnace was lighted ; but now, oneside only was warmed, the temperature of theother being scarcely raised. The cause of thiswas found to be the insufficiency of the liquidforced into the circulating pipes, and this beingremedied, there was for a short time a prospectthat all would go right. But it was for a shorttime only, for a fresh leak soon discovered itself,and once more arrested the proceedings. Thepeople annoyed at these interruptions, and thecomplication of the whole affair, with characteristichumour, nicknamed it the infernalmachine, and prayed that we might not all beblown up. Fortunately for us, the thermometerwas still high, viz. 26°-f .The wind being light, we did not seem to varyINCONVENIENCE OF THE VAPOUR. 139our position much during the night, and yet inthe morning of the 29th it was evident that theice near the shore had by some means or other diminishedin quantity, either by drifting away, orfrom having been broken up by the tide. Atall events, the channel of water was certainlynearer, and we ourselves closer to the land,which remained shrouded in sombre clouds.Much inconvenience was now experienced fromthe great accumulation of moisture on the lowerdeck. When the warming apparatus began tothrow out its heat this had partially disappeared ;but that complex and most vexatious pieceof mechanism, after performing its office withtolerable regularity for a few hours, again, with aninexplicable caprice, confined its action to thelarboard side, and soon after, though there wasno visible defect, or any want of fire, grewcold altogether, and consequently useless. Toremove 7 e the vapour for the present, two hangingstoves were placed on the lower deck, whichanswered the purpose, but half stifled withtheir smoke those who were below.The wind which had set in in the morningfrom the N. E. blew with increasing strength asthe day closed ; and when the moon shone out,a dark lane of water was supposed to be descriedbetween our pack and the coast which we wererapidly nearing. Here, as at the more westerly140 EXCURSION TO LAND.part, the ice had almost entirely disappeared, sothat there was every reason to suppose we shouldbe brought up by the inner edge of the packstriking the rocks. If this were realized, it wasto be expected that the concussion would notonly detach and pulverize the extremity immediatelyin contact, but that the reverberation ofthe shock might extend itself even to the ship,free her from her icy bonds, and leave her oncemore to the mercy of drift ice. This wasa consummation not to be wished, and Ipassed a restless night. More than once it wasthought that the pack had actually struck theland, but in the morning of Sunday, Oct. 30th,the appearance was found to have been a delusion,occasioned by the high and dark line of thecoast on this part of Southampton Island whichhas been already described as adjacent to CapeComfort. After the accustomed examination,and the religious duties of the day, the whole ofthe crew, under the guidance of the first lieutenant,made an excursion towards the nearestland which, however, they were unable to reach,on account of the interposition of a few feet ofwater between the pack and the bay ice andsludge adhering to the rocks. The distance fromthe ship to the spot whence they returned, whichwas considered about half way, was estimated atsomething more than a mile. At noon, theANOTHER EXCURSION. 141thermometer having been at 3°-+- rose to 9°+,the wind from the westward. In the early morningtwo prismatic lunar halos had been seen. Thepack was now arrested by the young ice, whichon the following day I went to examine, incompany with a small party of the officers, whocontinued their w r alk to the shore. They returnedin the evening with an account of thetoil they had had in scaling the precipitous sidesof the rocks, which, there, were of red granite.Seals and a recent track of a bear were seen, aswell as the excrement of Alpine hares. Fromthe summit of the hills, the young ice could betraced ahead or to the eastward of the ship, almostsurrounding the pack, which was decidedly theheaviest in sight. The weather being obscureto the westward, nothing could be ascertainedin that quarter.On November 1st, the thermometer was 10°+,and the ice stationary. The holds having nowbeen arranged, as well as the coals would allowwith more advantage, the articles liable toinjury from the frost placed in midships, andsix months' provisions stowed near the hatches ;there remained little of duty to occupy the attentionbeyond the important one of setting torights the warming apparatus. Assuredly, nopains were "spared to solve the puzzlingquestion, why it would not act. Some of the142 TROUBLE OF HEATING APPARATUS.pipes were again repaired and a volume ofhot salt-water having been driven with a forcingpump from one extremity to the other, itsentire reparation was thought to be conclusivelyestablished. The fire therefore was lighted, and,as the warmth spread throughout the ship, itwas considered that all obstacles were finally overcome,when suddenly, to our great and seriousdisappointment, first the starboard side cooledrapidly, and ten or twelve hours later the larboardfollowed the example. The evil now began topress on us the more heavily as our remedieswere failing ; for, not foreseeing nor imaginingsuch a succession of disasters, we had been suppliedonly with such a quantity of mortar as mightbe sufficient for making good any fracture in thefurnace, the whole of which was expended ; sothat it was necessary to leave it untouched untilsome substitute could be discovered. As therewas reason to suppose that the pipes had becomefoul or partially obstructed, I directed that astream of hot water should be forced throughthe whole range of pipes for several hours withoutinterruption, and went myself to superintendthe operation. Half an hour's trial, withoutvisible result, convinced me that, to do anythingeffectual, a part (at least) of the tedious contrivancemust be unscrewed and examined, andthis, notwithstanding the confusion it wouldAN EXPLORING PARTY. 143create in the officers' cabins through which itpassed, and the doubt of our being able to put ittogether again, was accordingly directed to bedone. In the mean time the temperature hadfallen to 22°—, throwing the lower deck into amost uncomfortable state, and yet not so badas the after cabins, which were dripping withmoisture. Much to the credit of the officersno complaints were heard, nor was the health ofany one affected. Moreover, under every disadvantage,the deck was kept perfectly dry.November 4th. I accompanied a party ofofficers to the land for the purpose of satisfying ourcuriosity respecting an opening about three milesfrom the ship, which had the appearance of aharbour. The result in some measure verifiedour conjecture, for we walked upwards of a milefrom the entrance to the further end, where,providing the holding ground were good, anyvessel would be securely sheltered. From abold perpendicular rock, one of the many bywhich it is girt in, the echo was so clear, thatan unhappy wanderer in these dreary solitudesmight have listened to his own voice, and fanciedhimself no longer alone. We attempted toascend a sloping side to gain the heights above ;but all except myself being unprovided withsnow-shoes, sunk so deep in the snow that theeffort was found too laborious, and was thereforeabandoned for another opportunity. In this144 EXPERIMENT OF WEARING A MASK.excursion a few tracks of bears, wolves, andfoxes, and our old acquaintance the raven wereseen ; and though the weather was fine, yet amoderate breeze from the westward was quitecold enough to freeze slightly the faces of two ofthe gentlemen, which, however, the applicationof a little snow soon restored to their formerflorid hue. By way of experiment LieutenantSmyth put on a common mask, and at first consideredit rather comfortable, until . gettingheated with exertion, a cake of ice was formedinside, which, not being the kind of lining hepreferred, was immediately rejected, aid fromthe face the mask was transferred to the end ofa boarding pike, the point being thrust, throughone of the eyes, and carried in that way over hisshoulder. With such a Gorgon's head, it waslaughingly remarked, we need not fear to face atroop of bears. In the afternoon w r e returned onboard.There was a broad sheet of bay icefrom the shore to the pack, but although nowfirm enough, w r e could form no opinion of whatmight be when acted on by the ensued spring!e. There was not the least sign of any tide-markalong the rocks, though a cracking of theiv as if it were sinking, was heard.On inspection of the pipes it turned out, as Ianticipated, that a considerable quantity of rustand dirt had accumulated in the starboard returnpipe, and this having been cleared out, theANNOYANCES FROM VAPOUR. 145apparatus was again put together, and for a timethrew out a general heat. But after two days'trial the heat, though occasionally as high as60°+ between decks, was found to be too irregularfor the purpose mainly intended, of keepingthe interior dry by the action of a uniformtemperature. On the contrary, it rather seemedto favour the generating of vapour, which nowran in streams from every part. The officers'cabins, gun-room, and midshipmen's berth weremiserably uncomfortable. It was in the after-part,esp' chilly near the first Lieutenant's cabin,that the greatest accumulation of moisture wasobserved, and there, as there seemed to be nochance of an improvement, a stove was now :permanently fixed. For the rest, the deck waspartly covered with snow, well beaten down, andin default of gravel or sand, strewed with sawdust.Besides this, the after-hatchway or com- jpanton was closed, and a tank placed over it foracondenser, while the ladder was transferred tothe main I .tchway, having a fearnought screenround it L:.4ow, and a regular door entranceabove on deck. With these, and numerousother precautions of a like kind, it was hope 1we might contrive to get through the coldmonths of the winter.After service on Sunday, November 6th, thepeople strolled on the ice, many extending theirL116 SURVEY OF HARBOUR.walk to the land. On the following day a partyunder the orders of Lieutenant Stanley, wasdirected to make a survey of the harbour.This was completed by the evening. It wasascertained to be one mile and a half long, andhalf a mile broad, by admeasurement ; exposedto a north-north-east wind, but sheltered fromall others. The echo-rock was six hundred andfifty feet high ; some others varied from that toeight hundred and fifty feet ; these again werebacked by the coast range, running generallyfrom one thousand to fourteen and sixteen hundredfeet above the level of the sea. Neitherthe depth of water nor the nature of the bottomcould be got, on account of the under layers ofice intercepting the lead. I called it Smyth'sHarbour, after the first Lieutenant of the Terror.Some of the gentlemen ascended the hills bythe vallies, and observed on their way numeroustracks of animals, — bears, wolves, foxes, and reindeer.A few willows were also seen, near whichwere the tracks of partridges.The pack in which we were frozen had nowremained so long unmoved, and the bay ice hadattained such a solidity, that many concludedwe were definitively fixed for the winter ; buton the 8th November a fresh gale ushered inthe new moon, and before night drove the hugepack from the inshore ice, leaving between thePASS CAPE COMFORT. 147two a dark lane of water. The land waseffectually shut out from view by the whirlsof drift raised by the gusty wind, but on thefollowing day, November 9th, a partial clearanceshowed that the pack had not only drifted out,but was also setting to the eastward, CapeComfort being at that time full on the beam.After this, the same kind of weather continuingthroughout that day prevented us fromascertaining the precise situation of the ship,till daylight of the 10th, when we found wehad just passed Cape Comfort. Our pack, inleaving the station where it had been so longundisturbed, had carried away a considerableportion of the bay ice attached to its edges, andhad now turned round about ninety degrees,placing the stem of the ship towards the land,and consequently leaving her head true north.From the crow's nest much young ice wasobservable on every side, but only in lanesintervening between the heavier bodies, of whichit was remarked that our pack was the mostextensive. The thermometer still retained anelevation which we thought high, viz. 11° + .It may well be imagined that these spring-tidechanges of position gave rise to no little speculationwhither we might be driven by the timethe ice commonly breaks up. During the threesucceeding days we were blown backwards andl 2148 DRIVEN TOWARDS CAPE COMFORT.forwards until the pack set in towards the shorea little to the westward of Cape Comfort, andhere it was hoped we might remain undisturbedup to the time of the next spring-tide : but notso ; for a strong north-westerly breeze coiningon with heavy squalls and much drift, we w r ereagain set in motion to the eastward, in an obliquedirection tow r arts the land, which, when seen atintervals through the drift, appeared to benearer than we had yet approached. The temperaturenow fell to 14°—, and this, though notin fact so low as on some previous occasionswhen the crew had walked out for exercise, wasfound, with the aid of the breeze, too biting tobe faced without great discomfort ; and, consequently,after our accustomed assemblage atdivisions and church on the 13th, the men weredirected to walk under the housing. Throughoutthe latter part of the day and most of thenight, heavy squalls were frequent from the samequarter, and though these had considerablyabated by the 14th, yet, to our astonishment,the pack had taken us, according to LieutenantStanley's measurement, within three thousandsix hundred and fifty yards of the inaccessiblecliffs of Cape Comfort, against which, therefore,there was reason to apprehend that the ice mightstrike, break up, and wreck the ship. The extraordinarydisappearance of extensive bodies ofRISK OF BEING CRUSHED. I'M)inshore ice, and the occupation of their places bythe still heavier ones from seaward, seemed at firstquite unaccountable, till the fact was establishedthat two thirds of it were actually ground and rpressed up to the height of twenty feet, in a solidmass against the unyielding rocks. What fatalconsequences, therefore, might not be apprehendedif any untoward fracture of the packshould unmoor us from our present bed ! Asmall hole of water was all that was visible fromthe mast-head, but happily that was off thepoint to the eastward, and between the packand the shore there was yet a weak barrier of driftand bay ice to fend off any serious concussion.The drift had spread such a uniform carpet overthe entire surface of the ice, that it seemed likeone immense floe, A vast proportion of it hadevidently been drifted down from the northward,and having wedged itself between thewestern extremity of our pack and FrozenStrait, was thus, in combination with the wind,gradually forcing us out : situated as we were,this was a consummation most devoutly to bewished, for our return to the strait was clearlyimpossible, even if the wind should veer to theeastward ; and any change of place was obviouslybetter than a position immediately off aniron-bound cape.And now again the annoyance returned whichl 3150 HEATING APPARATUS CONDEMNED.has been already mentioned oftener than I couldwish. In spite of every attention, our troublesomewarming apparatus could not be made toanswer. Scarcely did it begin to throw out alittle heat than one pipe or other graduallycooled, and left us teeming with vapour which ithad just had the power to generate. Not a daypassed without a complaint of its inefficiency.In its best state the officers' cabins were dripping,and a stove was necessary to dry the deck.I had been most reluctant to abandon italtogether, but at last, on repeated representationsof its failure, I issued an official orderto the proper officers to survey it, and on theirreport pronouncing its condemnation, I directedthe furnace and its appurtenances to be dismantled,and availed myself of the lead and copperattached to it, for fitting up a Fraser's stovea little before the main-hatchway on the lowerdeck.November 16th. We continued to move accordingto the direction of the wind, off thepoint of Cape Comfort, with some holes of waterround the pack, caused by its own motion, butdid not get beyond it, either to the east or to thewest. I examined the recently formed ice nearthe land, which w T as broken into slabs, and piledup in the utmost confusion, so steep and irregularas to be almost impassable. Just at theDRIVEN FARTHER OUT. 151edge of the pack, while keenly following thefresh track of a bear, in the company of three ofthe officers, we suddenly came to some gravelevidently thrown up by the lower ice, and lookingmore attentively round, observed that theadjacent ice was in a raised and spherical form, asif resting on a rock or bank of similar shape.The pack was only a few yards from this, andhad evidently been arrested by it, as was furtherdemonstrated by a crack about twenty feet fromits edge. To get away from the shoal, therefore,would require an off-shore breeze ; nor wasthis long wanting, for on the very same nightit blew fresh from the westward, and urgingthe ice along the land, faster than mighthave been expected in a neap-tide, by the forenoonof the 18th we had completely roundedthe Cape, and were considerably farther outthan we had been since the early part of lastmonth. On making an excursion with a smallparty, I observed that our pack had received anothershock, and that an extensive crack on the sidenearest the land was the consequence. AgainI saw the same convexity of surface, terminatedby huge mounds of splintered fragments amountingto hundreds of tons in weight, each piece orfragment, though of this year's ice, being fromtwo to two and a half feet thick. The existenceof shoals was manifest, since the pressurel 4152 ROBBED BY FOXES AND SHRIMPS.causing the accumulation referred to, ceasedabruptly where this and other similar remarkableelevations appeared. Beyond that line,and occupying a full mile in breadth, was asheet of young ice, alternating with heaps ofa different character, and extending towardsthe land, which, however, we were preventedfrom reaching by a narrow lane of water. Tracksof bears, wolves, and foxes were noticed, of whichthe last mentioned alone ever ventured to approachthe ship. Indeed these met with no veryfriendly reception, having put an end to allrelations of amity, by stealing sundry piecesof beef, left carelessly by the owners outside onthe snow. To do them justice however, theywere not the only depredators, as they soon experiencedwho, having been taught to mistrustthe honesty of the foxes, afterwards to be very safe,sunk their allowance of beef in the " fire hole."Alas! to adopt the pathetic lament of old Shylock,M There be water thieves and land thieves :" andhere a greedy colony of shrimps made suchhavock, that when in the morning one of the menwent to draw up the meat intended for the dinnerof his mess, he found in its place a few miserableshreds, to which the pirates still clung with un-satiatedappetites. The temperature fluctuatedfrom 0° to about 21° — , but there were neitheraurora nor other phenomena to excite attentionDRIVEN CLOSE IN SHORE. 153and employ the mind ; and all attempt to makemagnetic observations, except in occasional instances,was frustrated by the constant moving ofthe pack. This indeed was a serious disappointment,as we had many experiments in view, whichcould not have failed to be highly interesting.November 19th. The wind veered to the southeast,and some signs were observed of water in theopposite quarter, occasioned, as we knew, by themotion of our own pack. The night was unusuallycalm, yet it was apparent to every one that somedisturbing force was carrying us rapidly towardsthe frowning precipices not a gun-shot distant.The attention of those on deck was riveted tosounds distinctly heard of breaking ice, crashingand grinding with a discord the more horrible,as with that exception nature was in dead repose.When day dawned it appeared that we hadbeen driven to the westward, and close in shore,where the bay ice was still in tumultuous agitation,having been thrown up against the rocksin some shelving places, to the height of thirty orforty feet. After church a large party went tothe edge of the pack, or floe, as it was nowtermed, and witnessed the work of destruction asit went on. It was a spectacle indeed not lesssublime than appalling ; filling the mind withawe, and at the same time inspiring it withdevotional gratitude to that Being whose THERMOMETER RISES.evidence watched over us and preserved us in themidst of such fearful perils. On the 21st Novemberwe moved but little, though close in with thepoint of Cape Comfort, and therefore exposed tothe influence of those alternate tides whichworked so much confusion amongst the bay ice.The wind however began to blow fresh andsteadily from the south-east, with the same degreeof force which had hitherto characterized it onthe days of full and change. In consequenceof this change the thermometer showed a dispositionto rise, and on the 22d was 9° + , theweather being overcast, and the ship farther offshore. Still, notwithstanding the continuanceand strength of the wind, we did not increase ourdistance from the land so much as might havebeen expected, a circumstance which can only beaccounted for by supposing that its influence waspartial, or that ice had accumulated in the northso as to prevent any egress in that direction.Whatever it was, we certainly had not been driftedmore than five miles ; and after the period of fullmoon, an opposite breeze sent us again in shore,altogether to the westward of the Cape.On making holes at two places, a quarter ofa mile apart, the thickness of the ice beneath thecovering of snow, w r as found to be not more thantwo and two and a half feet. Much snow nowfell, and even with a fresh northerly wind, theHUGE MASS OF ICE. 155temperature was 11° + , So mild did the weathercontinue, with every wind, for several consecutivedays, that the snow remained fleecy and soft,and, obliterating every trace of the old tracks,perplexed us considerably in our daily exercise.Our floe had undergone a change of form fromthe pressure on the extremities, and having beenforced against the compact and solid ice offthe western low point of Smyth's Harbour,a large portion of it had broken and separatedfrom the main body. On examining it myself,I saw that there were cracks in all directions,and concluded that two more such encroachmentswould infallibly extend to us : nor wasit possible to avoid the reflection that no artcould save us, if we were once exposed to thegrinding pressure of the mass against therocks. Communication with the shore was cutoff; but having followed the channel some wayto seaward, it was found to be connected withanother open space of more than usual extent,though now fast becoming coated with thin ice.Nor was this distant from the ship ; and withina few hundred paces was an accumulation ofponderous masses of ice, the interstices betweenwhich were filled up with snow drift, so firmlycemented, and of such height, that it mightwell have passed for a berg. From its summit156 RAPID MOTION OF THE ICE.I looked down into the Terror's main-top. Oneof the crew saw some fish in the water whichhe described to be as large as salmon, but wewere unable to set lines, owing to the overlappingof the ice below the surface.November 28th. There had been a darksteel coloured sky, extending from about WinterIsland to the situation of Repulse Bay, so exactlyresembling that which indicates openwater, that we could not forbear imaginingthe ice in the centre of the Welcome to havebroken up. That some such occurrence musthave taken place was indeed evident, for the icewas now perpetually in motion, and we weredriven occasionally five or seven miles. Astrange refraction of the horizon to the northwas remarked about sunrise, or rather when thesun was seen just above the south-eastern hills.At the part to the north the sky was a darkgrey, and the icy horizon appeared in detachedhorizontal lines at a very acute angle. Thetemperature fell to 1G° — , with a moderatewind from the westward. Without much variationin the state of the weather, a very sensiblediminution was brought about on the edgeof the floe by the successive action of the inshoreice against it. But as the temperaturehad fallen to 30°— of Pastorelli's thermometer,AMUSEMENTS. 157and 38°— of Newman's, it was rather thoughtthat the detached pieces might again unite andform a stronger bulwark of defence than before.It has been already mentioned that the crewwere daily exercised on the ice ; and as itseemed better that the mind should be fixed onsome object, the accomplishment of which mightbe looked forward to with a sort of interest,the whole were directed to build up snow wallsand galleries in different directions from theship. These being destined for the comfort ofall, the work was cheerfully undertaken, andthe operators were rewarded with a proportionablestock of health. Good, however, as wasthe general health, it was necessary to relievethe monotony of scene and occupation ; andin this view the officers kindly undertook toperform a play for the amusement of the men.Accordingly, on November 29th, a day speciallyselected on account of the gallant actionoff Pelagossa, 1811, (such had been the deepimpression left by Sir J. Gordon's good officesand urbanity), every preparation that our limitedmeans would permit having been made, it wasannounced that the Farce of Monsieur Jonsonwould be acted that evening. The exhibitionat the appointed hour, ushered in by anappropriate prologue from the first lieutenant,and set off by scenery from the brush of thesame accomplished performer, occasioned hearty158 CRUSHING OF ICE.laughter, plentiful plaudits, and in conclusion,three hearty cheers. After the performance,the dramatis personam, with the other officers,passed a few hours together ; and I questionwhether in any other quarter of the globe, anequal number could be found more free fromcare than were the merry group so assembled.The sea, however, was not charmed into inactivity,for the usual grating noise was heard bythe watch on deck, and in the morning the floewas found to have turned in more towards theshore. A drift was skimming over the ice,which rendered walking, even with the advantageof snow-shoes, a more severe task than wasagreeable ; but being desirous to see what effecthad been produced by the uproar of the night,I went to our nearest boundary, and found thatit had suffered further encroachment, and wascrushed and thrown up like the rest beyond it.Dark, and therefore recently formed ice, occupiedsome conspicuous openings, though thiscould scarcely last beyond the next tide.December 3d. The temperature now beganto decrease rapidly. The difference betweenPastorelli's thermometer and mine, made byNewman (the same which I had with me on mylast expedition), amounted to eight degrees, theformer being 31°-, and the latter 42° — . Idetermined to test them by exposing a saucerof mercury to the atmosphere. In the courseTHERMOMETERS. 159of an hour it became dull in colour and flattenedat its edges, and in two hours and ahalf more was frozen. In the interval pastoral'shad fallen to 35° 5' — , and New-man'sto 44° — . After this test the one lastmentioned was fixed on a post about seventypaces from the ship, and thenceforth registeredas the standard thermometer ; the others, however,north and south, as well as one containedin a tin case perforated with holes and hoistedto the mast-head, being also noted in the log-book.The cold was now sufficiently severe tofreeze some of the people as they were employedon the ice ; the temperature being 49° — .However, being desirous to satisfy my doubtsabout the practicability of getting on shore, andas to the extent of the bay ice near us, I went onsnow-shoes, and on arriving at the boundary ofthe floe, which just at that part was unaltered,found a narrow lane of water kept fromfreezing by the agitation caused by the movingice. Thinking that the lane did not extend far,I skirted along it, first towards the west, andthen more north, until I lost sight of the ship.In this distance, perhaps about six or sevenmiles, the breadth of the lane was much reduced,but a continuous crack, in places large enoughto admit a boat, ran in an easterly direction furtherthan I could venture alone. But what160 ACCIDENT TO THE CARPENTER.most excited my attention was the comparativethinness of those portions of floe ice which hadbeen detached from what we considered as ourproperty ; for though upon a hasty glance itlooked thick and solid, yet a nearer inspectionconvinced me that this appearance was owingsolely to a compact crust of snow, the ice itselfbeing certainly not more than sixteen inchesdeep. Coupling so important a fact with thenumerous fractures for three hundred yardsfrom the extremity of the floe, there did notseem much reason to apprehend a protracteddetention in what had hitherto proved a place ofrefuge and security. A thick misty haze fromthe water impeded the view towards FrozenStrait, but up to the most distant point therewas a mixture of old and young bay ice, sothat in the event of a fresh easterly breeze,there would be nothing to oppose our settingagain towards Cape Bylot. The cold was sopiercing that, although to prevent being frostbittenI walked fast enough to keep up a drippingperspiration, yet on regaining the shipone of my toes was rather sharply touched.December 4th. After divine service thepeople went to walk, according to custom, andbeing close to the young ice, one of them, acarpenter, was thoughtless enough to step uponit, and immediately sunk to his arms, which,B■>.GOOD EFFECTS OF THE DUCKING. 1()1being extended, checked his further descent.His cries attracted the attention of LieutenantsSmyth and M'Murdo, who, wither. M'Clure,being close by, instantly rescued him. Thetemperature at that time was 43°— in the air.He spoke of the immersion as having given a sensationof pleasant warmth, doubtless attributableto the difference (15°) between the water and theatmosphere. On being placed on the ice, hisfirst request was to be permitted to sit down,and as in the absence of the officers he wouldin all probability have done so, he would inevitablyhave been frozen, perhaps to death. They,however, so far from acceding to his wish, compelledhim to run ; and when he was no longerable to do so from fatigue and the stiffness of hisicy garments, he was forcibly pushed forwardsuntil he reached the ship, where blankets hadbeen prepared for his reception. These hedeclined, as he well might, for on disencumberinghim of his clothes, it was seen that hewas in a profuse perspiration, and thus, allapprehension being removed, the whole affairwas converted into a jest. It was not, however,without a good effect, as affording a warningagainst incurring unnecessary risks for thefuture.December 8th. The interval since the lastspring-tides had been free from any striking dis162 SCHOOL FOR THE CREW.turbaned of the ice, and now that they hadcome round again, we were nearly in the sameplace as before, the only change being, that theship's head was turned something more in shore.The calmness of the weather, so different fromwhat had hitherto been experienced at thisperiod, excited general observation. On mostformer occasions the usual attendants of thespring-tides were squalls and boisterous gales,charged with snow and drift. But now everythingwas still except the dull grinding of theice along the rocks — a sound which time and usedo not familiarize, but which still comes like awarning, useful, perhaps, though disagreeable.It was odd enough, that having made a largekite for the express purpose of sending up aregister thermometer, we had not even windenough to raise it. A faint aurora was seenduring the night for a short interval, but thatphenomenon, so vivid and brilliant in the territoriesof the Hudson Bay Company, is evidentlyrare in this locality. An evening school for themen was instituted under the superintend danceof the first Lieutenant and occasionally visited bymyself.I ought to mention, that though our substitutesof stoves on the lower deck answeredtolerably well, yet they did not keep the placeeffectually dry \ for notwithstanding our tankTIDE SEPARATES ICE. 103condenser and other precautions, the most unremittingattention of the proper officers couldnot altogether prevent the accumulation of moisturein particular spots. In such cases, our onlyremedy was to use the stoves belonging to theboats, and as these, having no funnels to carry offthe smoke, almost suffocated us, it will be readilybelieved that nothing but necessity induced usto resort to them. It was found, moreover, thatthe hot air from below froze against the inside ofthe housing, producing a most disagreeable effluvia: to counteract this, a square hole was cut inthe roof of the housing, which being openedoccasionally had the desired effect. But theseinconveniences were trifles in comparison withwhat might have been expected from the failureof the heating apparatus.Though the clear weather which so unexpectedlycontinued was free from fresh winds, yetthe tides separated the ice, so as to leave openplaces in various directions. Through the nightthere had been a squall or two from the southeast,and on the morning of the 10th a broadlane of partly open water was seen to extendround the floe to seaward, and to maintain acontinuous line directly towards the land, east ofCape Bylot. Ice and a water sky were observablebeyond that again, but there was no connectingchannel or opening from the one lane to the other*m 2i(H CURIOUS PHENOMENON.Our own position was something nearer therocks, and moreover a little to the westward.There being now, as was thought, wind enoughfor the kite, it was sent up, but as in repeatedtrials it only mounted about two hundred andfifty feet, we desisted. It was evident, indeed, thatthe wind only prevailed to that height, whichwas also, according to appearance, nearly theheight of the dark vapour surrounding us.It had been remarked for a considerable time,that though the water immediately froze everywhereelse, yet on the larboard beam of the ship,about ten or twelve feet from the bends at the baseof the snow embankment, there was always sludge,or on its removal, salt-water in its place, thoughthe ice beneath was solid. I remember three instancesof the same kind in rivers, where, notwithstandingthe low state of temperature, thesurface for some distance, near particular spots,was invariably so moist, that our snow-shoeswere coated with ice, which it was necessary toscrape away. In the present instance, the phenomenonwas not confined to any precise period,but existed through the neap as well as thespring tides. The days now dwindled fast away,the sun being only visible for a few minutes at11 o'clock. It rose above the edge of a serratedhill, and in favourable weather, brightened thegloomy outline. Its altitude w r as 2° 10'.REGISTER THERMOMETER. 165December 12th. The floe had nearly resumedits old position, and was steadier than of late. Inconsequenceof this, two of the people reached theshore over the bay ice, which for upwards of amile was much thrown up and packed. To seaward,indeed, a very visible reduction of the floehad taken place from sheer pressure, which inmany parts had ploughed it up and broken itinto comparatively small pieces. The windhaving increased enough to accomplish the raisingof the kite, it was sent up with a self-registerin g thermometer. This showed a differenceof eight degrees greater cold at twelve hundredfeet perpendicular than on the ice, the figuresbeing zero, and eight degrees minus. It mayberemarked, also, that the spirit thermometerat the mast-head, which had hitherto during therecent weather, when the wind did not extendbeyond the surface, indicated less cold than thoseon deck, stood, when the kite was up, at threedegrees plus, or greater cold than below, agreeingin this respect with Six's.December 13th. The ice remained almoststationary, and enabled one of the officers toreach the shore. Here he saw a reindeer, whichat first bounded from him, but soon, as if notquite convinced that it had cause for alarm,turned round and trotted back again, gazing andmoving slowly on until Mr. Gore, having creptm 3166 REIN-DEER KILLED.on his hands and knees near enough, killed it atthe first shot. His exploit had been witnessedfrom the ship, and some men were immediatelydispatched with a sledge to bring on board theunlooked-for addition to our Christmas fare. Itwas very lean, and when skinned, only weighed60 lbs., the head included. This event, however,raised the emulation of our sportsmen, ofwhom several started early on the following day,but they saw only three wolves, which made thevallies echo with their howling. The weatherwas still fine, and the thermometer high, varyingfrom 20° — to 5° — , which, without wind, wethought satisfactory enough. The extreme edgeof the sun's upper limb was barely visible nowabove the lowest hill.A tranquil interval of uninterrupted clearweather followed, and all anxiety was set at restby the firm adhesion of the ice to the land,which was now T almost daily visited either forexercise or amusement. A few more deer wereseen, and a Polar hare as well as two whitepartridges shot. Lines also were set for fish, butinthis attempt we failed. A young fox hadbeen slightly wounded and caught. It was putinto an open snow hut and secured, but thoughin the night it got loose, it made no attempt toescape ; on the contrary, it diverted itself byrunning round the ship, and quietly retreated toRAPID FALL OF THERMOMETER. I67the hut, where it soon burrowed. When anyoneattempted to caress it, the little creaturemade a half stifled snarl, and snapped, but notviciously, at the extended hand. It rejectedbiscuit, but devoured a tallow candle with avidityand seeming satisfaction.From our proximity to the shore, the sun hadnot been visible since the 12th instant, when itsaltitude a few minutes after ll h was 1° 40' ; yet,according to our perception, little if any differencewas observed in the diminution of daylight. Atlength the 21st December arrived ; and as themoon would be at full on the following day, webegan to fancy that another spring tide wouldpass by with impunity. Indeed every circumstanceconcurred to confirm the opinion, untiltowards night, when the barometer began tofall with such precipitation as to prepare theminds of all for some uncommon occurrence.The mercury which had stood at 30 inches,had, in the course of eighteen hours, whichbrought it near the time of change, fallen to28. 26. During this interval the wind hadbeen light and unsteady, veering round thecompass, but at ll h a. m., December 22d, itsettled at S.S.E., and soon blew hard. Whilethese changes were in progress the whole sky hadbecome overcast, and a dense haze, occasionedby the partial falling of snow, limited the viewM 4168 FEARFUL STORM.to a very few yards. Hearing a rustling noiselike the rushing of water apparently beneath us,we supposed that the floe was already separated,and that the consequences would soon be manifestedalongside, but very shortly all speculationswere merged in the reality before us.Since our departure from England no suchstorm had been experienced. Within an hourit raged with such fury, that not a man couldface it. Several who endeavoured to performsome duty outside the ship were instantly frostbitten,and obliged to return, and the officer ofthe watch in merely going from the housing tothe afraid to register the thermometers had thewhole of his face frozen. Not that the temperaturewas so low as it had been a few daysprevious, for it was then 53° minus, and nowonly 30° minus, but the rapid extraction of heatwas beyond endurance, and a very short exposurewould have been certainly fatal to thehardiest.As nisfht advanced the barometer indicated achange, but the storm still raged like a hurricane,and covered the ship with snow drift.Our topmasts shook like wands, and the leerigging was forced out like a bow : piles of snowwere whirled on the lee side of the housing,until the chain which sustained the rough sparthat formed the ridge pole broke, and theFLOE CRACKS. 169accumulated weight fell ; but the end of the sparfortunately striking the windlass, was stopped inits descent, and thus saved the barge, whichotherwise must have been severely if not irreparablyinjured. As the wind was directlyoff shore, there was no great cause for apprehensionas to the holding together of the floe,unless indeed the drift should cause sufficientopen water to admit of any sea rising, for inthat case the result was certain. Though thefury of the tempest gradually abated, it was notentirely exhausted until the 24th. Then the skywas again serene, and a tolerably clear viewshowed us that instead of having been drivenout towards Frozen Strait, we were actuallytwelve or fourteen miles to the eastward ofCape Comfort. This can be accounted for onlyon the supposition that the flood-tide had comefrom the Welcome through Fury and HeclaStraits, and, taking the channel of the FrozenStrait, had met the course of the gale nearly atright angles, and thus produced a mean lineof direction for the ship between the two, whichin fact answered to the position.Our floe was slightly cracked within a few yardsfrom either side ; but in other respects it lookedmore extensive and firmer than ever. This wasverified by examination, for the high tide hadraised the entire body of old and young ice to170 GLOOMINESS OF THE CREW.the very rocks, and with the aid of the gale,the whole mass having been driven away, aninterval was produced, which was already firmlyfrozen over. As to the rest, no water wasvisible ; but what gave us infinitely morepleasure, the sun peeped over the distant mountains,gladdening us with his returning beams,after a short absence of twelve days. It was aglorious and a joyful sight, when we consideredthat each day would make its influence morefelt, and that at last, having liberated us fromour crystal bonds, it might light us to a happyissue of our labours.Sailors, it is proverbial, are naturally lighthearted,and have in general a great flow ofanimal spirits ; but in this respect ours mostassuredly differed from their brother tars. Whetherthis arose from the services in which theyhad been brought up, or from their never havingbeen subject to the salutary influence of navaldiscipline, I know not, but certainly their wantof cheerfulness was not attributable to any lackof example or encouragement on the part of theofficers. For about six hours every day exceptSundays, they were kept at some easy work onthe ice, as was absolutely requisite for theirhealth ; but it was in vain that we endeavouredto lead them into the wholesome habit of amusingthemselves with games or dancing, to cheer theirTHEATRICALS OF THE MEN. 171spirits, and while away the long hours of ourwinter evenings. The most trivial cold or othercomplaint induced despondency, and an attackin the joints of the legs and limbs attended withextravasation of blood, for which it may be remarkedthere was some difficulty in accounting,excited the most discouraging apprehensions.Under these circumstances, I was not a littledelighted when informed that they had contrived,in imitation of the officers, to get up a play, andhad appointed Christmas Eve for its performance.In due time two farces were announced forrepresentation, the " First Floor" and the * BenevolentTar ;" and these went off with unboundedapplause in a stifling atmosphere between decks,though outside the thermometer stood at 30° — .Christmas Day which succeeded, was duly andreligiously observed ; neither were the personalcomforts, more major, neglected, for, as wewere on two thirds' allowance, I directed adouble portion to be served of all but spirits, andthus gave the men a treat without intoxication.The officers also dined together ; and, among otherluxuries which the providence of the caterer hadfurnished, was a haunch of the rein-deer, shot byMr. Gore, and what every one most anxiouslylooked forward to, a smiling plum pudding, theconsiderate and substantial gift of Sir JamesGordon's amiable family, who in this way had172 FOOTBALL.largely contributed to our comforts. With theseincitements to enjoyment, no wonder that carewas forgotten ; mirth prevailed, friends weretoasted, home remembered, and the eveningpassed quickly and happily away.December 26th, some occasional gusts of windcame from the south-east, and as well as themist over the land would allow us to judge, weseemed to have gone a little to the eastward.The severity of the cold daily increased : thetemperature was. 44° — ; and as the effect of thiswas aided by strong winds and gales from thenorth-west, it is not surprising that we felt it moreacutely than formerly. All occupation outsidethe ship, except for amusement merely, was nowabandoned, for notwithstanding the unremittingendeavours of the officers to keep the men insufficientexercise for the rapid circulation of theblood, such was their perverseness or sluggishness,that though constantly frost-bitten from merewant of exertion, they would lounge about, whenleft to themselves, with the listlessness which belongsto a tropical climate. One expedient proposedwas the game of football, and every day, thewhole crew were made to play at this active andamusing diversion with the officers, who left nothinguntried to encourage them. Still in spiteof all our efforts, fresh men were daily seizedwith numbness of limbs, affections of the gums,SCURVY. 173and other symptoms of scurvy. The gunner,Mr. Donaldson, was in a very feeble state, notbeing able to walk more than a quarter of an hourwithout assistance ; and many more were limpingand complaining of general debility. As themost sedulous attention had been bestowed, bothas to the quantity and the quality of the clothingof every one, we were satisfied that this unwelcomevisitation, from which recent voyages tothis quarter have been for the most part happilyexempted, could not be attributed to any deficiencyin these respects. Neither could it be ascribedto any deficiency in quantity or samenessin kind of food, since fresh preserved meat withmaccaroni or rice, pickles and lime juice, hadbeen issued twice a week. But that nothingmight be omitted towards the eradication of theevil, the last named article was now directed tobe served out three times, and an extra quantityof preserved soup, cranberries, and other fruitsin our possession, considered to be anti-scorbutic,were likewise placed at the disposal of the medicalgentlemen. As it was necessary to prohibitthe use of spirits to such as were attacked, aprivation which few sailors like, they were apt toconceal their situations, until detected by theirlimping. I therefore directed Doctor Donovanto examine the whole crew, when only two orthree additional cases, and those slight, were ANNOYANCES FROM STOVES.covered : this system was continued afterwardsat stated times, independently of the daily inspectionat divisions. Hitherto the officers hadescaped every complaint, although two were nowtemporarily indisposed from a return of attacksto which they had been previously subject inother climates ; yet as these would probably havemanifested themselves anywhere else, they didnot create the same uneasiness as the former. Ido not feel my self competent to pronounce in whatthe malignant disease had its origin with us ; butwhen it is considered that the difference oftemperature, between the outside and inside ofthe ship, amounted frequently to one hundredand ten degrees, that the air outside was pureand extremely dry, whilst that inside was fetid andexcessively moist, there seems to be good groundfor presuming that this was, if not the source,certainly a great aggravation of the evil. Thetotal failure of the warming apparatus had indeedproved a serious misfortune. The stoves werejust sufficient to produce a warm current aboutthe central line of the deck, whilst the sides werecool enough to convert this into vapour, which,having accumulated within the cabins, streameddown the sides and from over head, until theywere half afloat. If open stoves were broughtdown to dry up the vapour, we were half suffocatedby the sulphuric odour of the coals ; andCANVASS FUNNEL. 175the sick, who had no other retreat, were tortured.Condensers of various kinds had been tried andsome w r ere still continued ; but at last it occurredto me that it would be worth while to try theeffect of a long canvass funnel, fixed on the topof the doorway and carried above the housing,in the hope that a considerable part of the impureatmosphere below might thus be carried off.This w r as no sooner fixed than the advantageswere at once perceptible ; a continuous stream ofvapour rose through it resembling smoke, forwhich, indeed, a novice would have taken it. Adifference of temperature of eighteen degrees wasthe consequence ; but, for the first time, we couldsee along the whole length of the lower deck.The two following days were so bitterly cold, thewind still blowing fresh from N. N. W., that noexercise could be taken outside the ship.On the 31st the wind veered a few points tothe north, but with scarcely any diminution inforce,and we were confined to the semi-circularspace inclosed between snow w r alls on the larboardside of the ship, and called humorously enough"the Court-yard." But notwithstanding footballtwice a day and a swing from the bowsprit,which, as a novelty, was for a time much used,the liability to pains in the legs still continued ;to obviate which, still further precautions weretaken against damp clothing by fitting up a DRYING ROOM.king-room, and requiring every man to hang uphis clothes there on coming in from the outsideair. That there might be no evasion or remissnesson the part of the more negligent, properofficers were specially appointed to see thesedirections carried into execution. And thus uncomfortablyended the fourth month of our imprisonment,and the last of this disastrous year.CHAPTER IV.Extraordinary Disruption. — Anxieties. — Rapid Change. —Commotion. — Masquerade. — Results of Commotion. ~Temperatures. — Invalids. — Anxiety for the Floe. —Advantages of Situation. — Death of a Sailor. — Reflections.— Desolation of the Land. — Curious Meteor. — LandExcursions. — Tracks of Animals. — Increase of Sick. —Precautions. — Phenomena. — Invalids, — Spirits of Crewimprove. — Weather. — Grinding of Ice. — Health. — Undercurrents.— Floe diminishes. — Phenomena of Ice. — Callosityof Limbs, — Intensely cold. — Influence of Sun. — MoreLimpers. — Death of Mr. Donaldson. — Fine Weather. —The Coast. — Soundings as before. — Set of Current —Heavy Gale. — Gale abates. — Holes of Water.Ie 1st January, 1837, which, at the requestof Mr. M'Clure, was duly ushered in by soundof bell, brought with it more auspicious omens.After a week of storm and drift, in whichall around had been enveloped in impenetrableobscurity, the barometer had now risen tothe unusual height of 30. 70, betokening a changewhich the day fully realized. There was a perfectlyunclouded sky, a bright sun just seenabove the mountains, and a heavenly calm.For the first time too, the coast, from which wemight be ten miles distant, was now visible ; andwe had the agreeable satisfaction to know that wehad been carried to the eastward with the entireN178 EXTRAORDINARY DISRUPTION. [CHAP.IV.body of ice, not less than forty-five miles, soirresistible was the power of a heavy galeand a spring-tide over the boundless ranges ofice, which were thrown up in chaotic confusionaround us. Suddenly a portentous crash, followedby a loud, quick, and rumbling noise,rent the floe in various directions, and evenwithin one hundred and sixty yards from theship. Strange rushing sounds, too, were heardthroughout the night; and in the morning ofJanuary 2d, the openings were found to bemuch wider, and many new cracks threateneda further diminution of our now circumscribedfloe. It is remarkable that in the meantimethere was not the lightest breath of air ; nor canI ascribe any other reason for this extraordinarydisruption than a possible compression or stoppageof the ice, by the Fife Rock on the onehand, and the coast on the other. It may bealso, that there were shoals inshore of us, though,on sounding, it required one hundred and fifteenfathoms to reach the bottom. Towards noon, abreeze sprung up from the S. S. W., freshened,and in the evening fell again, without producingany sensible effect on the ice. In the night afaint aurora displayed itself; and, on the followingmorning the appearance of another point of landto the eastward showed us that we had recededstill further from the off shore. All our anxiety,CHAP.TV.] ANXIETIES. 179however, was now centred in the floe, whichto our regret we beheld still further contractedby several other lanes of water, or rather youngice, within a short distance from the ship ;while towards the horizon, and again in shore,the body seemed to be more compact, although,the whole of yesterday, a long line of darkvapour was observed rising from that place.Thus, the same substance that had remainedfirm and unbroken throughout the raging ofthe storm was in a few hours of calm allshattered and disjointed ; and the sense of securitywhich a day or two ago had cheered us inthe midst of our discomforts, was suddenly, andat a time when it was least expected, convertedinto distrust and apprehension. Such are thestrange caprices of Polar navigation, and suchthe revolutions of feeling to which the adventureris continually subject! Happy is the temperamentwhich can preserve its equal balance betweenthe extremes of hope and despondency.The barometer had reached the unusualheight of 30 in . 84-. ; and what is equally singular,the thermometer rose from 34° — to 13° — ,under the influence of a very clear blue sky andcalms, a fact utterly at variance with all myformer experience. The sun rose above the mountainsto the southward at 10 h I5 m a. m. Theextremes of land at noon bore from S. S. E. ± E«N 2180 RAPID CHANGE. [CHAP.IV.to about W. N. W., and the distance from thenearest point was estimated at fifteen or seventeenmiles. Until night the ice remained almoststationary, but a grinding noise was then distinctlyaudible to the eastward, which with temporaryinterruptions continued for many hours. Theaurora was frequently observed in the south-eastquarter, flitting to and from the zenith, buthad nothing remarkable either in colour orappearance.As the morning of January 4th dawned, agreat crashing intimated that some seriouschange was in progress, and on making the tourof our sadly curtailed floe, we found that thewestern opening had closed a little, while thaton the larboard bow was considerably enlarged.We had thus been again favoured ; for the compactnessof the ice, immediately around us, waspreserved by a wide lane of open water betweenus and the land. So rapid had been the transitionthat, except one part of the edge, not aparticle was left to tell where the large tract ofbay ice, brought with us from Frozen Strait, hadbeen; the space which it had occupied being convertedinto what was not inaptly compared toan extensive lake. The light breeze from theeastward could scarcely have effected this, whichprobably therefore was partly the result of currentor tide. The same cause, whatever it was,CHAP. IV.] COMMOTION. 181had carried the ship a few miles to the west ;for at noon the observed latitude was 64° 51' N.,and longitude 82° 15' W. Thermometer 11°—.Weather clear.For three successive days the ice around usopened and closed so as frequently to leave oursmall floe entirely insulated ; at each closing,however, it was but too evident that we werelosers by the concussion. Fortunately, at leastas we supposed, the weather though overcast remainedalmost calm, leaving us exposed only to theaction of the spring-tide, which on this occasion(from what cause we knew not) produced nofurther disturbance than to send us somethingnearer to the shore ; a remarkable cliff being nownot more than seven or eight miles distant. Onthe night of the 7th, a moderate breeze fromthe north-west created a terrific din immediatelyastern of the ship, and so great was the pressurethat the ice was actually ploughed up ten ortwelve feet, while the rumbling and crashingunderneath and along the surface effectuallymarred our rest. Daylight of the 8th exhibitedthe same opening immediately ahead, and thefloe diminished ; still as many parts of it consistedmerely of frozen sludge covered with snow,which could not of course be expected to offereffectual resistance against the battering and pressureof a more solid substance, we were not within3182 MASQUERADE. [CHAP.IV.out alarm for its durable city. A few of the men wereattacked by the same extraordinary rigidity of themuscles of the legs, which I have spoken of before.Mr. Donaldson, and Walker, one of the seamen,were in a very critical state. All who were unableto walk were dragged about on sledges forthe benefit of air ; and improvements w r ere continuallysuggested and carried into execution foradding to the dryness and wholesomeness of thelower deck. Nor were our efforts relaxed tocheer the spirits and divert the minds of the crew.Another masquerade was got up and went offwith much spirit and humour, aided not a littleby the introduction, in character, of several comicsongs from the pen of Mr. Smyth. The barometerhad fallen a little, but the temperature of the airwas mild, having ranged lately from 2° to 11° — :wind westerly.Sunday had been spent in the accustomedexercise of religious duties, and in the evening,which was undisturbed by ice or wind, theaurora was powerful enough to shed a soft lighton the pale snow. For the most part it wasgenerally diffused; but at one time it concentrateditself near the north west, from whenceit shot up towards the zenith in beams and pencilledrays, finally settling in an arch from E. N. E.to S.S.W. Towards ll h r.M., and at intervalsduring the remainder of the night, the commotionCHAP. IV.] RESULTS OF COMMOTION. 183and grinding of the ice around us were painfullydistinct ; and, although the light airs above hadprevailed, yet to our utter amazement, the firstbeam of day on the 9th January displayed thehigh ridged cliff, which I have before mentioned,within three miles of the ship. What had becomeof the four or five miles of ice which but a fewhours before had intervened between us and thesame land, was beyond our comprehension. Allwe knew was that it was there no longer. Anattempt was instantly made to get soundingsthrough the fire-hole, but this was frustrated fromthe under part being entirely blocked up by ice.However, a lane or rather hole of waterninety fathoms ahead, answered our purpose,and the lead struck upon a green slimy rock atseventy fathoms. Along the surface of thisopening, some light pieces of ice were setting atthe rate of two knots directly south, for the shore,agreeing in that respect with the known set fromthe north, and Fury and Hecla Strait ; thiswould satisfactorily account for the line of driftas well as for the accumulation of ice generallyobserved along Southampton Island. Atnoon therewas still pressure against the north edge of the floe,which after crumbling up to some height, at lastfell over. Barometer 30. 14. and thermometer 7° — .The constant motion of the ice had precludedthe possibility of making satisfactory observationsn 4184 TEMPERATURES. [CHAP.1V.with the dipping needle, on account of the timenecessary for completing the set. But the samedifficulty did not apply to Fox's instrument, withwhich the dip had been observed November 1 6th1836, in latitude 65° 10' N., and longitude 83° 17'W. to be 87° 14', and the intensity 5S° 22'. And onJanuary 6th, off the ridded Cliff, the same instrumentgave the dip 87° 3', and intensity 58° 21'.It may be remembered that I spoke of an extraordinaryoozing of water alongside, for whichno satisfactory reason could be assigned. This hadnow ceased, but not before the following experimentwas tried by Messrs. Stanley and Mould.The temperature of the air was 9° — , and ofthe water in the fire-hole 17° 5 + , while thatfrom the hole alongside was only 1° 5 + .A li ounce vial filled with boiled snow waterfiltered through lint, weighed, independently ofthe vial, at a temperature of 5 1° + . 734. 75 grains.The same quantity of water from the hole alongsideweighed 799. 25 grains.The weather now became gloomy and overcast,with a variable wind, which, after flitting roundthe compass, at last remained for a time steadyat S. E. The necessary consequence was, thatwe were driven slowly along shore to the westward; for no long time however, for the fickleelement soon veered again. Our attention wasnow chiefly directed to the sick, who thoughCHAP. IV.] INVALIDS. 185comparatively few, yet remained on our hands.A pure and equable temperature was the thingmost required, and unfortunately most difficultof attainment. A snow hut, at the requisitewarmth, could not be kept free from vapour, andour only resource was to screen in a place on theforecastle under the housing, which with a stovein it we thought might answer. The project wasaccordingly carried into execution, and two of thegreatest invalids slept there on the night of the10th ; but though the weather was rather mild forthe season, the interior temperature could not beraised beyond 45°+ : nor could this, which mightperhaps have been sufficient, be maintained, inconsequenceof the necessary ingress and egressof the attendants and visiting officers. Thosewho were able to support the cold remained untilthe next day \ the weaker patients returned totheir old abode on the lower deck.Daylight of January 11th shewed us abreastof the ridged cliff, which the westerly breeze wasdriving us past, at a distance of about three orfour miles from it. Beyond was a kind of openbay, terminated by a rocky bluff headland nearlyahead, and closing the view. Immediately offthe latter, as well as farther east, there was allthe appearance of a water sky, though it washardly possible to imagine that there could beany thing more than a few holes or lanes so farfrom Hudson's Straits.186 ANXIETY FOR THE FLOE. [CHAP.IV.Oar experimental hospital having proved afailure, we now determined to build up a smallcabin on the larboard side of the forecastle withallthe spare plank and spars we could afford;and though we could not expect the externalair to be excluded as effectually as might bewished, yet we were not without hopes that,with the aid of a covering of sails, the placemight be made tolerable. Night came, and in itstrain, wind and drift; the land, however, wasjust distinguished abeam at 8 h p. m., as well ascould be judged not further off than before.Towards midnight there must have been immensepressure from the northward, as the shipnot only creaked about the afterward, but heeledover to starboard ; and this circumstance revivingt all my anxiety for the stability of the floe on which,thus close in with the shore, our safety in a greatdegree depended, altogether deprived me of sleep.Morning, however, of January 12th arrived, andfound us still imbedded within three miles of thebeach to the eastward of the Ridge Cliff, withsoundings in seventy-eight fathoms of mud andsand. We had been set into the outer line of a bay,with the same headland before us about eight orten miles away. Sloping from the Cliff was acontinuous deposition (as it seemed) of coarsegravel or shingle, through the surface of whichthere cropped out at intervals craggy blackrocks. Connected with these, again, were variaIV.] ADVANTAGES OF SITUATION. 187vous rocky hills, separated by vallies, and reachingto the headland, the distance being crownedby mountains less high and more rounded thanthose further west.January 13th. Very little alteration had takenplace in the floe, and our own position remainedunchanged. This for the present was exactly aswe wished, for our onward progress to the eastwardmight have carried us into a less interruptedspace, and therefore within the influenceof a stronger tide ; and as the floe in such casemust inevitably have been broken up, we shouldhave been cast loose too early amidst difficultiesmost harassing, if not inextricable. To be thusquietly arrested, even though not beyond thenext twenty-four hours, was a matter for whichwe were sincerely grateful.A sailor, named Graham Walker, had beenfor some time under the care of the medicalgentlemen who, at first, had good grounds forsupposing that little was the matter with him.However, he was treated as a sick man ; and forwant of exercise, or by some means or other, hesoon contrived to render himself so in earnest.Unhappily the symptoms shortly after becamescorbutic, and the man being of melancholic temperament,and utterly incapable of being rousedor cheered, grew daily worse. Yet his appetitecontinued good until within the last few days, and188 DEATH OF A SAILOR. [CHAP.IV.even on these he always ate some nourishing diet.This day, however, at 9 h p. m. he died withoutsuffering, and indeed so calmly, that those inattendance were unconscious of the moment ofhis departure. Such visitations are always melancholy,and it was. natural that in our case amore than ordinary impression should be made.Isolated as we were from our fellow-creatures,and at the mercy of a power over which we hadno control, who could help feeling that his houralso might shortly come ? At 10 h a. m., on the14th, the officers and crew of H.M.S. performedthe last mournful duties towards their shipmate.The body was conveyed on a sledge to theextremity of the floe, where a grave had beenduo* through the ice ; and the solemn and affectingservice for the dead having been read, theremains were committed to the deep.In the afternoon I went on shore, though notwithout some trouble and scrambling. It wasgratifying to observe that, separated and curtailedof its fair proportions, as our floe had been,yet many of the original pieces maintained nearlythe same relative positions as when part of themass, thus forming an additional barrier betweenus and the shore, which I now found was notmore than two miles and a half distant. Alongthe beach between the jutting rocks the iceappeared to have been forced up full twentyCHAP. IV.] REFLECTIONS. 189feet ; and, where the resisting barrier was precipitous,huge masses had been successivelylifted up, pile on pile, until they presented theappearance of bergs, for which indeed they weretaken. A stranger combination of ruin and confusionwith the softness and harmony of the mostbeautiful tints, from the faintest emerald to thedeep cerulean blue, it would have been difficultfor the most imaginative mind to conceive.Then from the sterile summit of the hill to gaze,far as the eye could stretch, upon a dreary plainof rocky ice, relieved only by the frost-smokeissuing here and there from a few holes or lanesof water, and suddenly to turn to the small darkspeck which denoted the ship, the abode, alas howfrail ! of living men imprisoned amidst this " abominationof desolation." What a multitude ofreflections rushed into the mind! — the might ofnature — the physical feebleness of man — and yetagain the triumph of spirit over matter — man,trusting in his own unquenchable energy and theprotection of an omnipresent Providence, bravingnature in the very strongholds of her empire,and if not successful in the encounter, yetstanding up unvanquished and undismayed ! Itwas indeed a scene not readily to be forgotten.The rocks seemed to be a striated granite singularlyplaced; some having a parallel inclinationwith open spaces between, and others again190 DESOLATION OF THE LAND. [CHAP.IV.being placed directly across, or almost at rightangles to each other. The intervals betweenthe rocks as well as the hills consisted entirelyof what in summer would be a coarse looseshingle with rounded stones, and with so littlesoil, that only in five or six places did I observeany symptoms of vegetation, if short thin grassand a few yards of moss even deserve the name.From the top of the nearest range a smalllake was visible, which discharged itself oversome steep rocks into a narrow bay or harbour,whose entrance lay between the ship and theheadland. It seemed to be covered with smoothbay ice, or ice not yet broken up, but it was evidentlyexposed to the north-east winds. Fromthe brink of the headland, along the tops andcurvatures of the inland country, was an uninterruptedline of utter barrenness and desolation.Not a bird, not an animal, not a solitary footprint,was there to indicate the presence of aliving creature. Not far from the headland waswhat looked like a narrow lane of water, whilein the remote distance in the direction of Fox'schannel I fancied there was the loom of land,which considering how greatly objects are refractedin this climate, was not impossible.On my return, I learned that at 2 h 55™ p. m.Doctor Donovan and Mr. Mould had seen anextraordinary meteor in the clear blue sky, at theCHAP. IV.] CURIOUS METEOR. 1Q1moment of detection bearing north at an altitudeof about 23 degrees ; it was then in rapid motion,and having ascended to 25 degrees orthereabouts, it declined, its course being somethingof a paraboloid. It was, as seen, of aboutthe size of a man's hand, and its colour was thatof a pale emerald. When it separated, whichit did at its lowest altitude, it dispersed intothree parts, each of the same pale tinge, andvanished from the sight. Having myself beentravelling south at the time, I was unfortunateenough not to see it. In the morning however,at a quarter before ten o'clock, while standingon a hummock about seventeen feet high, andlooking to the east, I had observed the upperlimb of the sun, as it filled a triangular cleft onthe ridge of the headland, of the most brilliantemerald colour, a phenomenon which I hadnot witnessed before in these regions. In aboutfive minutes afterwards the sun rose clear andbright, over the summit of the same hill, andthe whole sky was free from clouds and apparentlyfrom vapour ; though, as I previouslyremarked, I saw from the shore a lane of waternear the Point.January 18th. — During the few last daysnothing occurred to vary our position. Severalshooting parties had been on shore, and LieutenantStanley accompanied by Mr. Saunders,island EXCURSIONS [CHAP.IV.went to survey the harbour already mentioned,which was subsequently named after him. Itproved to be too much exposed to the north toafford the smallest shelter with a wind from thatquarter ; it was narrow also, and in the summermonths would rarely be accessible on account ofthe ice, which, judging from last year, it may bepresumed is usually set against it. Mr. Gorehad been eight miles in the interior, and on hisway passed a lake two miles long ; the shortnessof the day would not permit him to extend hisexcursion as he had felt inclined to do, if for noother purpose than to reach the highest hill,which, as usual to the inexperienced, the nextalways promised to be.Mr. Fisher also, after being baffled in oneattempt, contrived on the second occasionto reach the headland, thence called CapeFisher, and after traversing several steep hillsand crossing a frozen mountain stream, whosemouth was two hundred paces across, he cameto a spot, whence the coast was descried in theform of a bay trending S. E. by S., while inthe extreme distance the same officer, with theaid of a telescope, saw what he considered tobe two islands stretching far out from the mostsouthern point. The interval between, as wellindeed as the whole space from the headland,presented the novel appearance of a smoothCHAP. IV.] TRACKS OF ANIMALS. 193dark and unbroken sheet of bay ice. From theCape towards Frozen Strait, forming a wide semicircleas seen from the ship, was a continuousline of dense vapour, which clearly indicatedopen water, though the white gleam of ice mightbe easily distinguished beyond it ; so that thecrushing and crumbling which had progressivelydestroyed, separated, and almost pulverizedso many miles of floe ice around us, and whichprovidentially had ceased when within little morethan a hundred paces from the ship, must havebeen mainly caused by the undulating motionproceeding from this open water, acted upon ofcourse by wind and tide ; for it may be rememberedthat the extraordinary grinding complainedof, when the vessel lay to the westward,near Smyth's Harbour, took place only at suchtimes and under such circumstances, as wouldpoint to a combination of the above-mentionedcauses.Our gentlemen had seen but two tracks ofdeer, with others of wolves, hares, and foxes ;but what interested us most was the footstep ofan Esquimaux which Mr. Fisher had endeavouredineffectually to trace. If it were one (and itgave rise to as many conjectures as the memorablefoot-print in Robinson Crusoe), it musthave been that of some one who had wanderedfar out of his way in the eagerness of the chase jo194 INCREASE OF SICK. [cHAP.IV.since, as far as our knowledge went, the line ofcoast would scarcely afford sustenance to themost active and skilful hunter.Our new hospital, or sick bay on the larboardside of the forecastle, had been completed threedays, and with a boat stove kept always lighted init, the temperature could be forced up to 70° +,which was quite as high as the medical gentlemenrequired. The two most debilitated invalids,Mr. Donaldson, and Alexander Anderson, hadbeen immediately conveyed there ; and thoughthey had not yet derived the benefit that wasanticipated, they felt more comfortable andwere in better spirits. I was sorry, however, tosee that the former was dangerously weak andevinced a disposition to incoherency, from whichthe worst might be feared. Neither did any ofthe others who had been attacked entirely recoverj for although their general health wassometimes better, yet their legs continued discoloured,hard, and bent ; the number of the sickmoreover, was continually swelled by new accessions,and at last amounted to one sixth of the crew.Five or six of the officers also became slightlyaffected, thus establishing incontrovertibly that theevil, from whatever cause it originated, was at allevents not attributable to any difference in food.However, to put an end to ail fancies on this score,and to prevent the possibility of cavil, I gaveCHAP. IV.] PRECAUTIONS. 195orders for the issue of an extra allowance ofpreserved meat to all hands, together with cranberries,pickles, mustard, vinegar, spruce-beer,and lime juice, so arranged that some anti-scorbuticmight be taken every day. The crewmoreover were kept constantly engaged either inwork or amusement. The lower deck, which,though not exempt from vapour, was yet as dryas could be reasonably expected, was kept clearalmost the whole day, except at meal times,and the hammocks were hung up at 9 h p* m., andtaken down at 6 h a. m. Excursions were madeto the shore under the direction of properpersons, and on the return of the parties, officerswere appointed to see that every man entirelyremoved the snow from his clothes, and thenput on dry ones on going below. I am particularin detailing these precautions, in order toshow that this unexpected visitation was principallyto be ascribed to the failure of ourunfortunate warming apparatus, which thoughperhaps suitable enough for a temperate climate,and places where in the event of an accidentthe means of reparation are at hand, was certainlynot adapted for a service such as ours. Ourstoves were placed amidships, and near theintense heat thrown out by them the deck andbeams were dry ; but not so at the sides, wherethe tubes diffusing general heat should haveo 2196 PHENOMENA. [CHAP.IV*been ; and the consequence was, that it was nouncommon occurrence to hear one speak ofhaving filled a bucket with the water whichstreamed down the sides and ceiling of his littlecabin. As a last effort to get rid of the fetidand impure atmosphere that lurked in the lowerparts of the deck, I ordered a bell-shapedcanvass funnel to be made, having the mouthor wide opening within a foot and a half of thedeck, and leading through an aperture in thefore hatch, from which it was carried throughthe housing in such a manner as to conveywhatever it might be charged with, quite clearof the ship.January 19th. For the first time since thenew moon, the ice was heard to make a noiseto the north-east. The weather however stillcontinued fine, and nearly all hands went onshore for a run. At 2 h 4 m p. m. we had a par-helicon,whose semi-diameter as taken from thesun's centre was 22°, the prevailing colours beingorange graduating into red : and at 10 h 45 m p.m.Mr. Stanley observed a prismatic lunar halo,the outer diameter of which was 9° and theinner 5°.January 20th. A few of the gentlemen wenton shore with their guns, but met with nothingto reward them for their trouble beyond the benefitof the exercise. They reported that the iceCHAP. IV.] INVALIDS. 197near the shore had opened out a little, and that someholes of water, besides one extensive lane, wereclearly visible from the hills, for which informationI was quite prepared, not only by the hintof grinding ice to seaward, but also by the nearapproach of the full moon. It would have beensatisfactory to ascertain the true rise and fall ofthe tide at the full and change respectively, butthis the under layers of ice effectually prevented,though by a rough estimate of the depression ofthe ice on the sides of the rocks, without, however,knowing the thickness of that ice, orwhether it touched the bottom, a difference ofbetween seven and ten feet was repeatedly remarked.In one instance, indeed, Mr. Fisher'sparty were obliged to return by a different routefrom that taken in the morning, in consequenceof the ice adjoining the land having sunk toa level too deep for a jump.Our new funnel was put up and the decksomewhat improved, but still close. The temperaturewas 73° + , the dew point 65°, and thedegree of saturation, as shown by the hygrometer,7§6.The invalids did not recover as I could havewished, nor did the two worst evince any decidedor even encouraging change for the better. Oneman, who had been afflicted for upwards of amonth with the prevalent complaint of a dish3198 SPIRITS OF CREW IMPROVE. [CHAP.IV.coloured and rigid leg, but whose health in otherrespects had been good, was suddenly seizedwith syncope as he was walking ; and though herecovered in the course of a few minutes, yet inhis case, as in that of the other patients whowere similarly affected, it seemed to aggravatethe disease, or rather to reduce the pow r er ofstruggling against it. That the rest of the crew,and the few who were affected but slightly, hadrather gained than lost on the score of cheerfulnessand good spirits, I was to-day agreeably convinced; for, while taking my accustomed eveningexercise within the snow-wall inclosure, I was surprisedat hearing the sound of music somewhereon the floe, and before I could get outside thegallery, the whole crew, headed by the armourer,playing the fife, and under the orders of Mr.Vaughan, the boatswain, marched up in file, singingthe song of the " Southern Breezes." Theyhalted with a hearty laugh at the word of command,as given out by some one in militaryfashion, Halt, front! and gave three hearty cheers ;then placing the fifer on a hummock, theyfinished with a country dance, in which theslipping, sliding, and falling of the performersgave occasion to much mirth. It may be imaginedthat this was to me a most agreeablesight, and that I did not fail to pronounce mycommendations, and to encourage a repetition.CHAP. IV.] WEATHER. 199During the night the breeze occasionally freshened,and the sky was more or less overcast.The C Z 1st brought the spring-tide, but up tonoon there was no difference in the ice perceptiblefrom the ship, though one of the peoplehad seen, while walking, a narrow lane causedby the separation of the ice, near the shore.Wind W.N.W., squally ; thermometer 21°, andcold ; barometer 29. 72. The night was somewhatvariable, the wind occasionally freshening,and then decreasing again, but towards the morningof January 22d the weather became clearand almost calm, and we were left, much to oursatisfaction, in the same situation as before. Wehad reason, indeed, to apprehend that the windwhich generally accompanies the spring-tidemight be boisterous enough to blow the shipround the Cape ; for the light and moderateairs which had prevailed throughout the lastneaps, could not be expected to continue throughthe springs, our experience hitherto coincidingwith the following remark of Ellis, (who, in1746, wintered in Hudson's Bay,) as reported inBarrow's Chronological History of NorthernVoyages : " It seems, however, that the severityof cold is seldom felt above four or five daysin a month, and generally about the full andchange of the moon, at which times theo 4200 GRINDING OF ICE. [CHAP.IV.wind is usually from the north-west andvery tempestuous." At noon a faint grindingof the ice was heard to the north. Temperature24°— ; wind W.N.W*, light. Withinthe last week three common flies had introducedthemselves into the midshipmen'sberth.January 25th. There is something to meinexplicable in the eccentric action of the tideson the north side of Southampton Island. Forthree days after the full moon the utmost disturbancewhich reached us amounted to a dulland distant grinding, easily accounted for bythe prevalent westerly winds. But the lastforty-eight hours had been nearly calm, thoughintensely cold, the thermometer having indicated43°—, and the mercury having frozenin an artificial horizon. Yet now a loud rushingnoise was heard beneath the ice three or fourtimes a-day, agreeing, as it seemed, with the ebband flow of a regular tide. The lane off CapeFisher, which had been closed, was re-opened,and the ice outside our floe was lifted up with asinging or rather squeaking sound. This, again,at a later hour was followed by a distinct cracking,and then a hollow grinding : still we remainedalmost if not entirely stationary. Ournumber of sick did not materially increase, andCHAP. IV.] HEALTH. 201even of these the general health of several mightbe called positively good. They were almost freefrom pain, but could not get rid of the callousnessof the part affected, which continued, in spite ofevery effort, as hard as if it had been thoroughlyfrozen. One man only (and his was more arheumatic than a scorbutic case) had returnedto his duty ; on the other hand, the gunner,Mr. Donaldson, was in a declining and dangerousstate, notwithstanding the unremitting attentionof Dr. Donovan and Mr. Mould, who werethemselves affected with the prevailing complaint,and even walked about with difficulty.January 26th. There had been no wind ofany consequence throughout the night, somepart of which had actually been calm ; and yet inthe morning the ice, and consequently the ship,had been set to the eastward from a quarter tohalf a mile. Several lanes of water too wereformed between us and the land, while a darkgrey frost smoke extended some distance fromthe Cape to seaward. The weather was stillfine, though cold, the thermometer being 44'° — ,and a mist or haze hung round the horizon. Inthe evening the wind blew from the westward,and afterwards veering to the south, got moresqually, coming occasionally in smart gusts directlyoff* the land, which, when distinctly seenat 4 h p. m., bore from S.E. to N. W. by N. The202 UNDER-CURRENTS. [CHAP.IV.barometer had for two days indicated symptomsof some change, for the mercury fell slowly,and on January 27th, at 10 h a.m. was 29. 22.while the temperature varied in the night up tothe same hour, from 47°— to 34°—. It wasthen too misty with snow drift to make out theland clearly, though we could do so sufficientlyto ascertain that we had been driven somethingfarther from it than before, and more to the eastward.From this gradual falling of the mercury ofthe barometer over a period of nearly three days,and the fluctuations in the ice at a time of moonwhen the contrary was to be expected, I shouldconjecture that there had been boisterous weatherin some other quarter, probably not very remote,and yetfar enough for the intervening ice to qualifyand counteract its further progress — an effectfamiliar to those who have been driven from aheavy gale into a pack for protection. Thetransition in such cases is often as sudden as it isagreeable ; but the under motion of the seacontinues for a considerable extent, though ofcourse gradually diminishing in intensity. Itwas probably something of this kind which occasionedthe singular movements above described.For an undulation beneath the surface of ice, aidingor opposing the current, especially about thehours when it was influenced by the tides, wouldbe likely to produce such effects. I give this,CHAP. IV.] FLOE DIMINISHES. 203of course, as a mere conjecture, which howeverI thought it better to note down when thephenomena were before my eyes, than to trustto any after judgment, when the facts may presentthemselves less vividly to the mind, or be distortedto suit some theory.At noon the Cape was dimly seen before thebeam, and soundings were obtained in one hundredand fifty-six fathoms on a bottom of greenmud. On the 28th lanes of water were seen invarious directions, and we were sorry to observethat we had lost about sixty paces of the floe, tosay nothing of the unwelcome appearance of asmall opening of water at the edge of it astern.An officer had been round the floe and reportedthe inshore ice to be setting fast to the eastward,which led to an unfounded notion that we hadrounded the Cape ; the detection, for the firsttime, of an under-current, while sounding, havingstrengthened the conjecture. The set of thiscurrent could not be determined, in consequenceof the many under layers of ice which caught andentangled the line. It is probably by an accumulationof such layers, cemented together inbights or bays, sheltered by projecting capes orheadlands, and less liable to disturbance fromcurrents and tides, that the very thick ice foundin many parts of floes is formed ; for we hadocular demonstration, that with a very low tempestPHENOMENA OF ICE. [CHAP.IV.rature and calm weather, in the severest portionof the winter, no addition of bulk takes placefrom the surface downwards when protected as ourfloe was by a hard coating of snow and drift. Thedoubling and packing of ice during gales of wind,and when exposed to severe pressure, as well asthe growth of bergs and extensive fields, arephenomena which the attentive observations ofmodern voyagers have rendered familiar ; and, byan extension of the above remark, another explanationbesides the action of the waves (for themere heat of the sun has little influence) isafforded, how it is that the destruction of theimmense fields of ice is effected, not indeed bypointing out the agents of the destruction, butby showing how little may, in many instances,be added in successive winters to the bulk to bedestroyed. The fact that no new depositiontakes place underneath seems also at once toaccount for the decayed and wasting appearance,which every one accustomed to Polar navigationmust have noticed in what is called the old ice,of which sailors will sometimes say — " Aye, sir,that piece is older than I am, but it cannot lastabove another summer."January 29th. The weather, though fine overheadwas thick about the southern boundary ofour view, but from the aspect of a point ofRidge Cliff, which bore S. 82° 30' W., it wasCHAP. IV.] CALLOSITY OF LIMBS. 205evident we had gone still more off shore. Afterdivisions I inspected the decks as usual, andwas happy to find the lower one comfortablydry, a result mainly to be attributed to thelast bell-mouthed funnel, which carried off anamazing deal of vapour and impure air; indeed,with eight funnels, either for the stoves or vapour,constantly going, it would have been strange ifsome good effect had not been produced. Hadit not been for the masts and rigging, any one afew hundred yards off might have taken theship for a manufactory, for the vapour steamedforth in as great a volume, and nearly as denseas the smoke. The only drawback to the generalcomfort now was the unfortunate lamenessthat characterized the scorbutic symptoms. Inthis respect our list increased, though none,thank God, were worse •, and the poor gunner,who lay still dangerously ill, with scarcelystrength enough to change his position, seemedto be in better spirits. One third of the complement,including officers, were now affectedwith this extraordinary callosity of limbs.At noon the barometer was 29. 37 \ thermometer39°-. The night was particularly clear,and the stars were observed by LieutenantStanley to be freer from nebulae and that dancingmotion which he had always complained of206 INTENSELY COLD. [CHAP.IV.while making observations. Faint auroras, occasionallybrightening up a little, were seen frequently,but without any of the interestingphenomena which I had been accustomed toobserve in the inland regions of this latitude.The ice continued to move, more or less, at alittle distance from the floe, while a zigzag crackhad commenced at one part on the starboardquarter ; and, after an eccentric course throughsome of the thickest and largest hummocks, notunlike the wild track of lightning, had turnedround and ended as it had begun among the looserparticles.On the 31st January, we had been set farenough off shore to distinguish a distant pointbeyond Cape Fisher, the bearing of which atnoon was S. E. (true) while the other extremewas west ; the observed latitude being 64° 46' N.and longitude 82° 19'W. Happily for us, theweather continued beautifully fine, though intenselycold, the thermometer during several dayshaving never been higher than 38° minus, andgenerally below 44°. This night, the register atmidnight was 54° minus ; but though thus coldlywelcomed, the month of February was hailed byus with heartfelt gladness, as bringing us nearerto the day of liberation. The mercury froze inthe artificial horizon ; and such as were interestedCHAP. IV.] INFLUENCE OF SUN. 207in the experiment fired a pistol ball of that metalinto a piece of wood which had been long exposedto the cold.Now, as before, we found there was more grindingduring the prevalence of calms, or light airs,than in a breeze ; for, the greater part of the eveningand night of the 1st February, there was a fearfulnoise outside and even at the edge of the floe,and on examination the next day I ascertainedthat a further encroachment had been made ;and, from the uplifted waves of ice, and the confusedand massive heaps thrown up or partlycrushed, it was evident the force must have beenirresistible. Many lanes of water were visible onthe morning of February 2nd ; and though the thermometerwas still low, the sun whose altitude was8° 39' 45 /7 at noon, began to produce some effecton the southern thermometer exposed on boardthough surrounded with snow, the difference betweenthis and the northern one amounting to15°. If any thing, the ship had gone a littlenearer the shore. The variation was 60° 45'west. On walking round the floe, I observedthat some one had cut the figure of a cross onthe overhanging and inner face of a huge waveof ice, left by a former pressure in that menacingattitude.The wind having got round from N. E. to208 MORE LIMPERS. [CHAP.IV.S. E., and varying between that and S. S. W.,brought with it an overcast sky and fresh breezes,approaching often to a smart gale, which sooncaused a separation between the sea and land ice,and drove us slowly off shore. On the 4th thedistance had increased to ten miles ; and, from apartial glimpse of the land, it was conjectured wehad also moved seven miles to the east, a resultexactly similar to what had been before experiencedfrom an off-shore wind, and the reasonsfor which have already been assigned. Althoughthe barometer had predicted with such accuracythe heavy gale which had driven us from the westwardof Cape Comfort to Ridge Cliff, on thisoccasion it had not yet indicated the breezesexperienced since the 2nd instant ; but what wasremarkable enough, and forced itself unwillinglyon our notice, was the general effect on thesick, who all complained of being worse. Thetemperature, it should be observed, had risen tozero on board, and 2°— on the ice ; at the sametime there was a wide lane of water betweenthe ship and the land. On inspecting the crewat divisions this morning, I was sorry to observemore people limping, while not one could be gotout of the list. It was beyond our comprehensionor control. They had abundance of provisions,the allowance having been again recentlyCHAP. IV.] DEATH OF MR. DONALDSON. 209increased, with antiscorbutics of various kinds ;their bedding was shaken and purified ; theywere never suffered to remain below in dampclothes ; the deck was free from anything likea close atmosphere ; persons were appointed tosee them take sufficient exercise for health threetimes a day ; and the men themselves were ascheerful as the temperament of each permitted.As a still further precaution, chloride of limewas put into the pump-well, which had nevermorethan six, and generally less than threeinches in it. We may be said, indeed, to havebrought the disheartening malady with us in theperson of one of the marines, who must havebeen strongly predisposed to the complaint, asheshowed symptoms of it so early as a fortnightor three weeks after the expenditure of our livestock.Anderson, though improved in health,Was unable to quit his bed, and poor Mr. Donaldsonlay in a state of drowsy torpor, from whichthe medical officers had great difficulty to rousehim. He scarcely took any sustenance ; andwe could not contemplate the slow but markedchange which was going on without gloomyapprehensions. These fears were but too soonverified ; for after another day of lethargy, andbeckoning away with his hand any attempt togive him nourishment, he may be said to haveslumbered to death at the hour of six o'clock on210 FINE WEATHER, [CHAP.IV.Sunday morning, and was the next day committedto the deep with the usual ceremony.His case was very different from those who werestill suffering from indisposition, and who, withsound constitutions, were attacked with a local,and, as we hoped, a temporary complaint,brought on we knew not how ; whereas Donaldsonhad worn out a frame originally strong andvigorous, in a succession of long and arduous,services in the whale fishery, in the differentvoyages of discovery under Sir E. Parry, onboardships of war, and now finally in the Terror.Though leading what is generally styled a hardlife, he had seldom if ever been ill ; but whenhis constitution once began to break up, thesymptoms of decline were the more marked andrapid, and he died at the early age of forty-three.Though the event had been long anticipated,it did not fail to cast a gloom over the spirits,which however yielded in some measure beforethe holy duties of the day, and the reflectionsnaturally arising from them.The wind had abated but once, when for abrief interval it fell calm, and the thermometerrose to 4° — j but in a few hours afterwards, viz.at 8 h a. m. on February 6th, the cold had increasedto 29° — , with a fresh breeze from northwestand a clear sky overhead, though mistyand indistinct with snow drift along the horizon.CHAP. IV.] THE COAST. 211We were at least five miles from the nearest land,and had been set and blown with the entire bodyof the ice so far to the eastward, as to have theRidge Cliff for the most westerly bearing astern.At noon the observed latitude was 64° 38' 30" N.,longitude 82° 01' W., and soundings were obtainedin one hundred and fifty fathoms, with abottom of green mud. In the course of twenty-fourhours we had altered our position elevenmiles in latitude, and nearly twenty of longitude.The ice appeared to be drawing to the land,though no open water was seen near it, and thewind still continued on the quarter. The outlineof the coast was more regular and slopingat the point, which, with an elevated and obtuselypeaked hill, formed what seemed likeislands, and were probably taken for such on aformer occasion. Abreast of us were two bays.The wind having fallen considerably, the shipand ice continued to draw nearer to the land,but towards night the breeze freshened fromN. W. by N., and we began again to drift to theeastward. The coruscations of the aurora werevisible at intervals to the south-east. At cleardaylight, it was perceived that we had beenset round the comparatively low point describedas forming yesterday the eastern boundary ofview, and now saw at the extreme limit of visionahead, a high bluff, disconnected from thep %212 SOUNDINGS AS BEFORE. [CHAP. IV.low land farther south. From the mast-head,with a glass, about two points of the compasspresented a clear horizon, and then began thelow land, which after making a long curveapproached the ship to within four or five miles.This part not having been surveyed, manyconjectures were made as to the probability ofa passage to the south of the bluff land ahead,which it was further supposed might be foundto lead into Evan's Inlet of Lyon. It was howeverimpossible at our remote situation to formany conclusion, because, notwithstanding appearances,the clear space might be nothing more thanthe circular trending of the coastline, terminatingsomewhere about Seahorse Point. The changein the rounded and shelving outline of the hillswas too remarkable to escape the notice of themost careless observer, though this did not seemto affect the soundings, which at noon were inone hundred and fifty fathoms, with the samedescription of mud as before. The extremes ofland at the above hour were from E. 65° S., toW. 55° N., and the latitude was 64° 32' N.The whole of the 8th was foggy •, nor did theweather clear until near midnight, when theaurora shooting up to the zenith threw a faintlight around, and enabled the officer of the watchto catch a glimpse of the land, which he fanciedto be nearer. At broken intervals there was aCHAP. IV.] SET OF CURRENT. 213rumbling and crashing noise as of splintered icetowards the southwest, which continued more orless until day-break of February 9th. The weatherwas still calm, and yet, when the sun rose, itwas evident the ship and ice had been drifted tothe eastward, at a distance of five miles from theland, which became lower, more sloping, andmore free from bays. The soundings atl h p.m.were found in one hundred and fifty-two fathoms,and with a bottom of darker mud than before.The latitude observed was 64<° 29' N., and longitude81° 46' W., thus establishing the set of thecurrent along the coast. In two instances wehad been checked in our progress, and forceddiagonally about S.W. by W. towards the land;and the coincidence of times at which this occurredpointed to the action of two forces, thatis to say, the tide from the eastward in combinationwith the prevailing current from thenorth-west.All our boats which, except the barge, had beennecessarily kept hung at the davits, with a few indispensablestores in them, to be prepared for anysudden emergency, were now thoroughly cleansedfrom ice and snow, and after a minute and attentiveexamination by Mr. Smith, the carpenter, Ihad the satisfaction of learning that they wereuninjured, and perfectly ready for service. Theyp 3214< HEAVY GALE. [CHAP.IV.were, therefore, restored to their places, and theupper parts covered with their sails as before.The northerly wind continued to blow freshduring the night, and in the morning of the10th a lane of water was discovered at the edgeof the floe astern, extending from thence to duesouth near the shore. In this opening a fewseals were seen. In the forenoon two ravenswere observed flying northward. At noon itblew a fresh gale, and the streams of snow-drifteffectually shut out the land. As the galeincreased during the day, it was conjecturedwe were setting to the southward, and throughoutthe night, and up to noon of February 11th,it blew hard. The barometer in the meantimehad risen in the last twenty-four hours, from29. 59 to 29. 70, while the thermometer on theice had fallen from 18°— to 37° — ; and, such wasthe keenness of the cold occasioned by the windand drift, that it was at some hazard the officerof the watch could venture even to the registeringstation, though less than a hundred yardsfrom the ship. Eddies and clouds of driftwhirled incessantly round us, and caused thewood and spars to crack and split, so that onone occasion I thought we had got into shoalwater, and the ship was touching. Neithercould the people take their accustomed exerciseCHAP. IV.] GALE ABATES. 215on the ice ; and though sometimes a glimpsewas caught of the land, all that could be ascertainedwas, that it was low, and seemed verymuch like an island. The latitude gave 64° 21' N.,from which, and the fact of the gale being north,there was every reason to believe we were driftinginto the bay. Soundings gave one hundredand three fathoms, and the lead had struck ongreen mud.This uncomfortable weather continued throughoutthe greater part of Sunday the 12th ; but inthe afternoon some of the people were able towalk round the floe, and in so doing discoveredthat a piece of ice one hundred and twentyyards broad and two hundred yards long hadbeen separated from the western angle, and thatthere were several cracks striking in a directiontowards the centre of it. Towards night thewind got round to the westward, and soon afterwardsa loud grinding noise was distinctly heardin that quarter; and, in the early part of the 13tha wall of bay and other ice was seen at thewestern edge of the floe, which had been forcedup perpendicularly to the height of eighteenfeet, without, however, doing much damage.The mercury in the barometer continued to fall,and, as the breeze abated, some light snow succeededand kept falling for several hours. Landp 4210 HOLES OF WATER. [CHAP.IV.was discerned from S. S. W. to N. N. W., buttoo indistinctly for any satisfactory observation.Four or five holes of water however broke suddenlyupon the sight, the largest to seaward, orinthe direction of Fox's Channel, and theothers between the ship and the shore to thewestward.CHAPTER V.Valentines Day. — Floe damaged. — Outline of CoastsSymptoms. — Chaotic Commotion. — Tumultceases. — Clearing Deck. — Dovelike shot. — Awful Peril.Grandeur of Scene. — Expectation of Crisis. — Havocspreads. — Desolation. — Ship remains nipped. — Turmoil.Set of Ice. — Ship rights. — Ice Hills. — Dolts, fyc.loosened by Pressure of Ice. — Flight of Birds. — NauticalArtists. — Divine Service. — Blows a Gale. — ImminentPeril. — St. Patrick's Day. — Ice fluctuates — Sir J. GordonBay. — Peril of Two Sailors. — Flock of Ducks,and White Bear. — Death of a Sailor. — Baffin's Observations.— Flocks of Loons. — Improvement in Crew'sHealth. — Diminution of Snow. — Mr. Gore Snow-blind.The 14th February, Valentine's day ! By universalconsent in the temperate regions ofEurope, the harbinger of spring, the day whenhope revives and the future begins to triumphover the past ! Even with us, fast locked in thedreary wilderness of ice, amidst driving sleet andfog, the time was not without its influence, andI mark this day as the boundary from which webegan to look forward to our final release. " Howshort the past, how long the future appears," isthe trite and universal reflection ; yet in my casethe reality was exactly the reverse. When Ilooked back upon the past, (and it was the firsttime that I remember to have experienced such218 valentine's day. [chap. v.a feeling), the time since we left England, thoughbut eight months, seemed longer than any threeyears of my former not unadventurous life. Dayswere weeks, w T weeks months, months almost years.As objects seen through a haze appear moredistant, so to me the past had a dim and shadowyindistinctness which magnified its proportions.There were no marks to separate one day fromanother, no rule whereby to measure time ; allwas one dull and cheerless uniformity of darkand cold. But from this date, on the contrary,the successive days being occupied in active andexciting employment, with continual novelties ofsituation, and expectation of something to come,seemed to fly with accelerated speed as eachbrought us nearer to the termination of our imprisonment.But I return to my narrative.Our day of promise set in, it must be confessed,unpromisingly enough ; for through the night abreeze blew from the N. E., directly on the land,and the mist and snow drift continued so thick,that there was no possibility of seeing at whatpart of the coast we were. The barometer tookept falling, and the wind increasing. At noon,soundings were obtained in one hundred andthirty fathoms, but the sun was too obscure toget an observation. About 2 h p. m. it being rathersqually, a lane of water was formed along theedge of the floe one half round it, and the iceCHAP. V.] FLOE DAMAGED. 219seemed to be fast drifting to the south. Duringthe early part of the night a lunar halo, slightlyprismatic, and of 48° diameter was observed.Shortly after the wind veered more to the north,and with a rising barometer blew a strong gale,which remained unabated till morning of the 15th.From a severe shock, that was felt on boardsometime in the middle watch, as well as variousdull cracking about the stern frame and counter,I inferred that some commotion had been in operationamong the ice. I was not, however, preparedto hear that an opening, commencingwithin a short distance of the larboard bow, hadmade its way to within forty paces of theship, and then running diagonally across hadabsolutely bisected the floe - y nor, on furtherexamination, was this all, since, at the southernextreme, we had lost another large portion,broken off in a parallel line, while to thenorth innumerable cracks appeared in everydirection. This was the most unpromising sightexperienced from the time of our being frozen in,for there could be no doubt that the bulwarkof our security had been shattered ; and, as noinstance had been known of a reunion of partsonce separated from the mass, we could not butfeel, though with an humble reliance on themercy of that Providence which had hithertosustained us, how precarious was henceforth our220 SURVEY OF FLOE. [Chapel.condition. At noon, soundings were found inninety-five fathoms, but no land was visible. Thelatitude, however, by a hazy sun, was 64° 21' N.This day was remarkable as that on which ouroldest invalid was rescued from the sick list,but though well in general health his leg continuedcrooked. A parhelion was seen, whosesemidiameter was 23° : the barometer was slowlyrising, and at length the sky began to clear, sothat about 4 h p. m. land was made out to thesouth east, and also astern.About night fall a lane of water appeared onthe western extremity of the floe, extendinground the northern part of it to south east.The night itself was beautifully clear, and soonafter midnight quite calm. The barometer againfell, and at 6 h a m. a light air came from thesouth west. We had been of late so envelopedin mist and snow drift, that a fine day was quitea treat ; and after divisions and the usual inspectionof the decks, all hands rambled about thefloe, which now formed the limit of our excursions.I, also, as undisputed sovereign of the floe, (andnever certainly was monarch more anxious topreserve the integrity of his territory, or morejealous of the smallest encroachment on hisborder,) went forth to make a survey of myicy domain. After tracing the various cracksfrom one extreme to the other, I was sorryCHAP. V.] ENORMOUS PRESSURE. 221to find not only a complete verification of theformer report, but additional fractures also, of avery threatening aspect. The pressure had beenenormous, having thrown up terrific piles ofbroken, and in many instances ponderous, slabsof ice. Sad inroads had been made upon thefloe which, however, much as it was reduced,was yet infinitely the largest compact body withinthe circle of the horizon. In many parts, wherea temporary rent and separation had given freedomto masses confined underneath, huge calves,yellow and brown with age, darted up to thesurface, looking like unsightly blotches on thepale features of the general scene. One smallcrack even trespassed on the ship : but whatmost astonished me was the state of the ice composingthe entire body to the verge of thehorizon. Formerly it had been remarked to consistof innumerable floes of different sizes, allmore or less irregular, but chiefly crowned bypeaked and massy hummocks, which, withoutany straining of the imagination, might, in someatmospheres, have been mistaken for islands. Ofthese, not one now remained. The whole hadbeen crushed, ground, and powdered into anappearance, which I can liken only to thespeculated and splintery surface of brokengranite, as seen through a powerful magnifier.How it was that this effect had been produced,OUTLINE OF COAST. [cHAP.V.whether there had been no resistance, or that theparticles had intermixed and consolidated, wecould not determine ; but the fact was indisputable,that none of the hideous ruins piled uponboth extremities of our floe were distinguishableelsewhere. It is worthy of remark, as illustratingthe fracture of crystals, that the cracksin general pursued their course through everyimpediment of ice, large or small, in a track notunlike that sometimes marked by lightning onother substances. How far these continued, wehad no means of ascertaining.The clearness of the day enabled us to definethe outline of the coast very satisfactorily. Wehad evidently been set a little into a bay, thoughthe nearest land which seemed rather low andshelving, was at least twelve or fifteen miles away.From the deck, it seemed to trend southerly, untilquite lost in the horizon ; but with the assistanceof a glass, as viewed from the crowVnest, itformed a very deep bay, and again vanishedbehind a line of high blue land, clearly visibletwo points on the starboard bow. Beyond thelatter, and stretching something more to theeast, was the last point in sight, and which it wasconsidered must be the western side of SeahorsePoint, or at least very close to it. The ship'shead (which it will be remembered was turnedround by a commotion of the ice when not farCHAP. V.J ALARMING SYMPTOMS. 223from Cape By lot) was in an excellent direction,and allowing that the floe held together, and thewind continued from the westward, it was notunreasonable to suppose we should eventually betakensomewhere among the cluster of islands atthe western extremity of Hudson's Straits.At noon, soundings on a green muddy bottomwere struck in eighty-six fathoms, and at the sametime the extremes of land extended fromN. W. \ N. to S. E. \ S. The latitude observedwas 64° 19' 30" N. and the longitude 81° 40' W.February 17th, for some part of the day, mightbe said tone calm ; and, as usual, the ice under whatmight have been thought favourable circumstances,began to work with a noise by nomeans welcome to our ears. The weatherwas beautifully fine, and the wind quite light,rather off the land ; but though there w r as nothingin this respect which betokened a change, thebarometer was slowly falling, and it was remarkedthat the grinding noise around the floe increasedmore than usual. From l h to 3 h a. m. of thefollowing day (February 18th) the crashing of theice at the eastern edge of the floe was alarminglyloud, and a few minutes afterwards I was awakenedby a hoarse rushing sound, quickly followedby several severe shocks against the ship. Theofficer of the watch hurrying down, reported thatthe floe was certainly breaking up alongside, andI hastened on deck, where the first Lieutenant224 CHAOTIC COMMOTION. [Chapel.had arrived before me. Here we saw a rent inthe ice, extending from the stern of the ship tothe edge of the floe, and another stretching fromthe bow directly ahead to the eastern brink ;thus, in fact, forming a continuous line ofseparation directly through the centre. Thehands were immediately turned up and set towork in bringing on board the armourer's forgefrom a shed alongside, and hoisting up thedingy,* which, for convenience and preservationhad been stowed on the floe within our wall.The ship now began to complain, and strainedconsiderably under the counter. She then heeledover to port, and relieved herself about six inchesfrom the starboard embankment against the side,making by the effort gaping rents through thesnow walls. At this time, the crashing, grinding:,and rushing noise beneath, as well as at theborders of the floe, the rents and cracks in alldirections towards the ship, herself sufferingmuch, the freezing cold of altogether witha W.N.W. wind, and the dimness of the earlyhour, combined to render our situation not alittle perilous and uncomfortable. 1 had beenalone to examine the edge of the outer ice, whichthough greatly disturbed and making a deafeningnoise, had not yet broken into our floe. But at5 h a.m.; a commotion like an earthquake tookplace; additional cracks displayed themselvesA small boat.CHAP. V.] TUMULT CEASES. 225across our snow houses, galleries, and court yard.The ship creaked in her beams and timbers ; andto our great dismay, the increasing daylightshewed an advancing rampart of ice forming asemicircle to seaward, and already much nearerto us, from having rolled in one vast body fulleighty yards. It extended from S. W. to N. E.,and Lieutenant M'Murdo who made the report,estimated its height at thirty feet.* In all partsnow, within the scope of the above bearings,enormous calves, some round and massy, otherslike small floes, had escaped from confinement,and tossed up into irregular positions lookedlike so many engines threatening destruction.But at this moment of most imminent peril therewas a pause, and at near 7 h a.m. the whole tumultsuddenly ceased. It will be remembered thatas a screen from the severity of the climate, thedecks had been covered with layers, and thesides protected by embankments of snow, nowhardened almost into solidity. I gave ordersthat the whole of these should be clearedaway, as well to lighten the ship as much aspossible, as to get access to our supply of provisions,which were ranged along the bulwark,and this was the only step I could take towardsour preservation, in the event of the ship beingIt. afterwards sank to eighteen feet.Q226 CLEARING DECK. [Chapel.crushed. The ice all round was so splintered andjagged, that to put a boat upon it was out of thequestion. Neither could it be made, even for anhour, a deposit of provisions, full as it was ofclear cracks and small holes, the production ofeach instant. Nothing therefore could havebeen conveyed to the land, distant at least sevenor nine miles, and I think it at least doubtfulwhether any one, even without incumbrance,could have reached it.The work of clearing the deck with pick-axeand shovel went on briskly ; and at 3 h p. m. theship rose up four inches, and towards evening,when the after-part was completed, eight inchesmore. The men under the inspection of theofficers, had exerted themselves considerably,because, according to past experience, it wasthought the disturbance would recommenceabout three o'clock. Nothing, however, beyonda partial motion was then perceptible, nor until5 h 15 m p. m. when the ship was lifted up abaft.From that time, symptoms of the influence ofsome under-current were audible in the cabin,where the concussions of passing ice strikingunderneath were too clearly heard to be misunderstood.It ended in the separation of twoedges of a large crack, not more than fifty yardsfrom the ship, which opened in the space of fiveminutes into a hole of water. The extraordinaryCHAP. V.] DISUNION OF FLOE. 2^7part of this was, that the opening did not continuealong the crack to the edge of the floe,but took place only in a particular spot, as if theice had been scooped out from the interval socreated. At 10 h p. m. it closed a little, and immediatelya mound of ice was raised at the westerntermination, adjacent to the starboard quarter ;this had probably eased the pressure from theship, since little more was felt on board than afew squeezes and an occasional concussion.Meanwhile, the body of the ice outside theramparts, which had been for some time at rest,began to be again disturbed. February 19tharrived, and we looked with some anxiety tothe approach of the same hours, during which,on the preceding morning, we had suffered somuch annoyance, fully expecting a repetition ;but, fortunately the chief pressure fell on the crack, extending however occasionallyas far as the ship, and ending by heeling her overto starboard. In fact, when the sun rose, it wasfound she had forged about eight inches fromthe bank of the dock on the larboard side, wherebay or young ice had closed up the interval.About 10 h a. m. another crack close ahead,or rather on the starboard bow, opened, and enlargedothers near it, which in their turns producedfresh fractures, thus gradually separatingthe floe into its original constituent parts. Inq 2228 DOVEKTE SHOT. [Chapel,this latter disunion, I could not but remark howquickly the young ice was formed on the exposedsurface of water, on which thechrystals mightactually be seen darting and glancing till theyformed a continuous sheet. It happened that asolitary Dovelike had found in its wanderingsthe now circumscribed hole of water, which hadbeen created the evening before, and gladlyavailed itself of this relief from its wearied flight,unconscious of the dangerous neighbours whoobserved it. Our keen sportsman, Mr. Gore,soon brought it triumphantly on board, where ofcourse it underwent a careful scrutiny. Besidesthe two white spaces in the wings, the breastand under part were entirely white, as were thewhole of the neck and back except three patchesof a grey or speckled colour where the black andwhite plumage were intermixed. Though themaw was quite empty, their was tolerably plump.From the circumstance of its coming so far fromland, it was inferred that there could not bemuch, if any, open water in that direction; yetin a couple of hours, three or four lanes becamesuddenly visible, in one of which, at the edge ofthe floe, the ice was drifting past us to the S. S. E.Sunday had been kept on all occasions, whenthe duty allowed of it, as a day of entire rest ;but the necessity of clearing away the ice andsnow compelled for once a deviation from ourCHAP. V.] CONFUSED COMBINATIONS. 229practice, and the work proceeded with intermittedenergy. Looking at the heaps thus removed,the broken arches of our galleries, and therent walls, the cracks in the floe, and the vastmounds around it, one could not help being stronglyreminded of the scene which must follow an earthquake.The ship's head had been turned by thelate commotion about three points in shore ; andjudging from the land which was clearly seen,she had been set at the same time to the southwardand eastward, rather towards an openingin the bay, the exact nature of which could notbe ascertained. Evidently, however, it ran a longway to the south, as the low land on its westernside was lost sight of; and as we could distinguishother points to the eastward, it was byno means impossible that it might be continuouswith Evan's Inlet, thus making the land, theeastern extremity of which is Seahorse Point, anisland. If this be so, the extraordinary rush ofwater experienced in the recent convulsion ofour floe would be easily accounted for ; still thesoundings at noon had undergone no materialchange, continuing to give eighty-three fathoms,but with a substance containing particles of limestoneinstead of green mud. The latitude was64° 17' N. and longitude 81° 36' W. ; and theextremes of land were from S. 8° 50' east to N.q 3230 SHEDS TAKEN DOWN. [Chapel.32 W. ; barometer 29. 53, and temperature ofair 30° — A perihelion was observed.In a very short time the ice got into motion,and in a small lane on the starboard quarterappeared to be setting south. At 3 h p. m. thesame lane closed, and another immediatelyopened at a short distance from it. At 4\ theedge of the floe from west to north displayedsigns of considerable pressure, which, affectingthe ice alongside, drove it onwards with a rumblingnoise so as to heel the ship over tostarboard. The beam whale-boat being thusbrought too near the ice, was hoisted half upthe main rigging. The shed too, which had beenso long familiar to our sight as the armourer'swork-shop was now necessarily taken downand the spars, sails, ice-anchor, &c, brought onboard.At 8 h p. m. a barrier was thrown upnine feet high on the starboard bow, and, owingto some under convulsion, the large pieces ofthe floe on that side were much cracked andbroken ; besides which, the chink astern leadingto the edge of the floe in that directionbecame sufficiently wide to admit of thewater being seen through it. There was onlya light air of w r ind rather off-shore, so that thesechanges must have been occasioned principallyby irregular tides. At 10 h 30 m p. m. severalCHAP. V.] AWFUL PERIL. 231singular openings suddenly appeared in sight,and were soon followed by another of those loudrushing noises, known by experience to be theforerunners of evil. The thermometer was 40° — ,and the weather very cold.February 20th. For three hours after midnightthe ice opened and shut, especially on thestarboard beam and quarter, where mounds andheaps were squeezed up alarmingly near theship, but without in any manner disturbing her,beyond an occasional concussion and squeakingpressure under the counter. But at 4 h a. m.,the whole of the ice was in motion, producinginstantaneous fissures, and, among these, an actualseparation of the ice along the starboard side,extending beyond the bow, and throwing downevery thing in its way. Some of the gallerieswere now floating in the water, looking liketunnels. To find ourselves at freedom to move,would, tw r o months later, have been the summitof our wishes; but now we saw it with reluctance,as it only mocked us with a hope which couldnot be realized, while it involved us in immediateperil. At 7 h a. m., the ice returning withaccumulated force made the ship crack fore andaft with a hideous creaking that for some secondsheld us in suspense for the result. My cabindoor could with difficulty be forced open, andwas split with the pressure. The people, inq 4232 INSTRUCTIONS TO CREW. [Chapel.alarm, crowded on deck ; and even the poor sickcame tottering aft, in an agony of terror. Providentiallythe ship lifted herself up fully eightinches, under the pressure of a force that wouldhave crushed a less strengthened vessel toatoms ; and thus the opposing ice either passedin part beneath the bottom, or was wedgedagainst the large masses at either extremity.After 8 h a. m. we had some quiet ; and atdivisions, I thought it necessary to address thecrew, reminding them that as Christians andBritish seamen, they were called upon to conductthemselves with coolness and fortitude ;and that independently of the obligations imposedby the Articles of War, every one ought to beinfluenced by the still higher motive of a conscientiousdesire to perform his duty. I gavethem to understand, that I expected from oneand all, in the event of any disaster, an implicitobedience to and an energetic execution of everyorder they might receive from the officers, aswell as kind and compassionate help to the sick.On their observance of these injunctions, I warnedthem, our ultimate safety might depend. Somefresh articles of warm clothing were then dealt outto them ; and as the moment of destruction wasuncertain, I desired that the small bags in whichthose things were contained should be placed ondeck with the provisions, so as to be ready atCHAP. V.] GRANDEUR OF SCENE. 233an instant. The forenoon was spent in gettingup bales of blankets, bear-skins, provision, pyroligneousacid for fuel, and in short whatevermight be necessary if the ship should be suddenlybroken up, and spars were rigged over thequarters to hoist them out. Meanwhile the icemoved but little, though the hour of full moonwas passed ; but at noon it began to drift slowlyto the northward. We were now from five to eightmiles off the nearest land. The soundings werein eighty-eight fathoms, and showed black mud,which had not been seen before. The latitudewas 64° 16' N., and we had gone a little to theeastward. Thermometer 21°-, and cold, owingto spicula falling. Barometer stationary at 29*55.Wind west.Though I had seen vast bodies of ice fromSpitsbergen to 150° west longitude, undervarious aspects, some beautiful, and all more orless awe-inspiring, I had never witnessed, noreven imagined, any thing so fearfully magnificent,as the moving towers and ramparts that nowfrowned on every side Had the still extensivepieces of which the floe was formed been splitand divided like those further off, the effectwould have been far less injurious to the ship ;but, though cracked and rent, the parts, fromsome inexplicable cause, closed again for atime, and drove with accelerated and almostirresistible force against the defenceless vessel.234 EXPECTATION OF CRISIS. [Chapel.In the afternoon the other boats were hoistedhigher up, to save them from damage in theevent of the ship being thrown much over onher broadside. For three hours we remainedunmolested, though the ice outside of the floewas moving in various directions, some piecesalmost whirling round, and of course, in theeffort, disturbing others. At 5 h p. m., however, thepiece near the ship having previously openedenough to allow of her resuming a nearly uprightposition, collapsed again with a force thatmade every plank complain ; and further pressurebeing added at six o'clock, an ominouscracking was heard, that only ceased on herbeing lifted bodily up eighteen inches. Thesame unwelcome visitation was repeated an hourafterwards, in consequence of the closing of anarrow lane directly astern. The night wasvery fine, but the vapour which arose from themany cracks, as well as the small open spacealongside, quickly becoming converted into smallspicula of snow, rendered the cold intolerablykeen to those who faced the wind. Up to midnightwe were not much annoyed, and for fourhours afterwards, on February 21st, all was quiet.Every man had gone to rest with his clothes on,and was agreeably surprised at being so longundisturbed by the usual admonitory grinding.However, at 4 h l() m a. m. a commotion was heard,which appeared to be confined to the angle con-chap.V.] BEAMS, &C. INSPECTED. 235gained between west and north-west. On lookinground at day-break, it was found that theship had been released by the retreating of theice, and had nearly righted ; but at 5 h a. m. shewas again sorely squeezed, and the nip beingrepeated at 7 h a. m., she rose eighteen inches asbefore ; she was then at intervals jerked up fromthe pressure underneath, with a groan each timefrom the woodwork. Yet notwithstanding thesesuccessive attacks, very little additional waterfound its way into the well, which was soundedevery five minutes, and had not yet exceededseven inches in the twenty four hours. Oninspecting the beams and decks — a precautionthat followed every nip — the former were foundfirm, and the bolts still tight; but the latterfor about twelve feet abreast of the store-roomson the lower deck, had risen three quarters ofan inch, while the binding planks on the larboardside abeam had also started a little. In ordertherefore, to give additional support, it was proposedto put up quarter shores along the lowerdeck, and store-rooms, and the proposition wasimmediately carried into effect. At 10 h the iceeased off, and some on the outside appeared asif setting to the S.E., which was in shore of us.The weather was fine, but for the reason alreadyassigned, extremely cold in the shade, or facingthe northerly wind in the neighbourhood of286 HAVOC SPREADS. [Chapel*frost smoke. I felt it keenly in making theround of the now much rent floe, and in lookingwith fresh wonder on the gigantic piles beforealluded to. Of the awful grandeur of these nolanguage could give an adequate description, andeven the more effective pencil has been able onlyto catch one momentary aspect of a scene, theterrible sublimity of which lay chiefly in the rollingonward of these mighty engines of destruction.Cracks, rents, and banks extended fromthe edge or base of the barrier towards the ship,in every bearing on the north-east side, wherethe ice was much the heaviest, and, consequently,unless it should be splintered intosmaller masses, most to be dreaded in the encoun- *ter. Around the other part of the floe thehavoc was, if possible, still greater, reaching, byfour or five transverse fractures, even to thestarboard side of the ship, while ahead andastern longitudinal mounds of ice and snowbegan to assume the appearance of barricades.Whilst engaged with the first Lieutenant incontemplating these effects, within ten paces ofthe vessel, the sound of rushing water beneathwarned us to expect some change. All at once,however, it ceased : another rush was heard,which stopped as suddenly ; but a third, advancingwith a louder roar, threw the wholebody into motion, and bringing the ponderousCHAP. V.] VIOLENT PRESSURE. £37acres with all their loads against the ship, threwher up and considerably over to starboard, withgreat violence, though, strange to say, withoutapparent injury. It was then we saw her rise tothe pressure, and endeavour to thrust the icebeneath her bends, a result much to be desired,as it would form a sort of bolster to support her.We had certainly gone somewhat to the eastward,since a point named, after the third Lieutenant,M'Murdo, the bearing of which yesterdaywas before, was now abaft the beam, and thehigh bluff land was more clearly visible, thoughin some measure dimmed by frost smoke.There was no interruption from this time until3 h 30 m p. m., when the ice suddenly pressed upagainst the ship. It was not however till 6 h thatit came with much force, when the decks, especiallythe upper one, creaked fearfully in theafterward, notwithstanding the four newly erectedshores in my cabin. As usual, after some resistance,she rose and heeled over to starboard.The two following hours kept us in a state ofpainful suspense, for the ice closing in differentpoints occasioned violent pressure, that threwher over twenty inches, and raised her nearly asmuch. This was accompanied by one of thoseloud rushing noises beneath, so frequently mentionedbefore. Judging from the previous evening,we might now have expected a few hours of238 DESOLATION. [Chapel.tranquillity; but when every other part wasundisturbed, the extensive piece on the larboardside moved slowly to the south, and again nippedus. At ll h this slackened, and thenceforth wewere quiet until 5 h a. m. of February enduringwhich interval I conceive the tide andcurrent were setting to the south and east.From 5 h until 8 h a. m, the commotion againwent on, and caused several new, and enlargedmany old cracks, the detached pieces taking differentdirections, though still close together, and,consequently, grinding or overlapping whateverobstructed them. The pressure came suddenlyand without warning on the ship, and strainedher fore and aft, more especially, however, aboutthe orlop deck, where, on examination, the carpenterdiscovered that some of the iron fasteningsin the store-rooms had received injury.There had been, indeed, an immense pressureon the starboard bow, as may be conjecturedfrom the fact that a huge mass had beenthrown up fully nineteen feet above the level.The remnant of the wall across the bow hadbeen thrown down, and the ice there so brokenas to present a most ruinous and desolateappearance. The whole scene indeed, faras the eye could stretch, was confusion worseconfounded. Broken points at every angle, fromthe perpendicular to the nearly horizontal, hume*ft'fa§5Hsiti;V<>IfrCHAP. V.] SHIP REMAINS NIPPED. 239mocks, mounds, jagged and warted masses,splinters, walls, and ramparts, with here andthere, at far intervals, the remains of some floenot yet entirely broken up ; — such was thepicture which saluted us on every side, teachingthe lesson of humility and resignation tothe will of Heaven. Much ice was forced underneaththe bottom on the starboard side,and often bounded up with severe concussionsalong the run abaft, making the ship tremble ateach successive shock. The angle of inclinationon that side was nine degrees.Up to noon scarcely any alteration took place,the vessel remaining heavily nipped. It had beenremarked during the last eight or ten days, thatfrom the early part of the day until a few hourspast noon, we had been regularly set to the west ;but now, the ship's head had not only been turnedmore out, and consequently in a better directionfor going along the coast, but we were driftedby the ice to the north west until 3 h 30 m p. m.when we seemed to be stationary. Among thenumerous cracks around, were several astern,that after a temporary separation generally closedagain ; but an entirely new one now opened,from fifteen to twenty feet wide, within the shortdistance of thirty paces from the quarter : not farfrom this, and completely isolating the highhummock which under the name of Mount240 LANES CLOSED. [Chapel.Pleasant, had for the. whole winter, served as alook-out station, was another lane ; and this againwas bisected by a third, that cut in two the snowhut first made, the two parts of which were, on ashifting of the lane, carried different ways. Alarger and more distant hut was already partlycrushed, and only awaited the advancing roll ofthe rampart, now within a few feet of it, for itsfinal downfal. Between the hours of 6 h and 8 hp. m. the rushing 'bore'* was faintly audible tothe westward, and after various checks seemedto resume its course with increased violence,setting in motion whatever impeded its progress.The lanes adjacent were all closed, and beganGrinding down their edges, which were speedilythrown up into bordering mounds. The crackedice on either side was also agitated, and saved usconsiderably by affording a channel for the bore.Our anxiety indeed was not of long duration, forthe ice immediately adjoining the stern was morepounded and the ship less affected than on anyof the recent assaults. The sky was clear overhead,and almost calm, and midnight came withoutany more disturbance than an occasionalrustling at the extreme barriers. This tranquillityremained until about 6 h a. m. of the 23d,when a remote sound indicated another commo-thebore is a sort of rampart or wall of water, thrownup by the opposition of the current and the set of the tide.CHAP.V.] CONTINUED PRESSURE. 241tion ; but this effect was neither serious norlasting, and up to noon there was no annoyance.The ship, however, had still the same inclination,about three feet four inches to starboard, andconsequently remained nipped; and the breadroom having been cleared for an examinationabaft, a knee-chock on the larboard side was foundwrenched f of an inch from its position on theafter part, above which the deck was raised §of an inch. Three shores were fixed on eachside of the bread room, as an additional support.The weather was calm, and to a certain heightmisty, from the great increase of minute frozenparticles. The difference between the two thermometerson board, (those on the ice havingnecessarily been taken down,) was at a little pastnoon 27° ; the one being 19°—, and the other 8°-f .The high land was still in sight, and evidentlynearer ; the extremes being from S. to W. N. W.The latitude was 64° 14' 50" N. The ice continuedsetting to the N. W. until 4 h p. m., thenremained stationary until 6 h , after which therewas disturbance at intervals, in the direction ofthe north east, but without any material effect,except that a short cracking sound indicatedextra pressure on the ship.The 24th was comparatively tranquil, and atnoon the ship remained with precisely the sameinclination. Still, as the wind was now directly onR242 doctor's report. [chap. v.shore, there was no saying at what moment a nipmight come on ; and as the upper deck had beenmore affected than any of the others, the first Lieutenantsuggested a method of lashing its beams tothe stronger ones of the lower deck, to preventthem from rising up, as they had always a tendencyto do, when under the influence of heavy pressureamidships, or on the topsides. The people wereforthwith set to work in canting the barge andclearing the booms for that purpose. The windhad set us towards the land abeam ; and thatahead bore S. 3° E., distant about eight or tenmiles. After inspection to-day, Doctor Donovanmade a favourable report of the health ofthe crew, which he considered to be manifestlyimproving. One only was added to the list,whilst many of those who had been affectedwere so far recovered, as to stand in no furtherneed of an extra quantity of acid. Until 5 h p. m.the ice was generally in motion, and setting fastto the westward ; at that hour the motion ceased,and was succeeded by a noise to the northward,occasioned, as was supposed, by the fresheningbreeze breaking up the ice in that quarter.Soon after the cracking of the pitch and timberabout the stern frame gave notice of fresh annoyance; and, though nothing could be detectedby the officer of the watch denoting any actionon the surface, the cracking became more vehe-CHAP.V.] VIOLENT STRAINING. 243ment, accompanied with a splitting of part of thelining. It was evident, therefore, that there wasconsiderable pressure existing about the larboardquarter ; and, a few minutes before 8 h p. m., thecause announced itself by a succession of loudrushing noises, followed bv the rending of the icenear us, and the squeezing of the ship. For twohours more there was incessant motion of one kindor other, bearing the ice hard against the larboardside, particularly the quarter, and at midnightthe ship was straining much.February 25th. During a brief interval wewere relieved from anxiety by a general stillness,but the same unwelcome sounds soon returned ;the vast bodies pressed more closely together,producing complaints from the larboard quarter.When the sun rose the ship was carefully examined,but notwithstanding all the sound andfury heard in the night, no marks of externalviolence were discovered. Early in the forenoonthe ship began to set towards the S.S.E. As thelow land abreast could now be distinctly madeout, it seemed that we must have neared it ; theblue bluff ahead bearing due south was dimfrom the quantity of small snow which wasflying about, causing a penetrating cold that allcomplained of. The wind kept to the northwith a moderate force, and the temperature was33°— ; but the southern thermometer beingr 2244 SEVERE SHOCKS. [CHAP.V.sometimes shaded by the rigging, and having noother place so free from radiation to put it, theregister was not to be depended on. Barometer,29. 94. Latitude, 64° 14' 20" N., andlongitude, 81° 27' 15" W.During the entire part of the afternoon theice appeared to set in a northerly direction,though at 5 h p. m. the high land was far moredistinct than I had hitherto seen it, many breaksand inequalities being observed which were notpreviously visible. For a couple of hours therewere irregular movements near us, and between7 h 30 m and 8 h the usual rushing sounds wereheard in the north-west quarter. The crackingice marked the course of the disturbing forcewhatever it was, which, though frequently deviatingand interrupted for a few seconds,again broke onward with increased violence, bearingdown all opposition. Such were the severeattacks the ship had continually to withstand,and that too, at the weakest point. She crackedmuch around the quarter, and was otherwiseheavily pressed.February 26th. During several hours, theice, though to all appearance close jammed together,was often in motion, and came withsuch sudden shocks, that few were able to sleep.Many, indeed, lay down in their clothes, readyto start up at a moment. Our devotions thisCHAP. V.] SERMON. 245day were tinged with a solemnity becoming theprecariousness of our condition ; and a sermon,upon the appropriate text "It is the Lord : letHim do what seemeth Him good," was listenedto with the most profound and serious attention.At noon the high land was much nearer, andwe had now opened the deep bay, inlet, or strait,mentioned before. The land there was very low,not unlike the description of the coast to thesouth of Evan's Inlet. The bluff, which had beendenominated the blue bluff, from the tinge alwaysseen on it, could now be made out perfectly clear,and was not more than ten miles off, and thedistance of the nearest low land did not exceedfour miles. Soundings were found in seventy-twofathoms, having a bottom of rock and sand.Some of the gentlemen thought they saw thetrack of a fox, which, if so, must have takenmore than common trouble to make so long ajourney, and would find itself but poorly requitedafter all. As usual, in the afternoon, the iceeased off a little astern, and, after few concussionsunderneath, began to set in a body to the northwest.While this was in progress, there wasan evident disposition in the broken masses ofice, under the stern, to rise up ; and as theywould undoubtedly have staved in the cabinwindows, if nothing worse, some thick plankingwas nailed across them, which, with the deadr 3246 TURMOIL. [CHAP.V.lights, was considered to be strong enough toresist any ordinary force. There was no movementof any consequence until between 9 h andll h , when after many and various sounds, theentire body around to the Northward began to beagitated. The motion would suddenly cease,and then as suddenly recommence ; sometimesfar off, more frequently near the ship ; squeezingup ridges of ice, and causing a most distressingcreaking and splitting of the lining along thelarboard side. The aurora showed itself in thesouth-west in the form of an arch, from whichbeams darted up to the zenith.February 27th. The time of the lowest neapshaving arrived, we naturally expected a few days'respite, at least for the night, a boon which wouldhave been most joyfully accepted; for, the quantityof clothing which the cutting cold renderednecessary required so much time to put on,that few lately had ventured to disburse themselvesof the whole, when seeking to snatch afew hours of rest. It was not, however, ourfortune to be so indulged ; for about l h a. m.the commotion and turmoil recommenced, andsoon forced the ship, embedded as she was, abouttwo feet astern. The creaking and crashing of theice in that short space was horrible, nor did it entirelydesist, until again closing it held us in a stilltighter grasp than before. After a pause of fourCHAP. V.] SET OF ICE. 247hours, by opening out a few inches alongside, itallowed the ship to come more upright, still,however, with a considerable inclination. Somenarrow lanes of water appeared nearer the ice,which was at present immovably fixed to the lowland,forming the western entrance to the deep bayor inlet, and along the edge of which we seemedto be setting to and fro. The frost smoke fromthese lanes in some measure obscured the landwhich however we seemed to have approached ;thus making it apparent that the flood tide camefrom the north-west, and without any aid fromwind (of which for two days there had been verylittle), continued to drive us bodily along towardsHudson's Straits. Up to ll h a. m. the seawardice which encircled us passed rapidly to the southeast,along the outer edge of that wedged againstthe land at the entrance of the opening : at thathour it stopped, and in the concussion producedby the reaction, several pieces ground along andunderneath the bottom of the ship, but withoutproducing any corresponding action on the surface.At noon all was once more silent. Thecrew, for employment, were ordered to makeeach a small sledge of the staves of casks, andto sling the tin cases of pemmican. Our invalidswere generally better, except two on thesick list, who, probably from despondency, didnot improve as rapidly as their companions.r 4248 SHIP RIGHTS. [CHAP.V.About l h 40 m p. m. the retrograde action commenced,and after compressing the masses nearertogether, a temporary obstacle within twenty pacesfrom the starboard quarter squeezed up a smallridge twelve feet high. We kept driving to thenorth-west until 6 h p. m., from which time untilmidnight we enjoyed almost uninterrupted quiet.February 28th. The Aurora appeared in theform of an arch in the south-east quarter, and, asbefore, sent up beams towards the zenith, butwithout colour. At l h 40 m a.m. the reactiontook place, and once or twice pressed us closely,though soon after the ice began to be more disengaged,and that near the edge of the fixedshore ice appeared to be going to the westward.Between 4 h and 8 h a. m. there was somegrinding, but the cracks and openings grewwider, and the ship gradually righted. The seawardbody again set to the S.E. ; but a large andremarkable hummock, stationary among the landice abreast of us, showed us that our progresshad not been much, as the same mark had beenobserved under a similar bearing about an hourearlier the day before. Two or three narrow lanesclose to the vessel, and a continuous one alongthe outer edge of the land ice, extending asfar as the farthest point of coast, gave mereason to hope that the ice ahead was slowlyfinding an outlet by the strait, which, with aCHAP.V.] IMPROVING PROSPECTS. 249westerly wind, there seemed every probability ofour soon reaching. In fact, had it not been forthe uncertainty respecting our being nipped, andthe apprehension that the whole frame-workwould, by constant repetition, get daily weaker,nothing could be more desirable, or, as far as Icould judge, more favourable for my intention oftrying the passage by Sir Thomas Roe's Welcome,than our gradual approach towards SeahorsePoint. How far the ship might be batteredby floating ice, and cross tides or currents, whenwithin the influence of Fox's Channel, theStrait, and Hudson's Bay, not to mention theraces and strong sets of the Welcome, was aconsideration which I did not choose to dwellupon ; satisfied that if we once got into openwater, the difficulties generally encountered onsuch occasions would assuredly be overcome.The ice within us was considerably more rentby every fresh pressure, though that on the northeastside, which sometimes served as a bulwark ofdefence, and at others as an engine of attack,remained, together with an adjoining part of ourold floe, the most imposing piece around. Therewas one fact, however, as evident as it was newand satisfactory, namely, that the aspect of theice originally forming our floe, — the very solidproperties of which we had so disagreeablytested in our serious nip of last September, — was&50 SLABS OF SNOW. [CHAP.V.now completely changed. The identical pieces,with the marks of the ship's side, were stillwithin a few paces of us ; and some of themwere fractured sufficiently, to show that a verygreat reduction in thickness had taken placeupon the under surface. In every directionwhere huge masses were upturned, or ridgesand barriers thrown up, it was observed by theice mate, and those who had had most experiencein the Greenland seas, that there wascomparatively little solid ice, and that mostlyof this winter's formation. It was slabs offrozen snow adhering to and covering most ofthese masses, which gave them the formidableappearance they assumed. It may, therefore, beinferred that the rushing of currents and tides,the sounds of which were distinctly heard underneathour floe, even when to the westward ofCape Comfort, had the beneficial effect of grindingdown or wearing away the irregular under-surfacesof the ice, as they chafed against any obstructionsto their course. This, if, as seems probable, acorrect explanation, will, in connexion with othe rascertained facts to some of which I have beforeadverted, aid in accounting for the occasionaldisappearance of ice, and consequent facility ofnavigating these seas during particular seasons.The crew were kept employed, and one ofthem had a narrow escape from drowning, fromCHAP. V.] FINE WEATHER. shavingincautiously, whilst crossing a narrowopening, stepped on some slabs of snow, whichbroke under him : he fell into the water, andin a few moments would have been gone forever,had not Mr. Vaughan, the boatswain, seenhim, and run immediately to his succour. Beforenoon the ship was free from pressure, but the icechecked by the tide, drove her back againtowards the N. W. We were evidently fartheroff shore than before, though still nearing tworemarkable round hills, having each a small dome-shapedmound rising from the termination ofthe slope, and forming the summit. To thenorth and west, and seemingly connected withthem, was the blue bluff, now on our starboardbow ; farther south was another point, the extremesof which and the land astern were S. E.and N. W. by W. The weather was fine andcalm, and some icicles formed on the ship's side.At l h 20 ra p. m., a mercurial thermometer, hungagainst the sunny side of the ship, rose to 11° 5 + ;the spirit one on board in the sun being 15° — ,and the one in the shade 21° — . In the latterpart of the day the ice set slowly to the N. W.,but about 8 h p. m. stopped, and closed a little onthe starboard side of the ship.This was the lowest neap tide ; and as the weatherwas calm, we looked forward to the comfort of aquiet night. In this however we were disappointed.252 LANES OF WATER. [CHAP.V.From 10 h p. m. there was no peace, but on thecontrary, harsh rubbing, smart explosions, andother varieties of discordant sounds, quite sufficientto keep the mind on the alert. As daylightgleamed, several narrow lanes of waterwere perceived running from the quarter, inshore,directly ahead of the ship, and preciselyin the same crack, which we hoped to have gotthrough last year, when the ship's head was theother way. Under any circumstances they werenot wide enough to afford us a passage ; and a fewminutes w T ere sufficient to coat them with youngice, which of itself barred all progress. So long,however, as they remained open, they aided thework of destruction, by allowing space for thelarge bodies to grind against each other ; but theship was what is termed free in her dock ; thatis to say, she was from two to three feet awayfrom the walled sides of ice and snow whichusually hemmed her in, the clear interval belowbeing frozen hard with young ice. Whetherfrom the current of air thereby permitted tocirculate round the bends, or from the removalof the snow covering and embankment, or both,the water in the pump-well was found for thefirst time frozen. Its temperature was 30° -j-,and that of the lower deck 58° + . The landwas clearly seen from the deck, running outto a point in the extreme distance, bearingCHAP.V.] Perihelion. 253S.E. ^ S., but during the last twenty-four hourswe had not gone much if at all towards it. Atnoon there was a moderate breeze from the north,which increased so as to predict a gale, a resultleast of all to be desired from that point of thecompass, as it would have infallibly broughtdown an immense pressure upon the leeward icepacked against Southampton Island. Happily itdeclined with the setting sun, and subsequentlyfell quite calm. In the afternoon there was abeautiful perihelion, with an outer circle and onemock sun. The subtended angle of the latterwas 45°. It is to be observed, that for sometimepast w r e had regularly been set backwardsand forwards, along shore, with the flood and ebb,generally gaining upon the whole some triflingadvantage with the former, as proved by ourgradual approach to the land ahead. To-day,however, owing, as was supposed, to the opposingwind, there was no retrograde motion tothe westward at all ; and it was reasonable, therefore,to calculate at the turn of tide on someacquisition of distance. Nevertheless the hourpassed without the slightest alteration ; but,at 10 h p. m., several sudden jerks in the cabinwarned me that something was going on ; and, accordingly,near an hour after, a general rumblingwas audible to seaward and astern. After somealternations of commotion and pauses, and when254 DREADFUL COMMOTION. [CHAP.V.all was still and apparently ended, suddenly thevast bodies in contact with, and immediately surroundingthe ship, were in fearful agitation, risingup in grinding conflict, piece thrown over pieceuntil the ponderous walls tumbled over, and thewhole accompanied with a screeching and howlingand whining which was absolutely hideous : suchwas the violence of the pressure that the shipwas lifted up abaft, and both hull and riggingtrembled violently. Another pause ensued ;the stars shone brightly ; a faint gleam of aurorawas playing near the zenith, and so beautifuland hushed was every thing, that nature seemed,as it were, in a trance. But scarcely had the ideaflitted across the mind, when the war burst outagain with more fury than ever, and huge fragmentsand masses seemed to be rolling down uponus with an impetuosity that threatened immediatedestruction. Repose was impossible : manystarted from their beds, preferring, though theycould do nothing, rather to see than merelyhear the danger. The current rushed irresistiblyto the stern ; and, taking the hull foreand aft, forced a complete stream of brokenice under the bottom, lifting the after part stillhigher up than before. While the first Lieutenantwas below with the carpenter and hiscrew, anxiously observing the beams and decksas the heavy strain came upon them, to see whichCHAP. V.] HUBBUB CEASES. Q55most complained, and to be ready in the eventof injury if possible to repair it ; I was standingon the afraid, watching the approach of a solidmass, part of our late floe, which was forcinganother huge mass, like an advancing wave, overa hard piece, already noticed as having oppressedour starboard quarter last year. At length, theship became so completely hampered by iceunderneath, that the remainder of the floe, oneither side, moved about eight or ten feet ahead,leaving the ship fixed in the midst, and wedgedup in every direction. This was another noveltyto our Greenlandmen, who, in the strange andunaccountable phenomena which now presentedthemselves, grew daily more puzzled.At 2 h a. m., March 2d, the hubbub ceased,and we slept until morning without further interruption.As daylight broke, the havoc was moreclearly seen, and a wild scene of confusion itwas. About a mile ahead the frost smokebetrayed an opening that led along the land-packedice to abeam of the ship ; and this, witha few other lanes, was the only deference in thatrespect which was observable. The land wasmuch raised by refraction, and we seemed tohave neared it a little. I say seemed, for, inconsequenceof a gentle undulatory motion ofthe ice close to the ship, which, though imperceptibleto the eye, was proved by the mercury256 THERMOMETERS. [CHAP.V.in the artificial horizon, the observations couldnot always be relied upon as exact. The sunwas acquiring power daily ; for, at 10 h 30 m a. m.we saw the vapour rising from the southernaspect of a snow wall, and at ll h 30 m a.m. amercurial thermometer with a blackened bulb,placed against an empty coal bag, rose to 28° + ,while that on board (spirit and clear bulb) was19° , and the one in the shade 27° — . Thesky was free from clouds, a light air prevailedfrom the S.W. ; and, whether from the windbeing off shore, or some other local cause, wewere free throughout the day from annoyance ofany kind, except a distant sound, as of a rushingtowards the south.March 3d. The same sounds continued, andat 2 h 30 m a. m. reached the ship, but withoutproducing any thing more serious than rubbingand sliding loose pieces of ice against the sides.This soon subsided, and again we remained perfectlyquiet up to noon, when the mist whichhad hitherto concealed the land cleared away,and the bearings placed us a little to the eastwardof our position of yesterday. At l h p. m.the wind still slanting off the land, a lane ofwater was observed to open about half a miledistant from the ship. It was fully a quarter ofa mile broad, and extended a long way towardsthe point. From this fact, there was reason toCHAP. V.] A LULL. C presupposethat, however close and packed the icemight be in our vicinity, there either could notbe such a continuous body to the northward aswe conjectured, or, that it must be interruptedby lanes and other openings sufficiently extensiveto allow of its being put into motion even by alight wind. Towards evening the ice closed alittle, but until 6 h a. m., March 4th, remainedperfectly quiet, and thus allowed us the enjoymentof a sound sleep. Neither at that hourwas there any thing more than a slight rushingahead, occasioned probably by the change oftide, as the ship began immediately to drift tothe N.W., and so continued to do until noon.The approach of the new moon kept us alive toevery symptom of change in the weather ; andwhen the wind drew more round to north, causinga trifling movement among the ice in thatquarter, apprehensions began to be entertainedthat a breeze would come from the same point.Meantime the ship drifted backward and forwardwith the tide, without encountering any annoyance.We had now thirty-six small sledgesmade, which completed our arrangements forwhatever might happen.After a passing alarm in the early morning, the5th of March went quietly over until 6 h p, ivl,when a noise was heard in the north-east direction.The breeze also had freshened, and often came ins258 CONCUSSION. [chap. v.squalls. A little past 8 h the disturbance reachedthe ship, bringing down the heavy bodiesto windward with a fearful pressure, ploughingup the small quantity of young ice alongside,and lifting other large fragments up to thechains, from the starboard quarter to thebow. During two hours and a half our situationwas exceedingly precarious, and it seemedevery moment as if the ship were makingher last struggle. For a few minutes she wasforced up by the ice fifteen feet forwards,and then thrust resistlessly astern. Hardlywas this over when the large pieces on the starboardside moved slowly forward, and the stillmore ponderous ones to windward closed at rightangles, thus subjecting her to the severest trial.All this time the bottom was continuallythumped and hammered by the huge calvesstruggling to get free, each blow shaking thewhole frame so violently as to be sensibly felt ondeck ; and, not knowing what the effect might bethehands were turned up and the sick dressed,to be ready for the worst. The thermometer atthe time was 25°— , and the weather decidedlycold.By midnight there was a pause, and at l h a.m.March Gth, a relaxation on the starboard side,where two cracks had separated sufficiently toshow the water. The submerged masses, nowCHAP.V.] ICE HILLS. 25Qmore at liberty, sought release from their imprisonment; and finally, the ship freed by thesevarious secessions, righted. Still however thedisturbance continued, and at 3 h a. m. the iceagain closed with the same almost intolerablepressure. When daylight broke, the land wasdiscovered bearing from S. E. by E. to N. W.7} W., and apparently we had gone somewhatto the eastward. From what had occurred inthe last twelve hours a more than ordinarychange was expected, nor in vain ; for besidesseveral fresh barriers, masses of many tons' weightwere seen riding on the top of mounds whicheven before had been considered very high. Butthe most striking effect had been produced alongthe walled side of the shore ice, where, for severalmiles, actual hills fifty feet high had been thrownup. We were also nearer than before, but hopedthat the several considerable pieces which yetinterposed, would, for some time, perhaps entirely,prevent our being driven on the land. At 9 h 30 ma. m. as the tide turned, we of course suffered,but not materially as compared with what hadjust passed, and up to noon all was tolerablyquiet. The wind was still north, the barometer30.37, thermometer at 21° — , difference in thesun 14°. Latitude 64° 12' N. and longitude 81°16' W. At l h 45 m p. m. the ice ceased its driftto the N. W., and after some cracking alongside,s Q260 ANXIETY. [Chap, Vat £ h p. m. it set at the rate of between two andthree miles an hour to the S. E. The barometerindicated further rise, and therefore fine weather ;but though clear overhead it grew misty aboutthe horizon as the sun went down ; and the breezefreshening in squalls brought a proportionatepressure from the entire body to windward, whichcaused much straining and cracking on the larboardside and quarter. The ice too alongsideand near became agitated, occasioning considerableannoyance. On this day of the new moon,indeed, such effects were to be expected, but ourfear was that, having commenced earlier than wasexpected, they betokened something more seriousafterwards. Our anxiety for there is no becomingindifferent to this kind of trial) lasted till 8 hp. m., during which interval we had drifted closerto the fearful looking wall of what was called theshore ice. About 9 h p. m. the ship suffered manyshocks and hard rubbing from afresh disturbance,and we should doubtless have been kept in astate of restlessness all night, had not a separationtaken place in a crack about fifty pacesfrom the ship, which allowed a lateral escape tothe pressure of the opposing parts.On the following day, March 7th, we were unusuallyquiet until 5 h a.m., when another commotionbegan, and again made the poor ship crack andtremble violently. This was accompanied by aCHAP. V.] FURTHER AGITATION. 26 1grinding and heavy thumping abaft under thelarboard counter, where I understood from theofficer of the watch, a very compact gallery, builton a solid mass, was forcing itself underneath andlifting the ship over. Going on deck, I foundshe had risen two or three feet, and was certainlysuffering under severe pressure. Meantimeshe was carried by the ice rapidly to theS. E. We had the land more broad on the bow,and could clearly distinguish the farthest pointahead from the deck ; but we were not, as Ithought, nearer the wall, which however wasvery distinct, and perpendicular as well as high.Hitherto it had been supposed to be attached tothe land ; but Mr. Green, the ice mate, nowdetected the movement of an inner body, by accidentallyseeing two hummocks cross each other,the outer one steady, the inner one moving. Itwas evident, therefore, that we were at the edgeof the strongest set of the current and tides, and,could we have been divested of other anxieties,were perhaps in the very best situation for gettingearly into open water. After a tranquil day, theship setting backward and forward with the tideas before, at 5 h 50 m p. m, she was thrown up threeinches higher than before. This was the beginningsofa series of strange and unaccountable convulsions,which to any less fortified ship would assuredlyhave proved fatal. The northerly and N. N. E.s 3£62 APPALLING SHOCKS. [CHAP.V.fresh breezes which had brought the ice downfor more than three hundred and sixty miles,had fallen calm, and given way to a more westerlyand very light air ; an interval too of morethan twelve hours had elapsed to check the impetusso given, and it was, therefore, reasonable toconclude that no impediment would occur to apeaceable progress. In this, however, we werecruelly deceived. From 6 h p. m. ominous rushingsounds were heard far off to the north eastand north west. These gradually drew nearer,as the flood made its way either under the compactbodies that withstood the shock, or alongthe cracks and openings — gaining in these lattera furious velocity, to which every thing seemed toyield. It happened that there were several ofthese around the ship ; and, when they openedon us like so many conduits pouring their contentsto a common centre, the concussion wasabsolutely appalling, rending the lining andbulkheads in every part, loosening some shoresor stanchions, so that the slightest effort wouldhave thrown them down, and compressing otherswith such force as to make the turpentine oozeout of their extremities. One fir plank placedhorizontally between the beams and the shores,actually glittered with globules. At the sametime the pressure was going on from the larboardside, where the three heaviest parts of the ruinCHAP. V.] BOLTS, &C. LOOSENED. Q6oof the aloe remained, cracked here and there, butyet adhering in firm and solid bodies. These ofcourse were irresistible ; and after much groaning,splitting, and cracking, accompanied by soundslike the explosion of cannon, the ship rose fore andaft, and heeled over about 10° to starboard. Onsounding the well there appeared a trifling increaseof water, amounting in the day to c l\inches, a proof that she was loosened. Belowindeed, during the pressure, a part of the bulkheadof the steward's room had fallen out into the aftercockpit ; while three of the lower deck beamseighteen inches square, abreast of the larboardfore chains, had been lifted half an inch from theshelf-piece : the bolts that fastened them weredrawn a quarter of an inch, and several treenailsalso were much loosened. Even when theweather became calm the agitation of the ice didnot subside, but continued up to midnight, assailingthe ship with almost unremitted violence.Nor on the following day, 8th March, was theremuch abatement; and at 7 h a.m. the ice closed, andagain straining the ship, raised her several incheshigher, making in the whole four feet three inches.A light air was now blowing from the S. W.which was nearly off shore, but wedged as thevessel now was we could scarcely expect toescape all annoyance. In fact, not a hole ofwater was visible from the mast-head \ and, withs 4264 FLIGHT OF BIRDS. [CHAP.V.the ice so jammed in every part, it must haverequired an astonishing impetus in the first instanceto make the effects felt so far. Nothingindeed but a current from the north co-operatingwith the tide, could in my opinion possibly havebrought about such a result. We had decidedlygone more towards the outer point, which, evenwhen thrown up by refraction as all the landwas, appeared too low to answer the descriptionof high coast given by Captain Lyon asforming the Seahorse Point of Button. The landformerly called the blue bluff was now nearlyabeam, and appeared, as well as the snow permittedme to judge, to be composed of rocks, insome of which were gullies. It seemed the easternentrance to the Inlet, Strait, or Bay frequentlyalluded to before ; and receding from it furthersouth and east, the land bending in a semi-lunarform terminated in two bold and tolerably highhills, which are perhaps the most remarkablealong the whole coast as far as Cape Bylot.Their dome-like summits assumed a more angularoutline as we altered the bearings, andthe coast had some bays and cliffs. A noveltypresented itself in the shape of a flight of birds,supposed to have been dovekies, which were seenflying from the land towards the north, mostlikely in search of open water. At noon theblack thermometer was 36° + , the plain oneCHAP. V.] GALE. 2657° + , and the one in shade 14° — . At l h p. m.the blackened thermometer was as high as 41° + .The day passed quietly over, and at last, for thefirst time for many nights, I enjoyed the comfortof unloading myself from a stack of clothes.At noon of the 9th a visible progress had beenmade along the land, the south extreme of a highbluff bearing S. 38° W. The afternoon wasrather fine ; and though there was no perceptiblemotion on the surface, yet the two large piecesof ice opened apart almost athwart the stern,and within only a few paces from it. Thiswas done quietly, and directly against the forceof the wind ; but when the ship began to set tothe S.E., as she did at a little past 4 h p. m., theyclosed again, occasioning a strain upon thelarboard quarter. From that time the breezefreshened rapidly from the Nee., a point fromwhich it was least desired, as it brought thewhole force of the windward ice against thebroadside. At 7 h 30 m p.m. there was a stronggale, and squalls in quick succession, drivingthe low scud over the young moon with greatvelocity. The natural accompaniments werenot remote, and soon announced in gratingsounds their impetuous and destructive march.I beheld two enormous masses, one of whichhad hitherto resisted every attack to thrust itfrom its place, hurled onward across the stern,266 TREMENDOUS HUBBUB. [CHAP.V.in a line for the shore ice, which there seemedlittle prospect with such a gale of long avoiding.The ship cracked and shook violently, and nolonger able to offer direct resistance rose severalinches. It was a boisterous and restless night,passed in wearisome listening to the incessantcrashing, which, for aught known to the contrary,indicated the final dissolution of our hope andstronghold, the floe. The hubbub at lengthreached its climax. A hollow grinding, as fromthe onward motion of some vast body, camelouder and louder on the ear, and, speed andsound increasing as it approached, finally burstwith deafening fury on the ship, causing suchfearful cracks and ominous trembling, that allwaited the result in painful suspense. A littlemore and she must go ! What of human constructioncould withstand the violence of suchan onset ! Still she continued to rise as thepressure increased. In an instant it ceased, andall was still as death.After midnight, March 10th, the wind veeredmore to the north, blowing heavily in squalls ;and, in the north-west circle of the heavens, abeautiful meteor was seen shooting athwart thesky in an elliptic course, with a brilliant paleblue light. After this we were indulged with afew hours of repose, but from 4 h to 8 h a. m. wewere again disturbed, and again listened withCHAP. V.] SET OF ICE. 267anxiety to the severe complaining of our excellentship. On examination, the proper officerfound that she had been lifted up forward threeand a half feet, and one and a half abaft. Noinjury, beyond an indentation from the pressure,could be detected outside, and with the exceptionof two or three trifling leakage in theupper deck, there had been no mischief below.During the remainder of the day nothing materialoccurred. The ship was set backwards andforwards with the tide along the mural edgeof the in-shore ice, still advancing towards theS.E., but more slowly to-day in consequence ofthe course of the wind along the elbow of the wall.About 9 h 30 m p. m. there was an easing of theice from the sides, and a free space created ofthree feet on one, and nearly two on the otherside, whereby the ship was allowed to slide a littleastern and come more upright.We were favoured with a tranquil night, andon March 11th, after a slight commotion, thewhole body set fast to the S. E. At ll h 40 m a. m.this ceased, and at noon again set N. W. By thebearing of the land we had gone a little to theeastward. Though there was not much changein the ice inside of us, that to seaward certainlylooked less high than formerly, while the reactionwhich had made the whole body thereabouts easeout, indicated open water to the north. Indeed268 NAUTICAL ARTISTS. [CHAP.V.the fact of our being driven to this distance fromFrozen Strait, explains at once how it was thatSir E. Parry saw so much open water off WinterHarbour. In all probability it was at this verymoment equally free from all but young ice, asthe prevalent winds would have cleared it fromevery more solid impediment. At l h p. m. theblack thermometer was 43° + . The ice continuedperfectly still, and the day being fine, someof the men amused themselves by cutting outfigures from blocks of snow, bringing them asthey were finished within a few feet of the starboardbow, and depositing them on a smoothpiece of solid ice for exhibition. The oddity ofthe grouping provoked a smile. The most conspicuousfigure was that of a female, favoured witha most liberal allowance of bust, arms akimbo, avery slender waist, great deficiency of hips, andlegs deplorably curtailed. Injustice however tothe delicacy of the artist, it ought to be observedthat the limbs were supposed to be enveloped inastraight tight gown, ornamented with a fringedapron falling so low as to disclose only the substantialfeet and still more substantial ankles.Grouped around this principal personage, werevarious little boys in hats and trowsers ; houses,forts, vessels; and a heavy piece of ordnance,doubtless intended as the symbol and guaranteeof her sovereignty. She was attended, moreover,CHAP. V.] TURMOIL. 209I should rather perhaps say guarded, by a sort offierce wolf dog, which amidst all changes maintainedits post by its mistress's side. I encouragedthis humour of the men, glad to perceive thattheir minds were free enough from care to indulgein it. Indeed the first warmth of the sun and thetranquillity of the ice had dispelled the notion ofimmediate danger, and the light-hearted sailorsyielded to their feelings and enjoyed the hourwhile it lasted.After 6 h p. m. the tide set towards the S. E.,and notwithstanding the calmness of the weatherand the decreasing flow and ebb, there were atlong intervals, distant sounds, that portendednothing favourable. As these increased in strengthand rapidity, the various cracks and openings nearus gradually drew closer, but without squeezingthe ship. At length, after many rushes and manysudden pauses, the larger remnants of the floe toseaward came slowly nearer, preceded by ruinswhich, though insignificant as compared withwhat had been, were still massy enough to makea fearful clamour as they were sunk beneath andwedged against the ship's bottom. At this time(past 9 h p. m.) she showed symptoms of sufferingin the hull, which was evidently undergoing asevere ordeal. Inexplicable noises, in which thesharp sounds of splitting and the harsher onesof grinding were most distinct, came in quick270 INTENSE SUSPENSE. [CHAP.V.succession, and then again stopped suddenly,leaving all so still that not even a breath washeard. In an instant the ship was felt to riseunder our feet, and the roaring and rushingrecommenced with a deafening din alongside,abeam, and astern, at one and the same instant.Alongside, the grinding masses held the shiptight as in a vice ; while the overwhelming pressureof the entire body, advancing from the west,so wedged the stern and starboard quarter, thatthe greatest apprehensions were entertained forthe sternest and frame-work abaft. Some ideaof the power exerted on this occasion may begathered from this : — At the moment which I amnow describing, the forepart of the ship was literallyburied as high as the flukes of the anchorsin a dock of perpendicular walls of ice, so thatin that part she might well have been thoughtimmovable. Still, such was the force applied toher abaft, that after much cracking and perceptibleyielding of the beams, which seemed tocurve upwards, she actually rose by sheer pressureabove the dock forward, and then with suddenjerks did the same abaft. During these convulsionsmany of the carpenters, and others stationedbelow, were violently thrown down on the deckas people are in an earthquake. It was a momentof intense suspense ; and to avoid confusion,the hands were called, and the officersCHAP. V.] SHIP STRAINED. 271with their respective crews stationed at theirboats, ready for lowering and securing them onthe larger parts of the floe. All this was doneby the first Lieutenant, under my inspection,with the utmost coolness and promptitude ; andthus prepared, we waited the result. Heaven,however, again protected us, and at ll h p. m. allwas in dead repose.An examination for the purpose of ascertainingwhat injury had been sustained wasimmediately commenced by clearing the bread-room; and, so far as our compact and heavycargo would permit the inspection (for wewere afraid to move it lest the solidity andmeans of resistance should be weakened below),little was detected on the larboard side andright aft. But on the other, at eight feetfrom the round of the quarter, one of thestringers, nine inches thick, was found severelysplit, though the extent of the mischief couldnot be seen, owing to the diagonal doublingacross it. Four of the lower deck beams also hadbeen lifted from their pillars three-eighths of aninch. The well was sounded every five minutes,and at first we thought she did not leak \ but theunwelcome truth was forced upon us, when,from five to ten inches were reported. This wassoon cleared out, and subsequently she madeabout an inch and a half of water an hour. Itwas now, therefore, certain that the ship had272 DIVINE SERVICE. [ciIAP.V.been seriously strained ; and as it would benecessary for the future to inspect narrowly thecomplaining parts, I caused the bread, whichhad hitherto been stowed there, to be taken up,and placed, carefully covered over, on deck.March 12th. The ice began to set to theeastward, and at the dawn of day a narrow laneof water was descried ahead, extending northand south. On going outside, the ship was seenfairly lifted on the ice forward, and fearfullywedged up abaft. She was in fact four feeteight inches above her usual line of flotation.The ice was much pressed up at certain points,and closely jammed in all ; a circumstance easilyaccounted for by the fact, that as we were nearerthe mural ridge, this also had undergone achange in its outline : for though still, at unequaldistances, thrown up in smooth and perpendicularcliffs, terminated by peaked or jagged tops,there were spaces between these correspondingwith the rest of the crushed masses around.We fancied, moreover, that farther inshorethere was another similar ridge.We assembled at Divine Service as usual onSunday, and returned thanks for the protectionwhich had been so signally and mercifullyafforded us ; and in this, if I might judge fromthe earnest and devotional tone of the responses,there was no want of sincerity. Noon camepeacefully. We had undoubtedly advanced alongCHAP. V.] FIXING SHORES. TJ3the high land, and were bringing the lowerpoint ahead clearer into view. The weather wascalm: the latitude 64° 8' 30" N., and longitude81° 5' W.After midnight, March 13th, there was a commotionheard to the northward, but it did notextend to the ship, and again we had the luxuryof a quiet night. In the morning the ship wasfound to have settled down a few inches, although,with the exception of the tidal lane, there was noopen water in sight. One of the officers attendedby a couple of men attempted to reach the shoreto the eastward, but after a rather tedious walkof two or three hours, he found so much interruptionfrom narrow but open cracks leadinginto the principal lane, that he halted. He hadseen the fresh tracks of an enormous bear.About 8 h 30 m p. m. I heard a faint rush underthe stern, and from that time until midnightthere was considerable under pressure, which,with occasional cracking, in that part especially,raised the vessel up an inch or two more. Findingthat, notwithstanding the shores which hadbeen fixed in the bread-room and elsewhere,there was still an immense strain fore and aft, wedetermined on increasing the number, and forthat purpose immediately selected the best andfittest spars on board. Thrown up and nippedas we were under the resistless action of three274 GENERAL ORDER. [CHAP.V.hundred miles of drift ice, it was obvious thatif any thing did happen, it would be as suddenas in all probability it would be serious ; and Itherefore issued a general order to the officers incharge of the boats, to the following effect : thatwhenever it should be considered necessary tolower the boats, they were to see them firstremoved far enough from the ship's sides toavoid accidents from any motion which mightbe going on, and, if there were time, to lightenthem of the stores always kept there ; they werethen to be hauled to separate pieces of thelargest ice, and placed, together with the stores,in temporary safety. The invalids (if the casewere urgent) were to be taken care of by thecrews to which they severally belonged, and themedical officers were to see that such coveringsand protection from the weather were providedthem as the pressure of circumstances mightpermit. A man was to be left in charge of eachboat and cargo ; after which, the officers and theirrespective mates and crews were to return onboardand make their reports to me.On the 14th March the barometer continuedto fall, and the wind increased to a fresh gale,accompanied by snow and much drift. At intervals,indeed, the ship was quiet, but morefrequently cracked and strained, in a mannerthat showed how severely she was suffering.■HC=5voM"':F■FJfaFJ-~-T--:«air^=d(=3"asn0)VCHAP. V.] HEAVY WEATHER. Tj5This was more particularly felt in the after cockpitand bread-room ; and four more shores, withdiagonal bracing from the stringers to the orlopbeams, were fixed up. The ice was too close toget soundings, and the weather too misty fromsmall snow to allow the land to be seen, orobservations to be got. We seemed, however,very little nearer the mural edge. At noon thewr ind was N.N.E., squally, and at times blowinga gale. The thermometer (air) 3° — . Almostimmediately after there was a visible motionahead of the ship, and the ice then began toset slowly to the westward. At 2 h 30 m p. m.the weather cleared enough to allow of our seeingthe land, a point of which bore S. 22° E.,while the centre of the blue buff was S. 62° W.The gale continued unabated, blowing very hardinsqualls, with occasional lulls. A little after7 h p. m. the advancing ice began to press hardupon and underneath the stern and quarter,causing considerable cracking fore and aft. Nomotion, however, could be detected at the surface,For the following four hours the pressure at timeswas alarmingly severe, lifting up the lower-deckbeams three-eighths of an inch, and twice throwingdown all the upright shores. After this hadpassed, the ice was forcibly driven to the eastward,and though we were never entirely freefrom pressure, yet the cracking sounds were nott 22J6 BLOWS A GALE. [CHAP.V.so loud. March 15th. — The ship seemed sufferingmuch below, though again no motion wasperceptible from the deck on the surface of theice. The leak also had slightly increased.In the morning the weather was still thick andmisty with the same sort of small snow, resemblingthe sort of spray or congested vapour experiencedwhen to leeward of open water; thegale continuing to blow hard in squalls. Thatwe should make some advance, therefore, was notsurprising ; but, considering the extreme closenessof the ice, no one certainly had expected to seetheship not far from the low point which formedthe eastern extreme of yesterday. Such, however,was the irresistible power urging the entirebody forwards, that we were now actually withinfour miles of the low land on the beam ; andfrom 8 h a. m. the ice drove rapidly along thisshelving beach, composed, apparently, of coarsegravel and stones. No rocks were seen. It wasof importance to get soundings, but after a forenoon'strial, and with the loss of ice chisels, &c,the utter impossibility of cutting through theundertakers of ice, compelled us to abandon theattempt. Near the shore the ice was thrown up insome places from twenty to thirty feet ; and themural line, which had for a space disappeared,here began again and stretched out to anotherlow point almost ahead. As we rounded theAjtt ■ ' f VK:^"-: *- . &•.:;.'.£,'^■*a©•«Flip1JPsw■ a tS 13stICHAP. V.] TREMENDOUS RUSH. 077curve of the land the pressure and strain wereviolent on the larboard quarter and bow, forcingthe ship upon the ice, and raising her so much asto bring the eleven feet water mark in sight foreand aft. Several rushes succeeded and lifted herup more by the stern, again raising the beamsand causing a severe strain on the diagonal shores.The whole of the ice continued to set eastward,producing in its progress a jerking motion as itwas checked by the shore ice and the land. Atnoon the weather was misty, with the wind blowingfresh in squalls from N. W. by N. : barometer29. 17» always falling; latitude observed 64°. 9 N.Up to this day, however anxious, we wereyet safe ; but we were now destined to witnesstrials of a more awful kind. While we weregliding quickly along the land — which I mayhere remark, had become more broken androcky, though without attaining an altitude ofmore than, perhaps, one or two hundred feet —at l h 45 ra p. m. without the least warning, aheavy rush came upon the ship, and, with a tremendouspressure on the larboard quarter, boreher over upon the heavy mass on her starboardquarter. The strain was severe in every part,though from the forecastle she appeared to bemoving in the easiest manner towards the landice. Suddenly, however, a loud crack was heardbelow the mainmast, as if the keel were brokent 3278 IMMINENT PERIL. [CHAP.V.or carried away ; and simultaneously, the outerstern post from the ten feet mark was split down toan unknown extent, and projected to the larboardside upwards of three feet. The ship was thrownup by the stern to the seven and a half teet mark ;and that damage had been done was soon placedbeyond doubt by the increase of leakage, whichnow amounted to three feet per hour. Extrapumps were worked, and while some of the carpenterswere fixing diagonal shores forward,others were examining the orlops and other parts.It was reported to me by the first Lieutenant,Master and carpenter, that nothing could bedetected inside, though apprehensions were entertainedby the two former, that some seriousinjury had been inflicted. In spite of the commotion,the different pieces of our floe still remainedfirm ; but being unable to foresee whatmight take place in the night, I ordered the twocutters and two whale boats to be lowered down,and hauled with their stores to places consideredmore secure ; this was accordingly done, thoughnot under two hours and a half, even with theadvantage of daylight. The ship was still settingfast along shore and much too close to the fixedice ; but it was not till past h p. m. that any suspiciousmovement was noticed near us: then,however, a continually increasing rush was heard,which at 10 b 45 m r. m. came on with a heavyCHAP. V.] ANOTHER HUSH. #79roar towards the larboard quarter, upturning inits progress and rolling onward with it an immensewall of ice. This advanced so fast, thatthough all hands were immediately called, theyhad barely time, with the greatest exertion, toextricate three of the boats, one of them, in fact,being hoisted up when only a few feet from thecrest of the solid wave, which held a steadycourse directly for the quarter, almost overtoppingit, and continuing to elevate itself until abouttwenty-five feet high. A piece had just reachedthe rudder slung athwart the stern, and at themoment, when, to all appearances, both that anda portion at least of the frame work were expectedto be staved in and buried beneath theruins, the motion ceased ; at the same time thecrest of the nearest part of the wave toppled over,leaving a deep wall extending from thence beyondthe quarter. The effect of the whole wasa leak in the extreme run, oozing, as far as couldbe ascertained, from somewhere about the stern-post.It ran in along the lining like a rill forabout half an hour, when it stopped, probablyclosed by a counter pressure. The other leakscould be kept under by the incessant use of onepump.Our intervals of repose were now very short ;for at 12 h 50 m a.m., March 1 6th, another rushdrove irresistibly on the larboard quarter astern rt 4280 THE CRISIS. [CHAP.V.and forcing the ship ahead raised her up on theice. A chaotic ruin followed ; our poor andcherished court yard, its wall and arched doors,gallery, and well-trodden paths, were rent, andin some parts ploughed up like dust. The shipwas careened fully four streaks, and sprung aleak as before. Scarcely were ten minutes left usfor the expression of our astonishment that anythingof human build could outlive such assaults,when at l h a. m. another equally violent rushsucceeded ; and in its way towards the starboardquarter threw up a rolling wave thirtyfeet high, crowned by a blue square massof many tons, resembling the entire side of ahouse, which, after hanging for some time indoubtful poise on the ridge, at length fell with acrash into the hollow, in which, as in a cavern,the after part of the ship seemed imbedded. Itwas indeed an awful crisis, rendered more frightfulfrom the mistiness of the night and dimnessof the moon. The poor ship cracked and trembledviolently ; and no one could say that thenext minute would not be her last and, indeed,his own too, for with her our means of safetywould probably perish. The leak continued,and again (most likely as before, from counter-pressure)the principal one closed up. When allthis was over, and there seemed to be a chanceof a respite, I ordered a double allowance of pre-chap.V.] COMMOTION SUBSIDES. 281served meat, &c. to be issued to the crew, whoselong exposure to the cold rendered some extrastimulant necessary. Until 4 h a. m. the rushesstill kept coming from different directions, butfortunately with diminished force. From thathour to 8 h a. m. every thing was still and the icequite stationary, somewhat to the westward ofthe singular point, terminating as it were in aknob, which was the farthest eastern extremeyesterday. We certainly were not more thanthree miles from the barren and irregular landabeam, which received the name of Point Terror.To this was attached a rugged shelf of what forthe time might be called shore ice, having at itsseaward face a mural ridge of unequal, thoughin many parts, imposing height, certainly notless than from fifty to sixty feet. Such had beenthe diminution of our nucleus, that the shipwas now within four hundred yards of the waterline of demarcation between the floe and theland ice.I was naturally anxious to ascertain as far aspossible the amount of damage received; and, oninspecting the outside of the ship with the firstLieutenant and carpenter, we saw that the fore-footwas completely exposed, the ship having beenliterally lifted up on the surface of the same ice,which had formerly, as I have said, imbedded herup to the flukes of the anchors. How far she was282 CREW IN COUNCIL. [cHAP.V.from the water's edge could not be ascertained,though it was seen from the marks, that she washeaved up seven feet abaft, whilst on deck theascent in walking forward was considerable.The larboard side was found to be flattened andindented in such a manner, as to make it probablesome injury had been sustained about thetimbers near the line of flotation, in a directionsix or eight feet from the main channels forward,and the quarter on the same side was bolsteredup as high as the afraid by one of the largestfloe pieces, which pressed severely on one ofher weakest points. These appearances withthe facts of the damaged stern post and theleaks, raised a doubt in my mind, how far theship might be trustworthy when the ice shouldslacken off sufficiently to let her down to herbearings ; and, though every precaution had beenadopted with respect to the provision, &c. ondeck, which was ready to be thrown on the iceupon any sudden emergency, and other preparationshad been made for the worst ; yet, wheninstead of the ice remaining, as we had ferventlyhoped, stationary, it began again to movein a body to the eastward, and there was everyreason to expect during the night a similar visitationto that of yesterday ; I thought it myduty to collect the opinions of the officers, theice mate, and some of the leading men, who hadCHAP. V.] THEIR OPINIONS. 283had much experience among ice. They agreedthat a light boat with provisions should, if possible,be landed, to serve as a last resource to communicatewith the Hudson's Bay Company'sFactory, in the event of the loss of the ship.Other opinions were also given, creditableto the good sense and firmness of those whouttered them ; and as the greater part of themcoincided with my own, I felt more comfortedand assured. All that could be done immediately,was to get on deck some more sails, with flourand other provisions, and one of the cuttershaving been removed to a firmer piece of ice,the two whale boats were again hoisted up forgreater security. In the meantime we were rapidlysetting to the eastward, and by noon hadpassed the point, and opened another line ofhigher and more hilly coast, with ranges aboveand beyond the land forming the beach. Thecrew were now put on full allowance of provision.The weather continued misty, with abundanceof small snow : the top of the highest land insightwas S. 63° W. ; latitude 6i° 4' ; wind N.W. by W., fresh at times ; barometer, 2Q. 25,thermometer enduringthe remainder of the day there wassome disturbance, not very material, and inthe evening we appeared to be crossing a bayand nearing higher land ahead. During the284 st. Patrick's day. [chap. v.night rushing noises were occasionally heardastern and to the north, and though these onceor twice intimated their approach by some suspicioussharp cracks, yet we reached the morningof the 17th without serious molestation.The wind then came all at once from S. E. by S.nearly ahead, bringing with it a load of vapourymist, small snow and drift. The land was notvisible, but it was evident we had got muchnearer to the edge of tidal ice ; for several well-markedhummocks, which had been our companionsfor months and weathered out everygale, had in the comparative stillness of lastnight disappeared altogether, taking with themvery liberal portions of the surrounding ice.The wind had the effect of setting us slowlyto the westward, and though it graduallydrew ahead, yet there was no squeezing of theice, and St. Patrick's day was one of comparativeenjoyment ; nor in the midst of our owndisasters did we forget to wish all prosperity tothe " Gem of the Sea." The only drawbackwas the incessant clanging of the pump, whichwas still found indispensable to keep the shipclear from water. Meantime there was nolack of employment, especially on the outside,where a large party with pickaxes, ice chiselsand shovels were fast reducing the bulk of thetowering wave that propped up the stern. To-chap,v.] COAST. 285wards evening a lane of water opened not farfrom us towards the shore, which, however, soonclosed, and the night set in beautifully clear andtranquil.At daylight of the 18th the coast line was distinctlytraced from S.E. by E. \ E. to W. by N.,the nearest land abeam being about four or fivemiles distant. The character of the country wasnow shelving, with hills of moderate altitude ; onthe regular and apparently even summits of whichwere isolated cones, and other steep and roundedhills, totally covered with snow. Extending tothe eastward the appearances were similar ; only,that over a point, and something to the south ofit, was a distant range of high mountainous land,answering the description of that about SeahorsePoint, from which we were now not thirty milesdistant. We experienced, moreover, that peculiarlykeen cold against our faces, known by theterm of the " barber," which must have comefrom the eastward, as the lane of water was allbut closed. At 7 h a. m. a slight rushing noisewas heard to seaward, and more faintly alongside.The ice was then setting slowly to the westward,and about ll h 10 m a.m. a second weak rush justreached us, and the motion stopped. At 2 h 30 mp. m. the ice began to set slowly to the eastward,and from its closeness to the wall made a lowgrinding noise. For the rest of the day it conesCALM WEATHER. [CHAP.V.tin lied quiet; but the wind being very light fromthe westward, a faint disturbance was heard inthe first watch, supposed to arise from an attemptof the ice to open a little.March 19th. The same sounds, but moredistinct, were audible more or less frequentlyuntil the forenoon, and sometimes they wereaccompanied by rushes that set every one on thealert. Indeed, on looking minutely round, afew fresh cracks were discovered, and we wereobviously much nearer to the tidal lane, orrather wall, the interval between the two bodiesof ice not exceeding two feet, though how thishad happened we were somewhat puzzled tounderstand. There was much frost smoke risingfrom small cracks around, which rendered theland rather indistinct. After 8 h a. m. we driftedwest again, with rather an accelerated motion.Divine service w 7 as not omitted, and at noon theweather was fine but cold, out of the sun, thethermometer in the shade being 20°—. Atl h 30 m p. m. the ice commenced setting to theeastward, the wind then being light from theland. Soon after 4 h there was a small lane oropening between the ship and the wall ; andabout the same time a great noise was heard inthe direction of the starboard bow. Everythingwas again quiet by midnight, when thewind veered to the south.CHAP. V.] ICE SETS EASTWARD. 287March 20th. As the tide changed a grindingsound was produced along the mural edge, andat broad daylight, though there was a very hazyatmosphere, occasioned by the frost smoke, wecould see that there was a lane of icy water halfa mile broad, separating the sea from the landice, and that it extended in a direction northwestand south-east as far as the eye could reach.A little past 7 h a. m., when the tide made to thewestward, it grew narrower ; and, on a nearerinspection, we found we were getting continuallycloser, in consequence of pieces streaming off atourboundary. On the other hand, the surfaceof the water became immediately covered withyoung ice, infinitely too thick to move a shipthrough. The people were employed in clearingaway the higher portions of ice thrown upalongside to starboard, as well as in stopping aleak over my cabin. At l h 15 m p. m. the ice setto the eastward, and during the latter part of theeday the bay ice increased very fast, from whenceit was concluded that we were driving further offthe land, which the density of the frost smokeconcealed from view.March 21st. Many had been the forebodingsof what was to be expected from the coincidenceof the full moon with the equinoctial day ; yetnothing more had occurred than a fresheningbreeze from S. by W., which drove us easily off,288 PLEASANT TEMPERATURE. [CHAP.V.or backwards and forwards, along the coast.The latter was still obscured by frost smoke,which rose in dense clouds from the ever-shiftingblack lanes of water, instantly converted, onthe least cessation from action, into firm bay ice.The sensation was that of intense cold, when exposedto the breeze charged with frozen vapour,but the temperature was not only bearable, buteven pleasant, when under the lee of ice, and opento the warmth of the sun. Our cutters were stillon the floe pieces, for the ship remained preciselyin the position into which she had been thrownon the night of the 15th, and one pump wasquite equal to keep her dry; but as it was uncertainwhen she might come upright by the easingaway of the ice which bound and poised her up,I had every thing in readiness to hoist them tothe davits, and to set additional pumps at workwithout a moment's delay. About 10 h a. m. aglimpse was caught of the land ; but as only thelower part was discernible, the precise whereaboutscould not be determined. Neither holes norvapour were seen to the north-east. At noon, itcould not be ascertained in which direction theice was setting, so great was the haze. Thebarometer had risen to the height of 30. 58.Wind south, moderate. Thermometer 10° — ,and in the sun 11°-|-.This was the day for the examination of theCHAP. V.] HEALTH. 289crew ; and I was much gratified to learn fromDoctor Donovan's report that, with the exceptionof the three on the sick list, who werethemselves improving, the rest were in a fairstate of health, notwithstanding the lamenesswhich still, though without pain, oppressed someof them. To occupy the crew they were desiredto remove the mounds and other irregularheaps of ice round the ship, and to dig downbelow the bows. The forefoot being thus partiallycleared was found to be much worn away,and judging from the state of the bolts, wasconsidered to have received considerable injury.The ice which imbedded the starboard bow was,therefore, quickly cleared away ; and on a nearerinspection, the carpenter recommended cuttingaway the protruding part of one bolt to prevent itscatching against the ice, and at the same timesuggested the propriety of placing some ironplates over that portion of the injured part whichwas out of the water. By evening this wasaccomplished ; two more plates, three feet fourinches long, and nine inches wide, being securedwith eighteen iron deck spike nails on the forefoot,immediately beneath the iron sheathing ofthe bow, which was all that, under existing circumstances,could be done. The keel could bejust felt at the length of an extended saw underwater; and the carpenter was always of opinionu290 SQUALLS. [CHAP.V.that it had received little or no damage. Therewas a great deal of frost smoke between us andthe land, and up to midnight all was tranquil.March 22d. At daylight we seemed fromthe bearing of a known hill, to have been setoff and rather along the shore to the eastward.As before, only black lines of open water appearedto windward, though the extent of bayice was evidently greater, and certainly at thenearest part, not more than four or five hundredyards from the ship, which, however, fortunatelycontinued fixed in the same position. Duringthe forenoon we drifted westerly, and again in theafternoon slowly to the eastward ; the conicalhill at 3 h 30 ra , bearing S. 31° W. About 8 h p. m.the wind gradually drew more to the east, andbegan to blow fresh in squalls with every appearanceof a gale ; but subsequently, March unsettledat south-east, and moderated. The ice hadagain set to the westward, with no other alterationthan that of causing several lanes in the bayice. Up to noon, all was quiet. The weather todaywas warm enough, with the thermometer at10° + in the shade, and 32° + in the sun, even to beoppressive ; the blackened thermometer was ashigh as 39°+ • In walking to the bay ice, someof the officers saw the fresh track of a bear notvery far from the ship. We had drifted so muchoff shore, and in the afternoon more particularly,CHAP. V.] LUNAR HALO. £0,1had gone so far to the north west, that at h p. m.the blue bluff seen on the 11th, was in sight, andthe fact of an opening between it and the nearestland of Point M'Clure, being now evident, it wascalled Gore Island. The high hills too, whichwere noted about the same time, were equallyvisible, and proved to be the same, the principalof which we had hitherto been calling the ConicalHill, but now distinguished by the name ofMount Minto, after the first Lord of the Admiralty,and which every one had considered tobe quite distinct from those that had been passed.At our first station two rather deep bays wereclearly made out, with low land to seaward, andhere the low land was somewhat nearer to usthan the high ; so that, although it was impossibleto discern whether there was any ice between thetwo, I am not certain that the former may notbe islands stretching out from the latter. Asnight drew on the wind got round to the N. E.,by which means the pack that inclosed the shipbecame detached in one or two places from themore seaward body, causing a lane of water toappear. On the other hand, we commencedgoing eastward, slantingly towards the shore.March 24th. There was a prismatic lunar halowith paraselenae. In the morning we were moreto the eastward, but began to retrograde at 10 h .By noon we had drawn closer to the land, andu 2292 SUSPICIOUS Cracking. [CIIAP.V.were evidently ploughing up the intervening bayice. About 7 h 30 m p. m. a slight noise was heardon both quarters, the wind then having got moreto the westward, from which however it subsequentlychanged to N. E. with light snow.A faint glimpse was caught of the aurora in thesame quarter. March 25th the body of ice againmoved easterly, and at daylight, some suspiciouscracking was audible to seaward ; while the widelane of bay ice, which had intervened betweenour pack and that fixed to the shore, was nowdiminished to three hundred yards of squeezedup pieces, which, for the present, served as afender against the wall along shore. The weatherwas too thick to make out objects distinctly ; butfrom the appearance of the nearest land, weseemed to have almost reached the place fromwhich we were blown off when the southerlywind came. A crack in one of the remaininglarge pieces was detected during the forenoon ;and, in the early part of the afternoon, the ice toseaward of the crack on the quarter began toopen out a little, allowing us to get soundings,which were found in sixty-four fathoms, on a bottomof gravel, consisting of grey granite and smallparticles of limestone. The snow which fell afew hours afterwards, was of a soft and flaky kind,different from any we had seen since the autumn,and betokening, as we hoped, a southerly wind.CHAP. V*] SNOW. 293In the evening two more narrow openings wereobserved ; the one about a hundred paces fromthe larboard bow, which it crossed, joining theprincipal lane along shore ; the other a littlefarther astern, stretching out to the N. N. E.,where it ran into the one on the quarter. Theseseparations were the more remarkable, as thewind latterly had been from the north and east,and might have been expected, therefore, to bindthe ice against the shore. However, as we were atno great distance from Hudson's Straits, the iceeast of our position might have streamed away intothat opening, leaving the body behind it morespace for motion. The room thus made caused noparting of the heavy pieces, between which theship was lifted up, and notwithstanding a grindingnoise heard from the north, we did not alter ourposition in the least.March 26th. Small snow continued to fallthroughout the night ; and although when morningcame it was too thick to see the land, it wasevident we were setting to the eastward. Therewas an opinion that less water found its way intothe ship, but on ceasing to use the pump forforty-five minutes it was found that twelve incheshad accumulated. The men, however, were notkept so constantly at work as before, so thateither the leak was reduced, or they contrivedto throw more water out in a given time. Aboutu 3294 MISTS. [CHAP.V.noon soundings were obtained in ninety-fourfathoms, with a bottom of green mud, which implieda change of situation ; still the weatherwas so misty from small snow incessantly falling,that no land could be made out. The narrowlanes closed quietly. The temperature was 20° +at the north, and 29° + facing the south. About4 h p. m. the land was in sight from S. E. by S. toN. W., distant at the nearest part about threemiles. Nothing occurred during the night,beyond a slight rumbling of the ice to the eastabout the turn of the tide.March 27th. The weather was tolerably fine,though misty from the same cause as before.The land was barely visible. We were nowseparated only by a narrow breadth of bay icefrom the tidal wall, which was ground perfectlysmooth, curving very gently to a distant point ;and, on looking carefully at the shore ice, wewere delighted to observe the surface muchclearer and more free from points and inequalities.There certainly could not have been the samesort of grinding and confusion here, as we hadso lamentably experienced to the north-west.When Mount Minto bore S. S. W. |W., soundingswere found in one hundred and twentyfathoms, the ground being yellow mud, withsmall pebbles of felspar. A single raven flewround the ship, and again made for the landCHAP. V.] LANE AHEAD. 2Q«5whence it had come. Sunday afternoon, thebreeze veered a little to the south ; and as weset westward, the seaward body of ice drew off,so as to leave a perceptible channel within us.In the evening the weather became suddenlyovercast ; and the wind drawing round to thesouth, came first in gusts, then in heavy squalls,which, with the intelligence that a lane had openedahead, made me apprehensive of some suddenchange. The boats and stores, therefore, on eitherfloe were frequently visited, and scouts were sentto examine the cracks that on other occasions hadbeen known to open. At this time, however,they were closed. It may be here mentioned,that as soon as the gale had fairly set in thebarometer began to rise very rapidly, that is tosay, with a southerly ivied, in the same way thatit had often previously done with a northerly one.It varied in the ascending scale considerably inafew hours, and still continued to rise; nevertheless,the gale blew with much violencethrough 1 * the night, at the same time loweringthe temperature.March 28th. The ship cracked so as to inducean idea that she was easing down ; but, in allprobability, it was merely the effect of the galecoming full on her uplifted bulk, and causing herto shake at every squall. However, at break ofday our inclination was precisely the same, thoughu 4296 RE-STOWING. [CHAP.V.we were farther away from the land — a changewhich the proximity of the two icy boundariesyesterday had taught us to appreciate. Therewas still a mist hanging over objects in thatdirection ; but a dark gleam of water wasvisible, forming a part of the lane now muchencumbered with old pieces of ice, that musthave been detached from larger masses to theeastward. To seaward was still one unbrokenbody. In the forenoon the sky became clear, thewind having shifted to S. E. A few w T ell-definedclouds were remarked upon as a sight which hadnot for a long time been observed. Our deckswere naturally much lumbered from the storeof provisions which I considered it still necessaryto keep there ; but as the small snowwhich constantly fell was found to injure them,and particularly the bread, the whole was nowrestored, and covered well over w r with sails.As night drew on the wind again got round tothe N. E., and at intervals came in heavy squallswhich drove the ship fast towards the land.March 29th. The weather became morethreatening ; and in a short time a crackingnoise was heard to windward, accompanied by agrinding sound among the bay ice just within us.At 5 h a. m. the narrow lane about forty pacesastern suddenly opened from fifteen to twentyfeet, again partially closing a few hours after.CHAP. V.] ICE FLUCTUATES. #97The ship creaked more than usual from the forceof the breeze, indeed so much that it was thoughtpossible we might have set against the land ice ;and in truth, when daylight came, we were closerto the shore itself than at any other period. Butthe most extraordinary fact was, the great distancethat the ice had drifted, with the windabeam, to the westward ; for we now found ourselves,much against our wish, in the precisespot where we had been so roughly treated onthe night of the Loth. For a considerable intervalthe ice remained motionless, so far as thetide was concerned ; though on going to sound,which was done in sixty fathoms, the loose youngwas observed to rise and fall between theedges of the larger pieces as it would have donein a sea or swell. Afterwards for two hours anda half, the entire body set very slowly to theeastward, and then stopped. The wind wasN. N. E., and blew fresh in squalls : thermometer16° +, and in the sun 22° + . The nexttwenty-four hours nothing occurred worthy ofnotice ; and at noon of March 30th, the onlyalteration near the ship was in the lanes aheadand on the larboard quarter, which presented aconsiderably larger open surface. It was remarkedthat as one edge receded from the other, calvesand smaller pieces of old yellow ice emergedfrom beneath into the temporary free space.298 DOVEKIES. [CHAP.V.Our acquaintances, the ravens, paid us dailyvisits, and sometimes perched on the pinnacle ofthe most elevated hummock, apparently watchingthe movements of those on board. We exploredthe surface of the lanes for seals or other animals,but in vain, until a couple of curiouslyspeckled dovekies appeared playing about,though, from whence, no one could tell. Awish was expressed to shoot them, to which I —whom their lively motions and seeming enjoymentamused and gratified — was unwilling toaccede. The mottled plumage, however, wastoo great a temptation, and finally one of the officersset off to secure them ; he waited for sometimein ambush gazing at them, and hoping theywould come within shot, till at last wearied andcold, he was fain to relinquish the attempt. Inthe evening much snow fell, and two fresh holesof water appeared on the starboard quarter withina short distance of the ship.March 31st. The ice remained perfectly tranquilround the ship, though daylight showed agreater difference than had been noticed for along time. There were several lanes of openwater immediately surrounding our pack, whilenear the same places, but to seaward, wereholes and openings in various directions ; mostof them at right angles to the land. Inaddition to these, some of the waves of ice hadCHAP. V.] SEAL. 299eased down ; and to our no small astonishment,in one instance, no sooner had the ponderousmass fallen into the opening space, than a sealstarted up from beneath, in evident alarm.Up to noon, the wind being moderate from thewestward, the ice moved a little in the oppositedirection. Soundings were obtained in fifty-sixfathoms, having a hard bottom. The weatherwas always thick : thermometer 12°+ and 13°+;barometer 30. 31. All continued tranquil; andas the western tide made, the ice closed about thelanes, &c. turning our pack, and, consequently,the ship's head about three points more to thesouth.April 1st. The wind came from E. N. E., andabout 5 h a. m. the ship's head was veered more tothe west, almost dead on for the land ; the icethen moving slowly to the westward. Thechange in the weather was such as to thaw thesnow on the sails and housing, from whichwe beheld the novel sight of water dripping andrunning along the decks. And although therewas not the least alteration in the uncomfortableposition of the ship, yet it was gratifying to observethe pump less constantly in action, andstill more enlivening to behold the people clearingthe wet deck and removing the accumulatedrubbish of a winter's gathering. At 2 h p. m. thetemperature in the sun was 35° + , and 29° 5 tin300 MILD WEATHER. [CHAP.V.the shade ; and, such was the effect of the transition,that large well trodden cakes of ice adheringto the anchors and round the bows, whicha week before would have remained firm underthe blows of a sledge hammer, now peeled offwith little effort, enabling us entirely to clear theupper works. The breeze increased to a galeduring the night, and at one time a faint aurorawas visible in the N. W.During the 2d of April we were set ratherto the west tinder the influence of the easterlywind. In the night the wind veered to N.N.E.,and on the 3d, a slight commotion was heardto windward, but without result. At daylightseveral small holes of water were seen, and therewas a manifest diminution in the height of someof the waves and mounds, though in otherrespects the ice was perfectly close. Theweather continued overcast, though the temperaturewas 25° + and even 30 on the south side.A slight difference was perceptible on the hillsfrom the effect of the mild weather.The season was now rapidly advancing, andunder different circumstances I should havecommenced making the necessary preparationsfor more active employment. As it was, althoughthe ship remained cradled precisely as before,it was deemed prudent to caulk where therewas no strain from external pressure. Accord-chap.V.] CAULKING. 301ingle, the carpenters were set to work inboard,and some slight leaks on the quarter werestopped. The largest unbroken remnant ofour former floe, which lay between us and theshore on the starboard side, as yet had borneevery encounter ; but at 4 h p. m. to-day, withoutvisible cause adequate to such an effect, itsplit in two, and the parts opened out abouteighteen inches. The crack ran close to thecutter, which, together with the stores, wasquickly removed nearer the ship.On the following day, 4th April, the medicalofficer following up the system acted onthroughout the past winter, carefully inspectedthe whole crew ; and with the exception of twomen, before spoken of as still labouring underscorbutic symptoms, they were reported free frompositive illness and rapidly improving in appearance.In fact, the mild weather, though still generallybelow the freezing point, had produced avisible alteration for the better in all of us, Thiswas the night of the new moon ; and, rendered waryfrom the past, we could not entirely divest ourselvesof every anxiety, though there was nothingimmediately prognosticating further change.However, on the next day, April 5th, all was tranquil,and from daylight to 8 h a. m. the ship wascarried something more to the east than before,but the ice obeying the returning tide soon302 SOUNDINGS. [CHAP.V.retrograded. Much light snow had fallen ; andfor a short interval when the sun had power todart its rays through the misty atmosphere, itmelted at once, so that water was to be seenlodged in the hollows of the boats' coverings.Soundings were found in one hundred and thirtyfathoms. By 7 h p. m. we had passed two freshbarriers thrown up on the mural edge of theland ice, and at 8 h we were stationary, havingbeen set considerably farther to the eastwardthan at any former period since last August.April 6th. All was still quiet ; and when daybroke, it was seen that we had gained moreground to the eastward, being apparently driftedalong the tidal edge of the land ice, which hereaboutswas smoother than that more to the west.Unfortunately the land was obscured by a mist,but, from the faintness of the receding outline,it appeared to form a curved bay, across whichwe were setting to and fro with the variationsof the tide. In the evening we had nearedsome high land ; and at ll h 30 m a. m. soundingswere obtained in twenty-seven fathoms, whichwere the least we had yet found. At noon theweather continued misty, but a point of landbore S. 24° E., and a black mark on a distanthill N. 79° E. Wind N. by E., moderate. Thesun shortly broke through, and partly dispersingthe mist, showed us actually within a mile fromCHAP. V.] CURRENT OF ICE. 303the beach, where numerous huge fragments ofdilapidated floes were strewed about in confusion.They occupied the space lying betweenthe tidal edge and the land, and did not appearto have been of recent production. The densityof the atmosphere had deceived us in otherrespects also ; for that which, from its whitesmooth glare, had been set down for land ice,now turned out to be the even shelving side ofthe snow-clad coast. After 5 h p. m. a lane ofwater opened out on the larboard bow of theship, and this seemed to be the beginning of ageneral movement immediately around us ; forsoon after, the ice in every direction was evidentlyeasing down from those formidable ramparts intowhich it had been thrown, and settling into afreer space. We were at the time crossing thebend of a bay, and it was observed that the icewas set by the tide and current in a circle, as ifwithin the influence of an eddy ; but as this,from the straight line of bearing of the southernland, was scarcely probable, the effect may havebeen produced by the meeting of counter currentsfrom the north and south. Be the cause,however, what it might, we were in momentaryexpectation of seeing the two remaining floepieces on which we were partly poised, separate,so as to allow the ship to settle into the water ;especially, when the outer portion of the cracked304- PROSPECTS. [CHAP.V.floe, on the starboard side, suddenly partedfrom its better half, and glided mysteriouslyaway among the still rugged but looser fragmentsnear. But when our favourite look-out, whichwe had jestingly denominated Mount Pleasant,the faithful companion of our wanderings fromCape Bylot to this spot, staunch and unshakenamidst the crash and ruin which had surroundedit ; when this, too, departed, and became lostand indistinguishable amongst other peaks andhummocks, what could we look for but an utterdissolution of all the parts of our system ? Inspite, however, of all these defections, in spite ofupper or under current, spring or neap tide, forthe present we remained firm as a rock ; the onlyalteration being, that the direction of the ship'shead was exactly reversed, having been turnedround from the south to N.W. by W., in muchthe same manner as had been the case lastautumn at the western end of the island. Allthese things plainly demonstrated that the easternice was gradually drifting through Hudson'sStraits into the Atlantic, and making way forour liberation ; which I still sanguinely hopedwould take place, so as to enable me to carryinto effect some of the objects of the expedition.A narwhal was supposed to have beenseen in one of the adjoining lanes, and wasdescribed as being spotted, like those seen lastCHAP. V. 3 Perihelion. 305year. During the night there was repeatednoise among the ice ; but as it was rather that ofeasing down than the harsh grating of pressure,it did not much affect us. Twice we soundedin thirty fathoms, and about two miles off shorein twenty two fathoms, the bottom being composedof rock, shells, and mud.Daylight of the 7th showed that we hadalready gone and were still going rapidly to thesouth-east, along a hilly coast, apparently consistingof barren rocks with precipitous cliffs,based upon a low shelving slope, which passedimperceptibly into the shore ice ; both beingcovered with snow, and only distinguishable, insome places near the margin, by the black topsof protruding rocks. Here, then, was a totallydifferent formation from the smooth and roundedlow tract lately passed, and answered better tothe land about Seahorse Point.There was a beautiful perihelion for a shorttime, while a W. S. W. breeze was blowing:about a great quantity of small snow, but it soondisappeared. At noon the coast was distinctlyseen from S. E. £ S. to Mount Minto at W. ^ N.,terminating at the furthest east abruptly in abluff point. There was another bluff somethingnearer to us. In the afternoon lanes of wateropened out between us and the shore ; but asthe wind blew very fresh off the land, it onlyx306 sir j. Gordon's bay. [chap. v.bound us the more against the sea ice. As hetide changed, these places soon closed ; andagain at daylight, April 8th, opened muchwider than before. We drifted past the highpoint, which was then ascertained to be thenorth-western extremity of a fine open bay,called after Sir James Gordon ; which making asweep of about two miles, with a radius fromthree quarters to one mile, formed a secondpoint, and thence stretched to the farthest landin sight. Much frost smoke was rising from theopen water beyond this land ; and in consequenceof the mist it caused, we were unable tomake out satisfactorily whether two comparativelylow spots were continuous with the main coast,or islands off it. One fact, however, was beyondquestion, viz. that the land ended there ; and thatthe boundary, therefore, must be Sea Horse Point.Could the ship have been once freed fromher icy fetters, I should soon have set the matterat rest ; since the fresh gale of the night,combined with a favourable juncture of tide, hadso marvellously dispersed the inner, and indeedsome of the outer ice, that there was no otherimpediment sufficient to have prevented ourgetting entirely round it. As it was, I had nochoice but to remain quiet until nature shouldset us free ; satisfied for the present if I couldpurchase exemption from nipping. Every day,CHAP. V.] INVALIDS. 307however, the sun had more power, and anothermonth or six weeks might effect much. Myobject was to try the Welcome.A wind coming from the land at west, chilled usall; but the thermometer did not fall below 10° — :and as the wind veered more to the north it speedilyrose again. A couple of large seals were seen,but neither fish nor birds, notwithstanding theexpanse of water along the coast. At noon therewere soundings in fifty-eight fathoms, by whichtime there was scarcely any water to be seen,and the ship had considerably neared the land,being not more than two miles off. Though, asI before observed, our invalids generally continuedto improve, yet some of the numbercould not yet conquer the obstinate rigidity ofthe muscles of the leg. Of the two who remainedstill on the list, Alexander Young (whowas also the person first affected) was now in solow a state as to make his recovery extremelydoubtful — much to the regret of us all ; for hishappy disposition and steady conduct as gun-roomsteward had made him a favourite withthe officers, who left nothing undone to ministerto his comfort. Every thing on board favouredthe health of the crew ; for, since the adoptionof the funnels for carrying away the vapour, andstill more within the last ten days, during whichthe hatchways and fore scuttle had been thrownx 2308 RUSH OF ICE. [CHAP.V.open in the day-time, our lower deck had beenperfectly dry and pure. Until 8 h the ice wasquiet ; but about, that time, there being a lightwind blowing from the north, a low grinding washeard at the outer edge of the outer floe-piece,and soon after, the two or three holes of waterin that quarter closed up. The commotion wasfollowed at 10 h p. m. by a heavy rush of theseaward ice against the same piece, on which itnot only made encroachments, but shook itthroughout its whole dimensions so as to intimatethe effect on board by the short cracking of theafter part of the ship. Ultimately a barrier wasthrown up about eighteen feet high. It becameprudent, therefore, to secure the provisions andstores, which were alongside the cutters, and tohave the latter in readiness to hoist up ; since,notwithstanding the immense masses still appearingin every direction, there was not another pieceproper to receive them. Nothing further occurredat that time ; but when daylight came, on April 9th,the starboard floe-piece was found to be crackedin several parts. At 5 h a. m. the ice was settingto the east, and the temperature had fallento 26°—. However, at 8 h it had risen to 10° + .Shortly afterwards the seaward ice becameagitated, and ground so suspiciously against ourdiminishing territory, that it was consideredprudent to hoist up both the cutters. In theCHAP. V.] AGITATION CONTINUES. 309interim we continued to drift east, and beingalmost across Sir J. Gordon's Bay were unquestionablyfarther in that direction than at any timebefore. With the turn of the tide the directionof the drift changed as usual, and until 4 h p. m.we were setting rapidly to the west.April 10th. It was too obscure to see what wasgoing on ; but at 4 h 50 m the wind had got to thenorthward, and the ice commenced setting to theeast. The breeze increased rather more than wasdesirable, and the ice being extremely close packedbegan about 8 h a. m. to make a grinding noise.This soon became louder as larger masses werethrown up ; and looking towards the tidal edgeof the shore ice, we observed an immense piece,many tons in weight, forced up vertically toa height of between twenty and thirty feet.Scarcely had we had time to remark this, when aheavy rush of the seaward ice from the windwardcalled our attention to the opposite side ; and,after watching many piled-up mounds tumblingwith a rattle on our starboard floe-piece, we weregreatly surprised at seeing the latter slowlyassume a convex form, and, after graduallyattaining a moderate elevation, splinter intofragments, one-third of the' original piecebreaking off and sailing heavily away to theeastward. While this was going on, a similarinroad was made in a line towards the starboardx 3310 PERIL OF TWO SAILORS. [CHAP.V.bow, and matters were beginning to wear aserious aspect, when, in an instant, the noisewas hushed. The whole body, the weight ofwhich, greatly augmented by the breeze, wehad to bear our part in sustaining, was broughtup by the curve of coast where wt were embayed.Indeed it could not be otherwise ; forany wind coming from between N.W. by W.and N.N.E., must of necessity drive the entirebody of northern ice to this its only place ofegress into the Atlantic. While the turmoilwas going on, two of the men carelessly loiteringabout soon found themselves separated from us,and it required some activity in scrambling overthe moving mounds before they succeeded inreaching the ship. The wind blew fresh andkeen from N. by W., the temperature beingat 0°, though 23° + in the sun.The carpenters now commenced caulkingwherever they could outside the ship. At 7 h P. m.a slight noise was heard among the ice about amile to the westward of the ship, which, for thesucceeding two hours, drove fast towards thestraits ; but as the tide grew weaker the onwardmotion of the ice was of course checked, while thebreeze urged the whole western body with irresistibleforce against it ; the effect of which was, thatat 9 h p.m., while we were making the curve of abay, our roe-pieces were suddenly assailed by aCHAP. V.] DREADFUL COMMOTION. 311powerful rush of the seaward ice, which, thrustingus close to the tidal wall so as to causealmost a dead pressure, began to grind andplough up the edges on every side. Frequentlyduring the process there were briefintervals of cessation in one part or another,followed by a quick repetition, in a directionperhaps exactly opposite. Again, there wouldbe a general pause, not unlike the silence whichsucceeds a heavy crash of thunder ; but suddenly,when hope was beginning to whisperthat all was over, on it came again with a burstof deafening roar, destroying every thing inits furious course. Wherever our eyes wereturned they were met by rising waves of icerolling their burdens towards the ship. One inparticular, not more than thirty paces away, hadreared itself at least thirty feet on our innerfloe-piece, which, strong as it was, gave wayunder the accumulated weight j and a mass ofseveral tons being thus upturned and added tothe original bulk, the whole bore down slowlyupon our quarter. The ship herself was highout of the water on the ice, but this overtoppedher like a tower. Meantime we weregetting nearer and nearer to the land ice : largerents were showing themselves in the ice, atright angles, on each side of the fore chains : theship unable to right herself began to complain,x 4312 IMMINENT PERIL. [CHAP.V.and the scene every moment became more darkand threatening. Extra purchases were fixedto the pumps ; the hands were turned up ; thesick provided for ; and though nothing effectualcould be done for our preservation, the attentionof the men was occupied in hoisting two of theboats higher up. On former occasions therewere large pieces of ice around, any one ofwhich would have afforded a sufficient depositfor boats, provisions, or whatever in the exigencyof the moment might have been placedupon it. Now, on the contrary, we were surroundedby crushed and broken ice, some,indeed, ponderous enough, but all too angularand fractured to trust a boat upon : nor could weourselves have found footing so long as everypart was more or less in motion ; or, even if someof the more active and hardy had succeeded indoing so, still they could not possibly havereached the land. Knowing this, and feelingacutely for the many beings entrusted to mycharge, it may be conceived with what intenseanxiety I listened to the crashing and grindingaround. The strength of the ship, tried andshaken as it had already been, could hardly beexpected to withstand the overwhelming poweropposed to it ; and, what the result of that nightmight have been it is impossible to say andpainful to contemplate, had not an overrulingCHAP. V.] TUMULT ARRESTED. 313Providence mercifully averted the crisis, by suddenly,and at the moment of greatest peril,arresting the tumult. In less time than it couldbe spoken, there was the stillness of death, andwe were saved! The watch was called, thecrew dismissed ; and I trust that none thatnight laid his head on his pillow without offeringup a devout thanksgiving for the mercy whichhad been vouchsafed him.April 1 th. About half an hour after midnightthe wind having veered more to the west, the icewas observed to slacken out ; and this it continuedto do so rapidly, that at daylight the large waveand other ramparts of ice on the larboard side hadconsiderably subsided, and ultimately they disappeared,leaving only some straggling pieces tomark the scene of so much terrific grandeur.To seaward no alteration had taken place, andwe had leisure to contemplate the devastationthat a few short hours had brought home to thevery side of the ship. The cracks were wider apart,and our territory greatly diminished ; we were,however, further off shore, and at 5 h 50 ra a. m.were driving quietly to the east towards the lowpoint. In our progress a deep bay or, possibly, inletwas seen, for there might be a passage throughits south-eastern termination, though the land appearedcontinuous from the crowns-nest, whenceice was made out on the other or eastern side of314 ISLANDS. [CHAP.V.it. The high land which joined it, and alongwhich we were setting, rounded down to a point,between which and one or two islands, for wecould not satisfactorily make them out, wasunquestionably an icy channel. Soundings werefound in forty-eight and fifty fathoms, with amuddy bottom. At noon the ice was stationary.At 12 h 45 m the ice began to set slowly to thewestward, and the breeze freshening at the sametime forced it off shore ; so that in a few hours alane of water was plainly discovered along themural edge of the land ice, while that withinus, and bordering our floe piece, was ' brash,'such as under favourable circumstances mighthave been sailed through. At 6 h p. m. we weregoing slowly towards the east ; and, being now ata different angle with the land, thought that therecertainly was a passage through the bay justmentioned, which had been concealed before bythe overlapping of two projecting points.At daylight of the 12th we found ourselvesstill farther off shore, and the breeze had notonly kept us more than usual to the west, buthad caused several holes of water to open indifferentplaces. There was indeed a continuouschannel in shore for several miles, extendinghowever, no farther than the point. Beyond,all was compact ; the necessary consequence of aleeward situation, such as this would be with theCHAP.V.] REFLECTIONS. 315wind blowing slantingly from Hudson's Bay andthe Straits. Considerably to the west, near thespot where we had passed the last three weeks,was a dark water sky, and accordingly from thecrowns-nest, water was seen in the direction andto the extent so pointed out. It seems, therefore,certain that on this coast the first place where achannel is to be looked for is along the land,though probably with some winds not extendingfar, unless on favourable occasions, such as theone experienced in the last autumn, when an unhamperedvessel might have sailed round theisland. Farther out, whatever the prevailing wind,a ship must be immovably beset, and dependentaltogether upon the drift of the entire body ofice : if that take her into clear water, well ; if not,she must submit to the event. Undoubtedly avessel is more secure when beset than whencomparatively at liberty. In the former case, solong as the ice remains firm, she is exemptedfrom serious pressure, and tolerably safe; whereasalong the land, every rock, bank, or projectingpoint, catches the moving mass, and subjects theunhappy vessel to all the disastrous effects.It is in this sudden stoppage, or in nauticalphraseology, ' bringing up,' that all the dangerlies.April 13th. The wind had veered a little to theeast, and freshened, so that by noon we had been816 SQUALLS. [CHAI\V.driven so far to the west, as to bring into sightland that we scarcely expected, and, in truth, didnot wish to see again from this side of the island.It was gratifying however to find ourselves muchfarther off shore, as well as to behold a greaterportion of the intervening space occupied byfresh ice, forced in by the wind and tide from theStraits, which would serve as a barrier to keepus off from the mural edge, in case a change ofwind should drive us near our former station.On the next day we found ourselves set stillfarther to the westward without other alteration,but during the afternoon and night the barometerindicated a change in the weather. Accordinglyat night it blew fresh from N. by E., and onthe 15th the gale increased with squalls andsnow. The slightest change in the direction ofthe wind had always an immediate effect on theice, and we were set nearer to the land, thoughfrom the mistiness of the atmosphere we couldnot say how much. About 9 h a. m. the youngice, formed around, rose up under an easy pressureto the height of a foot upon the edge of ourinner floe, now but forty paces distant from theship. This however did not continue long, andat noon all was quiet, except the fresh breezewhich came stronger after every lull. Snow ofa soft and flaky kind, unlike the glitteringcrystals of the winter months, fell lightly butCHAP. v.] doctors' report. 317incessantly, and obscured the land. At 2 h p. m.some of the ice near us became again agitated forabout ten minutes, and then ceased, after whichthe breeze gradually diminished in strength,and towards midnight drew more round to theeast.April 16th. Every thing was quiet Theweather was overcast, and after divine service,examining the north thermometer, I was delightedto find it exhibiting a temperature of 32^° + ,being the first time this year that it had risenabove the freezing point. Little lines of watersoon dribbled from the snow on the weather sideof the deck and other places ; and great was thepleasure with which I remarked that instead ofinstantly congealing as usual, it maintained itsliquid form. Sir E. Parry had the same degreeof temperature at Winter Island, a little morethan two degrees north of our situation, on the27th, u e., exactly one week later in the year1822.On the 17th and 18th the weather wasmild, but still so overcast that the points ofthe land could not be distinguished. Againon the 19th all was tranquil. The crewwere inspected by the medical officers andreported to be in an improving state. Threehowever were still far from well, and one (Jones)had rather retrograded. Several others, though318 FLOCK OF BIRDS. [CHAP.V.able to do their duty and free from pain, continuedto walk lame from the rigidity of whichI have so often spoken.April 20th. The outside caulking of the shipwas completed as far as practicable j and thoughunder some disadvantage, on account of thepressure of our inclined position, yet the carpenterswere desired to proceed with the sameoperation along the water ways and upper deck.The sails were also under examination, and hadprudence permitted us to bestow the six months'provisions, which sadly lumbered the quarterdeckand gangways, we might soon have assumedsomething of a ship-shape appearance. Thishowever could not be until the ship was fairlyafloat, and it was necessary therefore to be satisfiedwith having all in readiness for good orevil. At noon the ice, affected by the constantblowing of the northerly wind, w r which hadprevailed since the day before, was found tohave gone considerably to the eastward. Alarge flock of birds, supposed to be ducks, thoughmore likely dovekies, was observed flying northward.At daylight of the 21st, it was found thatthe spring tide had set us farther east thanwe had yet been : a hole or two of water alsowas seen within a few hundred yards of the ship,and the ice had the appearance of easing down,chap. v.] lyon's remarks. 319a natural consequence of the offshoot wind.The temperature which had been lowered bya breeze from the N. W. to 2° + rose againas the sun gained power, and at noon was 18° +and 53° .At 2 h p. m. the ice commenced setting tothe east, and by 6 h p. m. we had drifted sofarto the south east, as to bring into viewsome new land, low, and apparently forming ashoal point, inasmuch as at some distance off,there were four rounded mounds of high andheavily packed ice, thrown up upon what we concludedto be sand banks or reefs. As the bearing(true) was S. 37° W. it was certain that we wereopposite to Seahorse Point, which was in latitude63°43'N., longitude 80° 10' W., and variation, 49°00 W. This is the most eastern part of SouthamptonIsland, but too low to be visible from PointLey son, though, as Captain Lyon remarks, theheights behind might be seen from thence ; and itseems to me most likely that the high land whichhe saw, and had supposed to be the continuationand boundary of the range terminating in theother extremity at Cape Comfort, was really MountMinto, which is fully one thousand feet high,and the adjacent ridge that was still within viewof the ship. It had always been an interestingspeculation with me what would be the directiontaken by us, or rather by the ice driven by320 FLOCK OF DUCKS. [CHAP.V.the current, on arriving at this spot ; for it wasdifficult to say whether we should be set roundthe point along the coast towards Caryswan'sNest, or to the East of Mansfield Island towardsLabrador, or, directly through Hudson'sStraits into the Atlantic. Confiding in theobservations of those who had preceded us, andassuming, therefore, that the meeting of the tidesfrom the Welcome and Fox's Channel was somewhereabout Caryswan's Nest, I held to thefirst opinion; conjecturing further, that the numerousdetentions likely to be encountered fromdifferent winds, eddies, or other causes, wouldeventually lead us near open water, perhapsquite as early as any practical use could be madeof it.In the course of the evening a flock of fiftyducks was seen approaching, but after comingwithin five hundred yards, they wheeled roundand flew away to the south east.At h a.m. of April 22d the ice in its courseto the eastward eased out so much, that manycalves sprung up from beneath the pack, andsoon after a few holes of water were seen. By8 h a. m. the south point bore S. 5 U Z° W. ; but theice, as usual, with the change of tide settingagain in the contrary direction, at noon, the extremepoint bore S. 32° W., and Mount Minto N.80° W. The wind was moderate from the S.W.,CHAP. V.] A WHITE BEAR. 321and though otherwise fine the temperature wasonly 24° + .April 23d found us twelve or fifteen miles offSeahorse Point, which, nevertheless, we did notget beyond, the wind being light and very unsteady.Certainly either the tide was not strong,or the whole body of ice moving together preventedour observing it. Some ducks wereseen, apparently looking for open water. About4 h p. m. the ice slackened considerably round theship and to the southward, causing in the courseof two hours several lanes and holes of water,but too far disconnected to have aided ourescape, even had we been at liberty. It was notalittle singular that with so much water thereshould have been no appearance of seals, sea-horses,whales, or any other denizen of theArctic regions. This evening, however, a visitorwas announced in the following manner. Detachedgroups of the crew were sauntering aboutthe ridged and extremely uneven ice that formedthe nucleus of our floe-pieces, when the Corporalof Marines, who was somewhat apart fromthe rest, gazing listlessly upwards at the peakedhummock above his head, saw, to his amazement,quietly looking at him, a white bear. Atthe first glimpse he started off with all thespeed which circumstances permitted, leapeda wide opening, which, on common occasions,YDRIVEN OFF SHORE. [CHAP.V.he would not have attempted, and in breathlessagitation announced the intruder. Instantlywere heard a hundred voices in all varieties oftone, from the shrill scream to the hoarse bawl :the news flew fast, and gathered as it flew ; sothat, by the time it had travelled from the forecastleto my cabin, it saluted me with the intelligence,that two bears, an old and a young one,were close to the ship. On reaching the deckI saw, indeed, a young bear about ninety pacesahead of the ship, shaking and eating a piece ofan old jacket which it had just picked up. Thefirst Lieutenant and Mr. Gore fired, and, bothballs taking effect, the animal staggered away aboutforty paces and fell dead. It was a female cub oflast year \ and though on being opened the stomachwas found entirely empty, there was still some fatadhering to the flesh. To us the adventure was anovelty, and gave occasion to some jests.By midnight the wind blew fresh from thesouth-east, soon closing the holes near us ; andduring the next twelve hours, so far had theice taken us off shore, that at noon, when thesun was fortunately clear for a few minutes,it was evident that the ship's head was nowpointing E.N.E., in a line directly for MillIslands, and that we were not less than seven oreight leagues from Seahorse Point. In this newposture of affairs it was deemed expedient imme-CHAP. V.] Restoring PROVISIONS. 323lately to refit, so far as could be convenientlydone. The small sails and deer had alreadybeen put into order, and now the topsails underwentan inspection, while the bulwark inside wascaulked, the seams paid over with a layer ofresin, scraped, and primed with a coating of yellowpaint. The tanks were also ordered to be cleansedin order to their being filled ; and, as the comparativelysmall dimensions of the fragments of icewhich now surrounded us, as well as its loose anddisconnected state, would necessarily render futileany attempt to save a stock of provisions, &c, incaseof accident, and there no longer, therefore,existed any reason for keeping it on deck, I gavedirections that every thing should be restored ;except a sufficient supply of pemmican, preservedmeats, &c, to be kept on deck for each boat inreadiness for any emergency, against which itwas still necessary to provide, as it was uncertainwhether the ship would float, when once morein open water. At all events, whenever thattime should arrive, whether soon or late, andwhether with good or evil fortune, it was clearthat the promptest activity would be requiredfrom all on board ; and that it was necessary,therefore, to have all prepared beforehand.Up to noon on April 25th nothing occurredworth mentioning. We were perhaps a littlefarther from the land, the nearest part of whichy 2324 DEATH OF A SAILOR. [CHAP.V.bore S. 85° W., distant by estimation twenty-threemiles. Mount Minto was once seen, andby admeasurement was forty miles away. Towardsevening the breeze became steady fromsouth-east, and gradually freshened as night drewin. A small bird, supposed to be a snow bird,flew near the ship. In the early part of the 26ththe wind increased to a gale from the southward,and placed us in latitude 63° 57' 02" N. ; but thehorizon being rather misty no land was seen,and the sun was not clear enough to get sights.This day terminated the life of Alexander Young(marine), who had been long slowly sinking underhis fatal malady. There had been occasionalfluctuations which afforded a ray of hope ; but,at length, after lingering on the verge of dissolutionduring a wearisome period, in which hedisplayed no want of mental energy or properresignation, he yielded to the overmasteringdisease, and with some appearance of sufferingclosed his mortal career. At his own request thebody was opened by Messrs. Donovan and Mould,who found the liver affected and very much enlarged.The blood was poor and extremelyserous, almost indeed separated into two parts ;and some water was lodged in the region of theheart. The following day, April 27th, the lastsad offices were paid by the officers and crew, anda third poor shipmate was committed to the deep.CHAP. V.] FORGE AGAIN ERECTED. 325Soon after the mournful ceremony was concluded,a little snow-bunting was observed tohover for a few seconds over the aperturethrough which the body had been lowered, andthen to fly away.For the preceding eighteen hours the windhad freshened considerably from the southwest,and at noon the weather being darkwith snow no observation could be got,neither was any land in sight, though we consideredwe were setting with the entire bodyof ice towards Mill Islands. The peoplewere occupied in refitting different parts ofthe ship, and our winter housing was takendown. So great indeed was the quiet we nowenjoyed, that the forge was again erected on theice, for the purpose of making and repairingseveral articles of which we stood in need. Nowater was visible : another flock of ducks passednear. In the evening the wind veered toW. N. W., and occasionally blew fresh in squalls.Early on April 28th a few holes of water wereobserved, but soon closed again. What howeverwas more interesting, was an island faintlydistinguished from the mast-head, bearing southeast.At noon it was no longer in sight, in consequenceof the ship having drifted to the southward.The temperature had once fallen solow as 1° — , but subsequently rose again toy3326 ISLANDS IN SIGHT. [CHAP.V.5°+- The latitude was 63° 58' N.,' and longitude79° 04/ 15" W., which made us about twenty-fivemiles from the western extremity of Mill Islands.The wind still blew from the same quarter,neither was there any change around the ship.April 29th. At daylight land was descried tothe south-east, and at noon the bearings, astaken from the crowns-nest, were Mill IslandE. \ N , Salisbury Island S. E. \ E., and northeastend of Nottingham Island S. £ E. Westill remained undisturbed, though apparentlydrawing nearer to Salisbury Island, which the hazeof the evening shut out from our sight. Anotherlarge flock of ducks was observed flying towardsthe north-west.April 30th. The wind had veered to north ; butfrom the dullness of the weather our precisesituation, with respect to the land, could not beascertained. One large hole of water was madeout about three miles to the eastward, but thissoon afterwards closed, giving place to two ofsmaller dimensions, which opened somethingnearer to us. The operations of the last weekhad clone much to clear and cleanse the vessel,and. the upper deck having been scraped, therewas an air of comfort and neatness, to which theclimate not less than the anxieties of the winterhad for many months rendered us strangers.The coldness of the westerly winds, which inCHAP. V.] ADVANCE OF SEASON. 3^7the night reduced the temperature below zero,and in the day seldom suffered it to rise muchabove, had proved an annoying drawback tothe exertions of the first Lieutenant; unfortunately,however, we were not pressed fortime, for at present there was nothing aroundbut one wide range of closely packed ice.Still the end of the month had arrived ; the sunbeamed brightly and travelled far in its diurnalcircuit ; the heralds of spring had flown beyondus towards the north, and the gladness of advancingsummer was felt by all of us. At 6 h p. m.a part of Mill Islands was seen, bearing Nee. byE.^ E., and some other land near it, most likelyone of the group. The breeze freshened fromN.N.W. in the night, and on May 1st the weatherwas keener than it had been for some time. Amomentary glimpse was caught of the land onthe starboard beam, but the haze prevented ourdistinguishing what part it was. The boats, whichit may be remembered had been hoisted high upthe rigging to keep them above the frowningmasses which then threatened to overwhelm us,were now removed to the davits, in the hope thatdanger of that kind was past. The horizonwas still obscured at noon ; but from sights withthe artificial horizon, the latitude was found to be63° 49' N., and longitude 78° 54/ SO* W.; thusgiving the anomalous result of our having beenY 4328 PROBLEM. [CHAP.V.set to the westward against a westerly wind, andwith fresh squalls from the north a progresssouth of only four miles. For this, I am at a lossto account in any other manner than by supposingthe passage between the islands to havebeen closely blocked up ; so that the southern ice,acted upon by the floods which attend the disruptionof the spacious lakes and rivers of the interior,had been pressed forward with such forceas to resist even the vast body of ice bearing downupon it from the north. The mast-head thermometer,which throughout the winter had been inaposition eighty-seven feet above the sea nowvaried so little from those on deck, seldom morethan 2° or 3° at the most, that it was taken downand the registering of it discontinued ; and I maytake this opportunity of observing that therewere very few occasions which on trial were foundfavourable for flying a kite with an appendedself-registering thermometer, during the formerportion of the winter when the floe was unbroken,and that the operation was utterly impracticablein the latter part, when the ice wasground into thousands of peaked and irregularheaps, mounds, and barriers, which defied theactivity of the most alert.The weather continuing obscured, nothingcould be distinguished beyond a mile or two fromthe ship, and on May L 2d there was no change ex-chap.V.] CHARTS DEFECTIVE. 329kept a fresh layer of snow, and a south-east windinstead of a northerly one. Several large flocks ofducks flew past us to the north, and one flock wasseen resting in a small hole of open water abouta mile to the south, Land was indistinctly seenabeam. The latitude at noon was 63° 39' N.,but the few miles gained to the south wouldprobably be lost again from the change in thedirection of the wind. The difficulty whichwe experienced as to the exact bearings ofthe land would have been in a great degreeobviated, had the observations and charts of theonly navigators who, as far as I know, have everpassed between these islands been transmitted toposterity. " Purchas," says Sir John Barrow, inhis Chronological History of Voyages into theArctic Regions, " is blameable, to a certaindegree, for the meagreness of Baffin's Journal,and the suppression of a chart which accompaniedit; for he admits, in a marginal note,that * this map of the Author's for this and theformer voyage, with the tables of his journaland sailing, were somewhat troublesome andtoo costly to insert.' " The consequence was,that the true places of these islands were notinserted in the maps ; and though the hiatusthus left has been in part filled up by other seamen,and among these, recently, by Sir EdwardParry and Captain Lyon, yet from the fact of330 Baffin's observations. [chap. v.all these officers having passed north, south, or eastof the islands, and none to the west, their remarks,however excellent in themselves, were comparativelywithout value to us. It is therefore, I repeat,much to be regretted that the entire account ofBaffin's voyage in 1615 has not been handeddown to modern times ; for we find it statedthat, after getting beyond Cape Comfort, theytacked and turned the shipped head homewards,without any further search;" and again that,after this, they " passed Nottingham's Isle, nearwhich they remained till the 27th of July,observing the set of the tides, the time ofhigh water, &c., and taking in ballast. Fromthence they proceeded between Salisbury andNottingham Islands." For our embarrassment,however, as to the width of the channel betweenthe islands, its depth and dangers, we werecompensated by not experiencing any of thoseturbulent commotions of the ice which had sopainfully harassed us before. We now driftedto and fro with the mass, on which the ship wasstill poised, with little inconvenience beyond theawkwardness of our position and the irksomemonotony of the scene.On May the 3d we were much nearer theland, the north-west point of which bore S. 20° E.The sky was blue, the weather nearly calm ;and at noon the temperature was 24° + , and 55° +CHAP. V.] GULLS, DUCKS, &C. 331in the sun. But that which most pleased me, wasthe sight of a gull flying towards the north-west.I had never known these birds to arrive earlierthan the 7th ; and at Fort Reliance, at the eastend of Great Slave Lake, more than a degree tothe south of our position, the same birds did notappear before the 15th of the month. Hence,though no water was visible from the mast-head,I felt confident that there must be some at nogreat distance from us. The evening was overcast,and snow continued to fall throughout thebetter part of the night, but on the next day thesun dispersed the gloom, and the weather, forthe first time these several months, became pleasant.Two rather extensive lanes of wateropened out on either side, about a mile awayfrom the ship, and at noon Nottingham Islandwas still in sight. Some flocks of ducks being*detected, two of the officers, unable to resist thetemptation, went in quest of them. They returnedin the course of the afternoon, sunburntand weary, with the acquisition of two loonsinstead of ducks ; and I cannot but suspect thatwhat before had been taken for ducks were alsoloons. A few dovekies and three gulls were theonly other kinds of birds that had been seen ;but later in the day a white whale showed itselffor a few minutes. As the temperature in theshade at,2 h p. m, was 46° + , it was not surprising332 WATER Ankle-deep. [CHAP.V.that they should have experienced much difficultyin picking their way over a surface soextremely rugged, but I was scarcely preparedto hear, as was the fact, that water had beenfound ankle deep. This was the effect of oneday's sun ; and if the thaw continued at thesame rate, there seemed every probability that alarge portion of the lighter pieces of ice wouldsoon be resolved into water, and that our releasewould be earlier than we had anticipated.May 5th. We appeared to be somethingnearer to Nottingham Island, which, from beinghigh and hilly, now declined by an easy slope tothe southward. A lane or two of water was stillopen ; and, besides many extensive floes in shore,one, at least a mile and a half long and quiteeven, was discovered at no great distance fromus. Such floes could not have subsisted wherewe had been ; and it was therefore inferred that,up to that time at least, there had been noviolent pressure in this quarter. This was themore remarkable, as it is a fact well attestedthat, about the spring tides, when the ice hasspace to move about in, the violence and irregularityof cross sets, together with that unaccountable" bore," or furious rush of waters, ofwhich I have so often had occasion to speak,have been experienced by all who have frequentedthese straits, perplexing the Commanders,CHAP. V.] REFITTING. 333and hampering their vessels so as to createalarm for their safety. Sir Edward Parry mentionsthe sufferings his ship received from theeccentric motion of masses of ice, which, underthe influence of a fresh working breeze, he wasunable to avoid ; and on several occasions CaptainLyon was so startled at the sudden tumult ofwaters around the Griper, that he was undergreat anxiety to know where the " wild eddy"would carry her ; once, indeed, he says, " anoise as of a beach surf was heard, and thefog being very heavy, the boats were loweredto tow our head off the supposed shore, butthe sky was suddenly cleared by the breeze,and no land was seen in any direction."The crew were kept employed in refitting,&c, and in the evening the top gallant mastswere swayed aloft and pointed. The next day,May 6th, brought a rather fresh breeze from thewestward, and, at noon, the south-west point ofNottingham Island in sight, bore S. E. by S. J S.But one lane of water was seen, and that was tothe south ; beyond it, however, there appearedto be a water sky.On May 7th the ice was perfectly close, andat noon we had been set nine miles to the south,and five to the west ; the extremes of land at8 h a. m. having been from N. 84° E. to S. 60° E.For the whole of the day the ice carried us to the334 HILLY COAST. [CHAP.V.southward, but still not a drop of water was insight.Three burgomasters (Lares Glaucus)flew past, and were followed by some flocks ofloons.May 8th, There was no change in the ice, butseveral flocks of birds were observed wingingtheir flight to the west. At noon we had gonenine miles to the south of yesterday's position.On clearing away the booms to caulk the deck,the seams were found more open than was anticipated,and numberless rents were discoveredbetween them, all of which were now filled upand made tight. The ice remained perfectlyquiet, and on May 9th there was no water insight,nor could the land be seen on account ofthe haziness of the weather. About 7 h 30 m p. m.before sunset, the sky became clearer, and showedus the coast of this part of Nottingham Island,extending farther than we had yet seen to thesouth-east. The distinct view now afforded us,gave an outline more marked than any hithertopassed, for irregularity and sinuosity, ravines andisolated hills. Of the hills, many had an elevationof no less than one thousand or fourteen hundredfeet, and it is probable that some, in the interior,were still higher, as their peaks also werefaintly visible. One, the nearest of the detachedheights, sprang abruptly from the comparativelysmooth summit of a shelving slope that roseCHAP. V.] FLOCKS OF LOONS. 335from the yet lower land abutting the sea, and inshape resembled the roof of a large barn. Twoothers, differing from the first in having moreridged and rounded extremities, next caught theeye, which, from these, wandered over a moreregular surface, until arrested by a gorge or pass.To the north and west of this succeeded arange of uneven heights, extremely varied andnovel. The southern termination appeared likean island, but was supposed, in fact, to be connectedby a small ridge of low land. Thesummits and rounded tops of a portion of thisextraordinary island were still enveloped in theirwinter mantle, but innumerable patches provedthe influence of the advancing season.May 10th brought no change : not a livingcreature was seen, nor a drop of water detectedwithin scope of the horizon ; the ice, so far aswe were conscious, was motionless, though ourobservations assured us that we were driftinggradually to the south east. As dusk drew on,two holes of water were seen in a south east direction,but up to midnight they were not enlarged.Very early on the 1 1 th an immense numberof loons flew towards the west, and were shortlyafterwards followed by additional flocks whichseemed to pursue the same course. The skywas overcast, and the land consequently indistinct; but there was little doubt that we had336 SQUALLS. [CHAP.V.moved slowly towards the southern point of theisland. Soon after a light breeze sprung up fromthe south west, and several lanes and holes ofwater shortly appeared in that and other directions,though the ice immediately round theship continued exactly the same. Over all theseplaces there was a dark horizontal cloud. Theatmosphere being favourable for seeing remoteobjects, it was observed, that beyond what hadbeen thought the termination of NottinghamIsland, there was an extensive line of low circuitouscoast, apparently dipping into the water, orrather losing itself in the ice ; and to the right ofit, at a bearing of S. 35° E., other land was detected,which could be no other than one ofDiggers Islands.May 12. After midnight the breeze freshenedfrom E.S.E. and drifted us somewhat to theN.W. along the land, now within a moderatedistance ; a fact curious enough, since nopressure had occurred inshore to make any vacantspace for an admission. Such, nevertheless,was the case. In the forenoon the wind veeredto south and blew with considerable violence insqualls, bringing light snow which dissolvedon the deck as it fell. An interesting event wasnoticed by one of the officers yesterday evening :Lieutenant M'Murdo was outside the ship onthe ice, and his attention being awakened by aCHAP. V.] RAIN. 337shrill screaming overhead, he looked round, andsaw a large white hawk with the tips of the wingsand the end of the tail black, chasing, what heimagined to be a solan goose, but which, fromhis description, I considered to be one of thenorthern divers. The hawk kept always aboveand repeatedly struck at it but without accomplishingits purpose, when, scared by the sound ofLieutenant M' Mundo's dog whistle, it wheeledround and went off slowly towards the south, inadirection for the coast of Labrador. The onlyhawks of a similar description that I rememberto have seen, were a few, found on the rockyborders of Artillery Lake in latitude 6 C 2° 56' N.and longitude 108° 24' W.; and it maybe worthremarking that the broad feathers of the tail areheld in such high estimation by the more warliketribes of Indians, that there is scarcely anythingthey will not give to obtain them.In the latter part of the day the snow wasconverted into drizzling rain, the first we hadhad for more than eight months, and in datecorresponding with remarkable precision to thesame circumstance in the interior of the HudsonBay Company's territories. At Fort Franklin, inlatitude 65° 1 V5& f N. and longitude 123° 08'52" W.in 1826, the first shower of rain fell on the 11thof May. At Fort Enterprise in 1 820, being in latitude64° 28' 24" N., and longitude 113° 06 '00" W.,z338 SHIP LEAKY. [CHAP.V.and at Fort Reliance in 1834, in latitude 62° 46'29" N. and longitude 109° 00' 39" W., rain fell aboutthe same period; and now off Nottingham Island, inlatitude 63° 11' 44" N. and longitude 78° 56' SO" W.,it came on the 12th May 1837 ; so that, in thisrespect, two degrees of latitude and forty-fourof longitude occasioned far less difference thanmight have been expected under circumstancesand modifications so various. A solitary ravenand some large flocks of ducks or loons wereseen going to the north-west, probably to openwater somewhere thereabouts. The rain, whichran down the rigging and across the deck,served to tighten the former, and to prove theleaky condition of the latter. It was, indeed, tobe expected that, twisted and shaken as the shiphad been, to say nothing of the chinks occasionedby the climate, some leaks would show themselves,especially about the butt ends ; but thewater found its way through so many places, thatunfavourable as the position of the ship wasfor caulking, it seemed prudent to do so atonce, even though a further repair might berequired hereafter when she came upright.Accordingly on the 13 th the carpenter commencedoperations, and the temperature beingmuch higher than usual, the opportunity wastaken to rattle down the rigging. No openwater was made out, but many dark clouds wereCHAP. V.] RAPID THAW. 339hanging round the horizon. In the afternoonthe weather was much clearer though the skyremained overcast, and there was certainly morelandfree from snow than on the previous day :the ice, too, surrounding the ship was hourlybecoming more honeycombed on the surface ;fresh water found its way into the cracks ; severalpools gratified the sight ahead and astern as well asin the cavities between the huge mounds ; and,such was the softness of the under ice in somefew places, that both officers and men, while endeavouringto pass along, frequently sank abovethe knee into water, until stopped by the substratumof ice. At 8 h p. m. some long lanes ofwater towards the south-west and Digge's Islandsappeared, and the whole sky in those pointsassumed a dark steely-blue hue, which, as itprognosticated, brought about midnight abundanceof rain, the thermometer being thenat34° + .May 14th. The welcome rain did not abate,and the surface of the pack, stripped of thefrozen snow, displayed a variety of tints, bywhich the age of its component parts mighteasily be detected ; among these, it was not theleast interesting to observe the dim and sombrehue of irregular mounds, ridges, or peaks ofage-stricken ice, peering out conspicuously amidstthe more recent and brighter formations, likez 2340 GLOOMY WEATHER. [CHAP.V.feudal castles frowning over a level waste.After attendance at divine service, I was informedby the officer of the watch that the shiphad settled down three inches forward, but analteration so trifling was not apparent on deck ;and, what was far more consolatory was the factthat the leak had taken up so much, as to makeit an easy task to keep it free with one pump,used four or five times a day. At noon theweather was thick and gloomy, with light rain,the temperature being 35° + . Drizzling rain,ultimately succeeded by snow, fell during mostof the night, and at daylight of May 15th watercould be made out from the crowns-nest, extendingfrom south-east to west. The thermometerdid not fall lower than 29°+ during the night,and began to rise rapidly after 8 h a. m. For thefirst time this season the sails, which had beenwetted by the late rain, were loosed to dry.The land was dimly visible and the sky stillovercast, but the same dark horizontal cloudswere always seen to the south-west. The breezefreshened as the day declined, and some lanes ofwater displayed themselves to the southward asusual.May 16th. When the land could be madeout, it was seen that we had set more to thesouth, and by noon we were opposite the roundedrocky hill, which had formed the terminatingCHAP. V.] IMPROVEMENT IN CREW'S HEALTH. 341point of view on the 10th of May. It wasremarked that a lower continuation of land ranbeyond it, and now, a still more sloping partended in what, judging from some grounded andup-turned pieces of ice lying off it, we imaginedto be a shoal. However, we were evidentlydrifting clear between it and Digge's Islands,which from the mast-head were seen to beardirectly astern, but the main land was notvisible. Countless flocks of loons, ducks, andteal were winging their way to the northward,all flying low, and what struck me as strangeand unusual, there was not a single one to befound on the water ; for though they not unfrequentlypassed across and round it, as if temptedto bathe and sport awhile, yet restrained, as itseemed, by some more powerful motive, theypressed onward to their destination. At noonthe temperature was 36° + , and even in thenight, under the influence of the north-westwind, it only fell to 26°. Upon inspection bythe medical officers the crew were reported tobe in reasonably good health : one alone wasunable to do duty, though three or four more,perfectly well in other respects, had not yetrecovered the complete use of their limbs.Indeed, Barker's leg was as inflexible as stone.As the sky cleared we were rather surprised tofind ourselves full in sight of Digge's Group,z 3342 ISLANDS. [CHAP.V.with high craggy land stretching to the eastward.Between the latter and Nottingham Island wereseveral lanes of water, which, either from thechange of tide, or some other cause, began graduallyto close, but were again found open earlyon May 17th, the ship having by that time beendrifted more to the south-east. Vast numbersof birds whizzed through the grey haze of themorning, which, from a heavy lurid glare, mingledwith a dull red tint, had all at once saddenedto mist. The sun, however, struggled throughit ; and as the vapour passed away we were gladdenedby the sight of a lane of water in amanner surrounding our pack, besides others notvery remote, and dark cloudy patches along thehorizon denoting still more. Salisbury Islandwas also seen beyond the point of Nottingham,as were Digge's, and the wild-looking land alittle to the east of Cape Wolstenholm, whichmust be much higher than was supposed byCaptain Lyon, whose description, however,gives an excellent idea of it. " The land hereabouts,"he says, " has a very remarkableappearance, being broken into high perpendicularbluffs, of from six to eight hundredfeet, between which the rocks were split intodeep ravines, descending abruptly to the water'sedge, and, at a few miles' distance, giving theidea of their being the entrances to narrowCHAP. V.] POOLS OF WATER. 343fiords. The rocks are apparently of gneiss,the strata of which dip, with a considerablecurve, to the northward." I may add to thisaccount, that the land behind rises into roundand high acclivities, which w r ere then in manyparts free from snow. By noon the ice a fewmiles off assumed a more detached appearance.Speculation as to when and where theeagerly desired event of our liberation wouldoccur was now over, for it was evident that noone could, with any show of reason, assign anypreference of place. The wind having set infrom the eastward slowly checked the outwardpassage of the ice, though by the evening wehad altered the bearings of the different remarkablebluffs and other projections more thanfour points of the compass.During the whole of May 18th we remainedmuch in the same position between the LabradorCoast and the Islands, the temperature at noonbeing 36°, and 51°+ in the sun.May 19th. There was no alteration in theice, and the ship was almost in the same place.About 6 h p.m. the ice commenced setting fast tothe eastward, and near the main land seemed tobe easing out. Numerous flocks of loons flewtowards the south, and one snow bunting wasseen. Pools of water formed from the meltingof the ice and snow around the ship. The windhaving veered round to the north-eastwardz 4344 DIMINUTION OF SNOW. [CHAP.V.brought drizzly rain ; and, as the temperaturefell during the night to 31° + , the rigging onMay 21st was partly coated with ice, which, asthe day grew warmer and the breeze freshened,fell on the deck like a shower of glass. Theweather cleared up enough by noon to allow ofour seeing Salisbury Island, which, notwithstandinga wind directly against us, we seemed to haveneared. This, as well as Nottingham Island,were much more free from snow than whenseen two days before ; and, indeed, a manifestdiminution was visible over the surface of theice ; yet no lanes were in sight, and but onesolitary hole of water in any direction. Alonely raven visited us for a few minutes, but noother birds appeared. One seal, the first seenfor a long time, was observed to rise in a hole ofwater. The temperature at noon was 36°. Thenext twenty-four hours produced no change butthat which was afforded by continued snow andsleet, eventually subsiding into rain ; and onMay 2£d, exactly eight months since we hadceased to have the control of the ship's motion,there was not a hole of water to be seen fromthe mast-head, nor was our position at allaltered. The temperature had been as low as29° + , but got up to 38° + . Wind east. Theland was seen in the evening, but no changeworth mentioning occurred ; and after a nightof snow and sleet, May 23d found us almost inCHAP. V.] CAPTAIN'S STEWARD ILL. 345the same place. We were then set back a fewmiles to the westward, until the wind, veeringto W.S.W., brought us to our former position,at the same time separating the ice into lanes,which opened and closed more or less throughoutthe night.May 24th. The sky was overcast, but aboutnoon Salisbury Island could be just distinguished,and by the bearing we seemed to have beendrifted to the east. The temperature was 23° + ,but subsequently rose to 37° + . After the favourableaccount which I had so recently received ofthe health of the crew, I certainly did notexpect to hear of any fresh attack, but I wasnow given to understand that the malady hadfastened on my steward, though no one hadbeen more regular in taking exercise, or moreparticular about his diet and comforts. Thesymptoms, it is true, were at present but trifling ;but as they had displayed themselves in thesame place and manner as in all the formercases, there could be no doubt of the nature ofthe malady, against which, therefore, thereseemed to be no security. The decks were notonly well ventilated and dry, but extremelyclean and comfortable, and there was certainly nowant of anti-scorbutic diet or generous nourishment.I was the more distressed by this newcase as fearing that it might extend further, at atime when the active services of every one346 SNOW. [chapel.would assuredly be required. It was observedthat we had gone more to the eastward in thelatter part of the day than during the whole ofthe last fortnight, and as the evening closedNottingham Island bore astern, making that ofSalisbury more abeam. The wind veered halfround the compass and brought abundance ofsnow, which continued without interruptionuntil noon of the 25th, when, from the obscuritythat prevailed, no land could be seen. The icelooked white and wintry, the fresh water poolswere all hard frozen ; and, with the solitaryexception of one opening, probably the effect ofthe tide, the whole surface was again onecompact mass. The temperature was as lowas 22° + 5 wind westerly.By the 26th we had gone sufficiently to theeastward, to be in sight of the extremity ofSalisbury Island as well as of a very high androcky part of the Labrador coast. On the 27ththe ship was set a little to the north-east, orina direction nearly across the straits. Nowater was in sight, but immense flocks ofloons kept flying to the south. On the 28ththe weather was warmer but yet no lanes appeared,though the entire body of ice hadassumed a more even appearance and was evidentlyeasing down. Two large birds like swansflew past to the north. The temperature roseatnoon to 45° + . A couple of loons wereCHAP. V.] MR. GORE SNOW-BLIND. 347shot by Mr. Gore. The day was dedicated tothe celebration of His Majesty's birth, the crewbeing allowed an extra store of good things toquicken their loyalty. There was little wind,and therefore little change of any kind. Onthe 29th the temperature, which had sunk to27° + , ran up the scale until at noon it reached sandin the sun 64° + . Our sportsman, Mr. Goreafter about ten hours' exposure on the ice, becamesnow-blind. No water was to be seen.On the 30th the weather was thick withlight snow, which shut out the land fromsight. The crew were again examined by themedical officers, and reported to be a littleimproved, though there was not one instanceof perfect recovery, and my steward was quitelame. At 6 h p. m. the east bluff of SalisburyIsland bore N.N.W., by which it seemed wehad been set something to the Nee. In thenight the wind blew fresh from the S.E., andsnow fell without cessation ; nor up to noon onMay 31st was there any change. Still no waterin sight, until at 5 h p. m, while the ice in thedistance was perfectly close, we were surprisedby the sudden opening of a serpentine lanethirty yards astern, extending to either side ofthe ship. The wind blew fresh in squalls duringthe night, and the entire body of the ice appearedto be setting to the north-east.348 [chapelCHAPTER VI.Feast of Loons. — Mr. Vaugharis Path. — Perilous Excursion.— White Whales. — Carpenters busy underminingShip — Result of Labours. — Polar Expeditions.Nationale. — Report of Health. — Cannonading Floe.Cheerful Labours in sawing away the Ice. — Employmentfor Armourer. — Impediments from Calves. — NewRent discovered. — Report of the Ships Drift. — Shipbursts her Bonds. — Novelty of Scene. — Stern-post shattered.Officers' Opinion in favour of Return to England. —Awkwardness of Situation. ■— Expedition frustrated. —Ship's Draught increased. — Visited by Esquimaux. —Ship struck by a Floe. — Shattered Condition of Ship. —Sail for England.— Arrival at Chatham.In the diary of the last month I have had fewincidents to record, and I am sensible that tothe general reader it may have presented little toattract attention. It is, however, the duty ofnavigators to detail with some minuteness suchfacts as, however in themselves uninteresting,may hereafter be found useful as guides to thosewho follow in the career of adventure, and Iproceed therefore with my journal.June 1st. The temperature fell to 23° + , butthe lane astern, as well as two or three others,continued open, and some loons and seals beingdiscovered, several parties went in quest of them,but without much success. Much light snowCHAP.VI.]] FEAST OF LOONS. 349fell during the night, but the weather cleared uponthe 2d ; and shortly after 8 h a. m. the lanes, orrather the one close to the ship, opened so much,that some of the officers went out in the dingy,while others made a long circuitous walk. Theparty altogether shot upwards of thirty loons,which being first skinned, and allowed to steepfor two days in salt and water, were then dressedlike jugged hare, and with red wine sauce andcurrant jelly, were esteemed by us as nearly equalin flavour. At all events we found them agrateful change from the preserved meats andother cured stock in our possession. At noonthe lane began to get narrower, but in the courseof three hours I had watched no insignificantquantity of detached pieces of ice streamwithout noise from the main body, and driftrapidly to the north-east as far as the lane wouldallow. This was encouraging, as betokeningthe facility with which a general separationwould take place, whenever the barrier fartherdown the straits should ease off sufficiently toallow of it. Salisbury Island bore directlyahead, and the Labrador Coast was merely insight.The temperature varied from 22° + to42° + . The ice became more slack, and beganto assume a promising look to the eastward.Numerous parties were tempted by the novelty totry their skill in shooting, and as the cheerfulness350 MR. vaughan's path. [chap. VI.which the sport was calculated to excite wasvaluable at the moment of recovery from indisposition,I encouraged the inclination. Therewere, however, other substantial advantages ; forsuch was the success of the day, that a sufficientnumber of loons were killed to allow of the distributionof an extra allowance to each mess inthe ship. Many, too, were the anecdotes relatedon the occasion. The Lares Glaucus, or Burgomaster,seemed to defy the powder and shotof the ablest marksman, contenting itself, whenstruck, with merely looking round, uttering ashort guttural screech, and flying deliberately tothe nearest wounded loon, which he dispatchedin so artist-like a manner as to leave no otherremnants than the clean bones and a few of thelarger feathers. But the boatswain, Mr. Vaughan,had met with the oddest adventure. Havingwalked over soft and hard ice along the marginsof the different lanes, sinking to various depthsin treacherous holes, and always holding acharged gun, ready to fire at the first thing thatcame within hail, but all to no purpose ; hevery resignedly stuck the butt end of his pieceinto the snow, and thrusting both hands in hispockets, walked up and down so much after hisusual methodical fashion, that he had soon beatendown a path the exact length of the forecastleof the ship. In this mechanical perambulationCHAP. VI.] A WALRUS. 351some time passed away, and probably his thoughtswere wandering to far other scenes, when suddenly,from among the pieces of ice at his feet,up sprang a walrus. The stranger startled theboatswain beyond measure ; and, far fromattempting to touch his gun, he stood staringwith riveted astonishment at the long tusks, and,to use his own language, the "grey beard," ofthe apparition before him, until the walrushaving sufficiently breathed itself, and less curiousthan the astonished seaman, quietly sank againto the dark recesses of the deep. He thenremembered it was a sea-horse, and came onboardwith the account.Towards night the ice opened, and streamedaway to the eastward past the ship, insomuchthat it became necessary to dispatch the boat forsome parties, who suddenly discovered that, insteadof being on the main pack, they wereslowly floating away on detached masses. Theutmost extent of water was not more than twomiles, in a south-west direction towards Hudson'sBay, and this, during the night, was partiallyclosed, though on June 3d there was anappearance of many slack places in the samequarter. The officers amused themselves in endeavouringto kill an immense seal, that incautiouslyrolled across a piece of ice within threehundred yards from us ; but, notwithstanding352 PERILOUS EXCURSION. [CHAP.VI.the correctness of their aim, it contrived to reachthe margin and plunge into the water. Thoseof the crew who had been sporting were equallyunfortunate, having met with few birds ; amongthose shot, however, may be mentioned a fatdovelike, and a kind of widgeon. The weathercleared and showed us Salisbury Island, whichbore N.W. h W. At 2 h p. m., it being thenspring-tide, the ice, gradually slackening beyondour pack, set to the Nee. for two hours, afterwhich it partially closed again, leaving, however,a few holes, to which some of the officers andmen went off, for the purpose of shooting whateverthey might find. But about 8 h p. m. therewas a partial slacking out of the ice betweenthem and us, and the water being soon coveredwith brash and sludge, which lay thickly betweenthe larger pieces, it was impossible to send out aboat. The officers, who, being disappointed oftheir sport, were nearer the ship, found no difficultyin returning ; but the men, who hadstraggled farther, were very differently situated.They had not only a lane to cross, but had topicktheir way from piece to piece over twomiles of loose ice ; a labour which we, unable torender the least assistance, watched with nolittle uneasiness, lest those who were less alertshould fall into the water or be disabled. Theymanaged, notwithstanding, to arrive on boardCHAP. VI.] ICE MORE COMPACT. 353shortly after ll h p. m., of course much faggedwith their exertions.June 4th. The ice closed at 4 h a. m., and,with some trifling variety, remained so till noon,when we were about four miles south, andtwo east, of our former position. The temperaturehad ranged from 23° + to 42° +, witha light south-east wind. There was no favourablechange of any description, either in theafternoon or throughout the night, the ice beingrather more compact than heretofore, a factwhich I was unable to comprehend, as the windwas much too light to affect it in any way,still less when subject to the counter influenceof a spring tide. The most probable conjectureseemed to be, that this very tide might have dislodgedsome heavy bodies of ice from the manyfaiths and bays to the north of Resolution Island;and that, aided by the southerly current, togetherwith the light winds which had prevailed of latebetween south-east and south, those bodies mighthave been driven against, or partly into, themouth of Hudson's Straits, and so blocked upthe space between that and our position. Certainit was, we had scarcely altered the bearing ofSalisbury Island, which at noon was N. 60° W.In the afternoon, while occupied in exercisingthe crew at small arms, and afterwards in reefingand furling, the wind came from the eastwardA A354 snow. [chap. vi.with more than usual violence, bringing with itso much snow, that, in the course of four hours,it lay eight inches deep on the deck ; deeper,that is to say, than had been the case on anyprevious occasion, in the same time. The icewas closely wedged, without a single hole ofwater so far as we could see.On June 6th there was a partial slackeningout, within a few hundred yards of the ship, butthe whole soon closed again, forming one unbrokenbody in every direction. That such hadnot always been the case in other seasons we areassured from the fact, that Bylot and Baffinfound little or no impediment to their sailingpast this very spot in June. Still, the Hudson'sBay Company's ships, admonished no doubt byexperience, seldom or never leave the Thamesearlier than the 6th June ; and, without question,last year they must have found that datequite soon enough. At noon the weather, whichhad been misty, cleared a little, but not sufficientlyso to enable us to see land. The temperaturevaried from 25° to 49° +. The windnow veered to west, and, like that from the oppositequarter, brought snow, from which indeedwe were seldom exempted. The ice presentedan appearance of opening, and with a freshbreeze down, or, in other words, out of theStraits, it might have been supposed thatCHAP. VI.] STRONG WINDS. 855this would continue for several hours ; yet ourconjectures in this, as in many other cases, werewrong, and it closed again almost immediately.Neither was there any improvement during thenight, and on June 7th the whole surface wasmore compact than had been observed for amonth past ; not a drop of water was to be seen.The thickness of the weather intercepted ourview of the land, though, from a hasty glimpse,Salisbury Island seemed farther to the north.The wind, which continued to blow steadilyfrom the same quarter, but with increasing violence,at length began to have some effect onthe immense surface surrounding us ; and althoughat midnight no water was visible, shortlyafter, on June 8th a lane opened out astern,extending, with some interruption, three or fourhundred yards to the south-west, in which directionseveral large holes were subsequentlyseem The ice immediately astern and adjoiningthe lane was more loose and disengaged from thelarger compact masses than it had previouslybeen, so that there was fresh reason to hope thatthe seaward body was streaming away from theentrance of the Straits and the neighbourhood ofthe Labrador coast. At noon we had drifted,by estimation, about eleven miles : SalisburyIsland was no longer to be seen. The latitudeplaced us one mile to the south of yesterday'sa a 2356 WHITE WHALES. [CHAP.VI.position. All repairs about the ship and riggingbeing completed, there was little occupation tobe found for the crew, who, by way of exercise,were regularly drilled by the Sergeant ofMarines, under the inspection of LieutenantSmyth, and made to march quick and travel hardround the upper deck, for an hour or more, untilthey had been properly breathed for the day.Having now more pemmican than with ourweakened crew could be made use of on boatservice, and as this was a perishable article, Iordered it to be issued once a week, in the placeof preserved meat ; the store of which, if notrequired, might be appropriated hereafter in anymanner Government thought proper. In theafternoon it blew a gale which separated the iceso far as to leave a considerable space of openwater, where, for the first time this season, somewhite whales were observed. At 6 h p. m. landwas descried to the south, the bearings of whichwere from S.W. to E.S.E.June 9th. There was much loose ice to theeastward, mingled with several smooth andregular floes, which evidently had neither beenexposed to pressure nor otherwise disturbed,except as we now beheld them. The ice formingour pack was unaltered in area, thoughslightly diminished in thickness from the increasedtemperature of the day. At night theCHAP. VI.] Thickness OF ICE. 357pools still froze, being invariably found crustedwith ice in the morning ; still, from the effectof the sun and the heat radiated from the sidesof the ship, upwards of two feet of ice andfrozen snow had slowly sunk away, thus almostexposing the keel from the fore-foot to the fore-chains,while a deep trench resulting from thesame cause extended quite round, exhibitingabove it the ruins of the ponderous waves, inthe hard gripe of which the whole of the afterpart of the ship lay immovably wedged.There were no means of ascertaining the actualthickness of the accumulated masses, which inso extraordinary a manner cradled us up, butsome of the pieces floating in the clear spacewere estimated at forty feet beneath the line offlotation ; and, indeed, from the force appliedduring the convulsions so providentially escaped,when the ship with all her heavy load was feltrising under our feet, it could hardly have beenless, while from the irresistible pressure thatdrove one mass under another, it might have beeneven more. It seemed, therefore, indispensable,that before we could get free, the weaker bodiessurrounding us and as yet adhering, should beentirely detached, so as to afford room for oursupporters to glide away easily. An operationof this magnitude could only be accomplishedby natural means ; but in order to divert theA A a358 OFF CHARLES ISLAND. [CHAIWI.minds of the crew, they were set to work withpickaxes, spades and axes, to reduce the formidablesummits of the nearer waves, and markout the most feasible line of escape, when accidentor time should favour us. There was agreat deal of loose ice between us and the land,which the fineness of the day brought clearlyinto view. It turned out to be Charles Island >so that the late gale had driven the ice rapidlyto the eastward, and, as regarded the ship, somethingto the south. At noon the land bore from8.S.W. to E.S.E. ; and, as seen from the deck,had the appearance of three islands. The iceclosed again.The adverse direction from which the breezecame kept the ice much closer than of late, andfor a few hours we seemed to retrograde ; but inthe night this ceased, and up to noon June 10th,we might be said to be stationary, the ice thenbeing very compact. The temperature variedonly from 30° to 38° 4-. The following nightwe were set a few miles off the land in consequenceof the breeze having veered to southeast,and increased in strength ; and though forabrief interval some openings were observed,yet they soon closed again, and in the morningof June 11th, the ice was again perfectly compact.However, soon after divine service, theweather became so fine, that little rills of waterCHAP. VI.] BRIGHTENED HOPES. 359were pouring down from the more elevatedpieces of ice into the hollows and thence into thesea. Before noon, a hole had appeared withinfifty paces of the starboard quarter, and, singularenough, without other apparent cause than atrifling motion in the looser floating ice. Aboutthe same time, and without any noise, a serpentinelane of water unexpectedly broke on oursight, at no greater distance than one hundredand sixty yards. It was connected with thehole just referred to, and extended across thebow towards some brash and mixed ice to thesouth-west, in the limit of which direction, forsome days past, a dark lane of water had beenmore or less visible. The appearance, as if bymagic, of an opening so near the ship, was probablythe most fortunate event that could havehappened, for until some such occurrence, wecould indulge but slender expectations of a speedyrelease ; whereas, now, the hopes which frequentdisappointment had dimmed suddenly brightened,and cast an enlivening gleam on the future.The temperature had not been lower than 30° + .Up to noon of June 12th, the only furtherchange was another separation between two ofthe heavier floe pieces, still nearer to the starboardside of the ship ; after which anothertwenty-four hours of tedious uniformity rolledheavily away amidst a dead calm and thicka a 4360 DIMINUTION OF ICE. [CHAP.VI.atmosphere. One novelty indeed there wasin those stagnant hours, and that a sufficientlygratifying one, viz. that the temperatureremained above the freezing point throughoutthe night, the lowest having been 33°-{-.At noon of June 14th it was 54° + , the skybeing still overcast and no land in sight. Somelanes of water appeared, but none of any consequence.Within the last few days the upperportion of the ice had undergone a perceptiblediminution from increased warmth, but therewas still an immense thickness to be dissolved ;and one summer, such as this region could beexpected to afford, might not suffice for thedestruction of so vast and, as it seemed, interminablea body, without the co-operation of somemore powerful and speedy influence. The impotenceof our own efforts had been already manifestedin the attempts in which, although zeal andself-interest had prompted every man to do hisutmost, we found ourselves unable to effect morethan to level down some of the inequalities of thesurface near the stern, or on either side of theship. Nothing, indeed, favourable could be expected,until the ice should become slack enoughto allow the imprisoned under pieces to rise tothe surface.The period had again arrived for examiningthe crew, who were reported to be in much theCHAP.VI.] INVx\LIDS. selfsamestate, some still continuing lame, and Gibbs,poor fellow, barely able to walk once or twicealong the deck by the aid of a stick in one hand,and resting on the bulwark, or whatever else hecould grasp for support with the other. Jonesalso was unable to do any duty, though in aless degree affected, while Barker and Andersoncontinued to complain of the stiffness of theirlegs. Smith (my steward) was still suffering,and walked very lame, and two more were temporarilyon the sick list. Indeed, the knee orankle joints of two-thirds on board were more orless affected with shooting pains or twitches,betokening weakness, and few could take evenordinary exercise without sensations of languorand uneasiness. The lowest temperature of thisday was 32° + .The prevalence of the northerly breeze,though moderate, was sufficient to bind thewhole of the surrounding ice on the Labradorside, and consequently our change of position,at the most, did not exceed two miles to thesouth. Some few holes of water were occasionallyseen as the ice varied in its movements,but generally speaking it was more packed andforbidding than had of late been customary.Much, however, was expected from a westerlywind, whenever it might come, and in the meantimethere was some satisfaction in witnessing362 CARPENTERS BUSY. [CHAP.VI.the diminution of the upper ice, which wastedaway from one to two inches in the twenty-fourhours.On June 15th not fewer than twenty-sixplanks of the ship's side could be counted fromthe fore chains directly down to the ice, and asthis had dissolved enough to bring within reachof the carpenters several more streaks, preparationswere made to caulk and coat them withcoal tar like the rest. It was found, too, thatwe could, by removing the ice down to the waterlevel, reach the upper part of the damaged stern-post,though this was not to be accomplishedwithout hard labour, since the mere pressure hadformed an icy cement so tough and adhesive,that fragments stuck to the planking, even betweenthe narrow breadth of the strokes of thepickaxe. It looked, indeed, as if the ship hadbeen placed in a bed of some plastic composition,which time had indurated into the solidity,and almost the substance, of limestone rock.However, under the direction of LieutenantSmyth, the men contrived to get below the tenfeet mark, and it was then ascertained that thedoubling as well as the split stern-post were moretwisted from their true positions than when lastseen about three months ago. The water insome measure interrupted the proceedings, butwith the assistance of the fire engine it was keptCHAP. VI.] UNDERMINING SHIP. 363so much under, that the work could be continued,while a second party, co-operating withthe former, went on steadily undermining thefore-foot, which has been described as restingupon the surface of the ice. It will be readilyunderstood that the object of these proceedingswas to remedy, as effectually and speedily as possible,whatever portion was accessible of the seriousinjuries which it was probable the keel andlower section of the hull had sustained ; and,though nature would in time have effected thesame thing without labour of ours, yet it wasof moment to be ready for any of those extraordinarychanges which, through the disruption ofthe surrounding ice, would sooner or later launchus into freedom.Three swans, a flock or two of ducks, and anoccasional plover or snipe passed towards thenorth, while a few loons and two or three kindsof gulls flew round or hovered over the differentholes of water. At noon Charles Island wasjust distinguishable from aloft, and soundingswere obtained in forty-six fathoms on a rockybottom with small pebbles, and a part of somecrustaceous animal. This corresponded exactlywith the soundings, as given in Captain Lyon'schart, and also those of the Hudson's Bay Companyin our possession.The labour of excavation was carried on with364 RESULT OF LABOURS. [CHAP.VI.cheerful alacrity, and by the incessant use ofdraining machines, in the shape of the engine,boats' pumps, and buckets, we contrived topenetrate as low as the seven feet mark; but thesea water then beginning to ooze through theunder ice, rendered abortive any further attemptto keep the space clear. This result, however,had been gained. It was ascertained that thedoubling, and a portion of the stern-post below,projected over to the larboard side several feet ;and that another portion, from the ten feet sixmark to seven feet five, was incapable of repair.It was, consequently cut away. The nightpassed tranquilly, and a flock or two of geeseflew past towards the north. No change transpiredamong the ice until early in the morningof June 16th, the anniversary of our sailing fromthe More, when it began to slacken round theheavy ice which we were partly entrenched inand partly upon. The weather, too, cleared, forthe wind came lightly from the south, and thedistinctness of the blue land (the snow being nowgone) of Charles Island, was a convincing proofthat we had been drifted a few miles in thatdirection. Still there was not the faintest indicationor promise of an open space ; for, let theeye roam where it would, there was one wide glareof dazzling white but too familiar to our senses.It is not a little remarkable to reflect on theCHAP. VI.] POLAR EXPEDITIONS. 365various ineffectual attempts that have been madeby different commanders in modem days, tofill up the small blank on the northern charts,between the bottom or south part of Regent'sInlet and Point Turnagain. Parry's and Franklin'sachievements are too well known to requireobservation or eulogium from me ; yet theformer could not penetrate through Fury andHecla Strait, and the latter found it impracticable,from the damaged condition of hiscanoes, the want of provision, and the advancedstate of the season, to proceed beyond PointTurnagain. Of Sir John Ross's eventful expeditionall have heard. My own, in search ofhim, is also before the public. Captain Lyon, intrying to reach Repulse Bay by the Welcome,was baffled by a succession of bad weather andheavy gales ; and now again, I, acting upon theunited experience of most of the distinguishednames just mentioned, under circumstances consideredfavourable, after getting nearly withinsight of my port, am stopped by drift ice, atwhat is generally the very best period for navigatingthe Polar Seas — am frozen fast, in October1836, at the entrance of Frozen Strait — andnow, Junel6th, am carried into Hudson's Strait,on some of the very same ice that originallybegirt the ship, without having had it once inmy power either to advance or retreat. In366 DIVERSIONS. [chap. VI.short, from north, south, east, and west, theattempt has been made, and in all equally withouteffect ; and yet, with a tolerably openseason, the whole affair is within the accomplishmentof six months.The crew were variously employed, butprincipally in removing the ice from under thefore-foot, the bend of which was literally abovethe level of the sea, now ascertained by thebursting up of the water from beneath ; on theother hand, the stern-post was immersed orimbedded a little more than nine feet. Theofficers also had their occupations : some of thekeener sportsmen lurked for the chance of ashot ; others were speculating on the possibilityof coaxing the ship's peas to germinate in aheterogeneous composition of coal dust. Afishing line, too, was set, but the most perseveringhad not been rewarded even by anibble. My aim was to encourage every thingthat could relieve the mind by abstracting itfrom a too fixed attention to our situation ; andas there were no complaints, it is fair to presumethat the end was in a great measureattained. Though the temperature at noon was4G° + , and with a blackened bulb thermometer66° in the sun, yet it had been as lowas 29° + in the night, and consequently the freshand brackish pools were once more coated withCHAP. VI.] INCREASE OF WATER. 36?ice. Little transpired throughout the night,but on June 17th the wind veered to the N.W.,and the ice began to open out all round, exposingby noon considerably more water thanhad yet been seen. A fog soon rose from it,which so completely darkened the sky that weneither saw land nor got observations, and wereconsequently ignorant whether we were driftingdown the Straits or not. The ship appeared tohave risen bodily up one inch during the twenty-fourhours ; but this of course was attributableto the thawing of the ice on the surface. Asmall fish was found in the mouth of a gull(boatswain), and more ducks and geese flewtowards the north. By 4 h p. m. the ice wasagain cemented, and subsequently Charles Islandwas seen, the position indicating that we hadbeen set a short distance to the south and east.Dark patches of sky created by the vapour fromopen water appeared all round the horizon,except towards the main land, in the directionof which were some extensive floes of a remarkablyeven surface. One or two, of minordimensions, could be just descried to the eastward; and as a conclusive proof that there wassomething more than a mere opening andshutting in of the ice by the action of successivetides, several pieces of broken and discolouredmounds, quite new to us, were swept near and368 A GALE. [CHAP.VI.ultimately past the ship. The temperature sankto 30°+ in the night, and the pools of freshwaterfroze over. Much small snow also fellwithout intermission up to noon of June 18th,with a temperature of 43° + . The ice againmoved about with great irregularity, flatteringus one hour by its loose and disconnectedaspect, and annoying us the next by resumingits compactness. Yet these transitions, unsatisfactoryas they were, betokened an activity ofsome sort towards the entrance of the Straits,which might therefore be clearing so as to allowthe western ice to drift down. The haziness ofthe weather concealed the land, but the latitudemade us still farther south.In the afternoon soundings were obtained ineighty-five fathoms, on a rocky bottom. The iceopened out towards night, and a solitary walrusshowed its huge frame above water but madeno long stay. About midnight, and on June19th, the wind blew from the E.S.E., and,increasing to a gale, speedily set the ice inmotion all round us. Occasionally, streams ofdrift-pieces drove, at the rate of two miles anhour, against the corners or edges of our heavyfloe-ruins ; and though without any perceptibleshock or injury at the time, yet, as it afterwardsappeared, with effective force, since, at ll h a. m.,a large strip silently separated itself from ourCHAP. VI.] BOLT STARTED. 369general mass. It was then that numerous lanesand holes of water ranged themselves in a lineexactly across the direction of the wind, almostup and down the Straits ; and the land becomingvisible during a partial cessation of sleet, snow,and rain, with which we had been refreshed, theice-mate, Mr. Green, imagined he could makeout several conical tents, from whose tops smoke,as he thought, issued. Unfortunately, dark cloudssoon obscured that part of the land, which seemedlike an island, depriving us, for the present, ofthe satisfaction which the realization of this ideawould have afforded. On inspecting the hull,as was customary, it was discovered that one ofthe copper bolts, situated in the eleventh plankbelow the fore part of the main chains, on thelarboard side, had started, and projected one-eighthof an inch outside the doubling ; a circumstancethat made it necessary to cut beneaththe head and clinch it afresh. Again, while employedin clearing out the fore part of the bread-room,for the purpose of getting at coals andprovisions, just below the broken stringer on thestarboard side, one of the through bolts of thelining was found to have started, and, from themere collapsing of the after part of the ship, oneof the casks had been actually pressed to such adegree, as to stick into the lining. Prudence,therefore, required that the stowage should notB B370 ICE MORE OPEN. [Chapter.be disturbed until we were afloat, for the shipstill inclined over as before, and it might bethat, at intervals, a strain was thrown on thatparticular part.The east end of Charles Island bore S.W.,and the weather was dark and gloomy, witha temperature of 31° -f . The ice, this afternoon,was more detached and open than ithad been during the season ; and had theship been freed of her bonds, there was spaceenough to have moved two or three miles tothe westward. But, as it was uncertain whenthat consummation so devoutly wished w T ouldtake place, or what might be her state whenafloat, as it was possible that she might benear the land, or in a situation requiring tobe immediately worked, I thought it right tomake such preparations for steering her, as theurgency of the occasion might demand. Fromwhat had been already seen, there were reasonsfor apprehending an insuperable difficulty inshipping the rudder ; and, indeed, if, as wasconjectured, the split stern-post projected threeor four feet at right angles to the keel, to saynothing of the doubling forced up, it seemedevident, that even if the old rudder could by anymanagement be fixed in its place, it would serveonly for an additional purchase to weaken thealready broken parts thereabouts. To provideagainst a contingency so serious as well as proba-CHAP. VI.] RUDDER CONTRIVED. 371able, it was requisite to devise a rudder of an entirelydifferent construction, yet so contrived asto lose little of its power, and such a one wasingeniously hit upon by Lieutenant Smyth. Itwas effected by the simple operation of transposingthe wood, forming the lower part or heel of therudder, to that forming the upper part, thusgiving to it when finished an oblong form, notmuch unlike that used by a Thames barge riggedwith sails, and at the same time the desirableproperty that it could be hung on the strongestpart of the stern-post. Having a spare rudder onboard,which had fortunately been put togetherin pieces for the convenience of stowage, as itwas divided into two portions, an upper and lower,just where the division was wanted, the thingwas half done to our hand*, some iron work anda few fittings for putting it together being all thatwas required. Throughout the night the icekept opening and closing, and the temperaturesank to 30° +. In the early part of June 20th,however, it became very slack to the westward,especially along the shore of Charles Island, towhich we were much nearer. The Strait, nevertheless,was completely blocked to the north andeast, though the ice, at least that near us, wascertainly drifting slowly down towards theThe rudder had been made in this way to provideagainst accidents.B B 237^ SOLIDITY OF FLOE. [CHAP.VI.entrance. We now began to cut through themounds at the edge of the floe pieces, and toopen a communication with the visible parts ofthose cracks extending diagonally from one extremeto the other, and in one instance crossingthe ship's bows ; for as it was mere speculationhow deep or tortuous these flaws might bebeneath the surface, it was at all events an equalchance whether our operations might not acceleratetheir rupture.Some snow had fallen which was succeeded bya south-west wind, and at noon thick weathercame on that hid the land. The temperaturewas only 35° +. The wind became variable,coming sometimes in fresh gusts accompanied bysnow and rain : partly from this cause and partlyfrom the tide, there was a more than commonstir among the ice, which now separated itselfinto detached streams and single pieces, exposinga chequered surface of water to the westward,most cheering to the eye. During thenight the ice was, what the Greenland sailorsterm, running about ; and, though firmly connectedpieces of various dimensions, from one tothree or four hundred feet in diameter, struckour floe with considerable violence in passing by,yet such was its solidity and weight that theeffect was merely to grind away insignificantpoints along the edges.CHAP. VI.] TRENCHING THROUGH ICE. 3^3June 21st came in with snow and a temperatureof 30° + . At 5 h a. m., all hands wereemployed in trenching through the mounds, andcutting as low into the water as they could.Saws unfortunately were altogether useless, onaccount of the thickness of the ice, which beingmeasured with a line, as far down as a projectingtongue, was found to be thirty-three feet, andwas conjectured to be, in the whole, betweenforty and fifty at that particular place. Somelarge calves rose up from beneath the starboardfloe piece, which indeed was the most vulnerable,and we now marked out a line of work at three tdifferent places, which were ultimately to beconnected, so as to form an upper channel ofcommunication with the sea. I would willinglyhave trenched down and cleared away the frozensnow, which adhered so tenaciously to the afterpart of the ship, but for the impracticability ofshoring her up, and the risk that must haveattended the disturbance of the shores on theparting of the floe ; all that could be done, therefore,was to conduct a channel of water withina few feet of the starboard side, to which sheinclined, in the hope that a severance might beeffected by some sudden jerk through the entiredepth below. By noon, we were rather nearerto the east end of Charles Island, which was quitebare of snow, except in fissures and ledges. Theb b 3374 EXTRAORDINARY EDDIES. [CHAP.VI.temperature was only 40° + , the weather calmbut hazy with snow, the barometer 29. 5 1 . Muchice drifted past and as far as the ship in theafternoon, among which, were several perfectlyeven floes of six to seven hundred yards long, ofa pale blue colour, and evidently of last winter'sformation \ while, contrasting with these, wereothers more soiled and channeled, that had apparentlystrayed from the northern lands at thehead of Fox's Channel, bearing on their shouldersthe ruins of other floes which had been brokenand borne over them in the convulsions ofthose extraordinary eddies. These did not remain; for in the early morning, a little after theclose of the longest day, with the last rays ofwhich the sky was yet tinted, they swept by,leaving us as usual fixed in our unyielding bed.There was a dead calm, and even on the dayof the summer solstice, the temperature sank to27° + . The crew, under the immediate directionof the first Lieutenant, were set to work at5 h a. m., and performed the novel duty withgood humour and perseverance. By noon wehad been drifted to the eastward, the latitudebeing 62° 54' 50", and longitude 74° 40' 30".The character of the shore was comparativelylow, even, and rocky, about the eastern extremity,but farther west, was more hilly, and if not composedof more than one island must possess someCHAP. VI.] MASS BREAKS OFF. 375very deep bays. The last twenty-four hours,the leak had increased twelve inches. By a suddenchange, the weather had become sultry, thethermometer in the sun being 62°. A very fewbirds, but not a fish or animal was seen. Theice merely opened and closed with the flood andebb tide, without further effect.On June 23d, the crew were employed in cuttingaway the outer mound on the starboard sideof the ship, and made such rapid progress in theirearly labour, that the edge of the floe rose twofeet six inches out of the water, and this wasimmediately followed by the appearance of atransverse crack between them and the ship. At10 h 15 m a. m., while steadily occupied at theirwork, the disconnected body of ice was observedto run with considerable velocity past the sternof the ship, directly towards the part they werereducing, and an enormous piece coming in suddencontact with a projecting point, that had beenpurposely formed by cutting away the ice aboutit in the morning, the whole mass broke off withthe concussion, and rolled partly over in consequenceprobably of the shooting of several immensecalves from underneath it and the floe.At the very moment of disruption a number ofmen were working on the separated piece, therocking of which placed them for the time in aperilous situation. From this, however, they376 MOTION OF ICE. [CHAP.VI.were promptly rescued by launching the clingsto their assistance, though not soon enough tosave all the pickaxes, shovels, handspikes, &c,some of which were lost. This circumstancemade a great difference both in the magnitude andcompactness of our island floe, and encourageda hope of getting the ship afloat earlier than hadbeen expected ; still this was a consummationwhich at the present juncture was hardly to bewished, as it would have been impossible to preventthe running ice from striking, or the heavierbodies from nipping her ; either of which, strainedand shaken as she was, it was obviously desirable toavoid. The motion of the ice on this occasion wassingular, being rotatory, as if influenced by aneddy, as indeed was not unlikely to be the caseabout the eastern end of an island, having only anarrow passage between it and the main, so far ascould be distinguished from the deck. The temperaturevaried from 30° to 47° + , and in the sun was73° + . The ice moved backwards and forwards asusual, but towards the close of the day was morewedged than customarily. However, at 4 h a. m.,24th June, there were many lanes of water tothe eastward, without a single one in the oppositequarter. Fresh water ran off our floe instreams during the warmth of the day ; and,what with those and cutting away more ice onthe starboard quarter, it was found by theCHAP.VI.] SET OF CURRENT. 377marks on the stern-post that the entire mass,composing that part of the floe, had risen threeinches. In the forenoon the ship was set to theeastward, and had certainly drawn nearer to theland, especially the eastern end of Charles Island,which was not more than five or six miles away.The other land, appearing at first continuouswith the latter island, was now ascertained to bethedark and forbidding coast of Labrador.It is worth mentioning that even in calms wewere evidently set to the southward and eastward,but more particularly to the former, owing,probably, to the set of the current throughFox's Channel and between the islands, whichwould strike somewhere on the main shore be-returningdirectly towards the Atlantic. Therewas no other change during the night thanwhat was occasioned by the tides ; and onJune 25th, the weather was too overcast andmisty to allow our position to be ascertained.At ll h 30 m soundings were struck in one hundredand eighteen fathoms, and the bottom was composedof mud and shells. It might be that theheavier ice, by which, I mean that formed in thewinter, had drifted out of the Strait, as thelighter pieces which now surrounded us seemedto be the recent production of the spring, beingmostly even and of but a few feet thickness,tinged with blue instead of the brownish green578 REPAIRING FOREFOOT. [CHAP.VI.and yellow of the older formation. Three orfour pieces had been lifted on the edge of ourfloe, in consequence, of course, of some unseenpressure. It was thought, too, that theship was a little more upright. The land wasonly dimly visible once or twice, for the daywas overcast and gloomy, and towards eveningsettled into rain, which poured incessantly thewhole night. Soundings were found in eighty-sixfathoms. In consequence of the prevailingeasterly wind the ice continued remarkably close,slackening, however, occasionally near the ship.Nothing, indeed, could have been done evenhad she been afloat, except to ascertain withsome precision, as I was very desirous of doing,the extent of our damage.For this purpose, on June 26th, the crewwere again employed in removing the mounds,while the carpenters were occupied about thefore-foot, which, owing to the rising of the ice,was now sufficiently exposed to allow of thebroken and damaged part being examined withmore exactness. It had been ground away bythe action of the ice, but the stem was uninjured,and we began immediately to cut awaythe ragged parts, with a view of substitutingmore solid pieces in their stead, and finallycovering the whole with iron sheathing, takenfrom the upper works of the bows, where ex-chap.VI.] Narwhal. 379prince had taught us it was not likely to beof service. At noon the weather was still dark,and the land invisible. A continuation of thesame gloomy atmosphere prevailed, and immensefloes of spring ice, not exceeding in thicknessthree feet, and black with water on the surface,crowded round our still solid island from differentpoints, but chiefly from the main or Labradorcoast, which happened to be the windwardshore. Many of these, driven forward by windand tide, struck against us with considerableviolence, but without splintering a fragment fromour rock-like mass. In the evening soundingswere got in one hundred and twelve fathoms(sand). All night the ice remained very close,the wind being fresh from the eastward ; andin the morning of June 27th all hands recommencedtheir labour on the larboard mound,which unlike some of its neighbours was onebody of solid blue ice, and though causing morehard work, yet began sensibly to diminish beforethe exertions of the crew. But few birds flewpast, though some narwhales were seen playingabout, to the great relief of the ice-mate, who,having been engaged in the Davis Straits' fisherythe greater part of his life, had been almostinconsolable at the paucity of * living creatures,'as he termed them. His joy, therefore, on thisoccasion, was commensurate 5 and having in-380 REPORT OF HEALTH. [CHAP.VI.gently watched their gambols to the moment ofdisappearance, he descended from the crossness,and with evident signs of pleasure proceededto give me a minute account of theirsize, colour, and length of horn. By observationat noon, it was found we were eight miles northof the last latitude, and by the view of the landwhich was quite clear, it was equally evident theship had been set rather east than west, thoughthe wind blew, and had been blowing fresh fromthe former quarter of the compass. It follows,therefore, that the northern ice must have socompletely blocked up the channels we had passed,as to prevent any thing like a retrograde action.The temperature varied from 34°+ to 39° + , andthe barometer was 30*01. Wind east.The men were examined to-day by the medicalofficers, and reported to be free from actual complaint,with the exception of the few individualsmentioned before, some of whom were rather worse.At this time, in an official letter addressed toDoctor Donovan, 1 demanded his opinion of theprobable consequences if the ship were detainedanother winter in these regions. His answer was,that it would be fatal to many of the officers andmen, some of whom were even now in a precariousstate; and he also reported that the mostuseful medicines for the prevalent disease wereexpended. The good effect of the labour ofCHAP. VI. J CANNONADING FLOE. 381the crew in throwing the weight of ice off thefloe, was made manifest by the fact of the ship'shaving risen two inches, her immersion in thewater and ice aft being 8 feet 10 inches. In theevening the ice was close, but much to oursatisfaction a large piece was separated from thelarboard side of the floe ; and, after midnight ofJune 28th, the wind then blowing fresh insqualls from the south-east, a sudden disruptiontook place one hundred and fifty yards ahead ofthe ship, and split the floe right across. Wetherefore returned to our task with fresh spirits ;and, as a matter of experiment, fired a couple ofsix-pounder shot at a mound, but without theresults expected, as instead of splintering andthrowing it down, the shot merely cracked it,and buried themselves deep in the substancewithout doing further injury. One of the shotwas next day recovered from the mound. It hadbeen discharged at the distance of twenty-oneyards, with a charge of 16 ounces of powder, andhad penetrated one yard and a half, splitting themass in various directions. The land was seenonce, and at noon we had drifted eight miles tothe north, being nearly in mischance ; but thewhole body of the ice was very close, infinitelytoo much so for any vessel to have made way.The temperature varied from 30° to 36°+ ; andice was formed on all the fresh water pools382 CAULKING, &C. [cHAP.VI.during the night, Barometer 29-95. A fewholes, some distance apart, showed themselves inthe evening, but, on the whole, the ice was extremelyclose. The carpenters completed andhad made a good job of the fore-foot, which waswell secured with three plates of iron.June 29th. Land was faintly seen from S. S. E.to S. W. ; the work went on as usual. At noonthe south-east wind had drifted us a little to thewest, the ice being very close and no land insight.Temperature from 32° to 36° 4- . Nothingtranspired to alter our condition, for the windwith singular constancy kept to its old point ofsouth-east, and consequently wedged the icecloser than ever ; nevertheless all opportunitieswere seized to do whatever might accelerate ourrelease from this icy cradle, and the carpenterswere again busied in caulking the butt ends ofthe planking, as they came day by day withinreach.On June 30th, four white whales appearedin a small hole of water near the ship, andoccasionally a seal popped up its head. Thelaborious work upon the mounds went on cheerily,and though some of the men began to be affectedwith inflamed eyes, they did not on that accountshrink from their duty. They had all alongworn each a small screen of green veil ; but findingthat this did not effectually answer the purpose, theyCHAP.VJ.] INAUSPICIOUS COLD. 38gcontrived to make goggles with crape over theends, instead of glass, with other devices notwithout ingenuity. The most distressing event,however, was another instance of a relapse, inthe person of Mr. Mould the assistant surgeon,who was very lame and altogether far from well.Gibbs, too, could not but be considered in anextremely precarious state, and his limbs, poorfellow, were dreadfully shrunk, and so weak, thathe could not walk the length of the lower deckwithout assistance. In clearing away the icefrom the fractured parts of the stern-post, apieceof its doubling two feet six inches in length, extendingfrom the four feet six inches mark to theseven feet, and consequently under water, wasbrought up by the carpenters, who furtherascertained that the outer stern-post had beenforced aft, and at the eight feet eight inchesmark it had opened from the wooden ends oneinch and a quarter. The night brought no change,and on July 1st the work was continued as before,but so cold had it been, that not only was iceformed on the fresh pools, but young ice wasseen even round the edge of the floe on the seawater; a strange phenomenon in the middle ofsummer, and not very auspicious for our hopes ;and, indeed an open passage could now hardly beexpected, if we were judge from what surroundedus, for the entire body of ice was not only closely384 CHEERFUL LABOURS. [CHAP.VI.wedged, but was more to the westward, morepacked, and altogether more unfavourable to theprospect of a speedy release than a month before.In fact, all depended on the direction of thewind, as must ever be the case in the navigationof these seas. Unless that be favourable fordriving out to sea the western packs of heavyice, all human efforts must be vain. Land wasonce made out, bearing S.S.W., and the weatherwas dull and cold, the temperature having got to30° + . The new moon brought us a north-eastbreeze, with a dark gloomy sky and abundanceof rain, which did not cease throughout theniffht. One or two small calves started up frombetween the cracks alongside, and on July 2dthe ice began to open out a little, having alimited space to move in towards the main landto leeward. The temperature varied only from32° to 33° + . No variation of any sort intervenedto relieve the dull aspect of affairs, butJuly 3d at least brought us what we had not experiencedfor a fortnight — a fine day. We nowdiscovered one part of the floe, on the starboardbeam, less thick than the part at which we hadbeen working ; and the men having got the ice-sawto work, and singing to time as they liftedit up and let it down, made such progress,that in the course of the forenoon, though thegeneral thickness averaged from twelve to four-chap.VI.] SAWING AWAY THE ICE. 3S5teen feet, they got through thirty feet ; whilst,on the other side of the ship, another party wasbusy in clearing away the ice from the crackleading athwart the forefoot to the extremity ofthe floe in that direction. In the meantime theship remained precisely in the same position.The observations made us a few miles to thenorth and west, the latitude being 63° 17' N.,and longitude 74° 39' W. Finding the ice becamethicker as the work approached the ship, itwas necessary to have a longer saw ; accordingly,the armourer, by means of the forge, formed twointo one, thirty feet long, which, how T ever, fromits comparative thinness, w r e were apprehensivewould not be strong enough. No change tookplace throughout the night, but the ice remainedso packed, that, had the season been fartheradvanced, the whole would most certainly havebeen connected into one immense body. As itw r as, the temperature did not sink below freezingpoint, though it arrived at it, as indeed it haddone for some time, within a degree or two.On July 4th the large saw was put intomotion, and answered remarkably well, its ownweight being sufficient to carry it down withoutany other incumbrance. With it, therefore, wemade better progress, though the ice was oftenas much as twenty feet thick, and by noon, hadcut to a main crack, the least pressure againstc c386 EMPLOYMENT TOR ARMOURER. [CHAP.VI.which, it was hoped, would carry away the piecealtogether. The wind having veered to N.N.E.,made the ice a little more slack, though it remainedstill perfectly fixed. Having sawed asfar as we could, the next step was to extricatethe saw itself, in attempting which, having beenaccidentally broken in two, it was again repairedby our industrious and zealous armourer, whonever seemed more delighted than when he hadplenty of work on his hands. We now made afresh survey of the ice directly astern of the ship ;and, finding that some places were much thinnerthan others, we forthwith commenced diggingand sinking a trench, from the edge of the floetowards, and in a line with, the keel, preparatoryto trying what might be effected with the longsaw. The rest of the afternoon was employed bythe carpenters putting in two screw ring-bolts,about three feet from, and on a level with, theeleven feet mark, according to a plan by thecarpenter, Mr. Smith, for securing the woodenends and injured parts of the ship's dead wood.This consisted in simply passing the stream chainunder the heel of the stern-post, through bothring-bolts, and securing it firmly on deck abaft,the object being to prevent any further damagethereabouts, either from the ice or sea.On July both, land, which proved to be SalisburyIsland, was distinctly seen at N.W. by N.,CHAP. VI.] LABOURS CONTINUED. 387and some water could be made out from themast-head, between south and west, but the icenear us was so close, that there would have beenlittle difficulty in walking five or six miles in anydirection. Indeed, it could not be otherwisewith these never-ending easterly winds. Asearly as 4 h a. m. the crew were working the longsaw astern, and by noon had cut through twenty-fivefeet, or more, of sixteen-feet ice. On allthese occasions the first lieutenant never quittedthem, early or late, frequently putting his handto the ropes himself, as did some of the matesand warrant officers ; and it is but justice to say,that nothing could exceed the cheerfulness andorder in which this laborious daily toil was encountered.The strictest regulations were observedrespecting the changing of boots andstockings, &c, each time the men came onboard,and again on returning to work, so thatthere were no complaints or illness of any kindfrom the constant exposure. Boards and plankingwere provided for them to stand upon, and aweak mixture of lime-juice was issued, at statedintervals, to counteract any ill effect that mightarise from too copious a use of cold water. Newice was nightly formed on all the pools, andsometimes at the edges of the salt water, though,according to the thermometer, the temperaturec c 2388 IMPEDIMENTS FROM CALVES. [CHAP.VI.had only varied from 33° to 34° + , the excesshaving been 40°+ in the southern exposure.Notwithstanding the compactness of the ice, theship was this afternoon whirled round severaltimes ; and some calves becoming entangledwith our floe near the part where the peoplewere sawing, so impeded them, that the utmostachieved was only five feet.Early on July Cth the work was renewed ; butfrom having cut in too slanting a direction, littlewas then accomplished : nevertheless, such w T astheir energy, that by noon fifty-three feet altogetherwere completed, through a thickness oftwenty-six feet. Other parties were not behindin their endeavours, and three good sized calveswere extricated from underneath heavier pieces,whilst another was heard by the first Lieutenantand myself grinding its passage out towards theedge of the floe. The entire body of the icecontinued close as before, and Salisbury Islandbore about W. by N., the latitude being63°20' N.,longitude 75° %5 f W. Nothing could exceed thegloominess of the weather ; and though fromthe rain that fell it might have been expectedto clear, there was no improvement, and neitherwind nor ice seemed disposed to change. OnJuly 7th some rumbling noises were heardby the officer of the watch, the precise cause ofCHAP. VI.] NEW RENT DISCOVERED. 889which he was prevented by the fog from ascertaining.The crew assembled at the customaryhour, and renewed their labour cheerily, thoughsome were obliged to stand in the waterwhich covered that part of the ice, in order toguide the saw. Fearing the consequences ofthis unavoidable exposure, I took care that theywere often relieved, and an extra allowance ofoatmeal, with a small quantity of spirits, wasissued. Pieces of ice of various dimensionswere either disentangled, or started up of theirown accord, from between the broad crack athwartthe bow and on both sides of the ship ; and asafurther encouragement to us, we saw for thefirst time an entirely new rent through a thickpart of the floe, which opened into the line ofwork made with the saw. By noon anotherspace of twenty-five feet had been cut through,although a depth of from twenty-four to thirtyfeet of tough solid ice had to be penetrated atevery motion of the saw ; and on examining themarks on the stern-post, it was seen that theship's draught was 8 feet 91 inches, and that shehad settled down 51 inches. The general body ofice continued deplorably close, while the temperatureranged between 30° and 43°-f; the windat east, and the barometer 29*94. A single sealwas seen, the only one for many days.July 8th. It was found by the marks on thestern-post, &c. that theshtphadsunk three quartersc c 3390 RIGGING SET UP. [CHAP.VI.of an inch forward, and risen half an inch abaft.The crew were early at their work, and felt thecomfort of the extra allowance. The ice maintaineda similar thickness, and by noon anothertwenty-two feet were gained, which made altogetherone hundred feet since the commencement;in fact, they were now approaching the stern, andat intervals they heard loud cracks close tothem, as if something were yielding underneath.Considering that the event might take place ata moment when least looked for, to the greatdanger of the people, I ordered ladders and ropes,to be hung from the stern within their reach,to which, if requisite, they might cling. Theyhowever seemed quite indifferent about thematter, and sang and worked as merrily as ifthey had been on terra firma. Easterly windsstill prevailed, as did the gloomy sky ; but thoughthe land was often obscured, yet once the Labradorcoast appeared bearing from S. W. to S. W.by W., and Salisbury Island from N. W. by W.to N. W. by N., making us much about the samespot where we had been a month ago. The icewas impenetrably close. At midnight there was.what seemed to be a dark water sky to the southward,along the coast, or it might be only theclouds, which were frequently seen hanging overthe skirts of the land.On July i)th the fineness of the day temptedus to set up the rigging, and forego what we neverCHAP. VI.] OCCUPATIONS. 391did omit except on urgent occasions, the observanceof divine service ; but a fine day was souncommon, that we were glad to take advantageof it under any circumstances. The ice continuedas close as ever, there being only one small holeof water near the ship. Here some narwhalcame to breathe ; and, as their timidity is extreme,they would scarcely have ventured so near, hadthere been any other place for the purpose. Atnoon Salisbury Island was in sight from the deck,much in the same bearing as before. The latterpart of the day was employed in erecting withthe spare topmasts a pair of sheers, to transportthe temporary rudder aft, and get it over theship's side, in case the original one could not bebrought into use when the ship floated. At midnightthe ice round us was slightly in motion butstill kept close.July 10th. Water was discovered about six milesoff, from S. W. to S. E., along the Labrador coast,and at noon Salisbury Island bore Wen. W. Thepeople resumed their sawing in the early morning ;and, although from the hardness of the ice, theydid not make their usual progress, yet they kepthard at work, in the hope of reaching the stern-postin another twenty-four hours. Not far fromthem, others were cutting a new trench at rightangles to the ship, where it was intended to saw,in order, if possible, to disunite some of the icec c 489^ REPORT OF THE Ship's DRIFT. [Chapelon which we were partly borne up. Already,indeed, it was so split by cracks, and our ownexertions, that it seemed almost certain that thefirst commotion, when the whole body shouldbegin to drift, would release us. The wind havingblown from the east twenty two days, at lastveered to west ; the weather became fine ; and thetemperature veered from 32° + to 46° + .The following statement of the drift of theship, whilst beset in the ice, between the 1st ofJanuary and the 30th of June 1837, was drawnup by Mr. Saunders (acting Master)*Course. Distance.Between 1st Jan. and 1st Feb. S. 23° 4' E. 6 Miles.„ 1st Feb. & 1st March. S. 38° 12' E. 36 „„ 1st Mar. & 2d April S. 62" 15' E. 29 „„ 2d April & 1st May S. 69° 59' E. 46 „„ 1st May & 30th May S. 60' 00' E. 70 „„ 30th May & 30th June S. 87° 35' E. 47 ,,Latitude observed. Longitude observed.January 1st, 64° 51' 00" N. 82° 25' 00" W.February 1 st, 64° 45' 00" N. 82° 1 9' 00" W.March 1st, 64° 16' 00" N. 81° 26' 00" W.April 2d, 64° 05' 00" N. 80° 37 30" W.May 1st, 63° 49' 00" N. 78° 54' 30" W.May 30th, 63° 14' 00" N. 76° 38' 45" W.June 30th, 63° 12' 00" N. 74° 54' 00" W.Thus it appears that the aggregate drift forsix months only amounted two hundred andthirty-four miles.Some more narwhal appeared again in ahole close by, and a seal drew itself on the ice,CHAP. VI.] SHIP BURSTS HER BONDS. 393no doubt to have a quiet lounge in the sunshine.This, however, the keenness of our sportsmenwould not permit; and though they failed in theirbenevolent intentions, they effectually frightenedthe visitors away.The light air from the westward had been sofarbeneficial as to loosen the ice, which wastranquil or in motion according to the tide, andwhilst in motion several calves rose up fromabout and under the fore-foot. Early on July11th Salisbury Island bore W.N.W. seven oreight leagues distant. The ice now acquired amore rapid drift ; and an old floe piece, havingbeen driven against us, forced up some light iceby its pressure, but without breaking a morsel ofour impregnable rock. The crew had resumedtheir customary labour ; and, as they drew nearerto the stern-post, various noises and crackingbeneath them plainly hinted that somethingmore than usual was in progress. After breakfastI visited them, and the other parties, who werebusy extricating calves and cutting a trench, aspreviously stated. Scarcely had I taken a fewturns on deck and descended to my cabin, whena loud rumbling notified that the ship hadbroken her icy bonds and was sliding gentlydown into her own element. I ran instantlyon deck, and joined in the cheers of the officersand men, who, dispersed on different pieces394 NOVELTY OF SCENE. [CHAP.VI.of ice, took this significant method of expressingtheir feelings. It was a sight not to beforgotten. Standing on the afraid, I saw thedark bubbling water below, and enormous massesof ice gently vibrating and springing to the surface; the first Lieutenant was just climbingover the stern, while other groups were standingapart, separated by this new gulf; and the spars,together with working implements, were restinghalf in the water, half on the ice, whilst thesaw, the instrument whereby this sudden effecthad been produced, was bent double, and in thatposition forcibly detained by the body it hadsevered.I was then informed that having cut to withinfour feet of the stern-post, they had ceased forafew minutes, to refresh themselves, when thedisruption took place, barely giving them time toclamber up as they could for safety ; whilst in themidst of all this bustle the first Lieutenant, findinghimself raised up by the ice on which he stoodto the highest step of one of the stern ladders,was seen composedly mounting it to come onboard.Nor were the other parties less fortunatein escaping accidents; so that our joy on the occasionwas not saddened by any serious misfortune.We soon found that the ship had onlysunk down to the ten feet seven inches and aquarter mark forward, and to the eleven feet nineCHAP. VI.] WELL SOUNDED. 395inches aft, having a heel of about two streaks overto port. The first thing was to sound the well,the water in which increased four inches in aquarter of an hour; and, supposing that this mightbe attributable to the change of the ship's plane,whereby the water which had been lodged asternwas allowed to come forward, it produced for themoment but little uneasiness. I soon howeverperceived that not only the offensive odour of thewell water was gone, but that what there was, wasequally salt with the sea water alongside.As the ship rested almost entirely on the starboardbilge, we naturally hoped that the firsttwirl of tide would set her fully at liberty ; andin this hope the top-gallant masts were ridded,the yards crossed, and every thing put in readinessto make sail. At noon the ice was stillclose except immediately round the ship. Meantimean increased quantity of water found its wayinto the well, which in four hours, notwithstandingthe constant use of one pump, had filled tothe depth of nineteen inches. Subsequently, wegained two inches on the leak, which thenceforthkept pretty steady at ten or twelve inches.Below this, without the use of other means, itcould not be reduced. The ponderous bodiesthat had hemmed us round for nine months andmore, the objects of our terror, and yet perhapsthe appointed means of safety, were now seen396 Stern-post SHATTERED. [cHAP.VI.floating away, dark and discoloured, among thefresh and unspotted ice. We were now ableto see clearly that the stern-post was sadlyshattered; entirely broken from the starboardside, and projecting fully three feet and a halfover to port. What other injury there might bewe could not yet divine, as the keel and lowerpart of the hull were firmly imbedded in solidice on both sides, though chiefly on the starboard,where a heavy fragment of the old floe still adhered.Imagining that additional weight in theship might assist in breaking the under ice away,we hauled alongside of a small floe, where therewas a pool of fresh water, and having got theengine to work with a long hose, shortly completedour water to nineteen tons. But findingthis without the effect desired, all sail was set ;and then, after bracing the yards in the mostadvantageous manner for our purpose, the officersand men sallied alternately from the one to theother side, and then fore and aft, still howeverwithout effect ; for although this shook the shipit shook the ice also, and the two, forming oneconnected body, merely undulated slightly together.Sail, however, was kept set ; and withour extraordinary appendage, we drifted gentlywherever the wind, which happened to be fair,listed to take us. Our motion did not exceed aquarter of a mile an hour; and, notwithstandingCHAP. VI.] LEAK NOT REDUCED. 397that detached pieces of greater or less dimensionswere frequently encountered, they did little elsethan produce some deviation in the line of drift.Much water opened in sight to the southward andto the south-west, but the breeze was W.N.W.,and we were driven about S.S.E. Throughoutthe night the pump was incessantly going, bywhich means, though the water at one timegained upon us, we were enabled generallyto keep even with the leak, though not toreduce it.July 12th. - The wind continuing light, studdingsails and royal were set, the ship driftingas before. Some shores were placed under thefore chains, in the hope that they might assist tolift the ship off; but I was apprehensive that astrong purchase might have the effect of tearingaway any fractured or splintered parts thatshould happen to be imbedded in the ice. Indeed,it was evident that great caution wasrequired in the endeavour to release her entirelyfrom her icy coating, as well on account of thedamage which was already known, as of thefurther injuries that might have been sustainedalong the keel, which we were in no conditionat that time to ascertain. It was, therefore,determined to have recourse again to the saw,which was forthwith put into order by our ablearmourer, the whole of the crew that could bespared from the pumps being, in the meantime,398 PROSPECTS CONSIDERED. [Chapelemployed in throwing off the surface of two ofthe three or four solid hummocks which yetremained alongside, while others of the same partycut a trench at right angles to the ship's beam,preparatory to using the saw. At noon there weresome narwhal near, and flocks of loons flew past;but there were few or no gulls. Owing to thehaziness of the weather no land was in sight.As I now hoped that a few days at most wouldyield the Terror to my own control, it becamenecessary for me to decide as to the possibility ofaccomplishing the original purpose of the expedition; and, although the altered state of thehealth of almost all on board made the prospectlessfavourable than it had been ten monthsao*o, yet I had not, until recently, entertained adoubt of executing in part, if not entirely, themission on which I had been despatched. Itcannot, however, be denied that the loss of threevaluable men, the entire disability of four orfive others, the symptoms of disease lingeringin many more — to say nothing of some of theofficers who were visibly effected — had, togetherwith Dr. Donovan's letter on the subject, alreadygiven me great uneasiness ; and now that theknown damage of the ship proved to be far beyondwhat I had anticipated, or rather had hopedagainst hope •> this, with her leakage, and otherinjuries, apprehended though not known, forcedme to contemplate the possibility of a differentCHAP. VI.] officers' opinion. 399conclusion. Unwilling, however, to admit athought so destructive of all my fondly-cherishedhopes and wishes, I demanded the written opinionof the three Lieutenants and Master. These,in separate communications, and for various reasons,decided that nothing was left but to get theship to England without delay ; and my ownsense of duty finally concurring in this opinion,the resolution was most reluctantly adopted.In the afternoon we got the saw to work,and by 5 h p. m. had cut to within a fewfeet of the ship's side, when, the ice beingcloser ahead, sail was reduced. We then driftedalongside of a floe, round a point of which wecontrived to pass about midnight, and saw muchopen water to the south-east.July 13th. Though there was ice in everydirection, we continued to drift about a quarterof a mile an hour. Some small calves foundtheir way from beneath our clog, and it was withgreat satisfaction that we contemplated the increasedbreadth of the saw line — a satisfactionnot lessened by the discovery that the ship hadsettled more down, her draught now being abaftthirteen feet eight inches, and forward twelvefeet eight. Neither, with the incessant workingcrof one pump, had the water accumulated in thewell beyond eleven inches. At 9 h a.m. therewas a moderate breeze from the westward with,400 DISRUPTION NEAR SHIP. [CHAP.VI.a thin mist, and, to our unaccustomed eyes asight almost marvellous, a gentle swell on anapparently unbroken surface. It was thoughtthe agitation, slight as it was, might crack orbreak the ice alongside ; but as it proved otherwise,two warps fixed to ice anchors, and leadingto either extremity of the ship, were firmlyattached at a favourable angle for separating andentirely disuniting the entire mass ; however,while we were in the act of heaving a powerfulstrain on the warps, it suddenly split diagonallyfrom a hammocks point about fifteen paces fromthe starboard bow, along its outer edge, to somewherenear the after part of the main chains.The detached portion, on which were two menathird being in the dingy, close to them), wasinstantaneously splintered into three pieces, twoof which, singularly enough, were separatelyoccupied by the persons just mentioned, who,standing steadily on the whirling and heavingice, thus violently discarded, gave a heartycheer, while their companion, having lost hisbalance from the sudden jerking of the dingy,lay stretched at full length, and grasping the gun-whaleon each side. The cheering however wasturned to astonishment, as they watched the shipslowly rising and heeling over to port. We onboardhad been surprised that no counter actionoccurred, and were beginning to wonder that theCHAP. VI.] PERILOUS EMERGENCY. 401vessel did not recover her equilibrium, but werenow startled by the conviction that she wasgradually going over ; and the great inclinationrendering it impossible to stand on deck, everyoneclung on to windward as he best could. Thenit was we beheld the strange and appalling spectacleof what may be fitly termed a submergedberg, fixed low down with one end to the shipside,while the other, with the purchase of alonglever, advantageously placed at a right anglewith the keel, was slowly rising towards thesurface. Meanwhile, those who happened to bebelow, finding every thing falling, rushed orclambered on deck, where they saw the ship onher beam-ends, with the lee boats touching thewater, and felt that a few moments only trembledbetween them and eternity. Yet in thatawful crisis there was no confusion ; the sailswere clewed up and lowered ; fresh men fromformer crews were stationed in the boats, whichagain were rather unhooked than lowered ; thebarge was hoisted out ; and with a promptitudeand presence of mind which I shall ever rememberwith admiration, the whole five were provisionedand filled with arms, ammunition, andclothing, and veered astern clear of danger. Thepumps were never quitted, and though expectingthat the ship might capsize, yet thequestion of " Does the leak gain on us ?" wasD D402 AWKWARDNESS OF SITUATION. [CHAP.Vasked, and when answered in the negative, therewas still a manifestation of hope. Our fate, however,yet hung in suspense, for not in thesmallest degree did the ship right ; happily forus there was a dead calm, which permitted usto examine the berg.At the only part along the side, wherewe could effectively act, it was found to befour fathoms thick, and along this it was determinedto cut with the saw, if, providentially,time were spared us for the operation. Ongoing; round outside with the first Lieutenant,I counted nearly fourteen planks below thefilled up part of the main chains to the edgeof the water, the angle of inclination being abouttwenty-five degrees, while on the lee side I steppedfrom the boat's thwart on deck. Looking atthe bottom, we perceived that the keel, from thefore-foot aft, was torn and ragged, but to whatextent the damage extended could not yet beascertained. The exceeding awkwardness ofour situation occasioned some difficulty inslinging and placing the stages and sheers forsawing, but this was surmounted ; and by Ll h a.m.the work was begun, and went on cheerily.The men were told that much depended on theirexertions, and were encouraged to finish theirtask the same day. Provisions were issued ondeck, and weak grog supplied occasionally j andthus fortified, and assisted by the officers, theyCHAP. VI.] CREW HARD AT WORK. 408sang and worked with that characteristic indifferenceto peril which has been so often admiredin British seamen. While we were thus occupied,several seahorse came up, and afterlistening and stretching out their necks with asort of curious stupidity as they drew themselveson the ice, they seemed undecided whetherto remain or not ; at length, however, theytumbled their uncouth bulks into the water, anddisappeared. Meantime, considerable progress,as was imagined, was made with the saw ; but,on sounding, it was found that instead of cuttingup and down it had taken a slanting course, andthus obliged us to recommence ; and the lowerpart, too, proved so hard, that a longer time wasrequired for finishing the half yet undone.Seeing this, and reflecting that the heaviestpart was detached, the same process was triedfrom aft ; and, this being found to be easier, bymidnight there remained but twenty-five feetto cut, for connecting the two sections. Againthe crew were supplied with food, making thethird pound to each man since the commencementof the work in the forenoon ; but, on thisoccasion, hot cocoa was given instead of grog.After one hour's rest the laborious duty was resumed,and, stimulated with the desire of seeingthe ship once more upright, they did not relaxuntil nature asserted her prerogative.d d <Z404 SHIP RIGHTS. [CHAP. VI.After 2 h a. m., July 14th, many became sofagged and drowsy that, in spite of the energeticremonstrances of the first Lieutenant, they workedmechanically, with their eyes shut ; and therefore,anxious as I was that all should be accomplishedbefore a change of weather or other contingencyshould interfere, and though ten feetonly were wanting to unite the fore and aft line,I gave direction that all should quit the ice, andHe down for two hours. It was remarked, aboutthat time, that the ship had righted a few inches,but still no one could move about the deck withoutholding on by the ropes to windward. Thepeople had crept under the shelter of the deckto escape from the chilling air of the morning(for filmy ice was forming on the sea) ; theofficers were dispersed about the deck above ; andI was contemplating the languid action of thosewhose turn it was to take the pumps, and moreparticularly, three or four jaded forms, stretchedout in death-like slumber on the lee side — when,suddenly, there was a sensible yielding beneaththe feet, with the grating sound of breaking ice,and, before a word could be spoken, the liberatedship righted entirely ; while broken spars, thebent saw, and the massy berg, were all in commotiontogether. Quick as they could spring,the crew jumped on deck, and I know not howmany cheers commemorated the joyful occasion.facto•46*iN3--<0HSia. 5aMNPa■ jI 1-©ni!>^i3-=CHAP. VI.] GRATIFYING REFLECTIONS. 405It was a scene not to be forgotten by the spectators.It wanted but one day to complete fourmonths since the ship had been thrown uponthe ice. In that period what extraordinaryphenomena we had witnessed — what manifoldmercies had shielded us when all seemed desperate,and now we were free : the good shipwas once more in her own element, and subjectto the will of man ! I almost doubted the realityof what I saw.The crew were again alive for duty ; andhaving unloaded and hoisted up the boats, thetermination, as we hoped, of our weary anxietieswas celebrated by the distribution of a little grogto the crew, who, after three cheers, which theyrequested permission to give, to myself and theofficers, the fine fellows were sent to theirhammocks. The officers were glad to followthe example of the men : Lieutenant Smyth, inparticular, must have been greatly fatigued ; forsince the 21st of June he had been himself dailyat work, and his exertions throughout this tryingaffair were as meritorious as they were harassing.Two accidents only happened, from first to last,and one of these was slight ; the other, as havingbefallen an invalid, was more serious, but yetnot dangerous. What might have happened hadthe people remained on the ice it is difficult toconjecture ; but as it rose and fell against thedd 3406 CLEARING DECKS. [CHAP.VI.ship's side, which again, on leaning over, pressedupon it, there is reason to apprehend that fewwould have survived that fatal crush. Wonderful,therefore, was the whole ! and well mightwe repeat with the Psalmist, " They that godown to the sea in ships, and occupy their businessin great waters ; these men see the worksof the Lord, and his wonders in the deep."Who amongst us can ever forget that day ?The ship, though tolerably upright, had atrifling list to port : her draught of water, afterthe consumption of one year's food, was reducedonly one foot, being fourteen feet eight inchesforward, and fourteen feet seven abaft. Left toher own guidance, she went slowly before thewind, avoiding, in a remarkable manner, themany pieces of drift ice which surrounded her.At noon the weather was beautiful. I nowheard from the carpenter, that during the timethe ship was on her beam ends, the midshippart of the upper deck rose up, while both theends were unsupported ; a trial which, in hisopinion, no other vessel could have withstood,but must inevitably have broken her back, andbeen in great danger of sinking. As soon as thehandsomer turned up, we commenced clearingthe decks, and in endeavouring to stow away thegunner's stores, it was discovered that the waterwas pouring into the ship in two rills, which,CHAP. VI.] PUMPS AT WORK. 407finding their way by the stern-post, fell over thetransom with a gush. Every thing was immediatelycleared out to enable the carpenter toget at the leak, and most of the things werewet from having been under water. The casksin which bread was stowed, being water-tight,little or no injury had been sustained by thisimportant article. The water in the well hadbeen kept under, at first with three, and subsequentlywith two pumps, constantly at work ;and, even when the carpenters seemed to checkthe stream, which rushed through the leak, stillthose on deck could not relax in their efforts.July 15th. To the Nee. there was a pack ofsolid ice, and the drift ice was too thick to allowthe ship to yaw about amongst it ; the little headsail,therefore, that had been set, was taken in,and we began to pass a chain round and underthe projecting part of the stern-post, heaving itso tight as to secure it against the effect of aheavy sea. The old rudder was now, by thehelp of the sheers erected for that purpose,taken on board, and the new one hoisted outand hung in its proper place. Sail was then set,and, having tacked under some disadvantage, weentertained a very favourable opinion of theresult of the experiment. The ship, however,was very leewardly, and the shock occasioned bythe first piece of ice that struck against her,D D 4408 EXPEDITION FRUSTRATED. [CHAP.VI.showed clearly how much she was shaken andweakened. I had waited for the verification ofmy apprehensions, before I could bring myselffinally to relinquish the object of my mission ;but my last hope having now vanished, — the shipcrazy, broken, and leaky, — I had no longer achoice ; and, accordingly, assembling the crewon the quarter deck, I told them they were nowgoing home. It may be well pardoned themthat their countenances brightened at the intelligence,and their feelings were manifested bythree hearty cheers.Thus in effect ended an expedition, fromwhich, had it been permitted to reach its portof disembarkation, it was reasonable to expectthe full accomplishment of its objects. Uncontrollablecircumstances prevented it. Theproblem itself, which it was intended to solve,remains of course unaltered. Whether, notwithstandinga repulse which may fairly be consideredas accidental, a further trial is to be made, is aquestion for the consideration of those to whosezeal and perseverance the science of geographyis already so deeply indebted.The wind having got to the eastward, theship was kept in the open water off CharlesIsland, in readiness to avail itself of any leadtowards the mouth of the Strait. Another leakwas discovered, which again intruded on ourCHAP. VI.] SLOW PROGRESS OF SHIP. 409Sunday service. At noon, the eastern point ofCharles Island bore S. \ W., and the ice continuingpacked to the eastward, we contentedourselves with standing off and on. The ship,however, was so leewardly, that by noon, July 17th,we were only opposite to the east end of the sameisland, having made but seven miles to windwardin twenty-four hours ; though, in smoothwater, with all reefs out and top-gallant sailsset. The leaks had been partially stopped ; butanother passage was soon found out throughand between the lining and the sides, and thesame quantity of water made its way into theship as before. As there was little prospect ofmuch improvement in this respect, a differentmode of working the pumps was adopted, andconduits were laid down and caulked, from thepumps to the ship's sides, in order to carry offthe water without wetting the deck. We nowsailed among loose ice, avoiding as carefully aspossible any concussion ; for the shock even ofa small piece made the ship's frame tremble in amanner that proved beyond doubt her ricketycondition. Night as it advanced, brought rainwith fog, and a freshening breeze which inducedus to shorten sail, and having tacked from theedge of the pack, we hove to.Next day, July 18th, the topsails were treblereefed, and as the same misty weather prevailed,410 RAINY WEATHER. [CHAP.VI.much caution and dexterity were required onthe part of the officers in keeping clear of driftice. All hands were yet occupied during theday in clearing those parts of the after hold adjacentto the leaks, and in restoring such as hadalready been disturbed. The carpenters detecteda considerable rising in the lining of the starboardside of the bread-room, just between thesleeper and the stringer, against which there hadbeen so violent a pressure for many months past.He secured it with sixteen long nails. Thoughthe wind had got round to the westward, yet,thick and rainy as the weather was, all that couldbe done was to steer clear of the ice ; but on July19th, the wind again veered to the north, andcompelled us to beat to windward, to avoid beingdriven on the southern shore. At noon it rainedheavily, and the ice was closely packed to thenorth-east. The two pumps were kept going asbefore, the leak making about four feet of waterper hour. Temperature 35° + . In the afternoonthe freshening of the breeze made it necessaryto reef the topsails, and we continued skirtingthe edge of the pack until after midnight, whenon the 20th, the ice beginning to stream off, anddrift in vast quantities towards the southernland, it was requisite to make an effort to eludeit, for fear of being carried with it in that direction.This, of necessity, threw us into the midstCHAP, VI. J DIFFICULTY OF STEERING. 411of it ; and, unmanageable as the ship was, andalways going to leeward, the utmost attention onthe part of those on deck could not prevent herstriking or grazing against various pieces, fromthe concussion of which she suffered greatly.Observing that the ice opened out to the northeast,in which direction I wished to go, for the purposeof returning along the known track of thenorth shore, rather than by the unfrequented, andalmost unknown navigation of the south one, advantagewas taken of the circumstance ; and, thoughgreatly annoyed by numerous unavoidable shocksfrom the drift ice, sufficient distance was gainedto bring in sight the coast along which we hadpassed last year. Such, however, was the difficultyof steering clear of concussions, andso great the importance of saving our newrudder, which was in danger of being carriedaway, that further progress was impossible; andas by good fortune an extensive floe was near,the ship was got to it and made fast by theusual means of ice anchors. At that time, onecompact sheet of ice filled the Straits from shoreto shore, and extended to the utmost limit ofview to the eastward. At noon Charles Islandbore (east end) W.S.W. and the Labrador shorestretched to the south and east, terminating in apoint. The temperature was 37°-\- , and 44° + inthe sun. That of the sea water which in a free412 ship's draught increased, [chap. VI.space was 35° -f , was, when surrounded with ice,only 31° -f. The effectual labours of the carpenterbegan to be manifested by a small butperceptible diminution of the depth of water inthe well : in consequence, however, of thewood becoming sodden, the ship had increasedher draught of water about two and a half inches.We found ourselves setting, as was supposed,fast to the south-east ; and, in the evening, thefloe to which we were attached split into threepieces, though leaving our part still large enoughto hang on by.July 21st. The ice had driven us nearer tothe Labrador Coast, a few miles from which wasan island conjectured to be that called Eggs.The main shore was high and apparently rocky,being diversified by hill and valley, where streaksand patches of snow yet remained. The channelbetween it and Charles Island seemed wide, andprobably contributed to form some of the eccentricwhirls, or currents, which every now and thenvisibly affected the ice. In the forenoon wewere obliged to get more warps out, to haul theship out of the way of such floe pieces as threatenedto drive against the rudder; for, though thesouth shore might have been approached, therewas not the smallest opening to the north andeast, nor indeed to the west. Two whales wereseen, and a narwhal, together with a few boat-chap.VI.] HILLY COAST. 413swains. At noon Charles Island bore W. by N.about eight leagues distant. There was muchdrift ice incommoding us in the afternoon, whenthe ship was hauled alongside the floe to allowof our filling our tanks with fresh water. Theremust have been a perfect block to the east ; for,though the wind was westerly, and, consequently,down the Straits, we moved only to the southwardwith the ice, which took us nearer andnearer the shore. About 6 h 30 m there was aprobability of getting three or four miles to thesouth-east, whereupon we cast off from the floeand made sail, and, having accomplished thedistance at 8 h p. m., we again made fast to alarge floe. This had certainly been exposed toheavy pressure, for many blocks and massesof ice were thrown upon it, to the height offifteen or twenty feet.July 22d, presented one glare of ice to the northeastand south-east from shore to shore, and atnoon, we found by the observations that ourdrift had rather carried us in shore ; so that wehad now an opportunity of beholding the coast inall its frowning grandeur. It rose into highhills, deserving the name of mountains, andthese were broken into numerous vallies, that,after shelving in some places towards the sea,terminated abruptly in fearful precipices andperpendicular cliffs, accessible only to birds.414 FLOE-PIECES Ii MOTION. [CHAP.VI.Some islands lay off, and, though evidently of nomean altitude, were completely in shade underthese towering cliffs. Harbours and deep bightswere sufficiently defined, but all were chokedwith ice, and unapproachable except by suchpressure as we had no desire to experience.Two pumps were still required to keep the shipfree. A whale was seen and several morses.Throughout the afternoon large floe pieces wereobserved to be setting in almost every direction,even against the wind, which had considerablyincreased in strength ; and frequently we werenot a little embarrassed to protect the rudderagainst their assault, being compelled to makeuse of warps to avoid them. The carpenter, onexamining the lining below, found that thewater trickled through still higher than before,and that, in consequence, the ship's draught wasaugmented to fourteen feet eleven inches foreand aft, being three inches deeper than whenshe righted from the ice.Finding that the ice continued in motion, andthat there was a lead somewhat nearer the land,I now decided on trying it, as not the slightestprobability appeared of an opening towards thenorth shore, where, on the contrary, the viewpresented only one compact body of impenetrableice. Although, therefore, I was not withoutsome anxiety of being closed in against theCHAP. VI.] FREAK OF THE SHIP. 415shore, if, as was not impossible, the breezeshould veer to the north and drive all the windwardice upon us ; yet I had, in fact, no alternative.At 8 h 50 m p. m. the surrounding massesbegan to drift to the south-east ; and, coastingoff from the floe, we threaded an in-shore leadunder easy sail until ll h p. m., when fartherprogress being interrupted by the closing of theice, the ship was kept beating to windward ofthe pack until the morning of July 23d, withthe view of taking the first favourable openingthat presented itself. The ship, however, decidedthe point herself rather more quickly thanwas anticipated ; for, refusing to answer thehelm, which had been put a-lee for tacking, shedrove bodily to leeward into the pack, to thegreat risk of carrying away the rudder and theremainder of the stern-post. This freak cost ussome severe shocks in forcing a passage to afloe, round whose point we contrived to get bymeans of warping; and, as the prospect was rathermore promising, sail was kept on the ship, and shebored her way with many sharp concussions andinfinite windings till about l h p. m., when, havingrun between twenty and thirty miles, she wasstopped by the usual impediment. Trifling asthis distance may appear, it seemed considerableto us who had been so long driven whereverwind and tide chose to carry us. The line of416 VISITED BY ESQUIMAUX. [CHAP.VI.coast was still mountainous and imposing, with asingularly irregular outline, partially lost in ahorizontal band of fleecy clouds, which the finenessof the day allowed to dwell there. Norwas variety wanting; for, besides numerousdark and rugged islands extending from pointto point, there were spacious bays and harbours,almost land-locked, and stretching so far inlandas to lose their sombre aspect in the soft blue ofthe distance. In one place there was an amphitheatreof frowning hills, the bases of whichwere buried in mist, while the picturesque summitsstood out clear and defined, touched hereand there with snow, producing an effect moststriking, but of which no description could givean adequate idea. Four noisy natives of theEsquimaux race had the hardihood to venturethrough much difficult drift ice to the ship, fromwhence, however, they returned amply rewarded,and the richest of their tribe. Some of the presents,supplied for that purpose by government,were given to them, together with a few brassmedals, having the ship's name on one side, anda figure of Britannia on the other. The northshore could be seen from deck.In the evening the ice became rather slacker,and an intimation of the freshening of thewesterly wind was given by the slipping of thewarp over the head of the hummock to which itCHAP.Yi.] ANOTHER INVALID. 417was fastened, in consequence of the increasedstraining of the ship. Early on July 24th atempting lead appearing in the right direction,that is to say, slanting off the shore, sail wasagain made, and leaving the floe, under theinfluence of a fresh breeze, we proceeded threeor four miles without any impediment from ice.At the end of that distance, however, the shipwas compelled to bore among heavy masses, andin so doing there was no possibility of escapingmany serious blows that shook her whole frame,though still without apparent injury. At 9 h 30 mthe impracticability of proceeding further becameapparent, and we made fast to an extensive oldfloe, of the yellow tinted kind, which happenedto be at hand. I ought to mention that, at onetime, we fancied a brigantine was in sight, which,as the day became clearer, turned out to be aniceberg, being over towards the north shore.We had succeeded in drawing away from theland about twenty miles, and the whole of theforenoon we were set considerably to the southeast.The hope of getting entirely free ofthe ice and breathing a different air had diffusedfresh spirits in most of our invalids ; but it wasannoying to find a new patient in the list, andone, too, who had passed through the regions ofthe winter without evincing the least symptomof disorder. The whole affair, indeed was inex-E E418 FLOES NUMEROUS. [CHAP.VI.placable to the medical officers, as we had had theadvantage of the best provisions, and assuredlyevery comfort which persons situated as wewere could possess. At l h p. m. catching aglimpse of an opening we left the floe, but aftersome boring were stopped, and again held on bythe heaviest floe we had seen since the winter.There had been immense pressure on it, as withthe floes in Fox's Channel, whence, judgingfrom its dirty yellow colour, it had in all probabilitycome. In the evening we made anotherattempt, which, after an hour's trial, was againrelinquished, and we made fast as before toanother floe, a great number of which lay inevery direction.July &5th. The westerly breeze now failedus, and up to noon the ice was infinitely tooclose to permit our moving. After some timehowever, the ship was warped from floe to floe,as circumstances admitted, and at 5 h p.m., justwhen it was thought that further progress washopeless, and we were about to make fast, the icegradually opened out, and sail being immediatelycrowded on the ship, she went with hardboring between very heavy ice, at the rate oftwo or three knots an hour, as was imagined,directly towards the north shore.July 26th. It fell partially calm, but after8 n a. m, a light air sprang up \ and, though com-CHAP.VI.] CURRENTS. 419lately hampered with ice of all descriptions, forthe berg was then plainly discerned from deck, yetwe thumped and glided on from piece to piece,and thus contrived to make a kind of deviouscourse to the east-north-east. The Labradorcoast was thrown up considerably by refraction,and, even allowing for this, appeared muchnearer than our estimated run gave us reason tosuppose. At noon this was accounted for bythe discovery that, though the longitude wasconsiderably to the east, the latitude was actuallya few miles south of yesterday's, thusdemonstrating the influence of a current settingfrom the west along the Labrador shore,directly contrary to the set described by otherofficers as existing on the north side of theStraits. This fact corresponded with what wehad already experienced somewhere about MillIslands, where it may be remembered someover falls were seen, which, together with astrong set down Fox's Channel, so completelyoverdo were the sailing qualities of the Terror,that for two days she was unable to beat throughthem. It is not improbable, therefore, that theupward current, becoming dissipated and brokenalong the sinuosities of the northern shore, maybefinally turned by the stronger one from Fox'sChannel, the effect of which would be that theset would be carried between the islands towardsee 2420 SLOW PROGRESS. [CHAP. VI.Charles Island, and thence east into the Atlantic,as we found to be the case in fact.During the remainder of the day, and untilnoon of the 27th, the wind was light, but stillstrong enough to enable us to sail and boreamong extremely heavy ice, which, from piecesof moderate dimensions, all at once changed itscharacter to enormous floes, completely blockingup the passage across. We could therefore onlycoast along them, as well as the impedimentspermitted.* Our progress, therefore, was necessarilyslow ; but after 9 h p. m. a casual slacktaking place, the ship forced her way a fewmiles ahead, striking with startling violence, butyet, as on former occasions, without increasingher leakage, though a great deal of oakum hadworked from out the seams under the counter.The ice was of an extraordinary thickness, andhad, moreover, long projecting tongues two orthree fathoms below the surface, which so obstructedour course that, though the ship's headpointed often N.N.E., we only made good aS.E. line of direction. By midnight the entirebody of ice closed in and beset us ; and theappearance, at the same time, of a faint aurora,brought about the recollection of last autumn.Two pieces of ice with fragments, refuse, &c. passed us.They were conjectured to have come from one of the Hudson'sBay Company's ships probably passing along the north coast.CHAP. VI.] REFRACTION OF OBJECTS. 4 c 2lJuly 28th brought no difference in our prospects,except indeed the unwonted presence, atthis season of the year, of no fewer than nine orten large bergs, the produce of Davis's Straits,proving the prevalence of easterly winds fromseaward, although of late we had experiencedwesterly ones in Hudson's Strait. Bergs ofthis description are always described, by thoseemployed in the Greenland fishery, to ' hold,'as it is termed, a great deal of water ; but everyoneof these, so far as could be discerned fromthe mast-head, was hemmed tightly round withice, nor was water visible in any point of thecompass, with the single exception of a narrowlane towards the Labrador shore. At noon thecentre of Long Island bore S. W. Therewas, and had been for two days, considerablerefraction of objects. The ship did not go herown length ahead, by any power derivedfrom her sails, and at night the ice was unusuallyclose-packed ; but what most astonished uswas a gentle swell, which perceptibly agitatedthe whole body around us, and indicated theneighbourhood of open water, disturbed by strongeasterly winds ; so that, having, in a manner,exhausted the fine westerly breeze which hadbrought us thus far through the seemingly endlessnuisance (for it was now one year since wefirst encountered it), our ship gently drifted toee 3422 POSITION AS BEFORE. [CHAP.VI.the south-east, in a sort of neutral territory betweenthe confines of the polar and temperate regions.July 29th. It was in vain that topmast andtop-gallant studding sails were set, for thoughthey seemed to hug the gentle air aloft, we remainedimmovable. Daylight however proved,by the altered appearance of Long Island, thatour drift had been southerly, and this was fartherverified by the appearance of some flocks of ducksflying from the land towards the north. At noonour position was much the same, only that land,supposed to be Green Island, was observed tobear south-east. The temperature was 54°, havingrisen from 33°+. We were still completelybeset, and as the day declined, the wind, graduallyveering to the eastward, so interlockedthe points of ice as to give the appearance of onevast floe. In the twenty-four hours, accordingto the noon observation of July 30th, our drifthad been a little westerly, and full fifteen milesdue south, which brought us still nearer to somelow islands lying off Long Island, With everyavailable sail set, the ship had forged aheadabout twice her own length in four hours \ andthough more or less sail was carried, accordingto the strength of the breeze, at midnight onlya few hundred paces of distance had beengained.On July 31st, so close was the ice, that thereCHAP. VI.] REVOLUTION OF ICE ASTERN, 423was no possibility of keeping the ship's head in theright direction, or preventing her from drifting bodilytowards the land : sail, therefore, was shortened,and we made fast to the largest piece near. By thismeasure, however, our way to the south was ratherincreased than diminished, and sail was again set ;when, after drifting considerably to leeward, herhead was at length forced in the right direction,and she went ahead about twice her own length.Th en,flnding all further exertion useless, the for merplan of carrying out an ice-anchor to the heaviestpiece was adopted, and, the sails being furled,we remained quiet until 10 h 30 m a. m., when, bya sudden revolution of the ice astern, a weightymass came in contact with the rudder, and, beforewe could warp out of danger, had well nighcarried it away. A few minutes, however,sufficed to haul the ship's broadside to the largerpiece, where we lay secure. It might have beenexpected, from our previous drift with a westerlybreeze, that now that the wind had drawn roundto the north-east we should have been driven stillmore to the southward, where some low rocks,apparently not much above the water, wereready to receive us. But here again was anotheranomaly; for, notwithstanding the drag of theship against the ice to which she was anchored,greatly to our astonishment she went to windward,almost, indeed, in the wind's eye, so thate e 4424 PUMPS STILL REQUIRED. [CHAP.VI.:by nightfall the coast of Long Island, whoserugged rocks were contemplated eight hoursbefore with no agreeable sensations, was beginningto assume a fainter tinge, and to give place tothe loom of some uncertain land, conjectured tobe Green Island, bearing about east.Heavy rain, similar to that ordinarily met withat the edge of a pack, or at least in the vicinity ofopen water, together with thick weather, effectuallyscreened the shore from view. This continuingthroughout the night, on August 1st we hadno means of ascertaining our position otherwisethan by sounding; but as this gave one hundredand twenty-eight fathoms water, on a muddybottom, all cause for anxiety was at an end.The ice continued to slacken about the shipand to windward, and at noon the temperaturewas 34°. Two pumps were always requiredto keep the ship free ; and, notwithstandingour present sheltered situation, yet the jerkingand concussions received from passing ice addedto the effect of a slight swell, just sufficient toswing the broadside at intervals against thepiece to which we were attached, had contributedto weaken still further the after part ofthe ship, so that, to use the carpenter's phrase,the bolts wept ;" or, in other words, werealready sufficiently loosened to allow of thewaters oozing between them and the wood.14fCHAP. VI. J SHIP STRUCK BY A Plot. 4 L 25.The result was an increase of water in the well,amounting now to a little more than five feetper hour, and an apprehension that it would bestill further augmented on exposure to a rollingsea. Several heavy remnants of floes hovered forthree or four hours of a rainy night alarminglynear our rudder and quarter ; and, anxious aswe were to guard these tender and . importantpoints, it was not a little curious to observe theeccentric movements of those huge masses ;now pressing directly towards us, now turningaside and athwart the previous course, as it werereluctantly retreating ; then again, as if urged byfresh vigour, turning slowly round, and graduallyapproaching ; until suddenly, under somepowerful but unseen influence, their whirlingceased, and they started off with acceleratedspeed in a straight undeviating line, immediatelyagainst the wind, ploughing up or tossing asideevery impediment that crossed their way. Rainfell all night, up to noon of August 2d, thewind continuing north-east and the ice close,whilst a gentle swell occasionally agitated theship. No land could be seen. At c 2 h 40 ra p. m.a sudden commotion took place among the ice,perhaps occasioned by the spring tide, whichdrove a large floe against the ship, upon the starboardquarter, with a crash that brought mostof the officers on deck* Fortunately, the blow42G HEAVY MISTS. [CHAP.VI.was not repeated ; and, after a lapse of twohours, it floated away to the leeward, whither,indeed, all the lighter ice seemed to be drifting,in the direction of south-east. The same darkthick weather, with incessant rain, prevailedthroughout the night, the ice being often veryslack, and then closing again with some degreeof violence.August 3d. Finding that the stern was moreexposed than the bow, which had the shelter ofa projecting point of our holding piece, the shipwas turned round end for end, and secured ;though, such was the uncertain action of thedrift ice, that it was little better than chancewhich was the better direction. At noon wewere still in the dark as to our position ; but,judging from the numerous flocks of loons flyingbackwards and forwards morning and evening,it was conjectured that the land could not bevery remote. Meanwhile, the easterly wind andmist continued, the temperature varying from32° to 3 r /° + . About 2 h p.m. the ice closedrapidly around us ; and a heavy floe which hadbeen at rest for some hours, acquiring instantspeed, struck our holding piece so forcibly as tosplit it, leaving, however, a remnant sufficientfor our purpose, when some necessary alterationshad been made with the warp. At 4 h therewas a partial clearing above, and some low landCHAP. VI.] TWO BERGS DISCOVERED. 427was indistinctly seen, bearing E.S.E. ; but thereturn of the mist again obscured it, and left usignorant of what part it was. Immense flocksof loons kept constantly flying in every direction,betraying a restlessness altogether unaccountable.There was no lack of water, which, however,they seemed to disregard ; so that had not wecaught a glimpse of our position, I should havecertainly thought we were not far from the rockswhere they roosted. Not long after this, twobergs were discovered ; and the wind havingveered to north-west, and the ice become moreapart, I determined on casting off from whathad carried us safely through three days of mist.I was utterly at a loss to know whether the shipwas north or south of her last ascertained position; but, as the horizon was visible for about fourmiles, and nothing appeared to indicate land, wewarped a short distance, and then made sail.The ice continued slack, and we had the satisfactionto find that the ship glided through thewater, though not without the usual penalty ofsome severe shocks, which made her tremble toher very keel. The carpenter had been assiduouslyemployed in an attempt to force up aquantity of oakum and tallow between thedoubling and the rents in the stern-post, in thehope of choking some portion of the leaksthereabouts j and the experiment, so far as he428 A SMART GALE. [CHAP.VI.could judge from the disappearance of thematerial used, was attended with tolerable success.At midnight there was almost a calm, andthe whole body of ice began to set fast to thesouth. However, on the 4th, the breeze revisitedus, and with more or less obstruction we wenton under the same sail. The ice now lay morein streams than formerly ; and between thesethere was so much water, as to induce the ice-mateto suppose we had got to the edge of thepack. That this was not the fact was subsequentlyproved by our being again slightlyhampered at noon, when by the latitude of67° 47' N., it was evident that notwithstandingthe northern course which had been steered,we had still crept to the southward. At 4 h p. m.Green Island was clearly visible from S.E. toE.S.E., considerably to the south of us, althoughbearing north by the charts; a circumstanceeasily accounted for, as it had only been seen bythe dead reckoning of one of our predecessors,and marked down accordingly. Its true position;is in latitude 60° 30' north, and longitude67° 26' 20" west.As the sun declined, the weather cleared andbrought on a fresh breeze that shortly increasedto a smart gale ; and the ice being closer andheavier than in the early part of the day, it becamerequisite to shorten sail and close-reef the top-chap.VI.] SPLENDID METEOR. 429sails, to lessen the violence of the shocksunavoidably received. Some of these, indeed,were sufficiently alarming to cause anxiety forthe safety of the rudder ; for, as we were in whatis called a loose pack, with no piece largeenough to make the ship fast to, she driftedagainst them broadside on, and, drawing herlength along with much pressure under thequarter, threw a powerful strain on the stern-post.On August 5th, about c 2 h a. m., a splendidcomet-like meteor appeared in the south-east,which darting from somewhere near the zenith inabrilliant prismatic blaze, and, taking a directiontowards the horizon, burst about fifteen degreesabove it, and after scattering rays of beautifulsparks, vanished altogether. Towards morninga ground swell was felt, and the ice becomingmuch slacker, and the wind lighter, ■ (thoughstill fresh), w r e made some way to the north,having passed two large bergs, which the nightbefore were barely in sight. Green Island, too,was distant and much refracted. We now, forthe first time since leaving Charles Island, gotinto a space of eight or ten miles of open water,and setting the main sail we beat to windward toround a point of ice, which, how r ever, was noteffected by noon. The latitude was found to be60° 54', and there seemed a reasonable proba-430 Dark-coloured BERGS. [CHAP.VI.ability of getting still more to the north, which Iconsidered the only certain way of avoiding thesoutherly set, and accomplishing a speedy passageout of the Strait. Easterly winds must havebeen unusually prevalent hereabouts, since alarge proportion of the heavy ice, recentlyencountered, was decidedly the produce of thedeep bays and inlets in the neighbourhood ofDavis's Strait, as was evident from theirweather-beaten form, and the difference of colour,which was of a purer white and deeper bluethan what we had been accustomed to. In additionto these, there were the bergs spreading atevery point, but which, with a northerly or westerlywind, would, long before this time, have beenfar on their journey towards the banks of Newfoundlandor the Gulf Stream. After three orfour tacks we reached open water at 6 h p. m., atwhich time Green Island was but just in sight,and the north shore, with Button's isles onthe other side, soon came into view. Thewind having abated, all sail was crowded onthe ship, and at 8 h r. m., there were but threeor four bergs and some straggling streams of iceto be seen, while a peculiar gloom of a leadengrey tinge, the effect of a dark sky on openwater, seemed, to eyes inured to a twelvemonth'sglare of Polar ice, unusually dull and heavy.But it had not power to damp the joy thatCHAP. VI. J INVALIDS CHEER. 431beamed on every countenance, at the longwished for liberation that now quickly brokeupon us. Our invalids became animated; and,even the few who were seriously affected, andhad long worn the sallow livery of disease,raised their feeble frames from their beds, and,with a smile, once more thought of home.Snow appeared to be still lingering on the highlandfrom Terra Neva to the East Bluff, thedenuded parts of which were strangely striatedby the refracted ice clinging close along thesinuosities of the coast. One of the lowersavage islands, alone, was seen dark and solitaryin the opening ; and beyond it, in colour notmuch deeper than the sky, was the bulky formof Resolution, the Calpe of the Strait.With more or less obstruction from adversetide or current, we pursued our joyous course,until on August 6th calm and rain for a whilechecked it; soon, however, a light air againsprang up, and at noon we were hastening onwards.We now hauled up more for the land,in order to clear the extreme point of somestream ice, but were puzzled at seeing onlyfour hills to the north, instead of ResolutionIsland ; the latter, however, was at lengthdiscovered in the shape of a narrow horizontalline far up in the clouds, on the dispersion ofwhich we found ourselves nearly opposite toHatton's headland. Every sail that could be3-12 EXTRA MEAL ALLOWED. [cHAP.VI."set was spread to the breeze ; though, scarcelyhad we fairly launched into the wide openingof Davis's Strait, than we were compelled toput the ship under snug canvass. In the midstof one of the squalls the look-out man calledout " ice ahead ;" and before there was timeto perform any evolution, we were right amongit: luckily, it was only the straggling edge ofa loose stream, which was passed without injury,though it required the utmost vigilanceto steer clear of the numerous bergs seendimly through the haze of a starless night.Early on August 7th Resolution Island wasjust in sight, astern ; and, under the influenceof a most promising westerly breeze, sail wasagain crowded, while active measures wereadopted to hoist inboard and firmly secureour boats, anchors, &c, for the voyage across.One circumstance alone gave cause for uneasiness,and this was the working of the injured partsof the stern-posts and keel by which more waternecessarily found admission. A strong shore wasimmediately fixed to counteract it, which insome respects answered well ; though it wasnot altogether effective, since the pumps wereconstantly required to keep the ship free. Thearduous duty thus imposed on a weakenedcrew, together with other considerations, inducedthe surgeon to recommend an additional mealof preserved meat in the week, with more an-chap.VI.] SHATTERED CONDITION OF SHIP. 433tiscorbutics. It had been observed, indeed, thatthe apprehension of sickness had induced mostof the men to go without food, except suchas they could save up of fresh provision,rather than take their regular allowance of saltmeat. We now went cheerily along betweenice bergs of an extent and altitude such as Ihad never before witnessed, until, leaving themfar behind, the temperature of the sea-watergradually increased from 36° to 41° + , and indicatedour entrance into a warmer climate.August 9th. The shattered condition of theafter part of the ship forced itself hourly moreon our notice, and, though yet unexposed to anythingbeyond a moderate sea, the rickety state ofthe stern-post and other parts, such as the deadwood,heel-hook, and heel-knee, as well as theincreased leakage between the lining, renderedimmediate attention necessary, before the arrivalof a gale should put us to too severe a test. Consequentlythe heel chains were again set up, andbeing brought over each quarter were hove tightby the capstan ; and in order to prevent thesearching of the doubling on the keel from breakingadrift, as was apprehended by the carpenter,as well as to secure the doubling itself, a lengthof the stream-chain cable was passed under thebottom of the ship, four feet before the mizenmast, hove tight by the capstan, and finally F434 BREEZE OFF CAPE FAREWELL. [CHAP.VI.moveable fastened to six ring-bolts on the quarterdeck.The effect was at once manifested, by agreat diminution in the working of the partsalready mentioned, and in a less agreeable way,by impeding our rate of sailing ; a trifling consideration,however, when compared with thebenefit received. Another man was added to thesick list, a second showed symptoms of scurvy,and the same evening Mr. Webster, the gunner,was similarly affected. Nothing could be morefavourable than the wind and weather had hithertobeen since quitting Hudson's Strait, but thoughmany additional bolts and supports had beenplaced abaft, yet the working of the ship, as shewas thrown about by the sea or swell, begansensibly to loosen the bolt-heads in the heel-hook,while the lining was much swollen. The onlyimmediate remedy for these unavoidable evils,was the substituting more shores to counteract theeffect, and give what strength we could.August 1 th. The stay bolts in the tiller broke,owing to a rather heavy swell from the southwestacting against a northerly breeze, whichrolled us about a great deal. From that timewe went on slowly, without material change, untilthe 15th, when, having rounded the broad pointof Cape Farewell, we were all at once exposed toa swell from the north east, which, though thebreeze entirely died away, increased to such aCHAP. VI. J INCREASE OF LEAKAGE. 435degree as to resemble the sea off the Cape ofGood Hope more than anything else. The consequencesto us were serious indeed, for, from theunavoidable pitching, rolling, and straining ofthe ship, the entire stern frame became moreand more loosened. The fastenings and bolts wererickety and twisted : this naturally slackened thepreventer lashings, till that time of great utility,and an additional quantity of water, now forciblyrushing in from a variety of places, warned ushow little we had to depend upon for safety, exceptthe providential care which had hitherto beenour stay and comfort. We did not however neglectto put four extra screw eye-bolts on each side ofthe heel-knee, through which ten turns of two-inchrope were passed for a lashing, that in somemeasure relieved the immense strain previouslysustained by the others. Nevertheless the leaksdid not abate, and owing to the quantity of coalsstowed in bulk below, and the manner in whichwe had been thrown about, the limber holes hadgot choked, so that on inspection not less thanfourteen inches of water were found over thecasing of the water-courses. This obliged us tocut a hole through the bulkhead on the starboardside, to allow of its egress to the pumpwell, and when it was done, the service of thewhole crew, properly divided into parties, wasrequired for upwards of three hours and twentyf f 2436 CRAZY STATE OF THE SHIP. [CHAP. VI.minutes, out of the four hours of each watch, tokeep the ship free. In fact she was becomingdaily more sodden and heavy, as was proved byher diminished rate of sailing, which now, underevery advantage of wind and sea, never exceededfive knots an hour. Generally, however, sheaveraged from two to three, and in moderateweather with any swell still less.August 18th. The keel chain having beenslackened, owing probably to the working of thedamaged part, was again hove tight with the capstan.The effect of this was soon shown, for theshores and fastenings below, where the carpenterof the watch was stationed, were observed by himto be set firm, thus proving beyond all doubt theloosened state of the under portion of the ship.Thus patched up, while favoured with moderateweather, we made reasonable progress ; but duringany abatement of the breeze, the rolling andplunging of the ship excited much anxiety, forthe leaks still gained, and the altered appearanceof the crew plainly evinced the change that wastaking place, from their incessant labour. Norcould it be concealed that the quantity of wateralways rushing backward and forward below, wasbeginning to affect the equilibrium of the ship,which now visibly heeled over to starboard. Thefavourable conjunction of circumstances whichhad carried us thus far without any squall orCHAP. VI.] WATER REACHES MAGAZINE. 437tempest, encouraged many in the hope that wemight be altogether exempted from such unwelcomevisitations.On August the 28th, however, the cloudsgrew dark and gloomy, whilst misty scud droverapidly before the coming gale, and the heavyroll of the sea threw us about in every direction.The bulkheads being considerably loosened,worked so much, that it became necessary tointroduce numerous wedges. These for a timeanswered the purpose of keeping them firm,especially when by carrying a press of sail theship could be kept well over on one side ; buton examining below, it was found that the boltsand tree-nails in the after-part of the sail-roomwere started, which in consequence was so muchweakened, as to allow the rushing in of a streamof water between the lining. This again demandedimmediate attention, and though theingenuity of our able carpenter enabled him tocheck its progress in that particular place, it soonforced its way to another.August 31st. The continuance of the galeaugmented our difficulties, for a fresh leak wasdiscovered on the larboard side of the heel-knee,and a considerable quantity of water found itsway into the magazine and injured the powder.The bread-room, too, was partially flooded, andthe entire stern-frame worked with every roll,ff438 CASCADE IN Bread-room. £CHAP.V.to such an extent, that it seemed almost impossibleto keep the ship from filling. The heelchains being found slack, were again about to besetup, when it was ascertained that the screwring-bolt fixed in the outer dead-wood on thelarboard side had been carried away, so that theloosening; of the chain was not to be wonderedat. It was, therefore, hauled up, while theremaining one, on which alone we had now todepend, was set as tight as possible. Still thewater rushed violently in below, more especiallyabout the stern-post and heel-hook ; and oozingthrough different parts higher up, fell like acascade into the bread-room and ' run.' Twomore screw ring-bolts were now driven into eachside of the heel-knee, which was secured by alashing of eighteen turns of two-and-a-half inchrope, while, apprehensive that further injury hadbeen sustained about the keel, another length ofchain was passed under the bottom, and set welltight to a part of itself across the after-part of thequarter deck. The ship was becoming excessivelyuneasy ; for the unabated fury of the gale,strengthened by squalls, raised a long breakingsea, in which she plunged so heavily, that it wasoften unusually long before she recovered herself.It was evident she was hourly gettingmore water-logged, and the straining and creakingof her whole frame, the working of theCHAP. VI.] SHIP SINKING. 439bulkheads, which actually raised the officers'bed-places, the rickety twisting occasioned bythe fore and aft motion, and the prolonged dullroll to windward, to say nothing of the cascade-likerushing of the water within, — all theseVerecertain indications of a consummation which noexertions of ours would probably be sufficientlylong to defer. Whilst thus seriously anxious,I was acquainted, shortly after midnight, byLieutenant Smyth, that the crew were no longerequal to the task of keeping the leaks under,and that, consequently, we were sinking. Such,indeed, was for the moment the fact ; but thefine fellows, though dreadfully exhausted, againrallied, and cheered and aided by the officers,worked with renewed vigour, until once morethey accomplished, and thenceforth maintainedtheir object.Up to this moment I had intended to proceedto Strongest, but it now became absolutelynecessary to make for the nearest land, and asLough Swilly, on the Irish coast, offered theeasiest access, that harbour was at once selected.However, on putting the ship before the gale,she was so difficult to steer as to compel us totake in all the sail off the main-mast, and to dependon a treble-reefed fore-top-sail, fore-sail, &c. :even then she was so wild as to be scarcely manageable.The crew were now so harassed withf f 4440 A SAIL DESCRIED. [cHAP.VI.unremitted work at the pumps, which could notbe left for a moment, that they were fast wearingout. To aggravate our disasters, the ship,too, laboured so as to make it impossible to lighta fire, and thus deprived us of the nourishmentessential for the restoration of our exhaustedenergies. This, however, was in somemeasure compensated by a liberal allowance ofpreserved meats, which, on this, as on manyother occasions, we had found extremely useful.The weather continued very boisterous, andso thick that Recall, though within ten milesof us, was not seen. A heavy sea now struckthe after-part of the ship, and, to complete ourmisfortunes, sprung the main piece of the rudderon the larboard side, not far from the deck.Happily we were enabled to get at it, and bypassing seventeen turns of strong whale lineround the injured part, we contrived to secureit. Still, as successive seas came rolling thicklyupon us, we watched with intense solicitude theresult, well knowing that if it gave way againthe safety of the ship was hopeless, even if lifeitself could be preserved.On we struggled, crazy and waterlogged, butthe gale abated; and on Sept. 3d, crowdingevery stitch of canvass, we descried a sail in thedistance, the first we had yet seen. Underordinary circumstances a signal would have beenCHAP. VI.] CAST ANCHOR IN LOUGH Silly. 441made to attract her attention, bat time was tooprecious with us now that we were pressing forwardfor our lives ; and about two o'clock in theafternoon, within half an hour of our calculation,the joyful sound of land was announced from thelook-out man at the mast head. It was latewhen we closed it, and being anxious to obtain apilot, rockets, blue lights, and guns were firedfor that purpose, but no one came ; wherefore,trusting to the soundings, we glided silently pastthe lights of the fishermen's cottage, and nearmidnight anchored safely in Lough Swilly.Fifteen long months had elapsed since thatpleasing sound of a falling anchor had greetedus , and when we reflected on what had passedin that interval, and, above all, on the differencewhich a few hours had made in our prospects,we could not but feel devoutly grateful to Providencefor the mercy which had been vouchsafedus. It was impossible immediately tocompose our feelings into tranquillity, and theremainder of the night was passed in a state offeverish excitement. When morning came,with what indescribable delight did we inhalethe fragrance and contemplate the beauty ofthe land. Imagination could scarcely picture ascene so enchanting as to our weary and frost-dazzledsight appeared that soft and lovely landscape,with its fresh green tints and beautiful442 THE TERROR RUN ON SHORE. [CHAP.VI.variety of hill and dale. It was an enjoymentto be felt but once in a life, and how much wasthat enjoyment enhanced when the wind suddenlychanged and blew a gale off shore, whichbut a few hours earlier must have driven us backto sea, and, in all probability, terminated ourlabours in a different wav.Harassed and worn out by extreme toil, thecrew were no longer able to work as formerly,and though ably assisted by the officers andmen of Her Majesty's service stationed alongthe coast, and especially by Lieutenant Murray,and the officers and crew of the Wickham,yet the Terror was gradually sinking by thehead, when finding that their united effortswere unequal to keep her afloat, it was determinedas the last resource to run her ashore ona small sandy beach selected for the purpose.It was found at low water that upwards oftwenty feet of the keel, together with ten feetof the stern-post, were driven over more thanthree feet and a half on one side, leaving afrightful opening astern for the free ingress ofthe water. The forefoot too was entirely gone,besides numerous bolts either loosened or broken ;and when, besides this, the strained and twistedstate of the ship's frame was considered, there wasnot one on board who did not express astonishmentthat we had ever floated across the Atlantic.CHAP. VI.] SAIL FOR ENGLAND. 413Her Majesty's Government being informed ofour situation and of the sickness that had prevailed,under the effects of which seven were stillsuffering, immediately sent a vessel round forthe conveyance of the invalids to Davenport.They had in the meantime been committed tothe care of Dr. Evans, at Burn canal, from whosejudicious treatment the greatest benefits werederived.A party of shipwrights from Chatham wasalso sent under the direction of Mr. Rice, in theColumbia Steamer, which was eventually ladenwith a part of our stores, and whose commander,a Mr. Thompson, lost no opportunity of renderingevery aid in his power. The zealous attentionof Mr. Rice and the indefatigable exertionsof his party are best attested by the fact that thework was completed about the 18th of October,when the Terror was hauled off to the anchorageand again prepared for sea. Nor must I here omitto mention the hospitality displayed by manyestimable families in the neighbourhood of LoughSwilly. To their attentions, indeed, may beattributed the speedy restoration to health ofmany of the officers, who, equally with myself,will ever retain a lively recollection oftheir kindness.When all was ready, occasionally assisted bythe Columbia, we made sail along the coast, and444> ARRIVAL AT CHATHAM. [CHAP.VI.with only one detention at Lock Ryan, arrivedfirst at Davenport and subsequently at Chatham,where the Terror was put out of commissionand taken into dock.I-&-> " > A4t 5Cat - •r*APPENDIX.APPENDIX.The few birds and animals obtained during theexpedition are so familiar to the readers of Arcticzoology as to render any notice of them altogetherunnecessary ; it may be mentioned, however, that avery small halibut (the only fish seen) was found in thebeak of the Lettres Marinus.The Temperature was taken hourly by the differentofficers, and carefully arranged by Lieut. Smyth, butthe Monthly Means alone are inserted here.The Latitudes, Longitudes, Variation, and Dip areselected from the Observations of Lieut. O. Stanley.G GAPPENDIX.COIcoGOGOc3GuOoOoua<H-CoCOaO•enS-CSs-aCM•&B) l, f «1o o £ cj•0^0°• • •J3 >1 X, >.' Xi >,*J (^ -W *J-J--4Jin d) !- OS »-c 05Ok o s o s■5^ ^ cs^ V5 05 3r» H H &o** cse- s;Sym.29.70■r.[/Iw w05 0505 05 05OSCS »ai>» 1 >"» 1t>~* 1 r*% f P*^ 1eg e8 es>. ,es-3 1^ 10)wrt eses : escScS1— 1-a bi-s lTj lig 1-3 1T3 1pq cna^dO Gl I> C75Oi G5 1> GlO i> Oi CM r-4 UOto ccC71 CMen TfCMrl Ol H H-h Gl i-h GlW H H rl ffl H1-H l-Hl-H (Ml-H 1-H\si.2 t-C-cofleSCO"*COi—i CoCO COCO 1-H 1>If)CMenS <»s t>COCOCO COi> coCO CTi CO1>t-CO—*HO„ encncnOS OCi Osaoi oocnent/5 >%os° CICICMCM CMCM CMCM CM GlCMCMCMfl ^rt Ov "iooO Cor*t>CD Gl 10CCCOUsoaoooi-h CMGl CriO O -iCMl-HCMO ,-o*— („ encnCiC75 CJ5co co05 C) flCtO)enis CosGGs° CIOlcqG^ CMCM CMCM CM CMGlCMGlO COfl CO5 rt^,*oCOenCO •— <CO CMCC •-! t-"*CMthWv COenGlCO CO^ 1>O l> COl-HCOOfl ■"es 051—4r. OCnoo oo oO O OoOOrq 3O 3csScoCMCOCO COCO COCO CO COCOCOCOflesv COOlCOVO VO•* t^Oj ^ HCOl-HGlCOCO>oCO COCO Ctt> O OCOencn*s s„ encno>a% ojOi <TiOi o oOiencn*» 2° CICMCNCN GlCM CMCM CO COCMCMGl-3 e&bJO h3 S•>. OCOr<*\00 COM< COrj> uo OfCOGlrtCioo1-4 COGl OO «-i CO'flCOcnJ3 Os§cnmC7>O C7>CO OiCi Ct Ct<3)enenfl GoucS° CI&GJCM OlCM CMCM Gl GlGlCMCMes O0) 05^ COlOOt- oCM COlO CO COOtoXCOCDcocoooCO COH CO TCO"*CMCSo gCioCoooCO COO OCO Cooo oCO CO CooCoocooCOO'HHl-HocuNO1— Huoor-1esI4- °co , o+ CO + l>+ t> + CO "^ V3•-0)+3s*1 1I 6 id» CM 1 CMenI O I CO i CM1 CO 1 rec THCS "i1 1cuCQ'oW ■• 1—3 3.3 COcS1 1+ <M +: h• • •i ^ j. 1> i V)W1 1- *•1—4• 1i I1 1 1eS o»<*oCOCO1 1I I1 1 1■4Jcos ,hir^CD-|N-|NtHCSJ ^OlCOCO , u,1 CO 1 ■*1 CO 1 ret + r-lCOVf)1>4-><Jak— iCOGJ1 CM 1 GlGlCMCO• •-* I(4-1ShoCJ•srj-|M-|Ne*-HT coCMCO1 i—i 1 Coico i rh1 «rj 1 io1 O 1 r-> 1 CO1 IT) I Tj< 1 CMCMGlenO —• i-HGlr— I1 Gl 1 COCMCM2 "cSf5fl «5fl k-Ha-•es ^*S0»eS+ MooCO + Gl+ G1 + G14. CM . Gl . V)T + CM + CMCM>ocn«5to3 2H§S 3•^ ouu>>•i^U ^2pS . >»C? ' 'i«5ifGOk-1»S5COCO >>~ , '3O]fccppO 525S co gP A^ kH ^fe S <5eo1—MHaA 2eS OCJ ^APPENDIX.A Table of the Latitudes, Longitudes, and Variation.Date.Latitude.Longitude.Varia".Date.Latitude.Longitude.Varia n .N.W.W.N.W.W.1836.O ' "O 1 IIO '1836.O I "o ' "o 'June 2459 57 004 41 0026^Aug. 963 30 0072 48 dr59 58 007 11 0063 36 dr73 40 dr59 19 008 47 0023 5063 33 0073 45 0059 19 0011 46 0024 5063 24 3873 53 0062 1559 43 0013 28 0063 26 0074 29 3060 52 0014 31 0064 10 dr76 22 dr60 45 0013 55 0037 4264 06 0064 23 0077 19 0077 45 0057 3756 3July 159 55 dr17 46 dr41 0064 42 0080 05 0059 56 0020 19 0064 57 0081 00 0060 11 DR22 20 0043 1765 8 0081 15 0059 59 0024 51 0045 0065 28 0081 15 0060 20 0027 22 dr65 42 0082 00 0049 5261 08 dr27 45 dr65 47 0082 12 3061 1160 11 DR27 24 dr65 45 0082 12 0061 3359 50 dr29 19 dr65 49 0082 06 0060 22 dr30 23 dr59 20 0031 41 0044 42Sept. 165 42 0082 02 0058 10 0032 57 0045 0065 26 0082 21 1558 4 0034 41 0065 12 5582 05 3057 06 0034 01 0065 5 0082 10 0056 51 0035 07 dr65 6 1582 43 dr57 54 0035 00 dr41 0065 7 3082 41 1558 19 0033 42 0065 5 0082 38 0057 39 0033 39 0065 12 3083 10 3057 14 0035 07 0065 14 2583 17 0056 50 dr36 30 dr65 18 0083 40 3057 13 dr40 10 DR57 26 dr43 29 drOct. 565 15 0083 37 1557 31 0044 17 dr65 15 0083 44 0758 03 dr46 33 dr57 53 dr48 48 drNov. 765 12 5083 32 0057 23 dr53 28 dr65 10 1283 958 29 0055 56 dr65 14 3083 2060 02 0058 22 dr60 15 dr61 00 DRStation I.65 12 2483 39 5057 5760 17 0061 57 0049 0060 22 0062 42 0052 371837.Jan. 464 52 1082 23 00Aug. 160 43 2763 35 3064 49 3082 13 0061 15 DR65 19 dr61 39 0067 70 00Stat n II.64 44 3882 07 0962 4 0068 12 3054 0062 30 1669 33 00| Jan. 3164 46 1582 06 1062 39 0070 54 0063 22 0072 23 0058 45Feb. 1| 64 45 5082 5 45G G 2APPENDIX.A Table of the Latitudes, Longitudes&c. — continued.Date.Latitude.Longitude.Varia n .Date.Latitude.Longitude.Variety.N.W.W.N.W.\V.1837.O 1 IIO 1 IIo /1837.1 IIO 1 IIFeb. 464 57 1581 49May 763 28 1678 47 0064 49 3181 48 0063 19 2578 39 4564 58 3681 38 4563 14 3278 41 1564 32 581 33 3053 363 11 4877 37 0064 28 5081 31 0051 0762 58 4177 44 1564 26 1881 28 3062 59 5477 39 5064 21 0781 25 1562 59 0777 31 5564 18 5881 24 0062 58 3177 24 4764 1681 2163 01 0077 52 2564 19 3481 23 0063 3 4777 10 0164 17 5081 18 4563 2 1376 41 5364 16 4781 15 0063 6 5976 19 3564 15 1781 13 0063 9 3976 23 0053 0064 14 5064 12 0081 15 0081 11 30June 463 13 4463 12 4075 49 0075 35 00Mar. 764 13 1581 10 0063 10 5675 9 1564 11 5881 07 3062 51 5974 43 4564 10 0081 03 0063 00 4075 1 1564 10 0780 59 0063 5 1575 5 4564 08 2680 56 0062 57 3674 49 3064 01 0380 46 0062 49 3874 45 4564 3 380 3862 55 574 6 1564 I 3380 41 0062 52 5573 58 1556 1264 5 5780 38 0054 0062 47 2773 55 3064 10 0080 40 0054 0063 10 3074 15 4564 6 0080 44 0063 12 0074 21 30April 563 59 0080 33 00July 363 16 1874 47 3063 57 0080 28 0063 20 0075 20 3063 51 2380 17 0049 0363 16 1075 27 3063 49 1280 15 0063 14 1775 25 3063 48 4580 14 0063 2 1574 35 4563 53 2280 11 0062 50 3572 29 0064 4 45SO 22 00Sunset.73 07 0064 5 3880 14 0062 26 4773 10 3063 55 0080 13 0061 44 971 00 3063 52 2880 7 8761 35 1771 12 1563 51 3079 4961 36 970 48 0063 58 0079 00 0061 19 4169 21 3063 54 0078 44 0061 10 1669 21 15May 163 48 4463 40 5178 45 0078 35 1560 58 Leo60 58 0069 31 4569 10 4563 43 5678 42 15Aug. 161 00 0069 3 1563 43 5678 42 3060 51 3067 36 00-63 39 3778 48 4560 55 0066 48 0063 36 4778 47 0061 17 0065 54 00APPENDIX,oooOh«pfcJOe it.at thetvvard.4d.fcjOoflrtiaoCJ.ac"S »•aiQoi— iHftlH<otOO•—uC3OCfjC3(A•COGOGOI— 1Ehcc?CU<a>*■■gH<COrtsoI— <eftCDrs"35ftisoefts(A«3OhftOusWOao$-icaVIO■*-<Co^ C3C3 «j'- '■M fec •*1— 1 —cl 2So-S oo** c:o^0- 03a &o 5O 3■}.enCsoo3 ^« sy —C3 -^cu oS **S 2x art oc cogoo oH 5• **+jrt«^«CO Vh% >o- -*a S8 ao55/5rtaoaooulboo ^OSi2 cen T3rtn ■•->O g« oort•rt&fcJOocen Oa «efOaoou3 OfcflCOoO COton2o S»- sOS -Ooen r-to ^rt *^aaoofta-*fcJ0«Ootu COcyen Srt aft art <&aen r-Jft-fta rto 2v oftoO3 .rt u^Ijr3 rto 3> 3° "3eft—50 ften ft^£8*CowNov."*jCO ^V °C3IS>>n*J CDo *;^2 rtoV3Uo• ■HOcn*->oo.2>so'-HHJortVIftort•crtpqG«OPSOt3cuft- 1>.*CO■•^3»HO••■p4lO■C+HKHK~•^^5r->*oCDoC3ftiCO■i5?^^i••COeft *o■4->oooOooooGO•wft* o»J-I^ r-W ,2o^3C3O-O.S3"3ccSrtOCS.ftCoo»oCooCooCooocooCO^r 1COCNlOp-ioCOCOCMOHp>•"3Q>c31 -oCOCOU3CCMf-HidTT 1oof— 1oCMftiwCOTo<**COcr<^COCMO)i—iCOlOCO^1COOlCoo«joCOS5OoenQc35 £»oo 5enlOloi—iCtlooCN>-0>^21— (CMCMoftH<!Dt-rift- <oooCOi-OCO>ooCOOCO(4>CDeg••<5tn-h^<iM-lhH<r^1>triol>COCDO0)-ft>O♦JQto ~oCOCOJ3OCot—1COCNefttol-HCOk-Ho<5CDs■^t-JDH?^<yj—.APPENDIX.fcfi -^c e.3 3>.cuoM3.»-*^p3•s• t-1■*->fcJO O-28.-c!h °°HH ^jft CM•cs O-2 rt3 >*3 cssrt-2•2 -Gcoco■ —e3• ^^hiC3•0)ooO•ft1-OCMcuCScoCSo• F-lcShtfcfl^3■^oh,O>Cocu,34->soI- 1 "%H•oftoCocooCMCOhicua>COCOX>CU*f-3•2 *cu *>p-h>CS 13OCOCSSoCO-ahiOhicSocoocs-3oCOhiCSoP-HCO•hcuCO-3hics<->CS02 e*CO **•13 —CS CSsCos0)HCSOhiP— IhiCU•t->ooCos*C3'incfl• —cohicsa»-c■<->hi0)h>csa>+jhicSwcu<HHr-lCUu• IHoocCocuu• PHcu■hicssCMCocuuSCOp»»sCO "3CO ^~ 6cu.a t*»pO?! 2S *p- esocuuo5 J>cCOC3&,soCO .2cs «3CO cu*S u<uoeg- —CO1sm♦J•-cu->otoCOC3&.ECo>ohicucSMcu-3OhiQcScuocu+3OCUcu• |Hcur—■*■>OCUo+3OhicucS-3•*-Ohi0)*iCSCosp>»o• 1— 1o,3-h>ohcucSl-lp-lO• — .CS>hicuco<->J 1 -3cu *"cusisSwI— 1oMw.2M« .Hhi0),2shiCUQ>•VCUcu"hcSCU.9*bj 2hto1 .hiiJoC/3hCSHiOCUHocu-2HfcJOhicStohiCSHihiCS*p2CObDpSCS MHiah,CSopOSct3CUHHH"CO*glGOefttoIfiiIIIIIIcuells-»o siCUco,3,3 oO0©0oO0©0ooO©©o©Oo McosoO*-pjoSftv o oO 03<* oloCO voCO CMfc>COCMoT—tCOCOl-H°hicS>«+HocS■5* fl-HCM ^•* CO!>-s?>oOl-HCOCOU0P*^ COO l-HCMCM OX COCMCOCtr^l-Hl-H•*COCS<r coCorfl>•^ J>iO>o^COCOCOCOCO>>cuf-cSs■«■ CMi—io °°TJHCOO iV)CooCMcoCM•4J• p— 1fccHOoCO1>° 1ol-Hl-HoCM<MCMl-HCMl-HCMCOr5 VIH ■t-1>l^COCOCOCOCOCOhJo ••a5 |25 ■nOirtCOCMCOr-HCM»o1>«}4-i- •*COCMo1u?o■tft 1«*<-^+JCMCOTjH-* '-*>^*ows>oVJ0cuCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOhiS '•-4->co1 1&ocucopi-4Pho«■>«CocowCO•• to*\no**#\cu*paQCO J 31— 14->r*+JCor—1-3(H-34-1p2,2CO ^ *COICMiO 3t^ 1ooCO-*lOCOt^t->— (i— ii— 1 oj1— 11— 1CMCMCMCMCMCMCMfcsJD<jAPPENDIX.cooCOCUucucoso• »H-cuCOOw0»fcJO8.2•a w.« yrfaf* scucu•4-"•aio-docuHoo.3 cuoocuO 1313 CUo <yH-a^d oooSeptotstseu>>cucuO •cu• iHucu•ih.So.cu>CUcuO •"•r*+jr*43 ohho*i■*-> eaAaa ">OoOO© O w « ©CO COCM COOco »oCO-H noI-H Cocoooo o^H ■*COCOCooCOCOa>CMi- CMocuooCB <D43 43cucueuWDselscufcDrt-ocucuo*Hcu-JcuCOJ-cSt-4ft•9So<HHCOJh£3>-»oo .CM aa* .2C3 cu*^ CO3 ^o oh isooocuiscu,cuc*hOoCOCOSoC3>*hcuCOOOoCJI^3coCUO"3CUCO.2 .a «C3c3eu 4JCJD otoCuo cu"■+1 .°O ^3'-Ja ^aoOaooCU co \Z,- .C3M W W^cufcfluacuC3cuC30O0O 000cocoVos°uo vrjCOCMocooCOCMCO>J0CMCOCO r*CO COCOCOCO 00 CoooCooCosCO COCM IQ<y> co1> 1>coCMCOCOCMCoooV3COCtCOV5>o>J0W)«0notHTt*■*^COCOCOCMCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCocoCOCO•gi%sgSPM<=5•PhCOPhPh<Phco -5"*2COCM*3H->T3COCOCOi>O1>CO 1>CriCOCOC7>CMI-HCMCOI-HCMCMftCUCO>o«cu■-• -Hftrto1-5o curicoCO«ftrtcu>>H->o£3rtOT3C1JassoH->rt• fH>-rtcu>oi-u,oCUr- COS rtSi*" HJC ^rt GOCU cuT3 hO r-H43 rt■w CUbc-9C 3J s3 ©- 1 CO.O ^3*M cu•"H -;rt 1343 O43 -cu cu43 42CU■SjqS -Socu ~co 43rt o•S 3cu 3^ rt^ co43 -^cu a ~43 rt cu•«-> J->». cuST) p«33 rt cu<j § a.- o42 43t£43c a43 C34a «cuO >Hfi art 42co43 3** Oco O^ 3cu a.3. 342 2^2^ 43 .cu ** O*» o cu^ ft4^^3 co >»cu cu 33o4< r?C cu 3** 4H -Ja a s+* r? co:«a2 o rtCU 42 •-.b rt -a33 cu .3^ o a343-h■S .3 **o „, >-Hc s; sh•IH -— o1> 42 cur}n i-q ^3«0 S Ci§CUTSCO > Curthj 13ft'co 43a g socu^coa2^2^a rtrt ^ 43tai ^ -^c8 -hCU t* «"rtrt O 43cu *^ •»*."3 3rt«h art ^i°13a *-43 rtocurtShcucurtucuH-»rtcu•—W3456 APPENDIX.Observations with Fox's Dipping Needle.Dip.o /June 7th, 1836, in Chatham dock-yard - - 68 58June 9th - Ditto - - - 68 58}89 55August 10th, on the ice in Hudson's Strait,lat. 63° 33' N., long. 73° 45' W. -October 31st, in a snow hut in Frozen Strait, 1 ft A()lat. 65° 45' N., long. 83° 48' W. - -J 0/ 4UNovember 16th, in a snow hut off Cape Com- 1 fi ufort, lat. 65° 10' N. long. 83° 06' W. - JJanuary 6th, 1837, in a snow hut off Cape! ft7 07Fisher, lat. 64° 50 N., long. 82° 18' W. -J 0/ U/February 9th, in a snow hut off Cape Fisher, "| ft ftr(Ther.l5 ),lat.64 29'N.,long.81°31'W.J e/ UoMarch 24th, on the ice off Terror Point, "I ft ftqlat. 64° 10' N., long. 80° 40' W. - ~ J s/ UcJLondon :Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New Street Square.