DRAMAS,BYJOANNA BailieIN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:PRINTED FOR.Hangman. B 9 . Orme. BROWN, ORF-KN, * Hangman,PATERNOSTER ROW.1836.Pifv. 2,TO THE READER.THAT the largeness of our two regular, long-establishedTheatres, so unfavourable for seeingand hearing clearly and accurately, havechanged in a great measure the character of thepieces generally exhibited within their walls, isa fact on which it would be useless now to dwell.How far the smaller Theatres of later establishment,some of which are of a proper size for theproduction of plays that depend for success onbeing thoroughly understood by the audience,will in time introduce a better state of things, itwould be hazardous for any one to conjecture.At present, however, from various circumstances,from restrictions, from customs, from acquiredtastes, &c. the prospect is not encouraging. Butthe cause that more, perhaps, than 3my otherdepresses the moral and rational effects of theModern Stage, is an opinion entertained bymany grave and excellent people, that dramaticexhibition is unfriendly to the principles aridspirit of Christianity.This deserves to be more seriously examined,because it prevails amongst a most respectableVI TO THE READER.class of the community, many of whom arepossessed of good understanding, of learningand imagination, and cannot, without a greatbreach of charity, be supposed to be actuated byworldliness or hypocrisy. It is in the nature ofman to delight in representations of passion andcharacter. Children, savages, learned and unlearnedof every nation, have with more avidityreceived instruction in this form than in anyother, whether offered to them as a mimic showbefore their eyes, or a supposed story, enlivenedby dialogue and addressed to the imaginationalone. The blessed Founder of ourreligion, who knew what was indian, did notcontradict nor thwart this propensity of our nature,but, with that sweetness and graciousnesswhich peculiarly belonged to his divine character,made use of it for the instruction of themultitude, as his incomparable parables so beautifullytestify. The sins and faults which hereproved were not those that are allied to fancyand imagination, the active assistants of all intellectualimprovement, but worldliness, uncharitableness,selfish luxury, spiritual pride, andhypocrisy. In those days, the representation ofGreek dramas prevailed in large cities throughthe whole Roman empire ; yet the Apostles onlyforbade their converts to feast in the templesTO THE READER. Vllof idols, and on sacrifices offered to idols, andtrusted that the general gentleness and humanityenjoined on them as followers of their blessedMaster, would keep them away from spectaclesof cruelty and blood. We cannot, therefore, itappears to me, allege that dramatic representationsare contrary either to the precepts orspirit of the Christian religion.But probably it is not a real conviction, thatgoing to a theatre is in itself unchristian orwrong, which keeps such persons away, but aconscientious persuasion that it ought to be discountenanced,because of the bad tendency ofthe pieces exhibited there, before the eyes of theinnocent and susceptible ; and because of thedisorderly and worthless company who frequentplayhouses, and gather about their passages andneighbourhood. These indeed are weighty andplausible reasons, that deserve to be thoroughlyexamined. And how far the absence of thegrave and moral part of society from suchplaces tends to remedy or increase the evils apprehended,ought also to be seriously considered.We shall begin, then, with the bad tendency ofthe pieces exhibited.A manager must suit his plays to the characterof the most influential part of his TO THE READER.thence. The crowd in the gallery and pit canbe very well entertained with a piece that hasneither coarseness nor immorality in it ; but themore refined and better informed, who generallyoccupy the boxes, and occasionally the pit, cannotbe pleased with one in which there is anythingimmoral or indecorous. But, if the refinedand well-informed stay away, there is nothing,then, to be taken into the account but how toplease such auditors as commonly fill the pit andgalleries, and the boxes will very soon be occupiedby company, somewhat richer, indeed, butnot more scrupulous or intelligent than theothers. Now, supposing matters to have cometo this pass, what kind of entertainment willbe provided for them? Scurrility and broadsatire is more easily procured than wit ; anddelineations of low" profligacy require less skillthan those of the habits and characters of higheror more virtuous society. Will a manager, then,be at pains to provide delicate fare for thosewho are as well satisfied with garbage ? This issurely not to be expected ; and in as far as moralor intellectual improvement has been or may besuperseded by intellectual debasement, occasionedby such well-meaning absentees from ourTheatres, so far does their absenting themselvesdo mischief.TO THE READER. IXLet us next examine the other reason, viz. thedisorderly and worthless people who frequentplayhouses, and gather about their passages andneighbourhood. Young women of respectablefamilies, whatever their rank may be, go totheatres protected and kept out of the wayof witnessing any thing improper, or in sotransient a manner as to be scarcely apprehended,and soon forgotten. It is, then, theeffect which coming in contact with such companymay have on young men that must chieflybe attended to. Formerly, when a youth camefrom the country to London, he went to theTheatre in attendance on the ladies of some soberfamily, to whose notice he might be recommended.Often some good aunt, cousin, orfriend, pointed out to him the beauties and defectsof the play, or the remarkable people presentamongst the spectators, if any such werethere ; and near her and her party, he was keptout of the reach of contamination. He mostprobably attended this friendly party home, andhad some slight refreshment with them before hereturned to his solitary lodging, and next morninghe awoke with a pleased fancy and an easymind. In those days, too, young men, residentin London, went frequently to the Theatre withtheir mothers or sisters, or other members ofVOL. IT. aX TO THE READER.their own family ; and even if they went alone,the probability of their meeting some of theirrespectable acquaintance was a salutary checkupon the dangerous spirit of adventure. Butnow this is no longer the case : the simple striplinggoes by himself, or with some companionequally thoughtless and imprudent ; and the confidencehe feels there of not being under theobservation of any whom he is likely to meetelsewhere, gives him a freedom to follow everybent of his present inclination, however dangerous.Nay, there are some excellent persons whocarry the matter so far as to wage general waragainst pleasures derived from imagination. Tobring before the mind representations of strongpassions, they say, is dangerous and unfavourableto virtue. Most assuredly, if they arebrought before the mind as examples, or asthings slightly to be blamed, as evils unavoidablyincident to human nature, they are dangerous; but if they are exhibited as warnings,and as that which produces, when indulged,great human misery and debasement, they teachus a lesson more powerful than many that proceedfrom the academical chair or the pulpit.Consistently with this maxim, historians, too,should refrain from animated and descriptiveTO THE READER. XInarrations of treasons, insurrections, sieges, andbattles; and the praises bestowed upon Livy,and other ancient writers, for having madethe events they relate, with their causes, viz.the strong passions of men, so vividly presentto the imagination of the reader, instead ofbeing their glory, becomes their reproach.The history of nations ought, upon this principle,to be given in the most calm, concisemanner, as a story upon which to fasten maxims,observations, and advice, but by no means toexcite or interest; and what would formerlyhave been called the dullest book must beesteemed the best. What I have ventured tosay of history will also apply to novels, and allworks of fiction. Even the master-pieces ofour painters and sculptors are liable to similaranimadversion : in proportion as they excel inthe higher departments of art they are dangerous.For what have been the subjects of suchworks, but the actions of men under the influenceof strong passions ?Were the pleasures we derive from works ofimagination discouraged and set aside, shouldwe become more intellectual and more virtuousunder their didactic matter-of-fact system ? Iapprehend not ; but rather that the increaseof gratifications allied to the inferior part of ourXll TO THE READER.nature would, by degrees, prevail over those ofa higher derivation. I readily admit that I cannotbe considered as an unblessed judge uponthis subject ; but the observations I have presumedto lay before my Reader, must with himstand or fall according to their own justice orimportance.THESEPARATION :A TRAGEDY.IN FIVE ACTS.VOL. II.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.Garcia, an Italian Count.ROVANI, his Friend.GONZALOS, an old Officer.THE MARQUIS OF Morton.LUDOVIQUO, Seneschal of the Castle.GAUVINO, Chamberlain.Hermit, $c. $c.WOMEN.MARGARET, Wife to Garcia.SOPHERA, her Attendant and Friend.Nurse, $c.Scene, a small State in Italy.THE SEPARATION.ACT I.SCENE I. A Chamber, with a great Screen atthe bottom of the Stage, behind which part ofa Bed is seen, and Voices heard as the Curtaindraws up, while PIETRO and GOMEZ are discoveredon the front, looking from a half-openeddoor, as if listening.GOMEZ.WHAT said he last? the word died on histongue.PIETRO.So much the better.GOMEZ.Makes he confession ? Hast thou listened long ?He ever wore, ev'n in his days of health,The scowling eye of an unquiet mind,*And some black deed disturbs his end. Ev'nso ;Thy face confirms itB 24 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.PIETRO.We shall be discovered.[Exeunt, shutting the door softly, while and GAUVINO come forward frombehind the screen']GAUVINO (looking earnestly at LUDOVIQUO, beforehe speaks).What thinkest thou of it?LUDOVIQUO.It is very strange.GAUVINO.'Tis but the fever* d ravings of disease :Hast thou more serious thoughts ?LUDOVIQUO.I would our good confessor were arrived,Whatever my thoughts may be.GAUVINO.Ay; then I can divine them. To my judgment,He speaks like one more forced to utteranceBy agony of mind than the brain's sickness.The circumstances of the horrid deed ;The wond'rous fleetness of his gallant steedWhich bore Count Garcio through the forestpathsLUDOVIQUO.Cease, cease ! I would the father were arrived.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 5GAUVINO.It was his fav'rite steed, and yet he ne'erMade mention of its name or of its end,But, when we prais'd its fleetness, frown'd insilence.Fve wonder' d oft at this, but thought no ill.LUDOVIQUO.Nor think it now. It is not credible,Making, as then he did, a lover's suitTo the fair Margaret, Ulrico's sister,That he should murder him.GAUVINO.He was the heir of all Ulrico's lands.LUDOVIQUO.True ; so he was.GAUVINO.tUlrico loved him not, and oft opposedHis suit as most presumptuous. But for this,Her brother's sudden end, the lovely maidHad ne'er been Garcio's wife. sLUDOVIQUO.All this is true ; and yet, perhaps, those factsHave on the mind of this poor dying wretchImpress' d dark fancies, which the fever'd brainShapes into actual deed. Oh, it is horrible !Canst thou believe one of his noble raceCould do a deed befitting ruffian hands,B 36 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.And only such ? Had he thus wickedlyDevised Ulrico's death, some hired assassinHad done the bloody work, not his own hands.GAUVINO.Well, but what think'st thou of his strangeaversionTo this, the goodliest seat our country boasts ?Although his countess oft hath urged him to it,He hath not since his marriage here resided,Nay, hath not pass'd a night within these walls :And, but that he is absent at the wars,Ev'n though the recent earthquake has in ruinsHis other castle laid, and forced us thence,This mansion had remained untenanted.LUDOVIQUO.I would the ghostly father were arrived I(Voice heard behind the screen')Blood will accuse : am I not curs'd for this?LUDOVIQUO.He speaks again : I thought that for the whileHe had been sunk into a state of stupor.Go thou and watch by him, Gavin ; haste !For steps approach, and none must be admitted.(GAUVINO retires behind the screen ; andLUDOVIQUO, running to the door 9 meetsSOPHERA, and endeavours to prevent herentering.)THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 7Thou may'st not come : he's still 5 he is asleep :Thou canst not see him.(Voice heard againstSOPHERA.Asleep, say'st thou ? do I not hear his voice ?Nay, let me pass ; I will not be withheld.My lady follows me with some good drugTo chafe his brow, poor wretch ! and give himcomfort.LUDOVIQUO.Return, and tell the countess to forbear :She must not see him j foul unwholesome airHas made the chambers noxious. Hie theeback,And say she must not come.SOPHERA.And dost thou think this will prevent her?Never,Ev'n from the sick bed of her meanest servant,Hath she stood fearfully aloof, when comfortCould be administer'd.I've seen the pain-rack'd wretch smile in hispainTo see his lady's sweetly pitying facePeep past his ragged curtain, like a gleamOf kindly sunshine, bidding him good morrow.And thickest thou now, from this poor dyingman,B 4f8 THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY.The oldest faithful follower of her lord,To keep her back with such a plea as this ?LUDOVIQUO.Cease! urge no more. Return; she must notcome :The sick man is distorted grown, and changed,Fearful to look upon : a lady's gentlenessMay not such sight abide.SOPHERA.A poor excuse !Hast thou forgotten when those woundedsoldiersLay near our walls, after a bloody skirmishLeft on the . field from which their comradesfled,How she did stand, with steady mastered pity,'Midst horrid sights from which her women fledWith looks averted, till each bleeding wretchWas bound and comforted? Distorted, mayestthou!Who goes to chambers of disease and deathTo look on pleasant sights ?(Voice againstI did not murder him.SOPHERA.He spoke of murder !(LUDOVIQUO pressing her back as she presseseagerly towards the screen, whilst GAUVINOcomes forward to assist him*)THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 9LUDOVIQUO,Thou shalt as soon pass through my body, fool !Such cursed obstinacy ! art thou mad ?If thou regards thy lady's peace of mind,Fly, I conjure thee, and prevent her coming.Enter COUNTESS behind them.COUNTESS.And why, good Ludoviquo ?LUDOVIQUO (who starts on seeing her).Gracious Heaven !COUNTESS.Why look'st thou so aghast ? Is Baldwin dead ?LUDOVIQUO.He is ; and therefore go not.(She still endeavours to passedNo, no ! he is not ; be entreated, madam !COUNTESS.What cause so strangely moves thee ?LUDOVIQUO.A powerful cause, that must not be reveal'd,O, be entreated, then !(Voice againstUlrico's blood was shed by Garcio's hand,Yet I must share the curse.10 THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY.LUDOVIQUO.Run to him quickly ! wherefore didst thouleave him ?(GAUVINO again retires as beforeCOUNTESS.What words were those he uttered ?LUDOVIQUO.Words of despair and frenzy ; heed them not,But quit the chamber. O, for Heaven's sake, go !\ILxeunt LUDOVIQUO, hurrying offthe COUNTESS and SOPHERA.SCENE II.A small Anteroom or Passage.Enter PIETRO and GOMEZ by opposite sides.GOMEZ.Is the confessor with poor Baldwin still ?PIETRO.He is; but, as I guess, will leave him presentlyI heard, just now, the chamber-door unlocked.I'll keep my station here, and see him pass.GOMEZ.And so will I. Ha ! yonder, see, he comes.THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 11PIETRO.His head bends to the ground, and o'er his eyesHis hood is drawn : would I could see his face !He is the cousin of our seneschal,I'll speak to him.Enter a Friar, walking hastily across the Stage.Good father ! give your blessing :How is your penitent ?[Friar waves him off with his hand, and exit.GOMEZ.He motions with his hand, and will not speak.PIETRO.In so much haste to go I this is not well.(Shaking his head.)No, no ! it hath a dark and rueful look.Well; God be praised! these hands are freefrom blood*exeunt.SCENE III.The Apartment of the Countess; she is discoveredpacing to and fro with slow, thoughtful steps,then stops short, and stands in a musing posturesome time before she speaks aloud.'Tis often thus ; so are we framed by nature.How oft the fitful wind or sullen bellWill utter to the ear distinctive words,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.According with the fancy's wild conceptions !So are the brains of sick and frenzied menStored with unreal and strange imaginations.after a short pause '.) Am I become a maniac ?Oh ! have words,To which the firm conviction of my mindSo strongly stands opposed, the baleful powerTo fix this misery on me ? This is madness !Enter SOPHERA behind.Is 't thee, Sphere ?SOPHERA.Yes, 'tis only me.COUNTESS.Is every decent office of respectDone to the corse ?SOPHERA.Yes, nought has been omitted.COUNTESS.'Tis well ; but what detains the good confessor ?I wish'd to see him.SOPHERA.He stay'd but till his wretched penitentHad breath'd his last, and quickly left the castle.COUNTESS.He is in haste, methinks ; 'tis somewhat strange.Why look'st thou on me with that fearful eye ?THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 13Think'st thou the ravings of a frenzied mindHave power to move me ?SOPHERA.I only thought I fear'd you wisely judge ;Why should they move you ? Well, the dismalstoryOf that most dismal murder, here committedBy hands unknown, might to a sickly brainSuch thoughts create of nothing.COUNTESS.What say'st thou ? here committed !SOPHERA.Did not your hapless brother in this castleCome to his end ?COUNTESS.Yes, but a natural end.SOPHERA.So grant it were, it is not so reported.COUNTESS.Ha ! what is else reported ?SOPHERA.The peasants round, all idle stories credit ;And say that in his castle, by his servants,He was discovered in the eastern towerMurder' d. But, doubtless, 'tis a tale of falsehood,Since 'tis to thee unknown.14 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.COUNTESS (sinking back into a chair).It was to me unknown.(After a long pause.} Dear, dear ! the friend,the brother of my heart,The playmate of my early, happy days,Could such a fate be thine !It makes me weep to think it possible,Yet I believe it not.SOPHERA.You tremble much.COUNTESS.I'm cold and chill: 'tis weariness of body;Do not regard it ; I shall soon be better.strumpet sounds withoutA trumpet ! then some martial guest approaches.O most unwelcome !SOPHERA.'Tis Morton's Marquis.COUNTESS.He is not in these parts ; it cannot be.SOPHERA.He is upon his march with some gay troopsTo join the army, and hath made a haltHere in our nearest town to rest his men.So said his servant, whom I found this morningLurking within the castle ; and I guessHis warlike lord is come.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 15COUNTESS.I cannot see him.Go thou ; plead my excuse : I am unwell ;Say what thou wilt, but let me be excused.Enter ROVANI.Rovani here ! O, how is this ? My lord ?ROVANI.He is not far behind. I am, fair lady,The vanguard of his band ; and, as I trust,Bearing no dismal tidings.COUNTESS.O no! they should, indeed, be joyful, ifAnd, as in truth I trust my lord is well !ROVANI.Yes ; from the wars, unhurt and strong inhealth,Garcio returns ! where he has done the serviceOf an undaunted powerful combatant,To that of a right skilful leader join'd.He is not one of your reserved chiefs,Who, pointing with their dainty fingers, thus,Say, " Go, my friends, attack yon frowningranks."No, by my faith ! with heavy diameterHe closes to the bloody work himself,And to the carnage of each grisly fieldBrings his full tale of death.16 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.COUNTESS (shrinking back).Is he so ruthless, then ?ROVANI.Ay, in the field.But in your hall or bower, where ladies smile,Who is more gentle ? Thus it often is :A lady feels not on her soldier's hand,That softly presses her more gentle palm,The deaths which it has dealt.SOPHERA.I 'm sure, were but thy rapier like thy tongue,The count must have in thee an able second.ROVANI.I may not boast ; but doth my circled fingerMore rudely press thy snowy arm, fair maid,Because this graven jewel was the giftOf a great Moorish princess, whose rude foeI slew before her eyes ?SOPHERA.Some angry puppy that with snarling mouthSnapp'd at her robe or sandals heels, belike.ROVANI.Nay, by my faith ! a foe in worth mine equal.SOPHERA.That I will grant thee readily. But say,How far behind thee is the noble count ?THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 17COUNTESS.Ay, is he near?ROVANI.Within a few short miles.The war has ended sooner than we guess* d,And we have made good speed.COUNTESS.So near !ROVANI.How is it ? This affects you strangely.COUNTESS.Such unexpected news ! I should be glad,But gladness comes with pain. I will retire,And for a moment strive to calm this tremor.(To SOPHERA.) Follow me not.[JEt*.ROVANI (looking after her as she goes off).I have, ere now, beheld the sudden newsOf a good lord's return from foreign landsBy wedded dame received ; but so received,Never till now. How's this? What is thematter ?How shall a simple bachelor, as I am,Have thoughts of this bless'd state, if such assheCold and capricious prove ?VOL. n. c18 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.SOPHERA.Blame her not hastily ; she is depress 5 d :Old Baldwin, whom his master left behind,That faithful servant, died with us this morning.ROVANI.Alas, poor soul ! and he is gone at last !Well, we have brought you thirsty throats enowTo drink his fun'ral vassals. Ay, poor Baldwin !A hardy knave thou wert in better days.If I had known of this, Heaven rest his soul !I had not sounded my approach so cheerly.SOPHERA.To tell the truth, that martial sound deceived us.We took you for Morton's warlike lord,Who, to refresh his passing troops, we hear,Has made a halt : I thoughtROVANI.Out with thy thought !Why dost thou hesitate ? I will explain it.I 've brought you disappointment.SOPHERA.You mistake me.Romani.Nay, pardon me ; I linger here too long :But, ere I go, how does the infant heir ?I must tell Garcio I have seen his boy.SOPHERA.With pleasure I '11 conduct thee. 'Tis an urchinTHE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. * 19Provoking smiles of love from every faceThat looks upon him, be it e'er so stern.ROVANI.How then will a fond father feel ! How oftHow oft and fondly hath he talk'd of him !Though but a little grasp of shapeless life,With puling whine, just winking to the light,As I remember well, when Garcio left him.SOPHERA.Is Garcio, then, so tender?ROVANI.Dost thou doubt it ?The bear doth love his cub, bear though he be :But Garcio is a man of strong affections.Come, pray thee, lead.\JKxeunt.ACT II.SCENE I. A mid Alley with a Grove behind.Martial Music heard without.Then enter Garcia with his Soldiers on marchandGONZALOS.Garcia.Halt, my brave comrades; here we'll rest a whilec 220 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Till sultry noon be past. Those spreading treesWill give you shade.(To GONZALOS.) See'st thou Rovani coming?GONZALOS.No, good my lord $ but through the trees I seeYour castle's turrets brighten' d with the sun.Look there ! it is a fair, enlivening sight.Garcia (turning away, after a hastyI see, I see. But wherefore stays Rovani !(To Soldiers") Go, choose, each as he lists, hisspot of rest ;I '11 keep me here.(GONZALOS and the Soldiers retire to thebottom of the Stage, but still appear partiallythrough the trees*)(After musing some time') An infant's life !What is an infant's life ? The chilly blast,That nips the blossom, o'er the cradle breathes,And child and dam like blighted sweetness fade.If this should be ! O, dear, uncertain bliss !Shame on his tardy steps ! Ha! here he comes !Enter ROVANI, while Garcia runs up to himeagerly.They are alive ? they 're well ? And thou hastseen them ?ROVANI.Your lady and your son ?THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 21Garcia (impatiently).Ay, ay !ROVANI.They're well.Garcia.Thank Heaven, they are! But yet thy wordsare slow :Does she not follow thee ? Waits she my coming?ROVANI.She surely does expect it.Garcia.What voice, what looks are these ? O speakmore freely !If there is mercy in thee, speak more freely !(Pauses and looks earnestly at him.)Something is wrong 1 have nor wife norchild!ROVANI.They are both well : have I not spoke plainwords ?Garcia.Plain words ! yes, baldly plain ; reserved andheartless.Thou dost not use me like a fellow soldier,In the same warfare worn. What hast thouseen?c 322 THE SEPARATION,: A TRAGEDY.Thou say'st my lady 's well : did she receive,With a wife's joy, the news of my return?ROVANI.I am not skill' d to say ; for dispositionsOf various hues are variously affected.The news were sudden and unlook'd for : oftThe joy of such is clouded and disturb'd.She did withdraw in secrecy to hideHer strong emotions.Garcia.She was strongly moved ?ROVANI.I know not how it was. The servants, too,Whisper'd together as I pass'd, and look'dWith a strange staring gravity upon me.Dull clowns! who should have cast their .caps inairFor joy of your return. Baldwin is dead ;And if for him they wear those sombre looks,Good piteous souls they are. A courtly damsel,Attending on the Countess, did, forsooth !Mistake my trumpet for the glad arrivalOf some gay visitor, who was expected ;Whose buxom train, no doubt, contains someyouthMore grateful to her sight than war-worn knight,Such as my paltry self.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 23Garcia.What visitor ?ROVANI.That very martial lord,The Marquis of Morton, save his worth !For he conducts his soldiers through these parts,And makes a halt in this fair neighbourhood,Some days or so, for needful recreation. (A pauseWhat ! stay we here to ruminate upon it ?Will that avail ? Come, " on ward to the castle !And, be our welcome there or cold or kind,'T is what Heaven sends us.Garcia.Off; disturb me not !Thy heart is light.ROVANI.No, Garcio ; 't is not lightIf thine be heavy. I have told my taleToo well I see it now but foolishly :Yet their cold looks provok'd me. Brood noton it:There is one face, at least, within your wallsWill smile on you with sweet and guileless smiles :A noble boy, might call a monarch father,Ay, by my faith ! and do him honour, too.Garcia.Does he lisp sounds already? And so lovely?I've found tears now, press'd being that I am!c 424 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Come then ; I'll summon strength : whate'erbetide,Or good or ill, I'll meet it.[Exeunt.SCENE II.An Apartment in the Castle.Enter COUNTESS and SOPHERA.COUNTESS.He is within the gates ; here will I stop,Nor wander further : I'll receive him here.(Listening Heaven give me strength ! his wellknown steps so near me !Enter Garcia ; he runs eagerly to embrace theCOUNTESS, who faints.Garcia.So moved ! Can this be joy ?(SOPHERA chafes her hands and temples, AwhileGarcia gazes on her with keen observation: she recoversMy gentle love,Who wert my gentle love, come I upon theeTHE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 5Like some unlock' d for, some unwelcomething ?COUNTESS.Is it thy voice, my Garcio, in mine earsSounding, as it was wont, the voice of love ?Garcia.How should it sound to thee ? The wars havespared me jThe bullet and the sabre's stroke have err'd,To spare this head, where thousands fell aroundme:For I believed thy saintly prayers did marTheir death-commissioned power. Yes ; I believedit,COUNTESS.And still believe it. Yes, my prayers wereraised %Most fervently to Heaven : and I will bless it,That thou art safe. (Takes his hand in herstenderly, and is about to press it to herbreast, when a shuddering seizes her, andshe lets it drop.)Garcia.What is the matter ? Thou art strangely seized.Does sudden illness chill thee ?SOPHERA.The Countess, good my Lord, is much o'ercome.26 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Her health is weak at present : agitationStrongly affects her. But she'll soon recover.Garcia.Thou answered for her readily, young lady,And wisely too.Enter ROVANI, followed by Nurse, carrying asleeping infant.ROVANI.Come on, good Nurse" 1 ; thou need'st not beashamedTo show thy bantling, sleeping or awake.A nobler, comelier, curly-pated urchinNe'er changed the face of stern and warlike sireTo tearful tenderness. Look here, my Lord.Garcia (turning eagerly round.The child ! my child ! (Lifting the mantlethat covers it, and gazing on the infantryROVANI.Ay, there are cheeks and lips like roses glowing;And, see, half-open' d eyelids show withinThe dewy azure of his sleeping eyes,Like loopholes in a cloud. Awake, sweet imp!Garcia.Nay, wake him not ; his sleep is beautiful.Let me support Come to my stirring heart,THE SEPARATION ; A TRAGEDY. 27And here be cradled, thing of wond'rous joy !(Taking the childHere, in the inmost core of beating life,I'd lodge thee* Mine thou art! yes, thou artmine !Here is my treasured being : - thou wilt love me.(Laying his face close to the child's')Blest softness ! little hand and little cheek !This is a touch so sweet ! a blessed touch !There is love in it ; love that will not change !(Bursting into, tears, while the Nurse takesthe child againstCOUNTESS (aside, observing his emotion.O heaven, he .weeps ! the tears of strong affection!-Away, base doubts ! (Running to him, and claspingher arms round him.}Garcio, dear Garcio! husband of my heart,Arid father of my boy ! is there within theeSuch soft and strong affection ? O, there is !And with it every good and generous feeling. -Forgive me, O forgive me !Garcia.How, my love ?How wakes this sudden burst of tenderness ?Dost thou at last feel for thy wretched husbandThe love of other days? I've thought of theeI've thought of this our meeting, but, alas !Not so my fancy shaped it.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.COUNTESS.O, forgive me !My mind was weak and brooded on dark thoughts.We'll cast them from us. Yes, thy child, thyboy!Look on him still : they say that in his faceThere are some traits of thine. Observe hismouth ;That smileGarcia.vj Nay, that sweet smile I could not give him ;No, nor those lips. He much resembles thee.COUNTESS.Thickest thou so ? Then haply thou perceivesAnother likeness some have sadly traced ;Dost thou perceive it?Garcia.No : another likeness ?COUNTESS.In my sad lonely hours, I have imagined,And sooth* d me with the pleasing, mournfulthought,He bears some faint resemblance to my brother,My poor Ulrico.(Garcia's countenance becomes stern, andlooking again stedfastly on the child, heturns away in silence,)It does not strike thee, then ?THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 29Garcia (motioning the Nurse to retire).We shall disturb his slumbers.COUNTESS (to him reproachfully.Sent off without a kiss of kind endearment ?Garcia.We should disturb him. (Looking after thechild as he is carried off.}COUNTESS.Thine eye pursues him with a mournful look :Thou fear'st, perhaps, an early fate may snapHis thread of life, like his lamented uncle's.Garcia.No; past and future are but shadowy visions ;Dark cumb'rous things which we must cast asideTo make the present hour endurable.Who waits without ? A cup of wine, I pray 5I'm tir'd and faint.COUNTESS.Indeed, thou seem'st unwell :I fear thou bring'st not back thy wonted health.Garcia.I'm well, I was in health, but this damp region,I breathe not in it but with breath suppress'd.Thou know'st right well I never liked this place :Why art thou here ?30 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.COUNTESS.It is necessity.Garcia.I know j I know ; but other homes there are ;We'll hence tomorrow.COUNTESS.Ha ! . so soon, my lord ?Garcia.It must be so. I would retire awhile ;Where is my chamber ?COUNTESS.In the western tower.Garcia. ,No ; I'll remain I will not yet retire.pacing to and fro, and then returning to her.}I know not how it is ; I'm fanciful ;I like a southern chamber.COUNTESS (in a faint voice, gazing fearfully uponhim).Ev'n as you will.SOPHERA, who has during the greater partof this scene retired to the bottom of theStage with ROVANI, now comes forwardsSOPHERA.Please you, my lord, to go, I will conduct youWhere many fair apartments wait your choice.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 31Garcia.I thank thee, courteous maid.[Exit SOPHERA, followed by Garcia ; andthe COUNTESS, after a thoughtful pause, isabout to break into strong exclamations,when, perceiving ROVANI, she checks herselfand goes out hastilyROVANI (coming forward, and looking after her).All is not well : that step, those looks, thosegestures,So quickly check'd when she perceiv'd me near,Betray too visibly a mind disturbedAnd far remov'd from joy. Garcio is comeUnwelcome upon her. Yet that burstOf what appeared like tenderness and loveWhen he caress' d his child! I cannot thinkShe has in act been false ; tho' much I doubt.Enter GONZALOS behind him.GONZALOS.Ha ! mutt'ring to thyself! what are thy thoughts?ROVANI.Faith ! ill-condition 5 d, moody, foolish thoughts,Such as lone men, whose heart no kind matecheers,Alone could harbour. Heaven forgive me forit!32 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.I think our lady here had been well pleasedIf this, her valiant lord, had from the warsReturned more leisurely. Her quondam lover,The Marquis of Morton, in the neighbourhoodWith his gay troops, bound for some petty frayBy them, in lofty phrase, yclep'd war,Has made a halt, andGONZALOS.Fie ! thou canst not thinkThat she could turn her heart from valiant GarcioTo such a fool as he ?ROVANI.Yet such strange things have happened. True,indeed,So vile a change could not at once be made.But let us now imagine some soft dame,Whose valiant lord is absent, in her castleSpending her dull lone days. (Changing his voice,and speaking fantastically.) " Ha ! whocomes here?"Good Madam," saith her waiting gentlewoman,A knight is at your gate." " He shall notenter :It is a fool ; go, bid him wend his way.""And will you be so rude?" " Ay, true indeed;Then, for good courtesy, since it must be,Ev'n bid him enter: 'tis a harmless fool."THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 33Good day, fair Dame." " The same to you,Sir Knight."Might I presume but how can words expressit,The sunshine of your beauty dazzles so !You will not chide me hence? What gentlegoodness !Dear, precious moments, but so swiftly gone ! "Then whispers low the waiting gentlewoman,Madam, may he return another day?"Well, well, he may, since thou wilt have it so.It is in truth an amiable fool."GONZALOS.Fie, fie, Rovani ! art thou not asham'd ?Who would believe, in hearing thee expatiateOn woman's weakness thus, that thou thyselfArt but a poor dependent on her favourFor all the bloom and sparkle of thy beingA very daily beggar of her smiles !ROVANI./, say'st thou ? Where, in what nook of the earth,Lives she for whom I sigh ?GONZALOS.Nay, rather ask in what nook of the earthShe liveth not. There's ne'er a moving thing,That wears upon its form a woman's weed,Be it or short or tall, or pale or buxom,Or young or old, but thou dost roll thine eye,VOL. II. D4 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.And writhe thy body to fantastic shapesOf affectation, to attract her notice.EOVANI.Nay, spare me, good Gonzales ! I, perhaps,May, as I speak my jest or merry tale,With restless eye keep peering to the sideWhere beauty listens, too apparently ;But think not this attack on female constancyI mean this present individual pushBy any other motive has been prompted,Than love and true regard for noble Garcio.After the toils and dangers he has pass'd,To see him thus received provokes me much.GONZALOS.Hush ! be more prudent ; speak thy mind lessfreely.Thy brain is ever full of idle fancies :Come to the air, and cool thy fev'rish spleen.\JLxeunt.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 35SCENE III.Before the Gate of the Castle.Enter LUDOVIQUO, GAUVINO, and some inferiorDomestics from the gate, while martial Musicis heard without.GAUVINO (to LUDOVIQUO, after looking off thestage).'T is as I guess' d ; look, Mr. Seneschal !They bear the ensigns of Morton. See !Their chief himself is inarching in the van.LUDOVIQUO.And, by my fay ! a warlike face he wears,Lofty and grim.GAUVINO.Ay ; full of awful terrorsFor quaking drum-boys and poor piping elves.LUDOVIQUO.Comes he to visit thus our valiant lord,And show his warlike state ? Heaven mend hiswit!D 236 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Enter TORTONA, with a few followers, in martialarray.TORTONA.Be not alarm' d, good sirs : though thus in arms,We at your lady's gate are harmless visitors,Who humbly crave admittance.(LUDOVIQUO, as Seneschal, steps forward toreceive him with courtesy, while GAUVINOmutters to himself)GAUVINO.Mighty man !What blest forbearance ! For our lady's sake,He will not slay and eat us for a meal !TORTONA (to LUDOVIQUO).Good Mr. Seneschal ! inform thy ladyThat I, Morton's Marquis, and her slave,Most humbly beg permission at her feetBut here comes opportunity more tempting :A gentler messenger.Enter SOPHERA.GAUVINO (aside to LUDOVIQUO).Great condescending man ! superb humility !TORTONA (to SOPHERA).Fair Lady ! most becoming, as I guess,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 3JThe beauteous dame you serve ; do me thefavour (speaking in a lower voice, andleading her aside)To tell the noble mistress of this castleThat one, devoted dearly to her service,Who breathes the air in which she breathes, asgalesWafted from Paradise, begs in her presenceWith all devotion to present himself.SOPHERA (in a loud voice.The Marquis of Morton, as I guess.TORTONA.The same ; and let not in your peaceful hallsOur warlike mien alarm you. In the fieldWhatever our power may be, forget it here.Within her precincts, Mars himself would doffHis nodding helm, and bend in meek submission.SOPHERA.True, valiant Lord ; the brave are ever gentleIn hall and bower. But think not warlike guiseWill so alarm us now : there are withinWhose nodding plumes, indeed, less downy are,Whose well-hack' d armour wears a dimmer hue,Who have already taught our timid eyesTo look more boldly on such awful things.TORTONA.How, those within ? What mean'st thou ?D 338 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.SOPHERA.Ha, my Lord !You come not then to wish the gentle CountessJoy of her lord's return.TORTONA.Is he returned ? It surely cannot be.SOPHERA.He is, in truth. This morning he arrivedWith many valiant soldiers from the wars,Where they have seen rough service.TORTONA.That war so quickly ended?SOPHERA.Yes, my Lord,And fortunately too. The Moors submitTo the victorious arms of noble Garcio ;Who, ere he left their coast, did for his princeA happy peace conclude. Will it not please youTo enter, then, and bid him welcome home ?TORTONA.I should indeed, but 'twill intrude upon him.He and his lady may, perhaps, desireSome hours of privacy. Oblige me, then,And offer my respect congratulationI do but ill express the joy I feel.I will no longer trespass. (Hurrying away, andthen returningTHE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 39'Tis delicacy makes me thus in haste,As thou wilt comprehend. Should time permit,Though much I fear tomorrow's sun will light usTo other scenes, I will return and payTo the most noble Count all courtesy.Fair maiden, fare thee well ! (Hurrying away,and returning again; then drawing herfurther aside and speaking softly in herearlyThe Count, as I am told, dislikes this castle :His stay, perhaps, may be of short duration ?SOPHERA.Belike it may.TORTONA.Though quitting this vicinity,My station for a time will not be distant.Couldst thou in such a case indite to meA little note of favour ? (Taking her handyPretty hand !A billet penn'd by thee must needs containWords of sweet import. Fingers light and slender!(Offering to put on a rings Let this be favour'd.SOPHERA.Nay, my Lord, excuse me.The pen these fingers use incites no billetsOf such sweet import as you fondly guess :A housewife's recipe, or homely letterOf kind inquiry to some absent friend,D 440 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Exhausts its power. Unskilled to earn such gifts,I may not wear them. Yonder comes Rovani,A noble soldier ; stay and learn from himThe story of the war. Word-bound he is not :He'll tell it willingly.ROVANI, who has appeared at the gate, duringthe latter part of their discourse, observingthem suspiciously, now comes forward.)TORTONA.No, no! I am in haste, farewell, farewell![Exit with his followers.LUDOVIQUO.He goes, I trow, less grandly than he came.GAUVINO.Such hasty steps, indeed, somewhat derangeThe order of his high nobility.LUDOVIQUO.Yet, pompous as he is, I have been toldHe is no coward.GAUVINO.I suspect him much.LUDOVIQUO.But thou art wrong : although he doth assumeThose foolish airs of martial gallantry,He is as brave as others.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 41ROVANI (who has placed himself directly in frontof SOPHERA, and has been looking for sometimesignificantly in her face.So, gentle maid, your martial visitorRetreats right speedily. How fortunate,To meet so opportunely at the gateA prudent friend, to tell him what, perhaps,May save his bones, although it damp his pleasure!Nay, smile not: I commend thee in good earnest.Thou art a prudent maid, endow' d with virtuesThat suit thy station. This is ample praise.SOPHERA.Ample ; and spoken too with meaning tones.What face is this thou dearest of sly significance ?Go to ! thou dupes thyself with too muchshrewdness ;And canst not see what plainly lies before thee,Because thou ain't at seeing more. I'll in,And bear Morton's greeting to my LordAnd to his Countess.ROVANI.Do ; and give it allThe message and its postscript: words of audience,And those of gentle whisper following after.Let nothing be forgotten.SOPHERA.Nothing shall.42 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Good day, and Heaven curtail thee of thy witsTo make thee wiser ! [Exit into the gate, andfollowed by LUDOVIQUO, 8$c. <$c.ROVANI (alone).Ay, ay ! a very woman ! pleased and flatter'dWith the stale flatt'ry of a practised coxcomb,Though plainly seeing for another's favour.A very, very woman ! As I guess'd,Some secret intercourse hath been in train,Although how far in blameful act advancedI know not. Now, 't is cross'd and interrupted.So will I e'en believe, and fret no more.What good have I in living free from wedlock,If I for husband's honour thus take thought ?Better it were to wear the horns myself,Knowing it not, than fret for other men. [Exit.ACT III.SCENE I. An Apartment in the Castle.Enter Garcia and LUDOVIQUO, speaking as theyenter.Garcia.Ha ! with a priest ! conferring with a priest !Have they been long together ?THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 43LUDOVIQUO.Full an hour.Garcia.And does she oft such ghostly counsel take ?Has she of late?LUDOVIQUO.My Lord ?Garcia.O, nothing ! nothing !Stare not as if I meant to question thee :I had no more to say. (Motioning him away.)\JExit LUDOVIQUO.(Alone.) At such a time retired with her confessor!What! hath her lord's return caused in her mindSuch sudden need of ghostly counsel ? Strange !Something hath been amiss : if not in act,She is, I fear, in will and fancy tainted.ROVANI enters behind him unperceived.ROVANI.Nay, pure or tainted, leave the fancy free.Of her concerns who may cognisance take ?Although cooled priests beneath their jurisdictionPretend to hold her, be not thou so strict.Garcia.Thou know'st, then, that my wife is with herpriest.44 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.ROVANI.I knew it not. She is a pious dame :She seems she is a very pious dame.Garcia.Nay, speak thy mind ! thou need'st not hesitate.We have been fellow-soldiers nine long years :Thou ne'er wert wont to weigh thy words withme.What dost thou think ? There is some cause forthis.ROVANI.Women are full of strange and fitful humours.Garcia.Not so ; it is not that. Yet, were she false,Methinks her shame-flush'd face would turn aside,Nor look on me so oft and earnestlyAs I have seen her gaze. It cannot be !In act she is not false. But if her heart,Where every kind and dear affection dwelt,If it be changed stamping on the ground)Some fiend hath been at work,Some cursed agent hath been tampering with her.pacing to and fro in violent agitationsROVANI.Be not so wretched for a doubtful ill,Which, if it be at allGarcia.A doubtful ill !THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 45Oh, if my head but ached, or fev'rish sleep,Or the more potent secret cause forced from meOne groan or sigh, what tones of kind alarm !And the soft pressure of her gentle handIn mute affliction, till I smiled again !Here, on my bursting heart I feel it still,Though cold and changed she be.(After a gloomy pause Perhaps some awfuland mysterious powerWithin these fated precincts doth for meLove to aversion turn.ROVANI.What dost thou mean by a mysterious power ?And but ev'n now methought I heard thee nameA potent secret cause. Thou hast been wontFreely to make me sharer of thy thoughtsOf all thy secret wishes.Garcia.So I have :Nought for thy good to hear or mine to utter,Have I conceal' d from thee. I hear a noise.ROVANI.No j I hear nothing.Garcia.But my ear is quick;Too quick, perhaps, in fancying sounds that arenot.46 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.ROVANI.Ay, thou art right : Sphere moved the latch.Enter SOPHERA.Garcia (to SOPHERA).Com'st thou to tell me that the priest is gone ?SOPHERA.The Countess did command me to inform youShe is not well, and begs that for the nightShe may in solitude recruit her spirits.She wishes you good night and peaceful sleep.She bade me say, my Lord, her maladyIs of no ardent kind that should alarm you ;But, as she hopes, will pass away ere morn.(Aside to ROVANI, while Garcia turns away insilence.) He takes it deeply.ROVANI (aside to her).No, faith ! a soldier is too well inuredTo disappointment ; knowing not at daybreakWhether his next night's slumber shall be hadOn silken couch, by some fair princess fann'd,Or on the cold damp earth, with dead men's bonesHis wounded head to pillow. No, sweet maid !We bear such evils lightly.SOPHERA.*T is well ye do ; and so, brave Sir, good night ![Exit.THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 47Garcia (returning to ROVANI).What think' st thou of this message ?ROVANI.I know not what to think.Garcia.Thou dost ! thou dost ! for in thine eyes I readA shameful thought, that must remain unuttered.Ruin, and shame, and misery come upon me !Heaven pours its vengeance on this cursed head !ROVANI.Nay, do not thus give way : be well assuredEre thou give loose to passion.Garcia.Assured ! and how assur'd ? What can I do ?Become a calm inquisitor of shame ?ROVANI.Restrain thyself, and go to thine apartment,As if to pass the night. But, some hours later,When all are gone to rest, steal softly forthInto thy lady's chamber. There thou 'It seeIf she indeed be sick, or if she holdThe vigil of a guilt-distracted mind.Garcia.I like thy counsel well : I'll to my chamber.Good night, my friend.\JLxeunt severally.48 THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.The Bedchamber of the COUNTESS, who is discoveredsitting on a low seat by the side of theBed, with her head and arms thrown uponthe Bed. She raises her head, and, after athoughtful pause , starts up eagerly.COUNTESS.It cannot be ! The roused and angry deepLashes its foaming billows o'er the barkThat bears th' accursed freight, till the scaredcrewInto its yawning gulf casts forth the murderer.On the embattled field, in armour cased,His manly strength to blasted weakness turns.Yea, in their peaceful homes, men, as by instinct,From the dark rolling of his eye will turnThey know not why, so legibly has NatureSet on his brow the mark of bloody Cain.And shall I think the prosperous Garcio, heWhose countenance allured all eyes, whose smile,Whose voice was love, whose frame with strongaffectionI've seen so dearly moved ; who in my arms,Who in my heart hath lived No ! let darkpriests,THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 49From the wild fancies of a dying man,Accuse him as they will, I'll not believe it.(After another pause Would in this better faithmy mind had strengthTo hold itself unshaken ! Doubt is misery.I'll go to him myself and tell my wretchedness.O ! if his kindling eye with generous ireRepel the charge ; if his blest voice deny it,Though one raised from the dead swore to itstruth,I '11 not believe it.Enter SOPHERA.What brings thee here again ? Did I not chargetheeTo go to bed ?SOPHERA.And so I did intend.But in my chamber, half prepared for rest,Op'ning the drawer of an ancient cabinetTo lay some baubles by, I found withinCOUNTESS.What hast thou found ?SOPHERA.Have I not heard you say, that shortly afterYour marriage with the Count, from your apartment,A picture of your brother, clad in mail,VOL. II. E50 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.A strong resemblance, over which your tearsHad oft been shed, was stop away ?COUNTESS.Thou hast.How it was stop, for value it had noneFor any but myself, I often wonder'd.Thou hast not found it ?SOPHERA.See ! this I have found.(Giving her a picture, which she seizes eagerlyCOUNTESS.Indeed, indeed it is !(After gazing mournfully on it.)Retire, I pray thee, nor, till morning break,Return again, for I must be alone.[Exit SOPHERA.(After gazing again on the picture.)Alas! that lip, that eye, that arching brow;That thoughtful look which I have often mark'd,So like my noble father ! (Kissing it.)This for his dear, dear sake, and this for thine :Ye sleep i' the dust together.Alas ! how sweetly mantled thus thy cheekAt sight of those thou lowest ! What thingshave been,What hours, what years of trouble have goneby,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 51Since thus in happy careless youth thou wertDearest and nearest to my simple heart.(Kisses it again, and presses it to her breast,while Garcia, who has entered behindby a concealed door at the bottom of thestage, comes silently upon her, and sheutters a scream of surprisedGarcia.This is thy rest, then, and the quiet sleepThat should restore thy health : thou giv'st thesehoursTo the caressing of a minion's imageWhich to a faithful husband are denied.Oh, oh ! they but on morning vapour tread,Who ground their happiness on woman's faith.Some reptile too ! (Stamping on the groundsA paltry, worthless minion !COUNTESS.Ha ! was it jealousy so much disturb'd thee ?If this be so, we shall be happy still.The love I bear the dead, dear though it be,Surely does thee no wrong.Garcia.No, artful woman ! give it to my hand.(Snatching at the picturesThat is the image of a living gallant.COUNTESS.O would it were! (Gives it to him, and he,E 2THE SEPARATION ! A TRAGEDY.starting as he looks upon it, staggers backsome paces, till he is arrested by the pillarof the bed, against which he leans in a kindof stupor, citing the picture fall from hishands.)Merciful God ! he 's guilty ! am I thus ?Heaven lend me strength ! I'll be in doubt nolonger. (Running up to him, and claspingher hands togetherGarcio, a fearful thing is in my mind,And curse me not that I have harbour' d it,If that it be not so. The wretched Baldwin,Upon his deathbed, in his frenzied ravings,Accused thee as the murderer of my brother :O pardon me that such a monstrous taleHad any power to move me ! Look upon me !Say that thou didst it not, and I'll believe thee.(A pause.)Thou dost not speak. What fearful look is that ?That blanching cheek ! that quiv'ring lip ! Ohorrible ! (Catching hold of his clothes.)Open thy lips ! relieve me from this misery !Say that thou didst not do it. (He remainssilent, making a rueful motion of the head.)O God! thou didst, thou didst! (Holds upher hands to heaven in despair, and then,recoiling from him to a distant part of thechamber, stands gazing on him with horror.Garcia, after great agitation, begins toapproach her irresolutely.)THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 53I've shared thy love, been in thy bosom cherish'd,But come not near me ! touch me not ! the earthYawning beneath my feet will shelter meFrom thine accursed hand.Garcia.O Margaret!Can gentlest love to such fierce detestationBe in an instant changed, for one sad deed,The hasty act of a most horrid moment,When hell and strong temptation master' d me ?And yet why marvel ? for thou canst not moreDetest that deed than I, the wretched doer.COUNTESS.Ah, ah ! why didst thou ?Garcia.Listen to my story.But, oh ! the while, unfasten from my faceThose looks of horror, else I cannot tell it.COUNTESS.Speak then, I hear thee.Garcia.Thou know'st too well with what fierce prideUlricoRefused, on thy behalf, my suit of love ;Deeming a soldier, though of noble birth,Ev'n his own blood, possessing but his armsAnd some slight wreaths of fame, a match unmeetFor one whom lords of princely territoryE 354f THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Did strive to gain : and here, indeed, I ownHe rightly deem'd ; my suit was most presumptuous.COUNTESS.Well, pass this o'er ; I know with too muchprideHe did oppose thy suit.Garcia.That night ! It was in dreary, dull November,When at the close of day, with faithful Baldwin,I reach' d this castle with the vain intentTo make a last attempt to move his pity.I made it, and I fail'd. With much contemptAnd aggravating passion, he dismissed meTo the dark night.COUNTESS.You left him then ? You left him ?Garcia.O yes ! I left him. In my swelling breastMy proud blood boil'd. Through the wild woodI tookMy darkling way. A violent storm arose ;The black dense clouds pour'd down their torrentson me ;The roaring winds aloft with the vex'd treesHeld strong contention, whilst my buffetedbreastThe crushing tangled boughs and torn-up shrubsTHE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 55Vainly opposed. Cross lay the wilding paths.I miss'd the road ; and after many turnings,Seeing between the trees a steady light,As from a window gleam, I hastened to it.It was a lower window, and within,The lighted chamber show'd me but too well,We had unwittingly a circuit madeBack to the very walls from whence we came.COUNTESS.Ah, fated, fatal error ! most perverse !Garcia.But, oh ! what feelings, think'st thou, rose withinme?What thoughts, what urging thoughts, what keensuggestionsCrowded upon me like a band of fiends,When, on a nearer view, within the chamber,Upon an open couch, alone and sleeping,I saw Ulrico ?COUNTESS.Didst thou slay him sleeping ?The horrible deed ! Thou could'st not! O thoucould' st not !Garcia.Well may'st thou say it! I've become, sweetMargaret,Living, though most unworthy as I was,Companion of thy virtues, one, whose heartE 456 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Has been to good affections formed and bent ;But then it was not so. My hapless youthIn bloody, savage, predatory warWas rear'd. It was no shock to my rude childhoodTo see whole bands of drunk or sleeping menIn cold blood butcher'd. Could I tell, to theeThe things that I have seen : things, too, inwhichMy young hand took its part ; thou would'st notwonder,That, seeing thus my enemy in my power,Love, fortune, honours, all within the purchaseOf one fell stroke, I raised my arm and gave it.COUNTESS.Fearful temptation !Garcia.After a fearful pause, I softly enter' d.The deed was done ; and, hastening from thechamberWith breathless speed back to the spot whereBaldwinHeld my brave steed, I mounted, favour'd nowBy a new-risen moon and waning storm ;And to the fleetness of that noble creatureI owe it, that though heir to him I slew,No whisper of suspicion upon meE'er breath'd as perpetrator of the deed.THE SEPARATION '. A TRAGEDY. 5JCOUNTESS.And I have been the while thy bosom's mate,Pressing in plighted love the bloody handThat slew my brother !Garcia.Thou, indeed, hast beenAn angel pure, link'd to a fiend. Yet, think notI have enjoy'd what guilt so deep had earn'd.Oh no! I've borne about, where'er I went,A secret wretchedness within my breastTurning delight to torment. Now thou knowestWhy on my midnight couch thought heard me oftUtter deep groans, when thou, waked from thysleep,Hast thought some nightmare press'd me.Oh ! were the deed undone, not all the differenceOf sublunary bliss that lies betweenA world's proud monarch and the loveliest wretchThat gleans subsistence from the fetid dunghill,Would tempt me to embrue my hands in murder.(Speaking these last words loud and vehemently*)COUNTESS.Hush ! speak not thus ! thou'lt be overheard :some listenerIs at the door. I thought I heard a noise. (Goingto the door, opening it, then shuttingit softly and returning')No 5 there is nothing: 'twas my fears deceivedme.58 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Garcia.And dost thou fear for me ? Is there within theeStill some remains of love for one so guilty ?Thou wilt not then, in utter detestation,Heap curses on my head.COUNTESS.Guilty as thou hast been, I cannot curse thee.O no! I'll nightly from my cloistered cellSend up to pitying Heaven my prayers for thee.Garcia.Thy cloister'd cell ! What mean those threateningwords ?COUNTESS.Garcio, we must part.Garcia.No ; never ! Any punishment but this !We shall not part.COUNTESS.We must, we must ! 'T were monstrous, 'twereunholyLonger to live with thee.Garcia.No, Margaret, no ! Think'st thou I will indeedSubmit to this, ev'n cursed as I am ?No ; were I black as hell's black fiends, and thouPure as celestial spirits (and so thou art),THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 59Still thou art mine ; my sworn, my wedded love,And still as such I'll hold thee.COUNTESS.Heaven bids us part : yea, Nature bids us part.Garcia.Heaven bids us part ! Then let it send its lightningTo strike me from thy side. Let yawning earth,Op'ning beneath my feet, divide us. Then,And not till then, will I from thee be sever'd.COUNTESS.Let go thy terrible grasp : thou would'st not o'ermeA dreaded tyrant rule ? Beneath thy powerThou may'st indeed retain me, crush'd, degraded,Watching in secret horror every glanceOf thy perturbed eye, like a quell'd slave,If this suffice thee ; but all ties of loveAll sympathy between us now is brokenAnd lost for ever.Garcia.And canst thou be so ruthless ? No, thou canstnot!Let Heaven in its just vengeance deal with me !Let pain, remorse, disease, and every illHere in this world of nature be my portion !And in the world of spirits too well I knowThe murd'rer's doom abides me.60 THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY.Is this too little for thy cruelty ?No ; by the living God ! on my curst headLight every ill but this ! We shall not part.COUNTESS.Let go thy desp'rate hold, thou desp'rate man !Thou dost constrain me to an oath as dreadful ;And by that awful nameGarcia.Forbear, forbear !Then it must be ; there is no mitigation.(Throws himself on the ground, uttering adeep groan, when ROVANI and SOPHERAburst in upon them from opposite sides.'}ROVANI (to the COUNTESS).What is the matter ? Hath he on himselfDone some rash act? I heard him loud andstormy.SOPHERA.She cannot answer thee : look to the Count,And I will place her gently on her couch ;For they are both most wretched.(SOPHERA supports the COUNTESS, whiteROVANI endeavours to raise Garcia fromthe ground, and the scene closes.)THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 6lSCENE III.The Inside of a rustic Hermitage ; the Hermitdiscovered marking a Figure on the Wall.HERMIT.This day to all the lonely days here spent ;Making a term of thirty years' repentanceFor forty years of sin. Heaven of its mercyAccept the sacrifice ! Who knocks without ?(Knocking at the door.)'T is nothing but my fancy. Break of dayYet scarcely peeps, nor hath a new waked birdChirped on my branchy roof (Knocking again.)Nay, something does.Lift up the latch, whoe'er thou art ; nor lockNor bar, nor any hindrance e'er preventsThose who would enter here.Enter ROVANI.ROVANI.O pardon, holy Hermit, this intrusionAt such untimely hour ; for miseryMakes free with times and seasons.HERMIT.Thou sayest well : it will d' off ceremony62 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.Ev'n in a monarch's court. Sit down, I pray:I am myself a poor repentant sinner,But, as I trust, a brand saved from the fire.Then tell thy tale, and give thy sorrows vent :What can I do for thee ?ROVANI.I do not for myself entreat thy pity,But I am come from an unhappy man,Who, inly torn with agony of mind,Hath need of ghostly aid.HERMIT.I am no priest.ROVANI.I know thou art not, but far better, Father,For that which I entreat thee.For the cooled monk, in peaceful cloisters bred,Who hath for half a century undisturb'dTold o'er his beads ; what sympathy hath heFor perturbed souls, storm-toss'd i' the wickedworld ?Therefore Count Garcio most desires to see thee,And will to thee alone unlock his breast.HERMIT.Garcio, the lord of this domain ?ROVANI.The same.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 63HERMIT.The blest in love, the rich, the prosp'rousGarcio ?ROVANI.He hath since dead of night traversed his chamberLike one distraught, or cast him on the groundIn all the frantic violence of despair.I have watch'd by him, but from thee aloneHe will hear words of counsel or of peace.Thy voice, perhaps, will calm a stormy spiritThat ne'er has known control.HERMIT.God grant it may !We '11 lose no time, my son ; I follow thee.[Exeunt.ACT IV.SCENE I. An Ante-room: ROVANI discoveredpacing to and fro.ROVANI.Their conference is long. The gentle HermitHas had, I fear, no easy task. He comes!64 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Enter HERMIT.Save thee, good Father ! hath thy shriving sped ?How is thy penitent?HERMIT.Better, I hope : may Heaven preserve his mindIn the meek frame in which I left it. Never,In all my intercourse with wretched sinners,Have I with a more keen ungovern'd spiritStronger contention held.ROVANI.I well believe thee :For I have seen ere now his spirit striveIn all the restless energy of passion.Thou hast at last subdued him ?HERMIT.Thank God, I have ! Meek and resigned toHeavenHe now appears. But go to him, my son ;He needs thy presence much. Within an hourHe leaves the castle, leaves his wife and child ;It is not fit that he should be alone.Go, good Rovani, arid with soothing wordsKeep thou his resolution to the bent.ROVANI.Ah ! such a resolution ! Heard I right ?To leave his wife and child ?THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY. 65HERMIT.Question me not, my son ; there is good cause :'T is meet that he should go.ROVANI.Forgive me, Father !That solemn voice and sorrowing eye too wellAsserts there is a cause, a fearful cause.I will obey thee. (Going, but returns again")Is there aught further thou would'st have me do ?HERMIT.He will, perhaps, desire to see his lady ;But till he be prepared to leave the castle,And take his last farewell, methinks 'twere betterThey should not meet.ROVANI.I understand you, Father.exeunt severally.VOL. II.66 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.The Apartment of the COUNTESS, who is discoveredsitting on a low seat, her elbows restingon her lap, and her face covered with herclasped hands. She raises her head suddenly,listens for a moment, and then springs from herseat.COUNTESS.I am not now deceived. (Goes to the door andlistens, then returns.'} I heard his steps,Yea, and his voice, and it was nothing. Ah!My mind and senses so confused are grown,That all this wretchedness seems like a dream ;A dream, alas ! from which there is no waking.I hear him now : it is a distant step :I may be yet deceived. (Going near the door,and listening against It is, it is !Heaven give me strength ! my trial is at hand !Enter Garcia, who approaches her, and thenstopping short, gazes at her sadly, while shestands with her eyesjixed on the ground.Garcia.Marg'ret, I thought I hoped I was persuadedThe farewell yearnings of a broken heartWould move thee to some pity of my state;THE SEPARATION *. A TRAGEDY. jBut that averted face, that downcast eye,There is abhorrence in it.COUNTESS.O no! I fear'd to look ; 'tis not abhorrence.(Raises her eyes to him, and shrinks back.)Garcia.What moves thee thus ?COUNTESS.Alas ! thou 'rt greatly altered :So pale thy cheek, thine eyes so quench'd andsunk !Hath one short night so changed thee ?Garcia.A night spent in the tossing of despair,When the fierce turmoil of contending passionsTo deepest self-abasement and contrition,Subside ; a night in which I have consentedTo tear my bosom up to rend in twainIts dearest, only ties; ay, such a nightWorks on the mortal frame the scathe of years.COUNTESS.Alas ! thy frame will feel, I fear, too soonThe scathe of years. Sorrow and sickness thenWill bow thee down, while cold unkindly strangersNeglect thy couch, nor give thee needful succour.68 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.Garcia.And wherefore grieve for this ? So much thebetter :They least befriend the wretched who retardThe hour of his release. Why should I liveIf Heaven accept my penitence? Hath earthAught still to raise a wish, or gleam the pathOf one so darken'd round with misery ?COUNTESS.Nay, say not so : thy child, thy boy, to see himIn strength and stature grown, would not thistempt theeTo wish some years of life ?Garcia.Others shall rear him ; others mark his changeFrom the sweet cherub to the playful boy ;Shall, with such pity as an orphan claims,Share in his harmless sports and catch his love ;Whilst I, if that I live and am by HeavenPermitted, coming as a way-worn stranger,At distant intervals, to gaze upon him,And strain him to my heart, shall from his eyeThe cold and cheerless stare of wondermentInstead of love receive.COUNTESS.O think not so ! he shall be taught to love thee;He shall be taught to lisp thy name, and raiseHis little hands to Heaven for blessings on theeAs one most dear, though absent.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 69Garcia.I do believe that thou wilt teach him so.I know that in my lonely state of penitence,Sever' d from earthly bliss, I to thy mindShall be like one whom death hath purified.O that, indeed, or death or any suff'rings,By earthly frame or frameless spirit endured,Could give me such a nature as againMight be with thine united !Could I but forward look and trust to this,Whatever sufferings of a lengthen' d lifeBefore me lay would be to me as nothing ;As the rough billows of some stormy faith,Upon whose further shore fair regions smile ;As the rent shrouding of a murky cloud,Thro' which the mountain traveller, as he bendsHis mantled shoulders to the pelting storm,Sees sunny brightness peer. Could I but thinkCOUNTESS.Think it I believe it ! with a rooted faith,Trust to it surely. Deep as thy repentance,Aspiring be thy faith !Garcia.Ay, were my faithStrong as my penitence, 't were well indeed.My scourge and bed of earth would then betemperedAlmost to happiness.F 370 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.COUNTESS.Thy scourge and bed of earth ! alas, alas !And mean'st thou then to wreak upon thyselfSuch cruel punishment ? O no, my Garcio !God doth accept the sorrow of the heartBefore all studied penance. 'T is not well :Where'er thou art, live thou with worthy men,And as becomes thy state.Garcia.No ; when from hence a banish'd man I go,1*11 leave behind me ail my crime did purchase.Deprived of thee, its first and dearest meed,Shall I retain its base and paltry earningsTo live with strangers more regarded ? No ;Poor as I was when first my luckless stepsThis fatal threshold pass'd, I will depart.COUNTESS.And wilt thou then a houseless wand'rer be ?Shall I, in warm robe wrapped, by winter fireList to the pelting blast, and think the whileOf thy unsheltered head ?Or eat my bread in peace, and think that GarcioReduce me not to such keen misery !(Bursting into an agony of tears.'}%Garcia.And dost thou still feel so much pity for me ?Retain I yet some portion of thy love ?THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. JlO, if I do ! I am not yet abandonedTo utter reprobation. (Falling at her feet, andembracing her knees.'} Margaret ! wife !May I still call thee by that name so dear ?MARGARET (disentangling herself from his hold,and removing to some distance).O, leave me, leave me ! for Heaven's mercy leaveme !Garcia (following her, and bending one knee tothe ground.Marg'ret, beloved wife ! keenly beloved !COUNTESS.Oh, move me not ! forbear, forbear in pity !Fearful, and horrible, and dear thou art !Both heaven and hell are in thee ! Leave methen,Leave me to do that which is right and holy.Garcia.Yes, what is right and holy thou shalt do ;Stain'd as I am with blood, with kindred blood,How could I live with thee ? O do not thinkI basely seek to move thee from thy purpose.O, no ! Farewell, most dear and honour' d Marg'ret!Yet, ere I go, could'st thou without abhorrence(Pauses*)F 47# THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.COUNTESS.What would'st thou, Garcio ?Garcia.If but that hand beloved were to my lipsOnce more in parting press' d, methinks I'd goWith lighten'd misery. Alas! thou canst not!Thou canst not to such guiltCOUNTESS.I can ! I will !And Heaven in mercy pardon me this sin,If sin it be. (Embraces him, and after weepingon his neck, breaks suddenly away andexit, while Garcia stands gazing afterher.}Garcia.Have I not seen my last? I 've seen my last.Then wherefore wait I here ?The world before me lies, a desert worldIn which a banish'd wand'rer I must be.(A pauseWander from hence, and leave her so defencelessIn these unruly times ! I cannot do it II'll seem to go, yet hover near her still,Like spell-bound spirit near th' embalmed dustIt can no more reanimate. Mine eyesMay see her distant form, mine ears may hearHer sweet voice through the air, while she believesKingdoms or seas divide us.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 73The Hermit is my friend, and I to himRest for the present, eager crowding thoughts !I must not linger here. [Exit.SCENE III.An outer Court of the Castle ; an arched Gatewayin front with a stone Bench on one side ofit.Enter LUDOVTQUO, GAUVINO, and PIETRO, andseat themselves on the bench.GAUVINO.The ev'ning breeze will cool us better here.LUDOVIQUO.After the sultry day it is refreshing.PIETRO (to GAUVINO).Well, as I was a-saying to the seneschal,I wonder that the Count should think of choosingThat noodle Gomez to attend upon him.GAUVINO.He has some reason for it, be assured.LUDOVIQUO.How so, good Chamberlain ?74 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.GAUVINO.Heaven knows ! but this fantastical Rovani,Whom as his deputy he leaves behind,Already takes upon him, by my faith !As if his kingdom were to last for ever.LUDOVIQUO.Thou speak'st in spleen ; he seems to me rightgracious.GAUVINO.I say not in the way of tyrannyHe takes upon him ; 't is his very graciousness,His condescending vanity I hate.A vain, assuming coxcomb ! Ev'n when GarcioFrown'd like a master o'er us, yet my heartAcknowledged htm as such, and loved him oftThe better for his sternness.LUDOVIQUO.Didst thou? I'm sure full many a time and oftThought grumbled like a fiend, whene'er hisorders,Too roughly given, have cross'd thy wiser will.GAUVINO.Well, well ; perhaps I have ; yet, nevertheless,Would he were with us still !PIETRO.Ay, would he were !THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. J5LUDOVIQUO.Perhaps he'll soon return.GAUVINO (significantly).He'll ne'er return. We'll see him here no more.LUDOVIQUO.Why say'st thou so ?GAUVINO.I have my reasons : he hath been too prosperous.PIETRO.And what of that?GAUVINO.The power that has upheld himWill, when his term is up, dire reck'ning take.PIETRO.What dost thou mean ?GAUVINO.Nay, if thou canst not guess,< I will not utter more.LUDOVIQUO.Ha ! yonder Gomez comes !PIETRO.Gomez, indeed ! (All rising to meet him.)LUDOVIQUO.His Lord is then return'd.76 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.Enter GOMEZ.OMNES.Returned already, man ! Where is thy master ?LUDOVIQUO.Is he not with thee ?GOMEZ.I would he were. I left him some leagues hence ;By his command charged to return again,And follow him no more. Long I entreatedTo be permitted still to share his fate,But was at last constrained to leave him.GAUVINO.Ha!Constraint! 'tis very strange. Where didstthou leave him ?GOMEZ.In the dark centre of a gloomy forest,Dismounting, to my care he gave his steed,And, as I said before, so strictly charged me,I was constrained to leave him.GAUVINO.A dark forest ?LUDOVIQUO.Saw'st thou where he went?GOMEZ.He turn'd away, and I with heavy cheerTHE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 77GAUVINO (very eagerly).Didst thou not look behind thee in retreatingTo see what path he took ?GOMEZ.I look'd behind,But in a moment lost him from my sight.GAUVINO (shaking his head).'T is marvellous strange !Was there not pit, nor cave, nor flood at hand ?GOMEZ.Not that I noticed. Why dost shake thy head ?GAUVINO.He'll never more upon this earth be seen.Whether or cave, or gulf, or flood received him,He is, ere this, I fear, beneath the earthFull deep enough, reckoning with him who boughthim.PIETRO.Reck'ning with him who bought him ! Be therethenSuch fearful compacts with the wicked power ?GAUVINO.Have ye not heard of John the Prosperous,Who, starting at the sound of piping winds,That burst his chamber door, full sore aghast,With trembling steps his gorgeous chamber left,78 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.And, by himself in a small boat embark* d,Wearing his way to the black wheeling eddyIn centre of the lake, which swallow'd him ?PIETRO.My flesh creeps at the thought ?GOMEZ.Dost thou believe it ?GAUVINO.Ay ; or what think ye of the Count Avergo,Who, after years of such successful crimes,Took leave of all his friends, at warning givenBy sound of midnight trumpet at his gate ;Round which, 't is said, a band of plumedspectres,Whose whiten'd bony jaws and eyeless socketsDid from their open'd beavers to the moonStare horribly, stood ready to receive him ?OMNES.And went he with them ?GAUVINO.Ay, certes, did he ! for above the groundWith mortal men he never more was seen.(jTo GOMEZ.) But enter, man, and have a stoupof wine ;Thou keenest faint and spent.OMNES.Ay, give him wine, for see how pale he is.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 79PIETRO.Like one who hath been near unearthly things.exeunt.SCENE IV.The Garden.Enter the COUNTESS and SOPHERA.SOPHERA (speaking as they enter).And look, I pray, how sweet and fresh and fragrantThe dewy morning is. There, o'er our headsThe birds conven'd like busy gossips sit,Trimming their speckled feathers. In the thickAnd tufted herbage, with a humming noiseStirs many a new-waked thing ; amongst thegrassBeetles, and lady-birds, and lizards glide,Showing their shining coats like tinted gold.COUNTESS.Yes, all things, in a sunny morn like this,That social being have and fellowshipWith others of their kind, begin the dayGladly and actively. Ah ! how wakes he,His day of lonesome silence to begin,Who, of all social intercourse bereft,80 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.On the cold earth hath pass'd the dismal night?Cheerful domestic stir, nor crowing cock,Nor greeting friend, nor fawning dog hath heTo give him his good-morrow.SOPHERA.Nay, do not let your fancy brood on this.Think not my Lord, tho' he with Gomez partedIn a lone wood, will wander o'er the earthIn dreary solitude. In every countryKind hearts are found to cheer the stranger'sway.COUNTESS.Heaven grant he meet with such !SOPHERA.Then be not so cast down. Last night the airWas still and pleasant ; sweetly thro' the trees,Which moved not, look'd the stars and crescentmoon :The night-bird's lengthen' d call with fitful lapse,And the soft ceaseless sound of distant rillsUpon the list'ning ear came soothingly ;While the cool freshness of the air was mix'dWith rising odours from the flowery earth.In such sweet summer nights, be well assuredThe unhoused head sleeps soundest.COUNTESS*The unhoused head ! and Garcio's now is such !I could not sleep ; and, as I paced my chamber,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 81Alas ! thought I, how long a term is nightTo lonely watchers ! ev'n a summer's night.And in the lengthened gloom of chill DecemberWhy dost thou move ?SOPHERA.There is a stranger coming.COUNTESS.Perhaps it is some message from my lord.SOPHERA.I rather fear it is Morton's lord.COUNTESS.I wish my gate had not been open'd to him.Will he persist to press his presence on me ?Enter TORTONA.TORTONA.Pardon me, Madam, this too bold intrusion,But hov'ring round your walls, like the poormothCircling the fatal flame, I needs must enter.I was compelled to do it. May I hopeI see you well as lovely, and inclined,From the angelic sweetness of your nature,To pardon me ?COUNTESS.You still preserve, my Lord, I do perceive,VOL. II. G82 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.The bountiful profusion of a tongueWell stored with courteous words.TORTONA.Nay, rather say,A tongue that is of all expression beggar'd,That can the inward sentiments declareWhich your angelic presence still inspires.(Pointing to SOPHERA.) This "lady knows howdeep, how true they are.She did refuse, yet, nevertheless, I trustShe bore my secret message to your ear.SOPHERA.'T was well for you I did not, good my Lord ;You had not else, I trow, found entrance here.COUNTESS.It had, in truth, prevented this presumption.A secret message, saidst thou, for the earOf Garcio's wife !TORTONA.And does the man who quits thee,Like a dull dolt such heavenly beauty quits,Deserve the name of husband ? No, sweetMarg'ret ;Gloze not to me thy secret wrongs : I know,Full well I know them ; nor shall formal namesAnd senseless ties my ardent love repel.(Catching hold of her hand.)THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 83COUNTESS (shaking him oBase and audacious fool ! did not thy follyAlmost excuse thy crime, thou shouldst mostdearlyRepent this insult. Thickest thou my lordHas left me unprotected ? Ho ! Rovani !Move with a quicker step.Enter ROVANI, followed by GONZALOS.(To TORTONA, pointing to ROVANI.) Behold, myLord, the friend of absent Garcio,And in his absence holder of this castle.To his fair courtesy, as it is meet,I now consign you with all due respect ;And so farewell. [Exit, followed by SOPHERA.TORTONA.I might, indeed, have known that modern damesAn absent husband's substitute can findRight speedily.ROVANI (aside to GONZALOS).Jealous of me, I hear.It makes my soldier's plume more proudly waveTo think such fancies twitch him.(Aloud to TORTONA, advancing to meet him.}Noble Marquis!Proud of the lady's honourable charge,Which to my care entrusts a guest so valued,Let me entreat you to partake within84 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Some slight refreshment. After such fatigue,So early and so gallantly encounter'd,(Two leagues at least upon an ambling steedYour morning's hardships fairly maybe reckoned,)You must require refreshment.TORTONA.Paltry coxcomb !ROVANI.Yes, paltry as a coxcomb, good, my Lord,Compared to greater. Pardon a deficiencyYour presence has occasion'd, and permitThat I conduct youTORTONA.Most contemptible!Follow me not! My way from this curst placeI'll find without a guide.ROVANI.Then be it so,If it so please you : and, farewell, my Lord,Until within these walls you shall againVouchsafe to honour us.TORTONA.Which may be, jeering minion, somewhat soonerThan thou dost reckon for.ROVANI.Whene'er you will, we're ready to receive you.\ JLacit TORTONA.He calls me minion : seest thou not, Gonzales,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 85Which way suspicion leans? The fool is jealous,Jealous of me ! Hath any one besidesHarbour' d such foolish fancies ?GONZALOS.No, by St. Francis ! ne'er a soul besidesHath such a thought conceived, or ever will.ROVANI.Thought angry : dost thou think my thoughts areevil?GONZALOS.No ; evil thoughts thrive not within thy breast,Valiant Rovani ; this I know right well :But vain ones there a fattening culture find,And reach a marvellous growth.ROVANI.Well, do not chide: I will with scrupulous honourFulfil my trust ; and do but wish my armsThe lady and this castle might defendAgainst a worthier foe than that light braggart.GONZALOS.But thou know'st well, or ought to know, Rovani,A braggart may be brave. Faith ! were it notFor some small grains of wit and honest worthWhich poor Morton lacks, thyself and heIn natural temperament and spirit areSo nearly match'd, you might twin nestlings beFrom the same shell. Be not so rash, I pray!G 386 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Morton is no coward ; and his forcesGreater than thou in ruin'd walls like theseCanst prudently oppose : therefore be wise,And send for timely aid, lest he surprise thee.ROVANI.I will be hang'd before another soldierShall be admitted here.GONZALOS.See to it then.ROVANI.And so I will ; it is not thy concern.[Exit GONZALOS.ROVANI (alone.He, too, 't is manifest, has some suspicionThat Marg'ret favours me. (Muttering, andsmiling to himself, then speaking aloudAy, those same looks. Well, well, and if it be,It touches not our honour. Fair advice !Call in some neighbouring leader of bandittiTo share the honour of defending her !I know his spite. Twin nestlings from the shellWith such a fool ! I know his jealous spite.I will be hang'd before another soldierShall cross the bridge or man our moaned wall.exit.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 87ACT V.SCENE I. The outer Court of the Castle.Hermit, Pilgrim, and several Mendicants, discoveredstanding round the Gateway at thebottom of the Stage.Enter, on the front, LUDOVIQUO, GAUVINO, andGOMEZ.GAUVINO,The rumour of our lady's bounteous almsSpread o'er the country quickly ; every morningAdds to the number of those mendicants,Those slothful pests, who thus beset our gates.LUDOVIQUO.Rail not so bitterly ; there are, thou seest,The sick and maim'd and truly miserable,Although some idle vagrants with the crowdHave enter'd cunningly. Dost thou not seeOur Hermit is amongst them ?GAUVINO.What, comes he too a-begging? Shame uponhim !His cot is stored with every dainty thingOur peasant housewives rear, poor simple souls!And prowls he here for more ?G 488 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.GOMEZ.He never came before.LUDOVIQUO.Ay, and belikeHe rather comes to give than to receive.GAUVINO.And what hath he to give ? God mend thy wit !A broken rosary ?LUDOVIQUO.A good man's blessing.GAUVINO.Poo, poo ! what folks are wont to sell at home,They will not go abroad to give for nothing.GOMEZ.And see yon aged Pilgrim by his side,How spent and spare he seems !GAUVINO.Hovels, and caves, and lazar-houses soonWill pour their pests upon us.LUDOVIQUO.Hush, man ! thou art a surly heartless churl !Yonder the lady comes.Enter COUNTESS.MENDICANTS (advancing, and all speaking at onceas she enters*)Blessings upon your head, most noble Lady !THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 89COUNTESS.I thank you all ! Have they been careful of you?MENDICANTS.Ay, bless you ! they have served us bountifully.COUNTESS.But wherefore stand ye here ? Retire within,Where ye may sit at ease and eat your morsel.Good Pilgrim, thou art weary, and blackest rest ;I fear the hardships of thy wand' ring lifeHave blanch' d thy scanty locks more than thineyears.PILGRIM.No, gentle Lady : Heaven provides for me.When ev'ning closes, still some shelt'ring cave,Or peasant's cot, or goatherd's shed is near ;And, should the night in desert parts o'ertake me,It pleases me to think the beating blastHas its commission, by rough disciplineTo profit me withal.COUNTESS.The beating blasts have well fulfill' d on theeTheir high commission.But, oh ! exceed not ! Wander forth no more.If thou hast home, or wife, or child, or aughtOf human kind that loves thee, O return !Return to them, and end thy days in peace.Didst thou but know the misery of those90 THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY.Who hear the night-blast rock their walls, andthinkThe head to them most dear may be unshelter'd,Thou couldst not be so cruelturning roundly Who ' twitch' d my robe?LUDOVIQUO.It was our holy Hermit,Who press'd, ev'n now, its border to his lips,Then shrunk aside.COUNTESS.But how is this ? He hurries fast away.LUDOVIQUO.He is a bashful man, whose hooded faceOn woman never looks.COUNTESS.Has he some vow upon him ?LUDOVIQUO.*T is like he may ; but he will pray for you.COUNTESS.And good men's prayers prevail, I do believe.LUDOVIQUO.Ay, Madam, all the peasants round, I trow,Set by his prayers great store. Ev'n mothersleaveThe very cradles of their dying infantsTo beg them. Wives, whose husbands are at sea,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY, 91Or absent, or in any jeopardy,Hie to his cell to crave his intercession.COUNTESS.Do they ? Most blessed man !(Beckoning to the Hermit, who stands aloof.)I have words for thine ear ; approach, I pray.(Leading him apart, on the front of the Stage.)The absent and in jeopardy by theeRemember'd are, and Heaven receives thyprayers :Then, oh ! remember one, who for himself,Depressed, discouraged, may not to God's throneMeet supplication make !(Taking him further apart, and in a lower voice.)There is a lonely wand'rer in the worldOf whom thou hottest. When the vespers sweetAnd ev'ning orisons of holy menSound through the air, and in his humble cot,With all his family round, th' unlearned hindLifts up his soul to Heaven ; when ev'n thebabe,Tutor' d to goodness, by its mother kneelsTo lisp some holy word, on the cold ground,Cheered of earthly thing, he'll lay him downUnblest, I fear, and silent. Such a oneThou hottest of) good Father ; pray for him.How's this? thought greatly moved, and dostnot answer.Have I requested what thou may'st not grant ?92 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Heaven hath not cast him off. O do not thinkit!The heart that loved him hath not cast him off,And do not thou. Pray for him : God will hearthee.(He retires from her; she still following him')I do entreat, I do beseech thee, Father !I saw thy big tears glancing as they fell,Though shrouded be thy face. Wilt thou notspeak ?HERMIT (in a disguised voice.I will obey thee, Lady.COUNTESS (to herself.He hath a strange, mistuned, and hollow voice,For one of so much sympathy.(Alarm bell withoutHa ! the alarm ! What may it be ? Ho ! Pietro.Enter PIETRO, in haste.PIETRO.Haste, shut the castle gates, and with all speedMuster our strength, there is no time to lose.Madam, give orders quickly. Where's Rovani?COUNTESS.What is the matter ? Why this loud alarm ?PIETRO.The Marquis of Morton, not far distant,THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 93With hasty march approaches, as I guessThree thousand strong.(Alarm rings again, and enter Row ANI, GONZALOSand others, from different sides).COUNTESS.Heaven be our trust! Hearest thou this, romani?ROVANI.I've heard the larum bell and strange confusion.COUNTESS.Morton with his hostile force approaches(To PIETRO.) Tell it thyself; saidst thou threethousand strong?PIETRO.Yes, Madam, so I did compute his numbers ;And with him, too, one of those horrid enginesSo lately known, which from its roaring mouthSends horrible destruction.Not two leagues off I met him in arraySkirting the forest; and through dell and stream,Fast as my feet could bear me, I have runTo give you notice.COUNTESS.Heaven aid the weak ! I fear our slender forceWill be as nothing 'gainst such fearful odds.What thickest thou, Rovani? for on theeOur fate depends.94 THE SEPARATION: A TRAGEDY.ROVANI.Fear not, my noble Mistress !I will defend you. In your service bold,Each of your men will ten men's strength possess.Withdraw then, I entreat you, to your tower,And these good folks dismiss.(Pointing to the Mendicants that still remained[Exeunt COUNTESS and all the Mendicantsexcept the Hermit, *who retires to a cornerof the Stage.GONZALOS (advancing to ROVANI on the front).Rovani, be thou bold, yet be not rash.I warn'd thee well of this ; but let that pass :Only be wiser now. There is a leaderOf bold gondoliers, not far distant,Send to him instantly : there may be time.ROVANI.I will not : we can well defend these walls'Gainst greater odds ; and I could swear thatcowardHas number' d, in his fright, Morton's soldiersThreefold beyond the truth. Go to thy duty :Muster the men within, while I, meantime,From place to place all needful orders give.[Exeunt GONZALOS and ROVANI severally,while many people cross the Stage in hurryand confusion, ROVANI calling to themsometimes on one side, sometimes on another,as he goes off.THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 95GOMEZ (to LUDOVIQUO, following ROVANI withhis eye).A brave man this, and gives his orders promptly.LUDOVIQUO.Ay ; brave enough, but rash. Alack the day !Would that our valiant lord were here himself,His own fair dame and castle to defend.Alas ! that evil deed ere stain' d his hand,If this was so : we'll see his like no more.HERMIT (going close to LUDOVIQUO).Fear not, good man, who lov'st thy haplessLord ;Give me thine ear. (Whispers to him.)LUDOVIQUO (aside to Hermit).Conceal thee in that tower.HERMIT.Hush, hush! and come with me: I will convincetheeThat what I ask is for thy lady's good.\JEtxeunt Hermit, leading off LUDOVIQUOfrom GOMEZ.96 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.The Great Hall of the Castle.Enter the COUNTESS, meeting SOPHERA ; a confusednoise heard without, and a discharge ofcannon.COUNTESS.What saw'st thou from the turrets, for thy faceLooks pale and terrified ? The din increases ;They have not made a breach ?SOPHERA.I hope they have not ; but that fearful engineIs now against our weakest buttress pointed.(Cannon heard again.)It roars again ; have mercy on us, Heaven !How the walls shake, as if an earthquake rock'dthem!COUNTESS.My child, my child ! I'll to the lowest vaultsConvey him instantly.SOPHERA.But you forget th 5 attack is still directedAgainst the eastern side ; here he is safe.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 97COUNTESS.And may th' Almighty ever keep him so !(Cannon without < ,)SOPHERA.Again the horrible roar !COUNTESS.Our ruin'd walls are weak, our warriors few :Should they effect a breach ! O Garcio, Garcio!Where wandered thou, unblest, unhappy man,Who hadst our safeguard been !Enter PIETRO.Ha ! bring'st thou tidings ?PIETRO.Ay, and fearful tidings.The foe have made a breach, and thro' the moat,Now grown so shallow with the summer drought,Have made their way.COUNTESS.Where does Rovani fight?PIETRO.He did fight in the breach most valiantly;But now the foemen o'er his body pass,For he is slain, and all, I fear, is lostCOUNTESS.It must not be : I'll to the walls myself;My soldiers will with desperate courage fight,When they behold their wretched mistress near.VOL. II. H98 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.SOPHERA (endeavouring to prevent her).O, Madam, do not go !Alas, alas ! our miserable fate !COUNTESS.Restrain me not with senseless lamentations ;Driven to this desp'rate state, what is my choice?For now I must be bold, or despicable.[Exeunt.SCENE III.The Ramparts : Women discovered looking downfrom one of the lower Battlements of the Castle;the din and clashing of Arms heard without,as if close at hand ; then TORT ON A and hisSoldiers cross the Stage, Lighting with the Soldiersof the Castle.FIRST WOMAN.See, there ! see how our noble lady stands,And bravely cheers them !SECOND WOMAN.If they have any soul or manhood in them,They'll fight like raging lions for her sake.GONZALOS (Without.Fie, fie ! give way before your lady's eyes !FIRST WOMAN.Ay, brave Gonzales, there right nobly strives ;THE SEPARATION I A TRAGEDY. 99But all in vain, the enemy advance ;They gain the pass, and our base varlet yield.(Voice withoutBear in the lady there ; 'tis desperation!(Second Voice withoutResistance now is vain ; bear in the lady !(Third Voice withoutA miracle ! a miracle !FIRST WOMAN.What is 't ? Why call they out a miracle ?SECOND WOMAN.Hast thou not eyes to see ? Upon our sideThe Hermit combats, coiling round one armHis twisted garments, whilst the other wieldsA monstrous brand, might grace a giant'sgrasp.O brave ! look how he fights ! he doth not fightLike mortal man : Heaven sends him to ouraid.FIRST WOMAN.And see ! there is another miracle !See Ludoviquo fighting by his side !Who could have thought our gentle seneschalHad pith and soul enough to fight so bravely ?H100 THE SEPARATION ! A TRAGEDY.SECOND WOMAN.See, see ! the vile Tortoises stand aghast :They turn, they fly !(Loud shouts heard without, and re-enterTORTONA and his party, pursued by theSoldiers of the castle, led on by theHermit.)HERMIT.Turn, valiant chieftain ! the most gen'rous foeOf dames, whose lords are absent ; turn, forshame !Do not disgrace thy noble enterpriseWith wounds received behind. Whatever theircause,Morton's lords have still been soldiers. Turn,Or be the scorn of every beardless boy,Whose heart beats at the sound of warlike coil.Thou canst not fear a man unhelm'd, nailed ?TORTONA.No ; if a man thou art, I fear thee not !HERMIT.Well, to it, then, and prove me flesh and blood.TORTONA.Whate'er thou art, 1*11 bear thy scorn no longer.[Exeunt, fighting furiously.THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 101SCENE IV.The great Hall: a shouting heard without.Enter PIETRO, calling as he enters.PIETRO.Where is the Countess ?Enter SOPHERA, by the opposite side.SOPHERA.Thy voice calls gladly ; dost thou bring goodtidings ?PIETRO.I do ; but stop me not! Where is the Countess?Enter COUNTESS in haste.COUNTESS.What joyful shouts were those ? My soldiers*voices !Some happy chance has changed the fate of battle.PIETRO.Ay, changed most happily.COUNTESS.And Heaven be praised !How has it been, good Pietro? Tell me quickly.H 3102 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.PIETRO.When we were panic-struck, reft of our wits,Treading, like senseless sheep, each other down,Heaven sent us aid.COUNTESS.And be its goodness praised !So near the verge of merciless destruction,What blessed aid was sent ?PIETRO.By our fierce enemy, as I have said,So sorely press' d, a powerful voice was heardCalling our courage back ; and on the sudden,As if the yawning earth had sent it up,A noble form, clad in the Hermit's weeds,But fighting with such fury irresistibleAs armed warrior, no, nor mortal manDid ever fight, upon our side appear' d,Inspiring us with valour. Instantly;We turn'd again on our astonish'd foe,Who fled to gain the breach by which theyenter'd.Few have escaped ; and by our noble HermitMorton's lord is slain.COUNTESS (after looking up to heaven in silentadoration).That mighty Arm which still protects the innocent,Weak woman, helpless infancy, and allTHE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 103Bereft and desolate, hath fought for us !But he, the blessed agent of its power,Our brave deliverer, lead me to him instantly !Where is the marvellous man ?PIETRO.I left him, Madam, on the eastern rampart,Just as Morton fell. See Ludoviquo,Who still fought nearest to him j he'll informyou.Enter LUDOVIQUO.COUNTESS.Brave Ludoviquo! But that woeful look,In such a moment of unhoped-for triumph !Is the brave being safe who hath preserved us ?LUDOVIQUO.Alas ! e'en as we shouted at the fallOf proud Morton, conquered by his arm ;E'en as he stoop'd to sooth his dying foe,The hateful caitiff drew a hidden daggerAnd plunged it in his breast.COUNTESS.Alas, alas ! and is his life the forfeitOf his most gen'rous aid !O lead me to him ! let me thank and bless him,If yet his noble mind be sensibleTo words of gratitude.H 4104 THE SEPARATION ! A TRAGEDY.LUDOVIQUO.They bring him hither. He himself desiredThat they should bear him to your presence. See !With sad slow steps they come.Enter Soldiers bearing the Hermit on a low bier,and set him down near the front of the Stage.The COUNTESS stands in woeful silence till he isplaced, then throws herself at his feet, embracingthem.COUNTESS.Devoted, generous man! Heaven's blessedminister !Who hast, to save us from impending ruin,Thy life so nobly sacrificed ; receive,While yet thy soul hath taste of earthly things,Receive my thanks, my tears, my love, myblessing ;The yearning admiration of a heartMost grateful ! Generous man, whoe'er thou art,Thy deeds have made thee blood and kindred tome.O that my prayers and tears could move thy God,Who sent such aid, to spare thy precious life !HERMIT (uncovering his head, and discovering theface OMargaret !THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY. 105COUNTESS.My Garcio ! (Throwing her armsround him for some time, then raising herselffrom the bier, and wringing her handsin an agony of grief.)This is my wretched work! Heaven was hisjudge,Yet I, with cruel unrelenting sternness,Have push'd him on his fate. O Garcio, Garcio!Garcia.Do not upbraid thyself: thou hast done well;For no repentance e'er could make me worthyTo live with thee, though it has made me worthyTo die for thee.COUNTESS.My dear and generous Garcio !Alas, alas !Garcia.O calm that frantic grief!For had my life been spared, my dearest Margaret,A wand'ring banish'd wretch I must have been,Lonely and sad : but now, forgiven by thee,For so my heart assures me that I am,To breathe my parting spirit in thy presence,For one who has so heavily offended,Is a most happy end. It is so happyThat I have faith to think my deep contrition106 THE SEPARATION : A TRAGEDY.Is by my God and Judge accepted now,Instead of years of wretchedness and penance.Be satisfied and cheer'd, my dearest wife !Heaven deals with me in mercy.Where is thy hand ? Farewell, a long farewell !SOPHERA.See, he revives, and strives to speak again.Garcia.Could I but live till I have seen my child !It may not be : the gripe of death is here.Give him my dying love. (Dies.}[Curtain drops.THESTRIPLING :A TRAGEDY.IN FIVE ACTS.WRITTEN IN PROSE.ADVERTISEMENT.THE following Play was written when MasterBetty, known by the name of the Young Roscius,was in the highest favour with the public, andbefore I had seen him perform ; but, upon afterconsideration, was not offered to the theatre.It appears to me, in reading it again, after a longlapse of years, to be a Play not ill suited to avery young actor, at the beginning of his career 5being in prose, and having, I hope, no false,overstrained passion in it, to mislead him intoranting or exaggerated expression, either as togesture, voice, or face.Were there more characters of simple nature,adapted to young actors, to be found in our dramaticstores, they would not at first acquire thosebad habits which so often prevent their afterexcellence. And the public would, in this earlystage of their progress, receive from them arational entertainment ; for, surely, to see a boyassuming the w r alike air and tormenting jealousyof Othello, or the delicate and complicated feelingsof the Prince of Denmark, scarcely deservesthat name.110 ADVERTISEMENT.The story of the Play is in some measure takenfrom a melancholy event which took place manyyears ago in Glasgow, yet still within the recollectionof some of its present inhabitants. Ayoung man, whose father was in prison, and aboutto be tried for a capital offence, his fate dependingon the single evidence of one person, whichit was believed must prove fatal, fired througha window at night, and killed the dreaded witness.The father's life was by this means spared,and the son was executed for the criminal act,though it was perpetrated from the strongestfeeling of filial affection, being himself in no degreeimplicated in the guilt of his father.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.ARDEN.YOUNG ARDEN.ROBINAIR.Briton.HUMPHRY, an old Servant in the Family ofArden.MORGAN, 1 &mm ^ROBERT, JGaolers, Servants, Countrymen, fyc.WOMEN.MRS. ARDEN.Madeline.Scene, in London and the Vicinity.THE STRIPLING.ACT I.SCENE I. ARDEN'S House; MRS. ARDENdiscovered in a disconsolate posture, withMADALINE hanging over her soothingly.MADALINE.BE not so overcome, my dear cousin ; he hasfriends who will exert all their interest on hisbehalf.MRS. ARDEN.Ay, ay ! thou tallest like a child who believesevery one as sincere and affectionate as herself.Who are they who interest themselves for theunfortunate? They who have daily conversedwith him, laughed with him, gamed with him?who have daily quaffed wine at his table, andrepeated every pleasantry that fell from his lips?(Shaking her head 'with an expression of bittercontempt My husband had many such friends !VOL. II. I114 THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.MADALINE.But you think too hardly of mankind : someone,even amongst them, will be found to standup in his defence now in his hour of need.Robinair, for instance; he will bestir himselfvigorously. He is in credit with people inpower : he has always been warm in his expressionsof friendship, I may say of admiration, forMr. Arden. He will find means to influencethem in his favour.MRS. ARDEN.Alas, alas ! does our hope hang on this point ?I fear, indeed, that he has too much committedhimself to this man : he hinted to me somethingof the kind, which, more than any other unfavourablecircumstance, makes me tremble.MADALINE.Why, how is this? I thought Robinair hadbeen your friend, too. I have always understood,though I was then too young to be admittedinto your confidence, that he was attachedto you before you married. And has he not,ever since his return from abroad, befriendedyour husband in all the embarrassments intowhich his imprudence has thrown him ?MRS. ARDEN.Rather say that, in the bitterness of disappoint-theSTRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 115ment, he has haunted us like a malevolent spirit,to enjoy our misfortunes and distress.MADALINE.Can he be so wicked ?MRS. ARDEN.Without being able directly to accuse him ofone unfriendly office, something within my breasthas always whispered this to me. But Arden,my poor Arden, thought otherwise ; and it wasthe only thing that ever caused disagreementbetween us. I enjoyed the confidence of myhusband till he became so intimate with him,and from that time I have been kept in the darkregarding all his schemes and transactions.Judge, then, with what heart I shall put my trustin Robinair !MADALINE.Try him, however : put his friendship to theproof.MRS. ARDEN.I mean to do so, Madeline : I have alreadysent to him, and expect him every moment.(Listening Is there not somebody coming?A heavy footstep his step ! Now must I holddown this proud heart within me, and be supplicantto him whom I despise.i 2116 THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.Enter Briton.Mr. Bruton ! I expected, Sir, to have seenyour friend.Briton.Unavoidable business, Madam, prevents Mr.Robinair from waiting upon you : he cannotpossibly come to this part of the town to-day ;but he will be happy to have the honour of receivingyou, at his own house, any hour in theforenoon which you may be pleased to appoint.MRS. ARDEN.He says so? (A pause I ought not to besurprised at this message. I shall wait upon himat half-past twelve. Perhaps I shall find moregenerosity in his nature than this message, orthe misgivings of my own heart, seem to promise.(Looking earnestly at BRUTON.) You are silent,Mr. Bruton : you make no rash promises foryour friend.BRUTON.I hope, Madam, you will not be disappointedin any good opinion you may form of him.I hope he will make every exertion in favourof Mr. Arden ; but, in cases of this nature,all applications to royal benevolence, unlessunder very peculiar circumstances, have provedunsuccessful.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 11?MRS. ARDEN.Alas ! I know that forgery is a crime which,in a commercial country, is rigorously dealtwith ; and if Arden is once condemned, notwithstandinghis innocence, I shall be hopeless.It is the services of a friend regarding the evidenceto be produced upon his trial that I wouldsolicit from Mr. Robinair. No one is so capableas himself of rendering them effectually.BRUTON.He is, indeed, active, sagacious, and acute.(Muttering words indistinctly)MRS. ARDEN.Yes, he has all the qualities you have named.Half-past twelve, then, you think he will beatleisure ?BRUTON.Yes, Madam : good morning. (Going.)MRS. ARDEN.Mr. Bruton ! (Calling after him.}BRUTON.Did you call me, Madam ?MRS. ARDEN.I beg pardon there is nothing : good morning.i 3118 THE Stripling I A TRAGEDY.BRUTON.Good morning, Lady. (Going as before, tillalmost off the Stage')MRS. ARDEN (stepping after him hastily).Mr. Bruton ! forgive this irresolute weakness :I did call you. Oh, Sir ! the wretched hope forsuccour where no claims exist, even from thestranger and the unknown; and think that everylook of pity comes from one who would befriendthem. There was an expression on your face asyou went ; have I read it truly ? Will you useyour influence with Robinair for the unhappy?Although, I acknowledge, the sentiments I havefelt and, perhaps, too strongly expressed for allthose who, with Robinair, seemed engaged indrawing my husband into expensive and dangeroushabits, do not entitle me to ask any favourof yo u.BRUTON.Be assured, Madam, no remembrance of suchexpressions shall rest upon my mind at present ;and if it is possible to be of any use to you, Iwill. Would to God I could serve you !MRS. ARDEN.You can you can ! You can move him.BRUTON.Move him ! I will try to do it ; but, if he isTHE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY. 119to be moved, who can do it so powerfully asyourself? My best wishes are on your side.exit.MRS. ARDEN."Move him!" "if he is to be moved'*Didst thou mark with what a voice he utteredthose words ?Madeline.Nay, do not despair.MRS. ARDEN.He knows the man. Oh, my unfortunatehusband ! And my son my boy, my pridemust thou be the son of a condemned(Bursting into tears.)MADALINE.Do not bewail yourself thus, as if the worsthad already befallen you. The storm will pass :the innocent will never be condemned, howstrong soever the circumstances may be whichmake him at present suspected. And for yourson, so far distant at school, he will know nothingof this terrible distress. How fortunate it is,poor boy, that he is absent! His affectionateand sensible heart would ill support itself againstthe dreadful shock.MRS. ARDEN.Alas, poor fellow! he is conning over hisdaily tasks, and sporting with his careless THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.mates, and little dreams of the misery at home.O that he may never know it ! Thank Heaven,however, that he is at present removed from it.MADALINE.It is one fortunate circumstance amidst yourmany distresses. Do not suffer yourself to be sodepressed ; wrestle more bravely with your misfortunes,and Heaven will support and protectyou.MRS. ARDEN.I will try to do so.MADALINE.This is well said : and, if I might advise you,retire for an hour to your chamber, and, if possible,take a little rest. You have been up thewhole night, and it is still early in the morning.You will not else have strength to comfort himwho so much wants your comfort.MRS. ARDEN.I thank you, my kind Madeline ; I will do asyou desire me, though nowhere is there any restfor me.\ Exeunt.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.An Ante-room.Enter HUMPHRY and ROBERT, meeting.ROBERT.Art thou from the prison, Humphrey ?HUMPHRY.Yes.ROBERT.Hast thou seen our Master ?HUMPHRY.Yes.ROBERT.Is he on the felon's side ?HUMPHRY (angrily.Yes.ROBERT.Be there irons upon his legs ?HUMPHRY (pushing him away.No, beast; but I wish there were upon thytongue.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.ROBERT.What makes you growl so at a body ? Isthere any harm in axing a question or two ? forI wants hugely to know how he looks, and howhe demeans himself upon it.HUMPHRY.He demeans himself like a man ; and how helooks, those may say who have courage enoughto look at him. I saw no part of him higherthan his waist.ROBERT.Ah, poor gentleman ! he was a good masterto us, I must say that for him ; and had it notbeen for those sharking fellows hanging abouthim so, eating up his substance through the day,and leading him to the gaming-house at night,he would have remained so, living in credit andhonesty. His lady, poor woman ! my heartgrieves for her ; and that fine lad, our youngmaster, what will become of him ?HUMPHRY.Ay, generous boy ! kindly boy ! noble boy !it will pull hard at his high spirit, I warrant ye.He will be fifteen next Monday j and what ajoyless birthday it will be !ROBERT.Yes, man : he is so courteous and so gentleus here j and yet they say at school, amongstTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 123his playfellows, he is the master boy of them all,and reigns over them as bravely as any prince.HUMPHRY.Ay ; woe is me for him !ROBERT.It is well, howsomever, that he knows nothingof it at present. Evil comes soon enough, Godwot.HUMPHRY.Is my lady in her chamber?ROBERT.I thought I heard a noise as if she were.(Both draw close to the side scene to listen.) Theytold me she was gone to lay down ; but she maybestirring now.Enter YOUNG ARDEN by the opposite side.YOUNG ARDEN (aside).Ha! there's old Humphrey and Robert confabbingtogether. I am taller since I left home,and they have never seen me in a coat of thisfashion: I think I may play them a trick.(Pulling his hat over his eyes, and speaking in afeigned voice.) Pray, ye good Sirs, is youngMr. Arden at home ?HUMPHRY.No, Sir ; have you any business with him ?He 's at school.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.YOUNG ARDEN.And he had better stay there, I trow, if he hasnot a mind for as sound a beating as ever fell tothe share of a sorry jackanapes.HUMPHRY.Sorry jackanapes, Sir ! There is not a braverboy in the kingdom. He would think no moreof chucking such a sneaking fellow as you intothe kennel than I should of twisting round thisjunk of tobacco.YOUNG ARDEN.Yes, to be sure, it becomes you to speak wellof him, for the honour of the house you are in ;but you know well enough that he is but a paltryfellow, who runs about the house and calls outO dear ! " if his finger be but scratched, thatevery body may pity him.HUMPHRY.He is ready enough to pity any body; butscratch his own finger to the bone, ay, cut offhis leg, an you please, and the devil himself willnot make him call out " O dear ! "YOUNG ARDEN (casting away his hat, skippingacross the room, and throwing his arms roundHUMPHRY's neck.My dear Humphrey! my kind old Humphrey!thou lowest me as much as ever, I see ; and ITHE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.might ride on thy shoulders still, were I notsomewhat heavier now, and thou scarcely sostrong. We have had happy days together,Humphrey ! and we'll have them again, thoughafter a different fashion.HUMPHRY.Ah, my dear child! what has brought youhere ?YOUNG ARDEN.Our school has broke up suddenly, on accountof a fever that has got into it. I thought Ishould come upon you by surprise. But how isthis? You look strangely upon me. And youtoo, Robert : are you not glad to see me ? {Apause What is the matter ? Is my fatherwithin ?HUMPHRY (making signs for ROBERT to be silent).No, he is not within or, rather, he is not athome or, that is to say, he has left his ownhouse for a little time.YOUNG ARDEN.And my mother, is she well ?HUMPHRY.Pretty well so so.YOUNG ARDEN.So so ! Where is she ?HUMPHRY.Taking a short rest, I believe, in her ownTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.room. preventing YOUNG ARDEN, who ishastening towards the door.) Nay ! let her restalittle while before you go to her; and waitmeantime in the library, where you will havebooks to amuse you.YOUNG ARDEN.Be it so, then ; but I cannot wait long. Iwant only to look upon her, but not to wake ordisturb her.HUMPHRY.How tall he has grown ! he has the size of aman, and I'm sure he had always the spirit ofone. Oh, how it will be put to the proof!ROBERT.It makes a body quake to think of it. Hisown father to die the death of a -HUMPHRY.I'll throttle thee if thou say another wordabout that !ROBERT.Lord 'a mercy ! one may not speak to you nowabout any thing that one cares most to speakabout.\ Exeunt severally.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.SCENE III.MRS. ARDEN'S Bed-chamber. She is discoveredlying on' a couch, as if asleep, with a shawlthrown over her face.Enter YOUNG ARDEN, stepping softly on tiptoe.YOUNG ARDEN.Is she asleep ? Her breast heaves under thatcovering, as if she slept soundly. (Going up toher.) All covered up so closely ! Ha ! here isa hand peeping out which I will press by and byright dearly (Kneels, and bends over her hand,mimicking the action of kissing, but without touchingit.) I can see her features, too, through thesefolds. (Putting his face close to hers, affectionately.)How surprised she will be when shewakes, and sees me by her ! Does she notmove ? She is awake. (Lifting the shawl gentlyfrom her face.) Mother ! my little dormousemother !MRS. ARDEN (shrieking, and starting up).Good God ! art thou here, Edmond ? Whyart thou come ? What brings thee ? Hast thouheard any thing?YOUNG ARDEN.Heard anything? What should I hear? Has128 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.any thing happened ? Where is my father ?They tell me he has gone from home for a shorttime : where is he gone ?MRS. ARDEN.Yes, yes ; he is gone from home. This houseis not his home at present. (Bursting into tearsand falling on his neck.YOUNG ARDEN.My dearest mother ! why this excess of grief?Where is he gone to ? For God's sake ! whereis he gone to ?MRS. ARDEN.He is gone they have put him he isgoneYOUNG ARDEN.To prison ?MRS. ARDEN.Even so, boy ! thou hast guessed it. But,oh, think not hardly of him ! He has been misled; he has been imprudent.YOUNG ARDEN.Think hardly of him, mother! I would notthink hardly of him, though I were turned tothe streets for his sake, and left to beg my breadfrom door to door.MRS. ARDEN.Oh, my child ! what hast thou to go through !THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 129YOUNG ARDEN.Think not of me, dear mother ; I can gothrough it all with a good heart. But what willbecome of you till I am old enough to work foryou? Fie on't! I am old enough now: I amsound of life and limb, and I have spirit enoughto face anything.MRS. ARDEN.Alas, alas for thee !YOUNG ARDEN.Fear not, fear not. I am a proud boy, it istrue ; but I will not be ashamed before any onewhen I am working for my mother.MRS. ARDEN.My blessed child ! and must this be thyportion ?YOUNG ARDEN.Yes, Madam, and an honourable one too.Cheer up, cheer up, my dear mother. I shall gotomy father presently, and meet him with such acheerful countenance, that he shall only wait for adischarge from his creditors, which they cannotrefuse when he has given up all that he has,to be a far happier man than he was before.MRS. ARDEN.Oh ! oh ! thou little thickest what thou hastbefore thee !VOL. IT. K130 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.YOUNG ARDEN.Nay, say not "Oh! oh!" I have lookedforward to this for some time, and have hardenedmyself to meet it. I saw well enough, schoolboyas I was, what the gaming-table and hisnumberless expenses would lead him to.MRS. ARDEN,And didst thou think of him thus ?YOUNG ARDEN.Yes, I did, mother ; but I loved him, nevertheless,and will love him still. Be composed,then, I beseech you, and let me run to himimmediately.MRS. ARDEN (holding him).Not now, not now ! Stay with me, and tell mewhy thou hast come to us so unexpectedly.YOUNG ARDEN.That can soon be told. But here is Madeline.Well, cousin ; you are come to welcomeme ? (Holding out his hand')Enter MADALINE.MADALINE.I was told you were here.YOUNG ARDEN.And this is the rueful face you put on for myTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 131welcome. Fie, Madeline ! you should cheer mymother, and look pleasantly before her.MRS. ARDEN.Don't reproach her : she is very kind and veryconsiderate. Without her, I should sink altogether.YOUNG ARDEN.Then, she is a good girl, and shall be chiddenno more.MADALINE.We shall make up this difference in the nextroom, where I have ordered some refreshmentfor you ; and you must eat something after yourjourney, and persuade my aunt to do so, too.You must both eat, if you would not sink underentirely.YOUNG ARDEN.I thank you, kind cousin, and so we will.Sink under, mayest thou ? No, no ! we shan't dothat, God willing. There is more spirit in usthan that comes to ; [is there not, mother ?(Taking her arm under his as they go off.)THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.ACT II.SCENE I. BRUTON's Lodgings. ROBINAIRand BRUTON, speaking as they enter.ROBINAIR.And you are just come from hearing Arden'sexamination ? How went it ?BRUTON.It was scarcely closed when I came away,as I thought you would be waiting for me ; butI heard all the material part.ROBINAIR.And how did he behave himself?BRUTON.With greater caution and presence of mindthan I should have supposed a character like his,depressed with a sense of disgrace, was capableof.ROBINAIR.Indeed ! He kept possession of himself, then ?BRUTON.Wonderfully : he has not betrayed himself inone of his answers, though he was questionedvery shrewdly.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 133ROBINAIR.Ha ! where have those brains been stored upall this while, which he now brings into use forthe first time ? " Call no man happy till he bedead," says the old proverb. We must now addsome words to it : Call no man a fool till thesame seal has been set upon him.BRUTON.Ay ; strong necessity will make a man wiseas well as bold. But your dislike to Ardenmade you undervalue his abilities.ROBINAIR.Devil take him and them both ! Not onceoff his guard ?BRUTON.Not once, as far as I could judge of the matter.It will be proved, indeed, that, a few days previousto the date of the forgery, he purchased atthe stationer's with whom old Fenshaw deals,that peculiar kind of paper upon which the oldgentleman always writes his money bills, akind which he had never purchased before :but this circumstance is not very conclusive,since Fenshaw acknowledges giving him a billof the same date, though for a much smaller sum.Now the old gentleman's memory is impaired,and he may easily be supposed to have set down,in mistake, one sum for another. Your havingseen the real bill is the only circumstance thatK 3134* THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.makes positively against him. His life, therefore,is in your hands.ROBINAIR.I know it is. Now is my time of revenge forall the scorn, for all the insults, I have enduredfrom that proud woman.BRUTON.And is it generous to use it ?ROBINAIR.Generous! and hast thou kept company with meall these years, Bruton, to talk so like a simpletonas thou dost ? I have carried myself with a showof specious sentiments to the world ; as everyman must do who is not a fool, and intends tolive with some credit in it. I have been thedelicate, the liberal, the good, and, above all,the good-natured Mr. Robinair, to many ; butwhen did I ever pretend to refinement orgenerosity before thee ?BRUTON.I cannot, indeed, greatly accuse thee of it.But the present case is so very distressing.ROBINAIR.It is so; I apprehend as much, good Mr.Bruton.Britonsyou have lived upon poor Arden j youTHE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. 135have encouraged him in all kinds of extravagance.ROBINAIR.Well, Sir, this has not escaped my memory.BRUTON.You have enticed him to the gaming table,and ruined him.ROBINAIR.Well 5 of this, also, I have some recollection.BRUTON.And your lax doctrines respecting moneytransactions have, I doubt not, suggested to him,that robbing an old relation of what he couldeasily spare, and of what, in the course of a fewyears, would probably be his own by right, couldscarcely be considered as a crime.ROBINAIR.Thou mayest truth : I have done all this.And wherefore have I done it, thickest thou?For the paltry gains to be made from the ruin ofa man of moderate fortune ? /, who had talentsto have speculated on a much grander scale?Out upon thy little narrow conceptions !BRUTON.Nay, I knew that revenge for disappointedpassion had a good share in all your manoeuvres.K 4136 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.ROBINAIR.Sharp-witted fellow ! thou knowest that I lovedhis wife, and was rejected by her, who preferredthis fool to me ; that I went abroad in disgust,and, upon my return, insinuated myself into hisconfidence, with the hope of sowing discord betweenthem, and, if possible, of undermining herfidelity. Thou knowest she has still treated mewith disdain, so that nothing but his completeruin can possibly detach her from him ; thouknowest all this, yet hast the folly to stand beforeme, with that piteous countenance of thine, desiringme seriously to undo all I have been labouringfor so long. Will the wolf, with the prey inhis fangs, forbear to devour it, because, forsooth,he will be called an unamiable wolf?BRUTON.I would have you at least to considerROBINAIR.No! good, compassionate Mr. Bruton : I haveconsidered, and I will not save him. On thescaffold let him die ! and let those who have sufferedwithin them the torments that I have enduredcondemn me, if they can. It is not bycalm, even-tempered dozers through life, suchas thou art, that I will submit to be judged.BRUTON.Then, by my faith, Robinair, thou art a fiend!THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 137ROBINAIR.Better be a fiend only, than fiend and foolboth. I am a man of more simplicity than thouart ; I do not try to have so many contrary qualitiesat once. Sound no more of that piteousnonsense in my ears !BRUTON.Pity, indeed, seems out of use at present.Who could have thought that old man wouldhave prosecuted the life of one who, though distantlyrelated to him, is still his nearest of kin ISome secret enemy has goaded him to it.ROBINAIR.And thou art at a loss, I doubt not, to guesswho this wicked enemy may be ; judging, asthou dost, in all the imbecility of innocence.(Smiling on him with malignant contempt')BRUTON (shrinking from him in disgust).I understand that smile.ROBINAIR.Thou hast understanding enough for that,hast thou ? But do not imagine, however, thatI am entirely destitute of every good disposition.I intend, when I am in possession of old Fen-shaw'sfortune, which he has promised to bequeathto me, to be liberal, and even generous,both to Mrs. Arches and her son. When she is138 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.in my power I will treat her nobly; but she mustbe in my power*BRUTON.I have no more to say to you ; my pleading isat an end.ROBINAIR.I am glad to hear it. And now, dropping thissubject, which must never again be resumed, letme remind you of the business you are to transactfor me at the other end of the town. I haveordered my carriage to meet me here, and it isjust drawing up at the door. (Hasting away,and returning.) Half-past twelve, I think, is thetime Mrs. Arden has appointed ?BRUTON.Yes, it is the time she fixed.ROBINAIR.I must hurry home, then. [Exit.BRUTON (alone).And this is the man to whom my cursed extravagancehas subjected me, while, having meinhis power, he treats me like a menial likea slave ! Oh, thou vice of gaming ! thou hastoverthrown thy thousands and tens of thousands,never to rise again never again to bear themselveswith the erect dignity of an honest man ![Exit.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 139SCENE II.An open Hall or Lobby in a Prison, from whicha wide arched passage branches off. Over thearch is written, " The Felons 9 Side.' 9Enter YOUNG ARDEN, meeting the Head GAOLER.GAOLER.Did you look for any one, young gentleman?YOUNG ARDEN.I am wrong, I see. Can you show me theway to the debtors' side ? There is a prisoner Iwould inquire after.GAOLER (pointing in another direction).That, Sir, will lead you to it : but you had betterstop here a few minutes ; for yonder are personscoming this way, conducting a prisoner fromexamination, a poor unfortunate gentleman.YOUNG ARDEN.A gentleman ! what is his name ?GAOLER.His name is Arden.YOUNG ARDEN (aside).Examination ! is it a meeting with creditorshe means?14<0 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.GAOLER.Yonder he comes, poor man !YOUNG ARDEN.You seem to pity him very much.GAOLER.It always grieves me to see a gentleman in hissituation.YOUNG ARDEN.You have a kind heart, Sir ; but misfortuneswill happen to persons in every rank of life ?j GAOLER.Here he is, and his friends and counsel withhim.YOUNG ARDEN (aside, and shrinking back).I '11 stand behind \ I cannot go up to him beforethose people.Enter ARDEN, with his Counsel, fyc., and walksslowly across the Stage, passing close by hisSon, who keeps behind the Gaoler, casting afurtive look at his Father's face as he passes ;then, seeing him about to enter the Felons 9 Passage,springs forward eagerly, as if to preventhim.GAOLER (putting him back).What would you ?YOUNG ARDEN.He is going the wrong way !THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. 141GAOLER.He is right enough.YOUNG ARDEN.That is the felons' side !GAOLER.And therefore it is his.YOUNG ARDEN.Thou lies !GAOLER.What say you ?YOUNG ARDEN.He is no felon !GAOLER.That will be known when his trial is ended.YOUNG ARDEN.What trial ?GAOLER.His trial, that comes on tomorrow, for aforgery. (Young ARDEN sinks to the ground;Gaoler, beckoning to the Under-Gaoler to assisthim.) Poor lad ! this has struck through hisheart like an arrow. He must be some nearrelation to the prisoner.UNDER GAOLER.His son 5 I '11 pawn my life on 5 t !THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.GAOLER.Ah, poor boy ! (Chafes his hands and temples,and YOUNG ARDEN recovers My good youngSir, go into my house for a while and recoveryourself.YOUNG ARDEN.There was a wonderful buzzing of voicesround me.GAOLER.There was nobody spoke to you but myself;and I spoke softly, too.YOUNG ARDEN.I must go to my father.GAOLER.Yes, presently; but not till you are betterrecovered. Beside, he is engaged at presentwith gentlemen, who are assisting him to preparefor his trial.YOUNG ARDEN.His trial ! Oh, oh ! But he is innocent !GAOLER.Yes, my good boy ; we hope so : and thenthere is no fear of him.UNDER GAOLER.The innocent are never condemned in thiscountry.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 143YOUNG ARDEN.Ah ! were that but certain, he would besafe.GAOLER.Then he is safe : so, cheer up, my sweet youngSir ; and come with me to my house, hard by,till his counsel have left him. How came youhere without a conductor ?YOUNG ARDEN.My mother desired me not to go till she couldbe with me ; but I was impatient, and stole outof the house as soon as she left it to executesome business elsewhere. Alas ! I see now whyshe forbade me to go. [Exeunt.SCENE III.ROBINAIR's House.Enter MRS. ARDEN, and a Servant showing herin.SERVANT (placing a chair.My master will attend you immediately,Madam. [Exit.MRS. ARDEN (alone).And here I am in the house of this man, ahumble supplicant for his pity ! Righteous144 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDYHeaven ! sunk thus low in misery, give mestrength to support it ! If I have been haughtyor elated in prosperity, teach me now resignationin adversity ! I hear him coming. Ah ! do Ifeel pride still ? No, no, no ! what have I to dowith feelings like these, when I am pleading forthe life of my husband?Enter ROBINAIR.ROBINAIR.Madam, I have kept myself at home in obedienceto your appointment.MRS. ARDEN.I thank you, Sir, for paying so much regardto one so very miserable. I come to you, Mr.Robinair, a depressed and wretched suitor.ROBINAIR.Is there any thing, in any situation, thatMrs. Arden will deign to desire of me ?MRS. ARDEN.There is, there is ! there is something I mustdesire I must beg I must beseech of you;and I will not do your friendship for Arden theinjury to suppose it possible that you should refuseme.ROBINAIR.I am infinitely honoured by your good opinion,Madam. In what can I possibly serve you ?THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.MRS. ARDEN.O tell me first tell me faithfully and truly,what is your opinion of my husband's situation.He has been very imprudent, but it cannot bethat he is guilty.ROBINAIR.Imprudence leads men into great temptation.You know whether or not the character of yourhusband made him more likely than other mento resist it.MRS. ARDEN.Alas ! I know well the weakness of his mind,and I know his necessities were great : but greatas they might be, they could never move him tocommit such a crime.ROBINAIR.So do all good wives conceive of their husbands'integrity ; particularly those who haveenjoyed the felicity of a romantic attachment.How happy should I be to feel equally confidenton this point.MRS. ARDEN.Then you are not ? O, no, no ! you cannotbelieve him guilty, how strongly soever appearancesmay be against him.ROBINAIR.I wish it were possible for me to hold yourfaith upon this subject, Madam, or even to avoidVOL. II. L146 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.the necessity I may be under of appearing onhis trial, as the principal witness against him.MRS. ARDEN.Merciful Heaven! and do you walk about atliberty, waiting here to give the death-blow tohim whom you have called your friend ? Fly,fly, I beseech you ! On my knees I beseech youto have pity on us. Fly this country for a season,and conceal the place of your retreat.ROBINAIR.Pray, Madam, do not give me the pain ofseeing you in that posture.MRS. ARDEN.No posture but this till you have granted myrequest ! Have pity on us ! Fly the country, orconceal yourself immediately, and we will blessyou. (Still kneeling, and catching hold of theskirts of his coat, as he retreats from her.}ROBINAIR.I will not listen to another word while youremain thus. (Placing a chair for her ; theyboth sit down.)MRS. ARDEN.Then you will listen to me now : you willconsent to fly, or conceal yourself, till the trialis over.ROBINAIR.Are you aware, Madam, that you are desiringTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 147me to become an exile, an outlaw ? to destroymy own character and credit in the world?Your many kind instances of regard for my happinessmay indeed merit a grateful return, butsomething short of this (ironically. Commandmy services in any other way. My fortune is atyour disposal. I will be the protector of yourselfand of your son.MRS. ARDEN (starting from her seat.Heaven forbid! thy protection were the venomousceilings (checking herself, and coveringher face 'with her hands.ROBINAIR.Of a serpent, you would have said. But,pray, speak without reserve, that we may understandone another completely. My protectionis not, perhaps, what you would voluntarily havechosen ; but, when no better expedient presentsitself, it may possibly be endured. Ay, Madam,and shall be endured, if you hope for any favourfor your husband, whom it is in my power tosave, without flying the country. Must I commitperjury to please you, whilst your marriagevow, the bane of all my happiness, remains unbroken?Must I be the sinner, and you stillcontinue immaculate ? (After a pause, in whichshe seems strongly agitated Take this into yourconsideration, Lady. I shall sleep to-night in148 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.my house near Chelsea, where, if you will havethe condescension to come yourself, and acquaintme with your determination, I shall think myselfhonoured. Excuse me now ; I am exceedinglyhurried with business. Let me have the pleasureof attending you to your chair, Letitia ; Ionce called you by that dear name (taking herhand familiarly.MRS. ARDEN (pulling attooy her hand indignantly).Insulting, detestable villain ! let one generalruin overwhelm us all, before I owe any thingto thee. (Hurrying from him.} [Exit.ROBINAIR (looking after her significantly).Yes \ pride must make some blustering, beforehe be entirely turned out of doors : this is butreasonable, and according to the working ofnature. Yes, yes, yes ! there will be time enoughbetween this and midnight to smooth the haughtybrow into submission. (Walking hastily up anddown, and stopping now and then as he speaks.)Now will the days of thy scorn be rememberedwith bitterness, when, wife to a degraded husband,thou loosest timidly up to the eyes of aprotector even him whom thou hast rejectedwith disdain. Let this once be, and I shall feelit worth all the No ; I will not call it vil-theSTRIPLING: A TRAGEDY. 149any my provocations would justify any thingall the artful management it has cost me.Re-enter MRS. ARDEN, with mortified timidity.MRS. ARDEN.You will be at Chelsea to-night ?ROBINAIR.Yes, Lady, where I shall be delighted to seeyou, and to obey your commands.[Exit MRS. ARDEN.(Holding up his hands exultingly I knew itwould be so ! There was a rude burst of anger,to be sure ; but the vision of a man's bare throat,with a noose about it, has crossed her in the hall,and checked her wayward steps. Ho, there !Enter a Servant.Send notice to the housekeeper at Chelseathat No, I must write down her directions,else there will be some cursed mistake or other.(Goes to a table, and sits down to write, while theServant waits')Enter BRUTON.BRUTON.You are engaged I see.ROBINAIR.No, no! I'll speak to you immediately.L 3150 THE STRIPLING *. A TRAGEDY.BRUTON (aside).What is he about now ? No good, I *m sure,from the eagerness of his eye, and that ironicaltwisting of his mouth.ROBINAIR (after sealing the note, and giving it tothe Servant).Bid Charles carry that to Mrs. Cookum withoutdelay.[Exit Servant, and ROBINAIR comes forwardto BRUTON with a gay, light step.BRUTON.You are not surely going to Chelsea to-night.ROBINAIR.But I am ; and I tell thee besides, as surely,that thou art going with me.BRUTON.Indeed ! I am engaged elsewhere.ROBINAIR.Let the elsewhere forego thy gracious presencefor this bout. Thou art engaged to me.BRUTON.Something too arbitrary, methinks.ROBINAIR.O ! displeased, I see ! Come, come ; do notbe a restive fool upon my hands, when I wantthee confoundedly. For I must be in waitingthere before the hour j and I hate to wait alone.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 151BRUTON.For whom.ROBINAIR.She who has the prettiest hand and foot of anywoman in England ; she who has haunted, andscorned, and tormented me for almost the halfof my life ; for Arden's wife. 1 have an appointmentwith her at midnight.BRUTON.You do not say so, you cannot say so. Hasmisery driven her to this ?ROBINAIR.We shall see you shall see.BRUTON.I cannot believe it.ROBINAIR.Be as sceptical and as cautious as you please ;but go with me to Chelsea in the evening, andlet seeing and believing be yoke-follows.BRUTON.I will not go. Nay, I will go to see you disappointed.You deceive yourself: she cannothave fallen so low.ROBINAIR.Ay, she was lofty enough once. But the larkcannot be always in the clouds ; the heavy rainbeats upon her wings, and down she drops uponL 4THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.the wet sod, where earth-grubs and snails areher neighbours. Disappointed, ha! ha! ha!But I have other things which thou must do formein the mean time nay, don't scowl sothings that must be done. Ha ! here comesBeach's man with the money.Enter a Person, with a small bag.BRUTON (aside, as he turns from ROBINAIR).Domineering insolence ! it is insufferable.ROBINAIR (to the Stranger).Good morning, Mr. Martin ; how is yourmaster ? You have brought, I see, the little sumthat was left unsettled between us. He is anhonourable fellow. But thou shakes thy headman; thou loosest ruefully.STRANGER.Come honesty first, and honour will follow.ROBINAIR.Fog ! some old saw of your grandmother's ;quite out of date now, my good friend. Looknot so grim at me : there is something to makethee more cheerful. (Offering him money withone hand, while he receives the bag with theothersSTRANGER.I *11 have nothing of yours, Sir.THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY. 153ROBINAIR.No ! good gold pieces are not to be despised.STRANGER.Be they gold or copper it is the same to me.exit.ROBINAIR (laughing.What think you of this angry fool, Bruton ?BRUTON.He has cause to be angry. You have strippedthe coat from the back of his poor silly master.ROBINAIR.Well ; he will go to Paris in his waistcoat.He may find it the fashion there, perhaps, to goso clothed.BRUTON.And how long will he keep his waistcoatwhen he gets amongst the worthies of the PalaisRoyal?ROBINAIR.What does that signify ? The thick waters ofthe Seine will make him coat, vest, and winding-sheet,all in one, with no more to do about thematter.Enter a Man, with papers, 8c.Oh, ho ! Mr. Skriever 5 you are come at lastwith the deeds.154} THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.SKRIEVER.Yes, Sir, and you will find the security good,and the interest of your money regularly paid.ROBINAIR.I trust so ; for otherwise I shall foreclose uponyou without hesitation. Go into my library, andI'll sign it there.\JLxit SKRIEVER by a side door.(To BRUTON, after going about the room fantastically,with a gay, skipping steps The breezesof fortune, you see, are in my sails.BRUTON.But you may be wrecked full soon, notwithstanding.ROBINAIR.Never fear : I am a skilful pilot as well as abold sailor, and when I am O what may Inot be ! I will make a man of thee, Bruton.BRUTON.Could you restore me to the man I was, whenyou first took me up, I should ask no better fortune,and take my leave of you for ever.ROBINAIR.What ! leave me ? No, no ! I must not partwith that sober face, and seeming sanctity ofthine : they will be necessary to keep me incredit with the world. "Hold your tongue,"will the faded maids and dowagers exclaim, asTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 155they arrange their cards, " I will not hear oneword against Sir John Robinair, as long as he isso intimate with good Mr. Bruton."BRUTON.Sir John Robinair !ROBINAIR.Yes ; I shall be a baronet by and by, youknow. There will be nothing very wonderfulin that, surely. But I waste time here : I mustgo and sign those deeds.exit into the side door.BRUTON.He is mad with prosperity. But pride comesbefore a fall j and may the proverb be verifiedhere I exit.156 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.ACT III.The Prison; ARDEN is discovered sitting in adisconsolate posture. After a pause, he rises,and walks once or twice across the front of theStage.ARDEN.And if it should come to this, in what is itreally different from that which, many times,in the accumulation of my distresses, I havewished for I have almost been upon the brinkof perpetrating ? How often, after returning indespair from the gaming-house, have I wistfullylooked at the pistols that hung on the wall, orthe razor that lay on my table! Ah! but disgrace,disgrace ! The murmurs of detestationand pity ; the broad gaze of the innumerablemultitude ; the last horrible act imposed on apassive wretch ; this is what the human mindstrongly recoils from ! this is dreadful ! sinksdown again upon his seat')Enter UNDER GAOLER, bearing a covered dish, fyc.UNDER GAOLER.I have brought you something to eat, Sir :you will be quite faint if you fast longer.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 157ARDEN.Take it away, friend ; I cannot eat yet.UNDER GAOLER.Pray, Sir, be advised. If it were but a singlemorsel, it would do you good.ARDEN.Take it away take it away, I pray thee.Why art thou so importunate ?UNDER GAOLER.There is a young gentleman below, who wishesto see you, and my master is anxious you shouldtake some refreshment before he comes to you ;just, as it were, to strengthen you first.ARDEN (starting up.A young gentleman, said ye ? A boy, do youmean?UNDER GAOLER.Yes, Sir, one of your good, manly, gentlemanlikeschool-boys ; but wonderfully out of heart,poor fellow.ARDEN.Good God ! Show him up immediately.UNDER GAOLER.Yes, Sir j but will you not take a little winefirst, if you will eat nothing ?158 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.ARDEN.No, no, kind fool ! it would choke me. Showhim up immediately.[Exit GAOLER.Now do I feel all my miseries ! Now am I theselfish, the cruel, the disgraceful father. O God !O God ! what is the gaze of a multitude to thisboy's eye ?Enter YOUNG ARDEN, who, running up to hisfather, falls upon his neck, and bursts into tears.ARDEN.Boy, boy ! why hast thou come to me ?YOUNG ARDEN.To bless you, father.ARDEN.To bless me, boy ?YOUNG ARDEN.Ay, and to cling to you, father : to be withyou and serve you, father ; who should do that,as you are now circumstanced, but me ?ARDEN.Woe is me ! that thou shouldst have such anoffice ! It must not be.YOUNG ARDEN.Turn not away from me thus ! I am now atyour feet in a posture you have never seen metake before. (Kneeling and catching his hand.)THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 159ARDEN.I know thee well : thou art a generous boy ;thou art a noble boy ; but what a father am I ?I have blasted thy fair promise, freshly springingplant ! I have blighted thee with disgrace !YOUNG ARDEN.Say not so, my dear father ! what ruin is theretohim who has a sound mind and a sound bodyleft, and is willing to be a poor man, sinceHeaven pleases not that he should be a rich one?And for disgrace, I shall think it no disgrace tobe the son of an unfortunate father, knowingthat he is only unfortunate. Look not on methen with such anguish ! You will be able tovindicate your character to the world. (ARDENshakes his heady Nay, and if all the world regardyou as guilty, I will believe you to beinnocent.ARDEN.Oh, oh, oh ! This is misery indeed.YOUNG ARDEN.Why that terrible groan, dear father?ARDEN.Thou fringes my heart, my son! Littledost thou know but thou shalt know it. Ihave kept thy mother in ignorance, but I will160 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.conceal nothing from thee. (Going to the doorto see if it be closely shut.)YOUNG ARDEN.Good heaven ! what is it you would tell me ?ARDEN.The fatal progress of a ruined unfortunateman.YOUNG ARDEN.I know you are unfortunate.ARDEN.Hold thy peace, and hear me out. Naturallythoughtless and profuse, and fond of the pitifuldistinction that expense bestows, I dissipated aneasy fortune which ought to have been thine,Edmond.YOUNG ARDEN.Nay, nay ! take no thought of that : let it go.It is but a feather in the air ; and may lightwhere it lists.ARDEN.Having squandered it, as I said, that falsefriend RobinairYOUNG ARDEN.Is he false ?ARDEN.False, base, and treacherous.THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. l6lYOUNG ARDEN.May he be sent to perdition then !ARDEN.Be quiet, be quiet, and hear me out. Thatfalse friend, who had insinuated himself into myconfidence, by many flattering praises and professionsof regard, and by sometimes accommodatingme with small loans of money, which Istill hoped to repay, introduced me to the gamingtable. There I was at first allowed to besuccessful, and encouraged to risk still higherstakes : at last a tide of ill luck, as it was called,set strongly against me, and I was borne downto ruin and despair.YOUNG ARDEN.what you must have suffered, father !ARDEN.1 was not a very happy man, Edmond ; andwhen I thought of your mother and youYOUNG ARDEN.Nay, nay ! say nothing of this. We shall dovery well : we are satisfied.ARDEN.I will go on with my story. Being thus desperate,I wrote to my old relation Fenshaw forthe loan of a thousand pounds, which I sincerelymeant to repay, whenever I should have it in mypower.VOL. II. M162 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.YOUNG ARDEN.I knew it, Sir : I knew you would willinglywrong no man.ARDEN.Nay, listen. Fenshaw, suspecting the state ofmy affairs, but pitying my distress, sent me,indeed, a bill on his banker, but it was only forahundred pounds, which was nothing to mynecessities. I had, formerly, to amuse myself,imitated different kinds of hand-writing, andonce, this is the circumstance that, if broughtin evidence, along with another only known toRobinair, would have the strongest effect on thedecision of a jury; namely, his having seen thebill which Fenshaw sent me. Nothing was concealedfrom him. Once, after copying a note ofFenshaw's so exactly that it could not be discoveredfrom the original, I showed it to and said, " This may be a resource to meintime of need."YOUNG ARDEN (eagerly).But you said it only in jest?ARDEN.I did so then : but ruin overwhelmed me ; Ihad no resource, and a strong temptation tookhold of me. To convert this bill for a hundredinto one for a thousand pounds, seemed so easilydone ; and still, like a madman, confident of re-THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. 163grieving all if I were but once more enabled toattempt fortune, I thought I should contrive torepay the sum, before the fraud could be discovered.This fatal idea came into my head inmy despair, was rejected, yet still returned tomeagain, and, at last, an irresistible temptationfastened itself upon my miserable imbecility.YOUNG ARDEN (in a half-choked voice).But you resisted it ?ARDEN.Alas! I did not. (Young ARDEN staggersback some paces, then sinks down upon achair, and from that upon the ground,where he throws himself along, coveringhis face with his hands, while ARDENstrides to and fro on the front of the Stage,in violent agitationsEnter MRS. ARDEN.MRS. ARDEN (to her husband, not perceiving herson, who is partly concealed by the chair fromwhich he sanlC).Ha! how is it now? Thou art more overcomethan I have ever seen thee before. Alas !if thy strength fail thee now, when thou hast suchexertions to make, what will become of us?ARDEN.Let me alone let me alone: thoughts ofunutterable anguish are dealing with me.M 2164 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.MRS. ARDEN.Alas ! alas ! I thought to have brought theecomfort.ARDEN.What comfort ? Where is it ?MRS. ARDEN.I went in quest of it, but I have returnedempty. He is inexorable.ARDEN.O ! I remember now. Thou hast been withRobinair then ?MRS. ARDEN.Yes ; I am come from his house, where I haveknelt and wept at his feet.ARDEN.And he is inexorable ?MRS. ARDEN.There is nothing to hope for from him. Hehas talked of befriending me and my son ; butfor thee he has no pity. He has talked, indeed,as if certain compliances on my part might havepower to move him in your behalf and desiredme to acquaint him with my determination thisnight at his house near Chelsea ; but there wasa malignant mockery on his face, as he spoke,which made me regard what he said as an unworthyinsult, that had no serious meaning.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 165ARDEN.But it had a meaning, a damned meaning.My life is in his power, and he had the audacity,even to me, to propose that which, were I but toutter it, would cover us both with shame.MRS. ARDEN.Let it not then be uttered ! Thou hast rejectedthe detestable proposal with abhorrence :I know thou hast ; and, for the rest, let Heavenin its mercy send us deliverance. (ARDENgroans O ! how is this? Where is that vehemenceof indignation ? Surely thou hast rejectedit with abhorrence !ARDEN.I did reject it with abhorrence, and I do sostill. But, oh ! Letitia ! there are moments whenthe thoughts of public disgrace ; of the lastdreadful act of dying on a scaffold, a spectacleto the unfeeling multitude, does so terribly besetmy imagination, that, were it possible to endurethe idea of thy degradation, I could almostYOUNG ARDEN (who has been eagerly listening,raising himself meantime from the ground bydegrees, now springs upon his feet, and rushingbetween his father and mother, separates themvehemently with his thrown-out arms.But it is impossible.MRS. ARDEN (to her son).Ha! art thou here?M 3166 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.ARDEN (to his son, who is looking fixedly uponhim).Take off thine eyes from me, boy; they strikeme to the earth. Look not so on one whomthou hast called thy father. I know the spiritthat is in thee, and, alas ! I know that it is noneof mine. Thou hast clung round my knees, andthe first word of thy lips Jas been my name ;thou hast clung to my side, and appeared tobelong to me, but the soul that is in thee claimsa far higher descent ; thou shouldst have beenthe son of a nobler father. Yet strike me notto the earth in my wretchedness : I can bearany degradation but this.YOUNG ARDEN.Father, father ! speak not such words of humiliation: they are in my heart like daggers ; theypierce it to the core. If I have looked at youas I ought not to have looked, punish me as youwill, but, oh ! not in this manner! Give me anyother chastisement! You are the father thatHeaven has given me, and I will be your son inrichesand poverty ; in honour and disgrace.ARDEN.My noble, my generous boy ! Oh, the curseof my unutterable folly ! What a proud fatherI might have been ! But now No, no !change thy name, and let no creature know whoit was that gave thee being. Let me die theTHE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. l67death of a malefactor: it will be horrible, but itwill be short.YOUNG ARDEN.May you not yet be saved ?ARDEN.I ask it not now : I am resigned, if thou canstsave thyself from infamy, and wilt blot out fromthy remembrance that a weak wish for life didonce for a moment betray me into unworthythoughts.MRS. ARDEN.O God ! and is there no deliverance for thee ?Can any thing be a crime that saves thy life ?ARDEN.Speak not of this again. The degrading wishwhich I have torn from my breast, shall returnto it no more. Be calm, be resigned, my dearLetitia : there is no deliverance.YOUNG ARDEN (after a thoughtful pause, springingup in the air.But there is there is deliverance !ARDEN.What keen voice of exclamation is this ? Artthou beside thyself?YOUNG ARDEN.No ; but I am beyond myself. I am morethan myself. The strength of a man thrills alongM 4168 THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.my new-strung limbs, and with it there is deliverancefor thee* (Running hastily to thedoor.)ARDEN.What dost thou mean? Where art thourunning to, Edmond ?MRS. ARDEN.Come back, come back, child : thou shalt notleave us.YOUNG ARDEN.Oh, call me not back ! Let me be for thisone day unquestioned, and free from control,and all my life after I am subject to your will.ARDEN.Knowest thou of any interest to be moved ?of any means that we are ignorant of?YOUNG ARDEN.Yes, father ; and ignorant you must be. Letme go, I beseech you : I have a thing in myhead, and with you I dare no longer remain.ARDEN.This is a strangely sudden thought.MRS. ARDEN.When shall I see thee again ? I shall be athome in an hour or two.YOUNG ARDEN.But I shan't return to you then.THE STRIPLING *. A TRAGEDY. 1 69MRS. ARDEN.Before dark, at least, I may expect you ?YOUNG ARDEN.I shan't return so soon.MRS. ARDEN.Good Heavens ! when shall I see thee ?YOUNG ARDEN.Enquire not about me, I beseech you ! Aftermidnight, perhaps but rise not when I knockat the door. In the morning daylight will bedawning on the sky when I see you again.Farewell, farewell ! and may heaven have pityupon us ! [Exit hastily.MRS. ARDEN (running after him).I cannot let him go : there is something in hiswords that alarm me.ARDEN (pulling her back.Do not go after him, nor prevent him fromfollowing his own generous impulse, noble creature! There is some person whom he hopes tointerest strongly in my favour; some of hisschool-fellows, perhaps, connected with peoplein power. It is vain, indeed; yet let him followhis own ideas. He will have satisfaction afterwardsin having made the attempt.MRS. ARDEN.Pray Heaven it be so ! I have strange fear170 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.upon me that I cannot account for. 'T is like apresentiment : I have become superstitious.What if I should see him no more ?ARDEN.Do not give way to it, my dear love ! Miserymakes us all superstitious.Enter GAOLER.Does any body wish to see me ?GAOLER.Your Counsel, Sir, are returned ; and as youare permitted to use the next apartment, wherethere is better accommodation than here, I haveshown them into it, and they wait for you.ARDEN.I will come to them immediately,[Exit GAOLER.)Leave me then, my dear Letitia, and keep upyour heart, if you can. I shall see you again inthe evening. God bless and support you, underthe sad trials which my sins and follies havebrought upon you !\JLxeunt.THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.ACT IV.A green Lawn, with Borders of Flowers, in frontof ROBIN AIR'S House, near Chelsea. Moonlight.Enter ROBINAIR and BnuTOxfrom the house.ROBINAIR.The night air is cool and refreshing here : itis stifling to sit in that close library, which youare so fond of. ( Walking quickly up and down,and sometimes stopping to listen.)BRUTON.Yet you give yourself no time to enjoy it. Isthat hurried pace the motions of one who comesforth to breathe the still air of evening ? Thereis a sky, too, over your head, with that peaceful,brilliant moon shining from it, to which thedullest eye might be turned with a species ofdevotion, yet you look not up once to behold it.ROBINAIR.This vile state of suspense ! Who thinks ofmoon, clouds, or sky, when enduring it? (listening')I hear a footstep coming up the lane.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.BRUTON.My ears are less quick ; I hear nothing : andif you are come out to listen for the arrival ofher whom you expect, you will have the cool airabout you long enough, I believe.ROBINAIR.What ! think you she will not come ?BRUTON.I am almost certain she will not.ROBINAIR.Thou little knowest how the proud may besubdued by distress.BRUTON.If I have any true knowledge of Arden, withallhis weakness and folly, he will not submit tobe saved by such base means as you propose.ROBINAIR.Pshaw, pshaw ! thou art too simple ; contemptiblysimple. The love of life works powerfullyin stronger minds than his. Besides, thelady may be willing to save him without his consent.She, depend upon it, will be here by andby.BRUTON.You are very sanguine.ROBINAIR.Not unreasonably so : she will be here ereTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 173long. And then that eye of pride, those lips ofscorn, that step of haughty defiance ay, thenshall I see them changed changed into humble,abashed, submissive gentleness. This will betriumph ! this will be happiness ! yea, that verything, happiness, which I have been pursuing allmy life, and have never yet overtaken.BRUTON.And so you confess, after all your successes inlife, the fools you have cajoled, the dangers youhave escaped, the sums you have amassed, thepassions you have gratified, that happiness is athing which has still escaped you ?ROBINAIR.Yes, Bruton, in some cursed way or other itstill has escaped me.BRUTON.But you are resolved to make sure of it now,by becoming the object of concealed detestationto one whose open disdain has so long and sosorely galled you ?ROBINAIR.Well, be it so ! be it so ! let her detest me asshe will ; but she shall, nevertheless, be thehumbled mistress, and I the condescending protector.174 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.BRUTON.An enviable state, truly, you project for yourself!ROBINAIR.And Arden, too ; he must in his turn giveplace, and bend his blushing brow to mortificationand contempt.BRUTON.A blessed sight to behold !ROBINAIR.Ay, and that proud boy of his, who beginsalready, like his lofty mother, to bear himselfwith a spirit above his years, even he must crouchand hold his tongue in humbling consciousness.BRUTON.And thus circumstanced, you propose to behappy. Why, the fiends themselves enjoy asgood happiness as this; and if such be your notionof enjoyment, Robinair, you need not be afraidof joining company with them hereafter, for youwill certainly have served your time here as anoviciate of their order.ROBINAIR.Well, if I do take that road to preferment, Ishan't have the regret of breaking up my intimacywith thee.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 175BRUTON.Nay, I know not that. I am disgusted withthis way of life, I assure you, and have veryserious thoughts of reforming my bad habits.ROBINAIR.Reforming, ha ! ha ! ha ! Why, what 's thematter with thee ? Hast thou got gout in thyhead, or water in thy chest ; or has thy good-naturedphysician threatened thee with apoplexy?Ha ! ha ! I am concerned to enquire into thismatter, thou knowest, as thou interest mostcertainly to make me thine executor.BRUTON.No, Robinair, I have none of the diseases youmention, nor any other, that I know of; but noone knows how long he may enjoy either healthor life.ROBINAIR (with mock solemnity.To be sure, nobody knows how soon his glassmay be run. Nobody knows when death mayknock at his own door we are all here to-day,but know not where we may be tomorrow. Ihave heard all this twenty years ago, from a muchbetter preacher than thou art. Come, come,let us go into the house again : our cool tankardis waiting for us.BRUTON.As you please : but here comes your man fromtown.176 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.Enter MORGAN.Returned from thy watching post, Morgan ?MORGAN.Yes, Sir.ROBINAIR.And with any intelligence ?MORGAN.I have kept my station there all the evening,on pretence of condoling with old Humphrey,who is in grievous distress for his master ; but Iknow not that I have picked up any thing particular.BRUTON.What has the lady been doing, Morgan ?ROBINAIR (eagerly.Yes, what of her? Was she at home, or atthe prison ?MORGAN.She returned from the prison for an hour ortwo in the evening, and, after writing some letters,as they told me, or suchlike business asthat, returned to the prison again, where, shesaid to Humphrey, she should stay till a late hour,desiring Robert to come with a chair for her.ROBINAIR.Not the chariot? This really looks butTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 177But art thou sure the chariot is not ordered afterwards?BRUTON.You would fain have the poor fellow to assistyou in deceiving yourself. Or did you not hear,Morgan, that it is suspected she will come roundin her chair by Chelsea, on her way from theprison ?MORGAN.No, Sir ; I heard little of her intentions, theywere all so taken up, before I came away, aboutyoung master.ROBINAIR.And what of him ? What has he been doing?MORGAN.After spending a long time in the closet whereMr. Arden keeps his arms, he has left the housewithout speaking to any one, and unseen byany body ; and all the servants, particularlyHumphrey, are in a terrible quandary about him ;for he had not returned when I came away, andthey fear some mischief has befallen him.ROBINAIR.Much disturbance about nothing, talkingfools ! They like to be frightened about something: it is an occupation for them, and doesnot hinder them from eating their supper.VOL. II. N178 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.MORGAN.Nay, Sir ; not a morsel has been eaten bythem : for they all love the poor youth as if hewere kith and kin to every one of them.BRUTON.He is, indeed, a fine-spirited creature. In hisfather's closet, said you ?ROBINAIR.And are any of the arms missing ?MORGAN.Humphrey says a light fowling-piece is gone ;but he is not sure that Mr. Arden himself didnot take it some time ago to be cleaned.ROBINAIR.And the old fool is afraid the child will blowout his brains with it. Well, since thou hast noother intelligence than this, Morgan, go thy waysto thy supper. [Exit MORGAN.] And let usmove into the house also. See, the candles arelighted now in the parlour, and our cool tankardwaits for us.BRUTON.With all my heart : we have been in this chillair long enough.\ Exeunt into the house.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 179Enter YOUNG ARDEN, with a fowling-piece in hishandy stepping cautiously, and then lookinground, as if disappointed.YOUNG ARDEN.He has got into the house already. Afterwatching here since twilight, I have sufferedhim to escape. Wretched timidity ! though hisfriend stood so near him, I am marksman enoughto have been in no danger of killing the wrongperson. Foolish, cruel caution ! must I returnto my father again, and no deliverance gained ?I will not return ! Here will I watch till themorning, and shoot him in the light of day. Iwill not return again to shame, and disgrace, andmisery, and despair. (Observing light from thewindow, and ROBINAIR and BRUTON, who maketheir appearance within, and sit down at a table,on which are some refreshments Ha! yonderhe is again ! Now is my time. (Raising hisarm.) Hand, hand, be thou strong and steady !heart, be thou firm ! The life of my father is inthe exertion of a moment. And Thou, greatFather of all ! wilt thou pardon this act? WiltThou pity me ? Wilt Thou have mercy on me ?O, have mercy ! have mercy ! though I dare notpray to thee ! (Goes nearer to the window, andpoints his gun, when BRUTON within changes hisposition, and comes upon a line with ROBINAIR.)N 2180 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.Nay, this must not be : I must not take twolives at once, the innocent with the guilty.(After a pause There is a window at the endof the room, looking to the beech walk; I'llfire in at that. [Exit, making his way hastilythrough shrubs and bushes, which knockoff his hat as he goes out. Presently thereport of a gun is heard, and ROBINAIRwithin is seen to fall Great commotionof Servants rushing into the room, andaiding BRUTON to give him assistance,Sc. fyc. Soon after MORGAN and othersissue from the house to give the alarm.MORGAN.Holla ! holla ! you who pass there ! Murder !murder ! There is murder committed here; andwe demand of every body in the king's name togive us assistance.Enter two Men by a wicket gate.FIRST MAN.Murder! where? who?MORGAN.In the house yonder ! my master !SECOND MAN.We heard the report of fire-arms. Was itthen?THE STRIPLING *. A TRAGEDY. 181MORGAN.Yes, and the murderer can be but a little wayoff. Assist us in securing him.SERVANT.There is a breach in the hedge at the end ofthat walk : he will escape that way if we are notquick. Let somebody come with me, for I cannotgrapple with a ruffian single-handed.FIRST MAN (looking in at the window).Ay, there lies the body within, as stark as anycorse, upon a board.MORGAN.For God's sake, don't think of satisfyingcuriosity now ! Try to secure the villain first,or he will escape. Come with me in this direction; and (to SECOND MAN) do you follow thefootman yonder, since nobody will go alone.FIRST MAN (as they are about to disperse.Here is a hat on the grass.OMNES (gathering round him.A hat?SECOND MAN.Pol ! it is but a boy's hat. Some varlet hascome over the hedge to gather gooseberries.MORGAN.Is there a name in it?N 3THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.FIRST MAN.No, there is no name ; so what does it signify ?I '11 e'en take it home with me. It will fit myNeddy to a marvel.MORGAN.Do what you will with it : but let us run. Welose time here.[Exeunt different ways.SCENE II.The hall in ARDEN'S house.Enter MADALINE and ROBERT.MADALINE.It grows very late ; did not the clock strikenow?ROBERT.Yes, Madam ; twelve and the quarter after.MADALINE.I know not what to do, Robert : your poormistress is in a terrible state of anxiety.ROBERT.Yes, poor lady ! I have listened for this halfhour to her steps pacing backwards and forwardsTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 183in her own room, and it has gone to my heartto hear it. I'd give the best suit I ever had tomy back, that my young master were returned.MADALINE.Humphrey is a long time gone.ROBERT.An hour and twenty minutes.MADALINE.Only an hour and twenty minutes ! But youhave reckoned the time with a more composedmind than we have done : perhaps you may beright.ROBERT.My watch has reckoned it, Madam, which ismore composed than any of us.MADALINE.Would he were returned !ROBERT.Shall I go after him ?MADALINE.That would do no good. Open the streetdoor, and listen if there be any footsteps coming.(ROBERT opens the door and listens') Do youhear any thing ?ROBERT.Yes, I do hear footsteps.N 4184 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.MADALINE.Light steps like those of a boy ?ROBERT (without side of the door).No, Ma'am - 9 mighty heavy steps : but theyare Humphrey's, I believe.MADALINE.Ah ! then he brings no good tidings. Do youhear no one coming after him ? Is he alone ?ROBERT.No one, Ma'am ; he is alone.MADALINE.Then he has not found him ; where can hepossibly have gone to? Humphrey, I hope, hasnot told his mistress of his having been in hisfather's closet before he went out, and his suspicionsabout the fowling-piece.ROBERT.He has not ; and, indeed, he thinks now thatthe fowling-piece was carried to the gunsmith'ssome little time ago.MADALINE.Humphrey must be at hand now. Call to him.ROBERT (thrusting his head again out at the door).Holla! holla, there ! It is him, Madam j heanswers me.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 185Enter MRS. ARDEN, running eagerly.MRS. ARDEN.What voices are those at the door? Is hereturned ?MADALINE.Humphrey is returned.MRS. ARDEN.And alone? O God! some mischief has befallenhim. He would not have staid so late, tomake me miserable. He never before, evenin his play, he was always considerate for me ;and would he now, when all this misery is uponme O, no ! some mischief has befallen him.MADALINE.Be more calm, my dear aunt, and hear whatHumphrey has to tell us. He is just at the door.Enter HUMPHRY.MRS. ARDEN (running to meet him).Have you seen him ?HUMPHRY.No, Madam.MRS. ARDEN.Have you heard of him ?HUMPHRY.No, Madam.186 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.MRS e ARDEN.Nor seen any one who has seen him or heardof him?HUMPHRY.No, Madam. I have been everywhere insearch of him, and have enquired of everybodyI have met, but can learn nothing of him. Thereis scarcely a creature now upon the streets butthe watchman, and you can hear his heavy stepsdumping upon the pavement a quarter of a mileoff.MRS. ARDEN (rushing towards the door).I'll go myself.MADALINE (holding her bactf).Alas ! what can you do by going out ? Thenight is dark, and you will meet with nothingbut disappointment, perhaps insult.MRS. ARDEN.Let me meet with what I may, I will go ; Iwill not be withheld. No night is dark to amother who is in search of her son. What isinsult to me ? I shall be strong ; I shall fearnothing.HUMPHRY.Indeed, indeed, my dear Madam, you willwander about to no purpose : and if my youngmaster should return while you are gone, weshall have him running out again after you, likeTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 187a mad creature. Be persuaded to stay here : hewill break his heart when he misses you, andfinds only us to receive him.MADALINE.Yes, Humphrey says right. Do return to yourchamber. (Leading her gently away.) Humphreywill be upon the watch, and give you noticewhen he comes.MRS. ArdentI cannot, I cannot! I'll walk up and downhere. I shall go mad if I return to my chamber.Walks rapidly backwards and forwards ; at lasta knock is heard at the door, and she runs to it.)It is he ! it is he !Enter YOUNG ARDEN.My son ! my son ! thank God I have theeagain ! Long, long have I watched for thee : Ihave been distracted with fear. Has accident,has illness detained thee ?YOUNG ARDEN.No, mother ; I am here now.MRS. ARDEN.Yes, thou art here now ; and I would nothave thee from me again for a world's wealthtold ten times over. (Looking earnestly at him.)But where hast thou been ? Thou art wondersTHE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.fully pale and spent. Hast thou come alongthus through the night ? Where is thy hat ?YOUNG ARDEN.Upon my head, is it not ?MRS. ARDEN.No, my love : hast thou been wandering bareheadedin the night air ?YOUNG ARDEN (putting his hand to his head).I knew not that I was so.HUMPHRY.My dear young Sir, what way came you ? Ihave been in search of you everywhere.YOUNG ARDEN.I can't tell. I ran straight forward from it,through every open lane and passage that I saw ;and here I am at last.MRS. ARDEN.Straight forward from what ? Did any thingpursue thee ?YOUNG ARDEN (in a quick altered voice).Yes, something did. Have you any wine athand, good Humphrey ? I am almost wild withfaintness.MRS. ARDEN.Alas ! I think thou art.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 189HUMPHRY.Did you say wine, Sir, which you dislike somuch ?YOUNG ARDEN.Never mind, never mind ; give me a gooddraught, though there were arsenic in ittMRS. ARDEN.Oh ! thou art not well. Run, Madeline, andfetch him some cordial. \ Exeunt MADALINEand HUMPHRY different *ways.~\ O what is thematter with thee ? Where hast thou been ?Thou contest out to seek deliverance for us,and the rebuff of some cruel-hearted man sendsthee back broken-hearted and hopeless to meand to thy miserable father.YOUNG ARDEN (his eyes lighting up keenly.No, mother ; I do not so return. I have keptmy word with you : my father's deliverance isearned.MRS. ARDEN.And dost thou tell me so with a joy so wildand so terrible ?YOUNG ARDEN.Hush, hush, hush ! Speak not to me ; looknot at me ; tell it to no one ; be as if you knewit not. Say in your own heart, " He shall livebut lock it up there unuttered.190 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.MRS. ARDEN.Dear child ! thy words strangely perplex me.But here is the wine.Re-enter HUMPHRY with wine.Take a good draught of it, and then go to rest.But will you not eat something ? (He shakes hishead') Well, then, I will not urge thee.HUMPHRY (Jilting up a glass with wine).Here, my young Sir, and may it do you good ;but I fear it will fly to your head, as you are notused to it.YOUNG ARDEN (having swallowed the wine hastily.No, it will not : I may take any thing now.Re-enter MADALINE with a phial.MRS. ARDEN.We had better not give him too many thingsat once. Go to your chamber, Edmond, andsleep will restore you.YOUNG ARDEN.Sleep! Ay, if I could sleep. Will you removethe light ?MRS. ARDEN.Not if you desire to have it left.HUMPHRY.My dear boy! something has scared you.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 191I'll leave the light in your room ; and shall I sitby you ?YOUNG ARDEN (eagerly.Do so, good Humphrey ! that is very kind inthee. And so, dearest mother, don't come withme, but let me pass to my chamber and lie down.(Hurrying away.)MRS. ARDEN.And wilt thou not let me bless thee ere thougoes?YOUNG ARDEN (returning to her).Thy blessing, my mother! (After receivingher embrace, he kisses her hand fervently.) IfHeaven bless what thou blesses, I shall havenothing to fear.MRS. ARDEN.And dost thou fear any thing ?YOUNG ARDEN.No ; nothing, when I look upon you. Goodnight! good night !\ Exit, hurrying from her, and followed byHUMPHRY.MADALINE (observing MRS. ARDEN, who remainsfor some time lost in thought).My dear Mrs. Arden ! what is your mind fixedupon so intently? Now that he is safely returnedand gone to bed, take some care of yourself.THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.Let me entreat you to take some nourishment,and lie down for a few hours. Remember youmust go in the morning to Mr. Arden, that youmay see him before he goes to court ; and thetrial begins early.MRS. ARDEN (starting from her reveries.True ; it is still night : it is not the hour yet.MADALINE.It is still night. I am begging of you to takesome refreshment and go to bed, as you must beup early in the morning ; and what you have togo through tomorrow, requires more strengththan, I fear, you possess. Do you hear me ?MRS. ARDEN.Yes, Madeline. I heard you speak ; I knewyou spoke kindly to me, but I knew not whatyou said.MADALINE.Let me go with you then to your room ; andcheer up a little. All may yet go well.MRS. ARDEN.O, if that be ! if all indeed go well, I shallsoon cheer up.[Exeunt, MADALINE supporting her asthey retire.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 193ACT V.SCENE I. BRUTON's Lodgings. BRUTONand his friend, a Justice of the Peace, are discoveredin earnest conversation.JUSTICE.And you decidedly say your suspicions restnot on Arden.BRUTON.Decidedly. There is not one trait in thecharacter of the man that should raise in mymind the slightest suspicion ; nor even any circumstanceregarding him of any kind, his interestin the death of the deceased only excepted.JUSTICE.Did you not hint at another person whom youdo suspect?BRUTON.I know a man whose fortune Robinair hasruined, whose sister he has seduced and abandoned,and whom I believe to be capable ofexecuting the fullest revenge ; yet, as I have noactual evidence to support my suspicions, youmust not receive them from me as any kind ofinformation to be acted upon. It were hard,VOL. II. O194 THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY.indeed, if the injuries he has received were alonemade the cause of more injuries.Enter a Servant.BRUTON.What do you want ? I am at present engaged.SERVANT.One of Mr. Robinair's servants is below, Sir ;and a poor labouring man is along with him, whofound a hat last night on the grass-plat near thehouse, just after the murder was committed.BRUTON.Show them up immediately.[Exit Servant.JUSTICE.This will probably lead to the discovery.BRUTON.Yes ; murder, the proverb says, is always foundout. And, in truth, it is often discovered bycircumstances that appear at the first wonderfullytrifling and minute.JUSTICE.When men commit such deeds, they do so inastate of mind which renders them incapable ofperceiving what circumstances will excite orprevent suspicion ; and they are as often detectedfrom caution as from oversight.THE STRIPLING: A TRAGEDY. 195BRUTON.True : the mind in that state may be cunning ;but it is a cunning which betrays oftener thanconceals ; like that of the poor cushat, whichvainly tries to mislead a practised fowler byhovering over the bushes where her nest and hernestlings are not.Enter MORGAN and a Labourer.BRUTON.Well, Morgan, what brings you and this goodmanhere ?MORGAN.This man, Sir, found a hat last night.LABOURER.Ay, please your honour, just as we were allsetting off after the villain that killed that theregentleman.JUSTICE.Tell us, my good friend, in what manner youfound it.LABOURER.In no manner at all, please your honour. Ionly sees it on the grass, and I picks it up.JUSTICE.Well, then, it was lying on the grass when youpicked it up ?o 2196 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.LABOURER.Yes, your honour; and I'll tell you all how itwas, without either meddling or making with it ;though I did think there was no great harm incarrying it home to my poor boy, who has beengoing about bare-headed for this fortnight past,like an ouzle, with its feathers on end.JUSTICE.Well, well ; where did you find it ?LABOURER.Last night, your honour.JUSTICE.I should call that 'when.BRUTON.You puzzle him, my good Sir.JUSTICE.No matter. (To Labourer.) When did youfind it, then ?LABOURER.Just there, too, please your honour.BRUTON.Don't question him so methodically ; but lethim tell his own story first.LABOURER (to BRUTON).Thank your honour, that is just what I meansto do as soon as I can get the end of it. ForTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 197you see, Sirs, as soon as I heard the gun go off,and some one a-calling out "Murder !" I guessedas how some mischief was a-doing ; so I runsinto the garden in no time, and just before me,on the grass, near a thicket, on this hand of meNo, no; on the other hand of me, a yard off,belike, (for I'll tell your honours exact how itwas,) I sees a black thing lying on the ground,at my feet.JUSTICE.And near the house ? about a yard from it,you say ?LABOURER.About a yard from the right or the left of me,I an't quite sure which ; but, as I said, I took itfor some black thing ; but when I came close toit,I found it was a hat.JUSTICE.Well, well ; give us no more of thy story atpresent, but let us look at the hat. Is there aname in it?LABOURER.No, your honour ; and so I thought no harmto take it home to my poor boy. (Shows thehat.)BRUTON (starting as he looks on it).Good God !o 3198 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.JUSTICE.What, Bruton, do you recognise it?BRUTON.I fear I do.SERVANT (to BRUTON, after examining it).It is the very same hat, Sir, that you gave inapresent to young Mr. Arden, before he wentlast to school. 1*11 swear to it : I know it bythe twisting of the band.JUSTICE.This is a strong fact. Come with me, mygood friends : your several evidences must betakenin a more formal manner. You seemmuch hurt, Bruton.BRUTON.I am so. aside') Is it possible that thewretched boy has sacrificed himself for his father ?(To the JUSTICE.) I'll follow you presently.JUSTICE.Nay, you must go with me now : I must notleave you behind. My duty requires me not tolose sight of you.[Exeunt.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 199SCENE II.The Street before ARDEN'S House.Enter HUMPHRY, meeting ROBERT, who comesout from the house.ROBERT.Returned from the Court already? Is thetrial over ?HUMPHRY.Ay ; thank God for it ! and our master is afree man again.ROBERT (skipping about).O, rare news! rare news! Let us run andtell everybody. Acquitted, acquitted; notguilty ?HUMPHRY.To be sure he is. How can a man be condemnedwhen there is no evidence against him ?ROBERT.I knew it would be so ; I knew he would beacquitted : I knew he had no more done it thanI had done it. And yet, for all that, all lastnight, through my sleep, there was such a howlsTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.ing of a last speech in my ears I could get norest for the sound of it.HUMPHRY.Hold thy tongue, fool! I hate to hear thevery name of it. Have I not told thee already,I '11 give thee a good sound beating if thou everspeak one word of such things again Run andtake the key of the back gate and open it.ROBERT.Why so ?HUMPHRY.Your master is coming home by a private wayto avoid the crowd, and will enter by the backgate. In the mean time I'll go and inform myyoung master of the good news ; for he must bequite overcome with despondency, poor boy, elsehe would never have rested quietly at home allthis time. It is so unlike his usual stirringspirits.ROBERT (calling after HUMPHRY as he goes off.Humphrey, hark ye, Humphrey !HUMPHRY (turning back.What mayest thou ?ROBERT.Did they raise a great huzza when he wasacquitted ; and did Master make them a lowbow, and all that ?THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 201HUMPHRY (pushing him off the Stage by theshoulders).Provoking fool ! Run and open the back gatedirectly, or I'll make thee bow lower than thouhast a mind to. He will be here in a fewminutes.\ Exeunt severally.SCENE III.A small Court or Garden behind ARDEN'S House.Enter MAVALiNErom the house.MADALINE (looking about).I thought Edmond would have been herebefore me. What can make the child so stilland inert at such a moment as this. My auntneed not have urged me to remain here to comforthim, I trow : he has kept himself out of theway of every body.Enter HUMPHRY.MADALINE.Come near me, good Humphrey ; there is athing I should have asked at thee sooner : didyour Master know nothing of Robinair's death,till after he came into the Court ?SOS THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.HUMPHRY.No, not a whisper of it, till the witnesses onthe side of the prosecution were called for.MADALINE.And how did he look when he heard it ?HUMPHRY.So astonished, at first, that his face becamepale with astonishment ; and one would havebelieved it was a witness on his own side thatwas lost. But soon after, I warrant ye, therewas a wonderful change in his behaviour.MADALINE.How so?HUMPHRY.Why, now, to make it clear to you, Ma'am ;seeing him before he heard it, and seeing himafterwards, was, according to my notion, likeseeing a man crossing over a river lately frozen,with his half-bended body, picking a step here,and picking a step there, while the ice is bendingand cracking round him on every side, andthen seeing him when he gets fairly to the shore,lifting up his head, looking round him again, andstanding upright and firmly on his legs, like apillar.MADALINE.And Mrs. Arden how did she receive thenews of his acquittal ? It grieved me not to beTHE STRIPLING t A TRAGEDY. 203with her ; but she had beseeched me so earnestlyto remain here with her son, that I was constrainedto obey her.HUMPHRY.I thought so, Ma'am ; for in truth she wanteda friend to be with her very much.MADALINE.Ah ! I fear she did. How was it, Humphrey?HUMPHRY.I carried her the news myself. Three stepsbrought me from the Court to the room whereshe waited ; and had I been threescore and ten,I should not, I believe, have made more ofthem.MADALINE.And how did she receive it ?HUMPHRY.O ! fainted away like a corse.MADALINE.Indeed ! O, that I had been with her ! Didyou tell her of Robinair's death, too ?HUMPHRY.Yes, Ma'am, after she was somewhat recovered,I told her; but I had as lief have held mytongue.MADALINE.Why so, my good Humphrey ?THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.HUMPHRY.Truly, I thought she would have been gladon't, knowing so well that she disliked the manfor drawing in her poor husband into so manyruinous courses ; but, contrary wise, she lookedterrified when she heard it, and has worn a faceof a marvellous thoughtful, gloomy cast eversince. But here comes the coach up the lane.glistening They will be here in a trice.MAD ALINE.And Edmond not yet come down to receivethem : how strange ! I thought an arrow fromthe bow would not have been swifter than he tomeet his father. Indeed I wondered much thathe did not rouse himself to attend his motherthis morning ; but his remissness now is astonishing.The carriage comes no nearer.HUMPHRY (listening).No ; it is not them. It has turned intoanother lane ; and Mr. Edmond will be downstairsbefore they come.MADALINE.I hope so. Who would have thought such abrave, spirited boy would have been so deeplydepressed with misfortune ?HUMPHRY.I have my own notions about that.THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. 205MADALINE.Your own notions ?HUMPHRY.Don't look frightened, Madam. I watchedby him last night, after his return, and from histossing and restlessness, and some strange wordswhich he uttered, as if in a kind of agony, onceor twice, I shrewdly suspect the poor boy was ata fortune-teller's, to enquire about his father'sdoom, and that he was frightened with somehorrid sight or other.MADALINE.Think you so ?HUMPHRYI am almost sure of it. Those cursed hagsmake people run mad sometimes with the sightsthey raise up before them.MADALINE.I have heard of such things in the country, indays gone by, but nowHUMPHRY.But the days of London wickedness never goby ; and if they have unsettled the brain of thatnoble boy, burning at the stake is too good forthem.MADALINE.Nay, you are savage.206 THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.HUMPHRY.Oh, Ma'am ! had you heard what I heard !He gave one groan so deep and so terrible, thatI started up and pulled the coverlet off him, tosee whether there was not a man under it, soimpossible it seemed that a boy should havestrength to utter such a sound.MAD ALINE.And did you question him ?HUMPHRY.I tried to do it, Ma'am ; but whenever Ibegan to speak, he looked so sternly at me thatI dared not persist. Blessed child! I neversaw him look sternly on any one before.MADALINE.And had you no conversation with him at allthe whole night?HUMPHRY.No, none. Whenever I said any thing, hecovered up his face quickly with the bed-clothes,as if he were going to sleep ; and so I coulddraw nothing from him, good or bad.MADALINE.There is something very strange in all this : Icannot understand it. But, hark! there comesthe carriage now.THE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY. 207HUMPHRY.Ay, it is it ; I know the sound of it well. Itis at hand it stops.[Runs and opens a small gate at the bottomof the Stage, and enter ARDEN and MRS.ARDEN, who both receive the embraces ofMadeline]ARDEN (looking about).So, Madeline, you are the first to meet us.Ha ! here he is.Enter YOUNG ARDEN, who runs to his father, andthrowing himself upon his neck, bursts intotears.ARDEN.My son !YOUNG ARDEN.My father !ARDEN.Yes, Edmond, I will now, indeed, be thyfather ; and to be worthy of thee and of thineexcellent mother, will be the business of myfuture life. Thy noble nature shall not be putto pain for me any more. I shall see thee virtuousand happy : that will be my portion in thisworld, and worth all that my folly and extravagancehave deprived me of.208 THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.YOUNG ARDEN.See me happy, father ! Oh, oh ! be happyyourself, and think not of that.ARDEN.How so, boy ? Shalt thou not be happy ?MRS. ARDEN (taking her son's hand tenderly.Shalt thou not be happy with us, my son ?Shall thy father and I, united as we may now bein sober domestic peace, not have the blessednessof seeing thee happy ?YOUNG ARDEN (with kindled animation).Yes, mother ; you shall see it : you shall seemehappy. I shall look upon my father and youin your domestic peace, and feel a kind of fearfulhappiness.MRS. ARDEN.O ! what words are these ?ARDEN.Let us go into the house. I must be alonewith thee, Edmond : I must strain thee to myyearning heart in privacy.(As they are about to go into the house, a party ofmen burst in upon them from the small gate,which has been left unlocked and lay hold ofYOUNG ARDEN.)FIRST MAN.Stop, Sir ; you are our prisoner : we take youTHE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY. 209into custody in the king's name. (MRS. ARDENshrieks, and is supported from falling byMADALINE.)ARDEN (catching hold of his Son, to pull him fromthe men).You must be mistaken, friends ; you can haveno warrant against a boy like this !FIRST MAN.Read there : it is our warrant against EdmondArden, junior.ARDEN (looking at the warrant).O God ! (Rushing upon the men.) Ye shalltake my life before ye seize him !HUMPHRY.And mine too, before you touch a hair of hishead ! (Brandishing his stick, and rushingfuriously upon the men, who keep hold of YOUNGARDEN.)FIRST MAN.Dare ye resist the king's officers ? (Drawinga hanger from his side.)HUMPHRY.Ay, or the devil's either ! What care I for theflashing of your steel ?\ A violent struggle ensues between HUMPHRYand ARDEN on one side, and the officersof justice on the other, in which YOUNGARDEN, between the two parties, iswounded, ]VOL. II. PTHE STRIPLING : A TRAGEDY.YOUNG ARDEN.Oh ! I am slain ! Give over, dear father :fight no more for me, my brave Humphrey.\ A general outcry and panic; and they allclose about him, ARDEN supporting him ashesinks to the ground, and MRS. ARDENkneeling by him distractedlyMRS. ARDEN.Slain ! O ! no, no, no ! Thou art wounded,love, but not slain : Heaven will not suffer suchcruelty. Run, O run for assistance immediately!YOUNG ARDEN.My dear, dear mother ! nothing can save me.MRS. ARDEN.Say not so. No, no ! thou wilt be saved.YOUNG ARDEN.There is sure and speedy death in this wound :I feel it, and I am glad of it. Move me notfrom this spot ; torment me not with any vainassistance, but let me quietly go where I oughtto go where I wish to go ; for it is not meetthat I should live.MRS. ARDEN.No, no ! thou shalt live ! I will breathe mysoul into thee ; I will encircle thee, and growinto thee with the warm life of a mother. Deathshall not tear thee from me !THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.YOUNG ARDEN.Alas ! my own dear mother ! wring not yourhands so wildly.MRS. ARDEN.Wo is me ! In the very blossom of thy youth !thou pride thou flower of my bosom !YOUNG ARDEN.How many mother's sons, not much older thanme, die far distant on the ocean, on the field ofbattle, with many terrible wounds; and here I ambeside you, mother, arid shall look upon you,and keep hold of your hand till the last. Myfather ; where are you ? Give me your hand.(Taking ARDEN 's hand, and joining it with hiswife's.) There, mother ; I have earned him foryou, and he will take care of you. Will younot now be united in steady unbroken affection ?This cheers me ; this makes death almost pleasantto me.ARDEN.My boy ! my noble sacrificed boy ! this isagony.YOUNG ARDEN.Say not so, father ! Mourn for me, but let itnot be with this bitter grief. I am not sorry todie. I have, I fear, offended my great and awfulFather ; but I have prayed to Him to punishand forgive me. This is my punishment, andTHE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.I know by it that He has heard my prayer.O may He bless and pity you when I am gone !But there is something I must say while I canspeak.ARDEN.What is it, my love ?YOUNG ARDEN.The men that arrested me let them comenear. (To the men.) Be ye witnesses that withmy dying breath I confess myself guilty of 'sdeath, and solemnly declare no creaturebut myself had any knowledge of it. Mystrength goes fast ; but this hand and this hand(pressing his father and mother's hands) are stillwarm in my grasp. Who else stands near whohas loved me? You, cousin, you have beenvery good to me; and, if I had strength, I wouldthank you.MADALINE.My dear, dear Edmond ! I love not my ownbrother better than thee : how shall I bear tothink of thy sad end !YOUNG ARDEN.And Humphrey too ; where art thou ? Giveme thine honest hand.HUMPHRY.Oh, my dear young master! I would have laiddown my life to save yours.THE STRIPLING *. A TRAGEDY. 213YOUNG ARDEN.I know thou hast loved me well better thanI deserved. If I had lived to be a man, weshould never have parted. Wilt thou live withmy father and mother when I am gone? No,no ! this is not right ; I do not ask it. Thouwilt find some master who is able to reward theeas thou deserves.HUMPHRY.But I will live with them ! ay, beg with themstarve with them. O, pardon me ! it is notwant of respect that makes me speak so. Yes,I will serve them, for your sake, as I would serveno other master on earth, were he as rich as aprince.YOUNG ARDEN.This comes over my heart ! My eyes are darknow ; lay me back a little. (Groans Be notunhappy if I groan somewhat. The painMRS. ARDEN.Alas, my dear love ! art thou in great pain ?YOUNG ARDEN.No, mother ; it is killing me now, but it is notvery bad. Farewell, farewell ! (Dies.)[MRS. ARDEN sinks down in a state of insensibilityby the body while ARDEN pacesabout in an agony of despair. ~]p 3THE STRIPLING I A TRAGEDY.ARDEN.Fool, fool, fool ! vain, selfish, detestable fool !this is the end of thy vanity and extravagance ;of thy contemptible ambition and thirst for distinction.Thou art distinguished enough now,the curse of Heaven is on this miserable head!(Beating his forehead, and striding across theStage ; while the Curtain dropsyTHEPHANTOM:A MUSICAL DRAMA.IN TWO ACTS.P 4PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.DUNARDEN, a Highland Chief.MALCOLM, his Son.THE PROVOST OF GLASGOW.CLAUDE, his Son.CRAWFORD, Friend of Claude.GRAHAM.ALLEN, CULLOCH, and other Highlanders.Sexton, Servants, and other Inhabitants ofGlasgow.WOMEN.ALICE, Daughter of the Provost of Glasgow.MARIAN, Daughter ofDunarden.JESSIE, attending on Marian.Bride,, Bride's Maids, Housekeeper, fyc.Scene, in the Western Highlands of Scotland) andafterwards in the City of Glasgow.THE PHANTOM.ACT I.SCENE I. A green Lawn, surrounded withRocks, and Mountains seen in the distance.An assembly of Highlanders are discovered,holding bridal revelry; Bagpipes playing,and a noise of Voices heard, as the Curtaindraws up.Enter ALLEN.FIRST HIGHLANDER.Welcome, brave Allen ! we began to fearThe water-kelpy, with her swathing arms,Had drowned thee at the ford.SECOND HIGHLANDER.Faith did we, man ! thee and thy shelty too.ALLEN.Am I so late? There's time enough, I hope,To foot a measure with the bonnie bride,218 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.And maidens too. 'T is well I'm come at all :I met the ill-eyed carlin on my way.FIRST HIGHLANDER.And suffered scathe by her ?ALLEN.Ay, scathe enough :My shelty, in the twinkling of an eye,Became so restive, neither switch nor heelCould move him one step further.SECOND HIGHLANDER.And so you were obliged to come on foot?ALLEN.What could I do ? It was not with the beastI held contention, but the evil spellOf that untoward witch. Ay, but for that,I would defy the wildest four-legg'd thingIn all Lochaber so to master me !FIRST HIGHLANDER.Well, well ; the pipes are playing merrily,Make up lost time as fleetly as thou canst.ALLEN.And so I will ; for here are rosy partners,Ribbons and cockernonied *, by my faith !Coil of hair on the top of the head.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Like very queens. They make, here as I stand,Each garter'd leg to thrill, and toes to tickle.(Seizing one of a group of Girls, advancingfrom the Dancers on the bottom of theStage.)Come, winsome Jean ! I'll have a reel with thee.Look not so coy : where did I meet thee last?We have not had a merry-making hereSince Duncan More's latewake. *JEAN.Say nought of late wakes here, I warn ye well :Wot ye who is the bridesmaid ?ALLEN.Some gentle dame, belike.JEAN.Some gentle dame !Dumbarton Mary, with her Lowland airs.ALLEN.Ay ! she that look'd so stern, and said it wasA savage thing, or some such word as that,To dance at old Glen Lyon's funeral.But, could the laird himself have raised his head,He with his ivory stick had rapp'd her pateFor marring with her mincing gentlenessThe watching of a corpse.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.The decent bravery of his last rouse.Come, let us have a merry reel together.[They mix with Dancers, who now advance tothe front, where a bumpkin, or dance ofmany interwoven reels, is performed ; afterwhich the Bride is led to a seat, and someof her Maidens sit by her"]BRIDEGROOM.Now, while the bride and bonnie maidens allTake needful rest, we'll pass the cheering cup.And, Rory of Glenoruch, clear thy throat,And sing some merry song, meet for a wedding,Where all are boon and gay.BRIDE.O, never mind for that! give us the songWhich thou wert wont on Clachan braes to sing,And we to praise. Thou know'st the song Imean.Tory.On bridal day the bride must be obey'd :But 'tis a song devised for gentle folks,Made by the youthful laird of Ballarnorin,And not for common clans folk like ourselves.BRIDE.But let us have it, nevertheless, good Rory ;It shows how sweetly thwarted lovers meetO' moonlight nights, and talk of happy timesTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Which fortune has in store for faithful heartsThe silliest moorland herd can follow that.Tory.Then be it as you please ; I'll do my best.SONG.I 've seen the moon gleam through the cave,And minute drops like diamonds glancing ;I 've seen, upon a heaving wave,The tressy-headed mermaid dancing :But ne'er was seen, in summer night,Beneath the moon, in brightness riding,A moving thing, to charm the sight,Like Flora to her Malcolm gliding.I Ve heard a pibroch, through the wind,As absent chief his home was nearing;A half-stripp'd infant, sweetly kind,With mimic words its mother cheering :But ne'er were evening sounds so sweet,As, near the spot of promise stealing,The quick, soft tread of Flora's feet,Then whisper'd words, herself revealing.My boat I 've fastened to the stake,And on the shelly beach am pacing,While she is passing moor and brake,On heath. r braes her shadow tracing ;And here we' 11 pass a happy hour,For hours and years of bliss preparing,When we shall grace our girdled tower,Lands, life, and love together sharing.222 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Enter CULLOCH.ALLEN.Ha! our young chief must be return'd, for hereComes Bullock, with his staring freckled face.OMNES (gathering round CULLOCH).Well, man ; what are thy news ? where hast thoubeen?CULLOCH.We've been at Glasgow.FIRST HIGHLANDER.Glasgow ! Save us all !ALLEN (half aside to First Highlander).I doubt it not : his master, I hear say,Goes oftener there than his good father woes of;Ay, or his sister either. I suspectThere is some dainty ladyFIRST HIGHLANDER.Hush ! say nothing.ALLEN.And so, brave Bullock, thou hast traveled far:And what is Glasgow like ?CULLOCH.Like all Drumleary crags set up in rows,And chimneys smoking on the top of them.It is an awful sight !THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.FIRST HIGHLANDER.And what saw'st thou besides the crags andchimneys ?CULLOCH.There be six kirks, I told them on my fingers;And, rising from the slates of every kirk,There is a tower, where great bells ring so loud,That you might hear them, standing on thissward,Were they on great Benlawers.FIRST HIGHLANDER.Tut ! tut ! thy ears are better than thy wits.BRIDE.And saw'st thou any silken ladies there,With all their bravery on ?CULLOCH.Ay, ladies, gentlemen, and red-coat soldiers,And plaided drovers, standing at the cross,As close as heather stalks on Hurrah moss.Ah ! well I trow it is an awful place !ALLEN (aside as before).And well I trow the chief has business thereHe wishes no observer to discover,When he, of all the idle household loons,Took such an oaf as Bullock to attend him.But I'll e'en go, before he join the dance,And have a private word of him, to favourMy poor old mother in her rum'd cot.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.I know full well he will not say me nay,Though the old laird himself be cold and close.FIRST HIGHLANDER.Go, then, and speed thee well !\Exlt ALLEN.BRIDEGROOM.Hear, bonnie lassies ! the young laird himselfWill soon be here, and foot it with you featly.OLD WOMAN.O, bless his comely face ! among ye allThere is not one that foots the floor like him,With such a merry glee and manly grace !BRIDEGROOM.We '11 have no further dancing till he come.Meantime, good Rory, sing another song ;Both bride and maidens like thy chanting well :And those who list may join the chorus rhyme.SONG.Upon her saddle's quilted seat,High sat the bonnie Lowland bride ;Squires rode before, and maidens sweetWere gently ambling by her side.What makes her look so pale and wan ?She's parted from her Highlands.What makes her look, &c.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Where'er they pass'd, at every doorStood maids and wives the sight to see ;Curs bark'd, and barnes by the scoreRan bawling loud and merrily.But still the bride looks dull and wan ;She 's thinking of her Highlands.But still the bride, &c.The Lowland laird, in bridegroom's gear,Prick'd forth to meet the fair array ;His eye was bright, his voice was clear,And every word was boon and gay.Ah ! little did he reckon thenOf bold and burly Highlander.Ah ! little did he reckon, &c.The bride she raised her drooping brow,And red as crimson turn'd her cheek.What sound is that ? The war-pipe nowDescending from yon broomy peak.It sounds like marching of a clan ;O can it be her Highlandman !It sounds like, &c.Their bonnets deck'd with heather green,Their shoulders broad with tartans bound,Their checker'd hose were plainly seenRight fleetly moving to the sound.Quick beat her heart, within a ken,To see the valiant Highlander.Quick beat her heart, &c.Now challenge-shout is heard, and soonThe bare claymores are flashing bright ;And off scour'd many a Lowland loon,Who ill could brook the fearful sight.VOL. II. QTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.The fiend," quoth they, " from cave and glenHas pour'd those stalwart Highlander.The fiend," quoth they, &c.Then pistols from their holsters sprang,Then waxed the skirmish fierce and hot,Blades clashing fell, and harness rang,And loudly blustered fire and shot ;For, sooth to say, the bridegroom thenFull bravely meet the Highlander.For, sooth to say, &c.And so did all his near o' kin,As Lowland race such stour may bide :But sank, at last, the mingled din,And where was then the bonnie bride ?Ay, ask at those who answer can ;Ask at the cunning Highlandman.Ay, ask at those, &c.The bridegroom, in a woeful plight,Back to his furnish'd hall has gone,Where, spread on boards so gaily dight,Cold has the wedding banquet grown.How changed since break of morning, whenHe thought not of the Highlander !How changed since, &c.And who, upon Bended's side,Beneath his shieling blest and gay,Is sitting by that bonnie bride,While round them moves the light strathspey ?It is the flower of all his clan,It is her gallant Highlandman.It is the flower, &c.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.Re-enter ALLEN, snapping his fingers, and footingthe ground, as he speaks.ALLEN.I 've seen him, Sirs ; I have had words of him.FIRST HIGHLANDER.Had words of whom ?ALLEN.Of the young laird himself.OMNES.Hast thou ? and is he coming to the green ?ALLEN.He bade me say he '11 join you in the evening.OMNES.And not till then ?ALLEN.Some strangers have arrived.And I have seen them too : the lady 's mountedUpon a milk-white nag ; and o'er her saddleA scarlet cloth is spread, both deep and wide,With bobs and fringes deck'd right gallantly ;And in her riding gear she sits with graceThat might become the daughter of a chief,Ay, or the king himself.FIRST HIGHLANDER.Perhaps it is the Glasgow provost's daughter,THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Who is, as they have said, the very matchWhich our old laird is planning for his son.ALLEN.Ay, he may plan, but love will have its way,Free, fitful love thinks scorn of prudent planning.No, young Dunarden went not to the town,With simple Bullock for his sole attendant,To see the provost's daughter.BRIDE (to ALLEN).And so he will not join us till the evening?ALLEN.No, damsels ; but here's ribands for the bride,And for ye all, which he has sent by me.Now they who have the nimblest hands amongstye,Will catch their favourite colours as they fly.(Pulls out ribands from his pouch, and dancesabout in a whirling figure to the bottom ofthe Stage, strewing about pieces of ribands,while the Girls follow, to catch them asthey fallsTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SCENE II.The Hall in the Tower o/* DUNARDEN.Enter DUNARDEN and MARIAN.DUNARDEN ( ' speaking as they enter).In sooth, she well may grace a noble mansion,Or chieftain's hall, or palace of a prince,Albeit her veins swell not with ancient blood.If so much grace and sweetness cannot pleasehim,He must be ill to win. And by my faith !Perhaps she is this same mysterious lady,To whom, as thou suspected, his late visits,So frequent and so long, have been devoted.MARIAN.Ah, no ! I fear another has his heart,His constant heart, whom he, at least, will thinkFairer than this sweet maid, or all besides.DUNARDEN.And if it should be so, will nothing please himBut the top-flower of beauty and perfection ?The second best, methinks, ay, or the third,Q 3230 THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.Where fortune gilds the prize, might suit himwell.Why dost thou shake thy head ?MARIAN.What might be, and what is, stand far apart,When age and youth on the same objects look.DUNARDEN.Was I not young, when, of thy grandsire'sdaughters,I chose the fairest, and was plainly toldHer heart and hand were promised to another ?But did I then perversely mope and pine ?No, I trow not : I cleared my cloudy brow,And wooed the second fairest, thy poor mother.MARIAN.So will not he.DUNARDEN.Why so : belike he will not,If thou abet his folly, as, methinks,Thou art inclined to do.MARIAN.No, father ; not inclined : I shall regretAs much as you, if any prepossessionPrevent him from approving this fair maid,Who is, indeed, most gentle and engaging.DUNARDEN.Out on thy prepossessions ! Younger sons,THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Who may be soldiers, sailors, drovers, ay,Or tinkers if they will, may choose a mateWith whom, o'er sea or land, through burgh orcity,To scour the world. But for the elder born,Who must uphold the honours of the race,His ancient race, he is not thus at libertyTo please a youthful fancy.MARIAN.But yet, dear Sir, you may be ignorantDUNARDEN.What ! am I ignorant ? Do I not knowThe world sufficiently to guide and counselThose through whose body my own blood isflowing ?Not many men have had more opportunityTo know men and their ways, and I have turn'ditTo some account ; at least I fain would think so.I have been thrice in Edinburgh, as thou knowest,In Glasgow many times, in London once jAnd I, forsooth, am ignorant !MARIAN.Dear father !You would not hear me out : I did not meanThat you were ignorant of aught belongingTo worldly wisdom ; but his secret heart,As I have said before, his prepossessionsTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.DUNARDEN.And what has he to do with prepossessions ?He is, of all men, bound to wed for wealth,Since he, with his unceasing liberalities,Would bare me to the quick. No tacksman dies,But he must have appointed for his widowA house, with right of browsing for her goats,And pasture for a cow, all free of charge.The bedrid carlins, too, and orphan brats,Come all on me, through his petitioning ;And I, God help me ! have been weak enoughTo grant such suits too often.MARIAN.You will not say so on your dying day.DUNARDEN.For that, indeed, it may be well enough ;But for our living days, I needs must say,It doth not suit at all. If he were frugal,And would with care lay up what is our own ;Having some hoarded store, he might morereasonablyIndulge his prepossessions, as you phrase it.MARIAN.Nay, be not angry with him.DUNARDEN.Angry with him !Such want of reason would provoke a saint !Is he to spend the rents with open hand,THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA. 233Stretch'd out to all who need, or all who ask jAnd please himself besides, by an allianceWith some slight May, who brings but smilesand bloomTo pay the yearly charges of her state ?MARIAN.We do not know her yet, and cannot sayThat she is poor.DUNARDEN.But we may shrewdly guess.Else why those stealthy visits, this concealment?Oh, 't is provoking ! This, our Provost'sdaughterIs just the match that would have suited us,That would support our house, and clear ourlands,And he, forsooth! I'll cast him from myfavour !MARIAN.I know you will not.DUNARDEN.Lady Achinmore,If he persist I'll say and do it too.His prepossessions truly ! mighty plea !Supported, too, by Lady Achinmore. (Walkingin wrath to the other end of the hall.)THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.MARIAN (aside.I'll hold my tongue, and let the storm subsideFor when he calls me Lady Achinmore,Reply is worse than useless.DUNARDEN (returning.Methinks the lady tarries in her chamber.MARIAN.To lay aside her travelling attire,And put her robe or fashion' d mantua on,Requires some time.DUNARDEN.And where is Malcolm ? Surely he should beIn readiness, for very decency,To bid a stranger lady welcome here.MARIAN.He will appear ere long, and is, perhaps,Attending on her brother.DUNARDEN.No, he is not.I saw young Denison walk forth alone,As if to look for him.MARIAN.Here comes the lady.Enter ALICE.DUNARDEN.Ah, gentle lady ! were I half the manTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 235That once I was, (how many years gone byWe shall not say,) you should to this poor hold,To these old walls which your fair presencebrightens,A rousing welcome have. But times arechanged,And fashion now makes all things dull andspiritless.ALICE.My welcome, as it is, gives me such pleasure,I will not think of what it might have been.Your daughter has received me with a kindnessWhich has already freed me from restraint,And given me courage to express my pleasure.MARIAN (to her.Thanks to thee, gentle friend ! so may I callthee,Knowing so well thy worth. Might we retaintheeSome weeks beneath our roof, then we mightboastThat our poor welcome had not miss'd its aim.Burdensomeweeks ! We Ml try to turn those weeks tomonths,And then, who knows but that our mountainsoil236 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.May ev'n prove warm enough for Lowland flowerTherein to flourish sweetly.ALICE.Thanks, noble Sir ; but we must go tomorrow.DUNARDEN.So soon ! the daughter of my early friendBeneath my roof, seen like a Will o' th' wisp,Glancing and vanishing ! It must not be.Were I but half the man that once I was,I'd fight thy stubborn brother hand to hand,And glaive to glaive, but he should tarry longer,Or leave his charge behind him.ALICE.Nay, blame him not : it was his own good willWhich made him from our nearest homewardroute,Though press' d for time, start these long milesaside,To pay his father's friend a passing visit ;For Malcolm, he believed, was still in Glasgow,So rumour said.DUNARDEN.I thank his courtesy ;But, if my name be Fergus of Danarden,Neither the morrow, nor next morrow's morrowShall see thee quit my tower. I'll go and findhim,THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.And tell him thou thyself art captive here,Though others be in thraldom of thy beauty,And shalt not be released. [Exit.MARIAN.Thou seest how gallantly old hearts will warmAt sight of winning youth. He almost woosthee :And yet I would not pay a stepdame's duty,Where I would rather yield a sister's love.ALICE.These words of kindness ! Oh, you will undomeWith so much kindness ! (Bursts into tears.)MARIAN.Dear, gentle creature ! Have I given thee pain ?I have unwittinglyALICE.Done nought amiss.I have a silly weakness in my nature :I can bear frowning coldness or neglect,But kindness makes me weep.MARIAN.And can it be that coldness or neglectShould e'er be thine to bear ?% ALICE.Better than me have borne it.238 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.MARIAN.Better than thou ! In all your stately city,Is there a lady fairer than thyself?ALICE.Yes, Lady Achinmore, there is a creature,Whose beauty changes every other faceTo an unnoticed blank ; whose native graceTurns dames of courtly guise to householddamsels ;Whose voice of winning sweetness makes thetonesOf every other voice intruding harshness.MARIAN.And if there be, conceit will mar it all :For too much homage, like the mid-day sun,Withers the flower it brightens.ALICE.It may be so with others, not with her.MARIAN.Thou lowest her then ?ALICE.O, yes ! I love her dearly ;And if I did not, I should hate myself.Heed not these tears, nor think, because I weep,In saying that I love her, aught lurks here,Begrudging her felicity. O, no !THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 239MARIAN (taking her hands affectionately.Sweet Alice ! why so moved ?ALICE.'T is my infirmity : I am a fool,And should not go from home, so to exposeA mind bereft of all becoming firmness.MARIAN (embracing her.Come to my bosom ; thou hast but exposedThat which the more endears thee to my heart ;And, wert thou firmer, I should love thee less.But, hush ! let me kiss off those falling tearsFrom thy soft cheek. I hear thy brother coming.ALICE.Thy brother?MARIAN.No ; thine own, thy brother Claude.Ha ! Malcolm, too, is with him ! this is well.Enter MALCOLM and CLAUDE, whilst ALICEcomposes herself, and endeavours to look cheerful.MALCOLM.Fair Alice, welcome to our Highland mountains !Which, as your brother tells me, you admire,In spite of all their lone and silent barrenness.ALICE.He tells you true : our fertile Lowland dales,THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.With all their crofts and woodlands richlychequer' d,Have less variety than their bare sides.MALCOLM.Yes, when fleet shadows of the summer clouds,Like staghounds on the chase, each other followAlong their purple slopes ; or when soft hazeSpreads o'er them its light veil of pearly grey,Through the slight rents of which the sunshinesteals,Showing bright colour'd moss and mottledstones,Like spots of polish'd beauty, they appearObjects of varied vision most attractive.ALICE.Then, to behold them in their winter guise,As I have never done !MALCOLM.You might then see their forms enlarged anddark,Through the dim drapery of drifted rain,Like grim gigantic chieftains in array,Bidding defiance to approaching host ;Or lifting their black shoulders o'er the massOf volumed vapour gather'd round their base,Which seem like islands raised above the earthIn purer regions of the firmament.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.ALICE.And then how sweet the bushy glens betweenthem,Where waterfalls shoot from the rocks andstreams,Course on their wimpled way with brawling din !MALCOLM.Where low-roof 'd cots, with curling smoke areseen,Each with its little stack of winter fuel,And scanty lot of furrow' d corn-land near;And groups of hardy imps, who range at will,Or paddle in the brook, while bearded goatsBrowse on the rocky knolls, and kids are sportingAmongst the yellow broom.CLAUDE.Pray thee have done, good Malcolm ; thou wiltfillThis girl's fancy with romantic visions,Which may, perhaps, make the rich, fertile fieldsOf her own country seem insipid things.MARIAN (to CLAUDE).One thing, you would observe, he has omittedIn the description of his bonnie glen,The cottage matron, with her cumb'rous spade,Digging the stubborn soil ; and lazy husbandStretch'd on the ground, or seated by the door,Or on his bagpipe droning some dull dirge.VOL. II. RTHE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.MALCOLM.Well, freely I confess our mountain matronsIn useful virtues do excel their mates jAnd in what earthly region is it otherwise ?CLAUDE.I dare not contradict thee, and be deemedUngallant for my pains.Enters a Servant, and delivers a packet to CLAUDE.ALICE.Is it from Glasgow ?Is there within the cover aught for me ?CLAUDE.There is a letter with thy name upon it.(MALCOLM withdraws some paces from her')ALICE.Which, nevertheless, thou deepest to thyselfWith eyes intently fix'd upon the writing.Is it a stranger's hand to thee unknown ?CLAUDE (giving the letter.No, not unknown.ALICE.It is from Emma Graham (to MARIAN), andwith your leave,I'll read it by this window. (Turns round, andstarts uponjinding MALCOLM close to her.)THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 243MARIAN,Why do you start ?ALICE.I knew not he was near me.MALCOLM (in confusion).I crave your pardon : 't was unwittingly ;I scarcely know myself why I returned.[ALICE opens the letter, whilst CLAUDE andMALCOLM stand gazing anxiously on heras she reads it to herself.]MALCOLM (to ALICE, who seems to have come tothe conclusion).Your friends are well, I hope ; all 's well inGlasgow ?ALICE.She says a deadly fever rages there,And nought is seen along their dismal streetsBut funeral processions ; nothing heardBut death-bells tolling, and the hammer's soundNailing in haste the corse's narrow house.MALCOLM (agitated.And she herself amidst this wreck of life !ALICE.She is, ere this, removed from the contagion ;For these concluding lines inform me plainly,That she and all her family were preparedR 2244 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.To leave the town upon the following dayTo that on which her letter has its date.MALCOLM (eagerly.I thank thee, Alice.CLAUDE peevishly.Wherefore dost thou thank her ?MALCOLM (haughtily.Whate'er thou hast a right to ask of meShall have its answer.MARIAN (to CLAUDE).When Highland pride is touch'd, some lack ofcourtesyMust be excused. You have not from thiswindowAdmired the falling of our mountain stream.pleads him to the bottom of the hall, anddetains him there in apparent conversationsMALCOLM (in a softened voice.So, gentle Alice, thought in friendship knitWith Emma Graham ! and meet companions areye! (Looking closer to the letter, whichshe still holds open in her handyForgive me ; Lowland ladies far surpass,As fair and ready scribes, our mountain maids :I ne'er before saw lines by her indited.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.ALICE (putting it up hastily ; then hesitating,then recovering herself.No ; why should I withhold it from thine eye ;For still the sweet expressions from her penExcel the beauty of its characters.(Gives it to him.}Peruse it then, (aside, as she turns from him)while I peruse myself.MALCOLM (returning the letter, after having readu}.Thou art in tears, sweet Alice ; has thy mindSome boding apprehensions for her safety ?ALICE.No, God forbid ! I have a feeble body,The worn-out case of a more feeble mind,And oft will weep for nothing. Heed me not.MALCOLM.No, say not so : thy mind and body bothAre lovely yoke-fellows, and will togetherGod grant it be so ! hold their prosperous courseFor many years. (Seeing her endeavours to speaksStrive not to answer me ;This wish, though most sincere, deserves nothanks.Enter Du GARDEN, followed by Servants, carryingdishes of meat, 8$c.DUNARDEN.Come, honoured guests, the first dish of our meal,R 3THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Poor though it be, is passing to the board ;Shall we not follow it? Although, in verity,I am ashamed that such a poor receptionIs offered to such friends.MARIAN.Dear Sir, they will forgive what things arelacking,The heart's kind cheer not being of the number.DUNARDEN (to ALICE).Had I had timely notice of your coming,I had sent messengers for thirty miles,Cross moor and mountain, to incite our neighbours;And tables had been covered in this hall,Round which we should have held a merry feast.And this same wedding, too, detains the clan :So that our wings are clipt on every side.ALICE.Your courtesy is great : but surely, Sir,A merry wedding well may make amendsFor a lost feast, ev'n in Dunarden hall.DUNARDEN.And so it shall, fair Alice. Pardon meThat I should be so bold to name you thus !At fall of eve we'll join their merriment;And thou shalt be my partner in the dance.(Taking her hand gallantly.)I'll have thee all and solely to myself;THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 247Unless, perhaps, if these old legs should fail,Thou wilt accept of this young Highlander(Pointing to MALCOLM)To be my substitute. Come, gentles all!By this soft lily hand let me conductThe daughter of my old and honour' d friend ;My trysted partner too. Aha ! aha !(Leading off ALICE gaily with a strathspeystep.) [Exeunt.SCENE III.A Lobby or Entrance-room, with fire-arms,swords, and Fishing tackle hung on the walls.Servants are seen passing to and fro withplaids and bundles of heath in their hands.Enter HOUSEKEEPER.HOUSEKEEPER.Make all the speed ye may : in the long chamberThere must be twenty bed-frames quickly set,And stuffed with heather for the tacksmen ; ay,And for their women, in the further room,Fourteen besides, with plaiting for them all.The wedding folks have broken up their sport,And will be here before we are prepared.Enter the BUTLER.BUTLER.And what are twenty beds, when all the drovers,R 4THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.And all the shieling herdsmen from Bengorach,Must have a lair provided for the night.HOUSEKEEPER.And who says so ?BUTLER.E'en the young Laird himself.HOUSEKEEPER.'T is always so ; Dunarden's courtesy,With all his honied words, cost far less troubleThan young Dunarden's thoughtless kindnessdoth.The foul fiend take them all ! Have we got plaidsFor loons like them !BUTLER.Faith, we at least must try to find them bedding.HOUSEKEEPER.Let each of them find on the green hill swardThe breadth of his own back, and that, I trow,Is bed enough for them. Herdsmen, indeed !(Several Servants coming all about togetherMore plaids ! more plaids ! we have not yetenow.Another Servant.And Espy says the gentle folks must havePillows and other gear.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.HOUSEKEEPER.Out on ye ! clamouring round me with yourwants,Like days about the ruined turret ! think yeThat I - I am distracted with you all !BUTLER (aside).And with some cups of good Ferntosh besides.HOUSEKEEPER.Howe'er the shieling herdsmen may be lodged,I have provided for the Lowland strangersRight handsomely.BUTLER.The bed of state, no doubt, is for the lady,And for the gentleman the arras chamber.HOUSEKEEPER.Thou art all wrong : the arras is so ragged,And bat holes in the cornice are so rife,That Lady Achinmore bade me prepareHis lodging in the north side of the tower,Beside Dunarden's chamber.BUTLER.They leave the house tomorrow, waiting onlyTo take a social breakfast. My best wineAnd good Ferntosh must be upon the table,To which the beef, and fish, and old ewe cheeseWill give a relish. And your pretty playthingsOf china saucers, with their fairy cups,&50 THE PHANTOM *. A DRAMA.In which a wren could scarcely lay her egg,Your tea-pot, pouring from its slender beakHot water, as it were some precious drug,Must be, for fashion's sake, set in arrayTo please the Lowland lady.HOUSEKEEPER.Mind thy concerns, and I will look to mine.My pretty playthings are in daily use,As I hear say, in the great town of Edinburgh ;And 'tis a delicate and wholesome beverageWhich they are filled withal. I like, myself,To sip a little of it.BUTLER.Dainty dear !No doubt thou dost; aught stronger wouldoffend thee.Thou would'st, I think, call rue or wormwoodsweet,Were it the fashion in your town of Edinburgh.But, hark ! the bridal folks are at the door ;We must not parley longer. [Music without.]I hear their piper playing the " Good-night."Enter ALLEN.BUTLER.They are at hand, I hear : and have ye hadA merry evening, Allen ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.ALLEN.That we have.Dunarden danced with that sweet Lowland lady,As though it made him twenty years the younger.HOUSEKEEPER.Dunarden! Danced she not with young Dun-arden,Who is, so says report, her destined husband ?ALLEN.Yes ; at the end, for one dull reel or twoThey footed it together. But, believe me,If this rich Provost's daughter be not satisfiedWith being wooed by substitute, which homageThe old laird offers her abundantly,She'll ne'er be lady of this mansion ; no,Nor of her many, many thousand marks,One golden piece enrich Dunarden's house.HOUSEKEEPER.Woe's me ! our Malcolm is a wilful youth!And Lady Achinmore would dance with Claude?ALLEN.She danced with him, and with the bridegroomalso.HOUSEKEEPER.That, too, would be a match of furtheranceTo the prosperity of our old house.BUTLER,But that she is a widow, and, I reckon,Some years his elder, it might likely be.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.HOUSEKEEPER.And why should that be such a mighty hindrance?ALLEN.Fie, Butler ! dost thou utter, in such presence,Disqualifying words of age and widowhood?HOUSEKEEPER.You are mislearn'd and saucy, both of you.But now they are at hand.Song without, of several Voices.The sun is down, and time gone by,The stars are twinkling in the sky,Nor torch nor taper longer mayEke out a blythe but stinted day ;The hours have pass'd with stealthy flight,We needs must part : good night, good night !The bride unto her bower is sent,And ribald song and jesting spent ;The lover's whisper'd words and fewHave bade the bashful maid adieu ;The dancing floor is silent quite,No foot bounds there : good night, good night !The lady in her curtain'd bed,The herdsman in his wattled shed,The clansmen in the feathered hall,Sweet sleep be with you, one and all IWe part in hopes of days as brightAs this gone by : good night, good night !THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Sweet sleep be with us, one and all IAnd if upon its stillness fallThe visions of a busy brain,We '11 have our pleasure o'er again,To warm the heart, to charm the sight,Gay dreams to all ! good night, good night IHOUSEKEEPER.We've listened here too long : go all of youAnd get the rooms prepared. My head's distracted! \ Exeunt all, different waysSCENE IV.A Bed-chamber.Enter ALICE and MARIAN, with a Servant beforethem, carrying lights.MARIAN.You must be tired with all this noisy merrimentSo closely following a lengthen'd journey.ALICE.To be amongst the happy and the kindKeeps weariness at bay ; and yet I ownI shall be glad to rest.MARIAN.And may you find it, sound and undisturbed !There is among our household damsels here,THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.A humble friend of yours, the child of oneWho was your father's servant.ALICE.Ha ! little Jessie, once my playfellow,And since well known to me, as the attendantOf a relation, in whose house I found her,Some two years past : a gentle, faithful creature.MARIAN.The same. She will attend upon you gladly,And do what you require. See, here she is.Enter JESSIE.ALICE.Jessie, my old acquaintance ! I am gladTo find thee thus, domesticated happilyIn such a home. I hope thou hast been well,Since I last met with thee.JESSIE.I thank you. Madam ;I am right well ; and, were I otherwise,To see you here would make me well again.MARIAN (to ALICE).The greatest kindness I can show thee now,Is to retire, and leave thee to prepareFor what thou need'st so much. (Kissing her.)May sweet sound sleep refresh thee ! Oh ! itgrieves meTHE PHANTOM: A DRAMA. 255To think that we must part with thee so soon ;And that ye are determined to returnTo that infected city.ALICE.Be not afraid for us. We shall pass throughit,And only tarry for an hour or two.Good night, and thanks for all your gentlekindness !Thanks, in few words, but from my inmost heart.\JEtxit MARIAN.And thou art here, good Jessie. I am glad,Right glad to see thee-but I'm tired andspent,And (take it not unkindly) cannot speakAs I was wont to do.(Throws herself into a chair > whilst JESSIEbegins to uncoil her hair, and take outthe ornamentedJESSIE.1 will prepare you for your bed, dear Madam,As quickly as I can. To-morrow morningYour strength and spirits too will be restored.ALICE.Thou 'rt a good creature. Dost thou stillrememberThe pretty songs thou used to sing so sweetly ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SONG.JESSIE (singing gaily).My heart is light, my limbs are light,My purse is light, my dear ;Yet follow me, my maiden bright,In faith ! thou need'st not fear.The wallet on a rover's backIs scanty dower for thee,But we shall have what hordes lackFor all their golden fee.The plume upon my bonnet bound,And broadsword by my side,We '11 follow to the war-pipe's sound,With fortune for our guide.Light are my limbs, my purse, my heart,Yet follow me, my dear ;Bid Care good-bye, with kinsfolk part ;In faith I thou need'st not fear.ALICE.I thank thee : that was once a favourite song.I know not how it was ; I liked it thenFor the gay reckless spirit of the tune.But there is one which I remember well,One my poor aunt was wont to bid thee singLet me have that, I pray thee.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 257SONG.They who may tell love's wistful tale,Of half its cares are lightened ;Their bark is tacking to the gale,The sever'd cloud is brighten'd.Love like the silent stream is foundBeneath the willows lurking,The deeper, that it hath no soundTo tell its ceaseless working.Submit, my heart ; thy lot is cast,I feel its inward token ;I feel this mis'ry will not last,Yet last till thou art broken.ALICE.Thou finest sweetly, ay, and sadly too,Even as it should be sung. I thank thee, Jessie.JESSIE (after having entirely undone her hair,and taken the fastenings from other parts ofher dress).Now, Madam, let me fetch your gown and coif.ALICE.I want no further service, my good Jessie,I'll do the rest myself: and so, good night;I shall be soon in bed. Good night, and thanks!JESSIE.Not yet good night ; I will return again,And take away the light.VOL. II. STHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA*ALICE.Well ; as thou wilt : but leave me for a while.Exit JESSIE.This day, with all its trials, is at lengthCome to an end. My wrung and wrestling heart !How is it with thee now ? Thy fond delusionsLie strew'd and broken round thee, like thewrecksOf western clouds when the bright sun is set.We look upon them glowing in his blaze,And sloping wood, and purple promontory,And castled rock distinctly charm the eye :What now remains but a few streaky fragmentsOf melting vapour, cold and colourless ?(After a thoughtful pauseThere *s rest when hope is gone there shouldbe rest.And when I think of her who is the cause,Should I complain ? To be preferr'd to her !Preferred to Emma Graham, whom I myselfCannot behold but with an admirationThat sinks into the heart, and in the fancyGoes hand in hand with every gentle virtueThat woman may possess or man desire !The thought was childish imbecility.Away, aw r ay ! I will not weep for this.Heaven granting me the grace for which I'llprayHumbly and earnestly, I shall recoverTHE PHANTOM: A DRAMA.From this sad state of weakness. If she lovehim,She '11 make him happier far than I could do ;And if she love him not, there is good causeThat I should pity him ; not selfishlyOn my own misery dwell. Ay, this should be ;But will it be? Oh, these rebellious tears!(Covering her face with her hands, andthrowing herself back in her chair, in astate of abandonment.Enter, by the other end of the chamber, thePhantom of a beautiful young Woman, whichadvances a few paces, and then remains still.ALICE (raising her face.Who's there? Is there true vision in mineeyes? (Rising quickly, and going withopen arms towards the Phantom.)Dear Emma ! dear, dear Emma ! how is this,That thou art here, unlook'd for at this hour,So many miles from home ? Alas ! that faceOf ghastly paleness, and that alter' d lookOf sad solemnity! Speak to me quickly;I dare approach no nearer, till I hearWords of thy natural voice. Art thou alive ?PHANTOM.A term, short as the passing of a thought,260 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Hath brought me from the chamber where myfriendsAre now lamenting round my lifeless body.ALICE.And 'tis thy spirit which before mine eyesThy body's semblance wears: and thou artnothingThat mortal hands may touch or arms encircle !look not on me with that fixed look !Thou lov'st me still, else thou hadst not beenhere,And yet I fear thee.PHANTOM.Fear me not, dear Alice !1 yearn'd to look upon thee ere I passThat gulf which parts the living from the dead :And I have words to utter which thine earMust listen to, thy mind retain distinctly.ALICE.Say what thou wilt ; thou art a blessed spirit,And cannot do me harm.I know it well : but let thy words be few ;The fears of nature are increasing on me.(Bending one knee to the ground')O God ! Lord of all beings, dead and living !Strengthen and keep me in this awful hour !PHANTOM.And to thy fervent prayer I say, Amen.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 261Let this assure thee, that, though diff'rentnaturesInvest us now, we are the children stillOf one great Parent ; thou in mortal weedsOf flesh and blood ; I in a state inexplicableTo human comprehension. Hear my words.ALICE.I listen most intently.PHANTOM.The room in which I died, hath a recessConceal' d behind the arras, long disusedAnd now forgotten ; in it stands a casket,The clam shell of our house is traced upon it jOpen, and read the paper therein lodged.When my poor body is to earth committed,Do this without delay. And now, farewell !I must depart.ALICE.Ah ! whither, dearest Emma ? Will a momentTransport thee to Heaven's court of blessedness,To extasy and glory ?PHANTOM.These are presumptuous words. My place,appointedIn mercy to a weak and sinful creatures3THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.I soon shall know. Farewell, till we shall meet,From sin, and fear, arid doubt released for ever !exit.[ALICE stands trembling and gazing, as thePhantom disappears, and then falls on theground in a swoon. Presently re-enterJESSIE.]JESSIE.Mercy upon us ! lying on the ground !Life is not gone ; God grant it be not so !Lady, dear lady ! No ; she does not hear.(Endeavours in vain to raise her, then runsoff in great alarm, and is heard without,knocking and calling at the door of anotherchambers(Without Open the door ! Rise, Lady AchingMARIAN (Without.I am not yet undress' d : what is the matter ?JESSIE (without.Come to the lady's chamber : follow me.MALCOLM (without, opening the door of hisapartment.What has befallen ? Is any one unwell ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 263Re-enter JESSIE, followed ly MARIAN, who bothrun to ALICE, reusing her from the Floor, andone supporting her head, while the other chafesher temples and the palms of her hands, $c.MARIAN.Support her drooping head, whilst from my closetI fetch some water, and restoring drugs,Whose potent smell revives suspended life.MALCOLM (looking in upon them from the door).O leave her not ! I '11 find whatever is wanting.exit.MARIAN.There is a little motion of her lip \Her bosom heaves : thank God ! life is not fled.How long hadst thou been absent from theroom?JESSIE.Some little time \ and thought, on my return,To find her gone to bed.MARIAN.How was she when thou let's her ?JESSIE.She was well then.MARIAN.It hath been very sudden,s 4THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA,Re-enter MALCOLM, "with phials, fyc.MALCOLM (applying herbs to her nostrils, whileMARIAN pours out essence from the phial, andrubs her temples and hands.Life is returning ; she is laid uneasily ;Let me support her on a stronger arm. (Takingher from MARIAN, and supporting her.)There 's motion on her lips, and on her eyelids.Her eyes begin, through their soft raven lashes,To peer like dew-drops from the harebell's core,As the warm air of day by slow degreesThe closed leaves gently sever. Yes; she moves.How art thou now, sweet Alice ?MARIAN.See, she looks up, and gazes on us too ;But, oh, how strangely !MALCOLM.Why do her eyes thus wander round the chamber?(To ALICE.) Whom dost thou seek for, Alice ?ALICE.She's gone ; I need not look ; a mortal eyeShall never, never look on her again.\ A peal of thunder heard.~\Hear ye that sound ? She is upon her way.MARIAN.What does she mean ? It was a sultry night,And threatened storm and lightning.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 265MALCOLM (to ALICE).Thou 'st been asleep, and scarcely yet art waking,Thy fancy is still busied with its dream.ALICE (raising herself more, and looking towardsthe place where the Phantom disappeared.It was no dream : upon that spot it stood ;I saw it, saw it for a lengthen' d time,Saw it distinctively.MALCOLM.Whom didst thou see ?No living creature could have enter'd here.ALICE.would that it had been a living creature !Her beauty was the beauty of a corseNewly composed in death ; yet her dark eyesWere open, gazing wistfully upon me.MALCOLM (hastily withdrawing his arms from her,and clasping his hands together in agony.Thou hast seen Emma Graham !ALICE (rousing herself.Is Malcolm here ? I am confused, bewildered;1 know not what I've seen, or what I've said:Perhaps it was a dream.MALCOLM.It was no dream ;Or if it was, 't was one of sad import.Oh, if it be ! there is distraction in it.(Tossing his arms, <c.)266 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.MARIAN.Dear brother ! such wild gestures of despair,For the mere shaping of a sleepy brain !MALCOLM.It was not sleep from which we have revived her.MARIAN.And grant it were not, swooning, I've been told.Will sometimes have its dream as well as sleep.ALICE.I was not well ; I have been long unwell ;Weakness and wretchedness disturb the brain ;Perhaps it was the vision of a swoon.Be not so miserable, gentle Malcolm !O that this vision did foretell my death,If she were well and happy !MALCOLM.Forgive me, dearest Alice ! O, forgive me !When paining thee, I'm hateful to myself.(Taking both her hands, which he presses tohis lips.}MARIAN.Leave us, dear brother ! go to thine apartment.MALCOLM.I'll go where yearning nature urges me.(Going, then returning again to ALICE.)And didst thou hear her voice ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 267Enter CLAUDE.CLAUDE.Is Alice well ? I heard a busy noise.H ow art thou, sister ?ALICE.I have had a swoon,But am recover'd from it. Go to rest.{Aside to MARIAN and MALCOLM.)Say nothing of the vision. O, be silent !MALCOLM (aside, to himself, as he goes off.Is he so much concerned ? No, no, he is not :He does not, cannot feel what tortures me.CLAUDE.Dost thou avoid me, Malcolm ? Dost thou thinkThat kindness to my sister can offend me ?MALCOLM.I've other thoughts, which do no wrong to thee,And owe thee no account. \JRxit.CLAUDE (aside.He is offended. aloud to MARIAN.) Thanks toyou, dear madam !For your kind care of Alice. Rest, I hope,Will perfectly restore her. The fatigueOf her long journey, and the evening pastimeHas been too much for one so delicate.(To ALICE.)Undress and go to bed, poor harass' d creature !I trust tomorrow thou wilt wake refresh'd.268 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.ALICE.I hope so too, dear Claude ; and so good night.Remain no longer here. \ Exit CLAUDE.] I 'mglad he *s gone.\ A peal of thunder as beforeThat awful sound again ! she 's on her way :But storm or thunderbolt can do no harmTo disembodied spirits.MARIAN.I may not leave thee here, my gentle friend ;In my apartment thou shalt pass the night.Come then with me : I dare not leave thee here,Where, sleeping or awake, thou hast receivedSome painful shock. Rise : lean upon my arm.[Exeunt.SCENE IV.A rudely paved Court, with a low Building infront. The Stage perfectly dark, and thunderheard at a distance.Enter MALCOLM, who goes to the door of thebuilding, and knocks.MALCOLM.Ho ! Bullock ! art thou waking ? Rouse thee,Bullock !I hear him snoring in his heavy sleep,THE PHANTOM: A DRAMA. 269Press* d with the glutton feasting of the day.(Knocking louder than before')Canst thou not hear? Holla! ho! rouse thee,Bullock !The heavy sluggard ! Ha ! he's stirring now.(Laying his ear close to the door')CULLOCH (within).Who 's there ?MALCOLM.It is thy master ?CULLOCH.What is wanted ?It is not morning yet.MALCOLM.That drawling voice !He is not yet awake. (Very loud.) Rise, man,immediately:Open the door, and do what I desire thee.(To himself, after a short pause.)Six hours upon my gallant steed will endThis agony of doubt. I'll know my fateJoy or despair. He is asleep again.(Knocking as before")Make haste, make haste, I say ! inert and sluggish!O that, like spirits, on the tempest borne,The transit could be made ! Alas ! alas !If what I fear hath happen'd, speed or stillness,270 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Or day or midnight, every circumstanceOf mortal being will to me be nothing.Not ready yet ! Ha ! now I see the light.slight seen from the window')Six hours of my brave steed, and if my fearsAre then confirmed forgive me, noble creature!We'll lay our burdens down and die together.enter CULLOCH slowly from the building,rubbing his eyes with one hand, and holdinga candle In the othersHaste, tardy creature ! art thou sleeping still ?CULLOCH.What is your honour's will ? O hone ! O hone !It is a murky night.MALCOLM.I know it is.Unlock the stable door, and saddle quicklyMy gallant Oscar. thunder againstCULLOCH.Does your honour hear it ?MALCOLM.Hear what ?CULLOCH.The thunder growling o'er Tenore :And that was lightning too that flared so fleetly :The welkin's black as pitch.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 271MALCOLM.And let it growl ; and be the welkin pall'dIn sackcloth ! To the spot where I am goingWe '11 find the way by instinct. Linger not :Do what I have desired thee instantly.CULLOCH.Ay, ay ! the saddle upon Oscar's back.The bran new saddle would your honour have ?MALCOLM.Yes, fool, and set about it instantly.[Exit CULLOCH.These dark and heavy boding of my mindCome from no natural bent of apprehension.It must be so. Yet, be it dream or vision,Unmeaning chance, or preternatural notice,As oft hath been vouchsafed, if living seersOr old tradition lie not, this uncertaintyEre morning dawn would drive my brain distracted,Were I inactively to wait for day ;Therefore, to horse !(Thunder louder than beforeThat sound is in accordance with the stormIn this perturbed breast. Is it not ominousOf that which soon shall strike me to the dust,A blasted lonely remnant ?Methinks he should ere this time flies apace ;The listless sluggard must be urged to hastenHis so unwilling task. [Exit hastily.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.ACT II.SCENE I. The Cross of Glasgow. A greatcrowd of people are discovered, and bellsheard tolling occasionally from the neighbouringchurches.FIRST CROWD.Ah ! woe is me ! so bonnie and so young !Of all that death hath ta'en in this fell ravage,None hath he ta'en that seem'd so ill to suitThe coffin and the mould. Ah ! woe is me !SECOND CROWD.Ay, neighbour, she was one mark'd from themall.Though we have many fair and gracious ladies,We had not one who could be paired with her :The bonniest lass in all the west of Scotland.FIRST CROWD.Ay, thou may'st say, the bonniest and the best.THIRD CROWD.Nay, softly, David ! for the point of goodness,That is a matter, on her burial day,We may not question ; yet, if it be trueTHE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.FIRST CROWD.If it be true ! It is not : nought is trueThat can throw speck or spot upon her virtue.FIRST CROWD WOMAN (/O First CROWD).Be not so angry, man ; my husband meansAgainst her maiden virtue no reproach,Ev'n if her faith was lavishly inclined.FIRST CROWD.She was no Parish ; I'll take oath upon it.The cloven foot of Satan in my shoeIs at this point of time as surely buckled,As that she was aught but a pure believer,A good and godly lady.FIRST CROWD WOMAN.That gentleman, so brave and soldierly,Who lately has return'd from foreign wars,Is a rank Romanist, and has been oftReceived by her. But, Lord preserve us all !We, by God's grace, may sit by Satan's side,Ay, on the self-same settle, yet, the while,Be ne'er one whit the worse.THIRD CROWD.And I should guess -SECOND CROWD.Hist, hist ! the funeral 's coming :I hear the heavy wheels, and o'er the topOf all those cluster'd heads I see the feathers,VOL. II. TTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.The snow-white feathers of the high-coped hearseMove slowly. Woe the day ! oh, woe the day !How changed her state ! She was on milk-whitesteedMounted right gallantly, with cap and plume,When I beheld her last.VOICE (without.Make way, good folks, and let the ladies pass.SECOND CROWD (to him without.None can pass here on horseback.VOICE (without.It is the Provost's family : make way.SECOND CROWD (as before.An 'twere the king's, they must dismount, I trow,Or wait till the procession be gone by.Enter ALICE, MARIAN, and CLAUDE.CLAUDE (to CROWD).What makes so great a concourse? and thosebellsTo toll so dismally ? Whose funeralAre ye convened to see ?FIRST CROWD.Ah, Sir ! the fairest lady of the place.I warrant you have seen her many a time ;They call'd her Emma Graham.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.CLAUDE.It cannot be ! What didst thou call her ? Speak ;Repeat her name.FIRST CROWD.Her name is Emma Graham ; her father is -CLAUDE.No more ! no more ! too well I comprehend it.And death hath dealt his blow on what was life'sCompletest, dearest, best.(Covers his face with his cloak.)MARIAN (turning to ALICE, and supporting her).Dear Alice, thou art pale, and faint, and ill :Lean upon me, my friend.ALICE.Think not of me : poor Claude ! my heart-struckbrother !His wound is deep and sudden : for this strokeI was prepared.VOICES (without),Stand back ; stand closer : it is now at hand.[A funeral procession crosses the Stage ; theMourners following the hearse on foot']FIRST CROWD.Ah ! never corse was follow' d to the graveWith deeper sorrow !FIRST CROWD WOMAN.Ay, tears are following tears down manly cheeks,276 THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.As goats fall in Saint Mungo's dripping aisle,Near which the grave is dug that shall receiveher.FIRST CROWD.That is her grey-hair'd father, so bow'd down ;And those her brothers walking by his side.SECOND CROWD.Then all the kindred walking, two and two.THIRD CROWD.But who is he that follows after all,In mourner's cloak so muffled to the eyes ?He walks alone, not mated like the rest ;And yet, methinks, his gait and motion sayThe greatest weight of grief falls to his share.CLAUDE.God knows who hath the greatest share! Nothe. (Pushing eagerly through the crowd')ALICE.Where goes thou, Claude ? (Endeavouring tohold kern.)CLAUDE.Prevent me not. Shall mourning weeds aloneHave privilege, and sorrow be debarr'd.\JExit hastily after the funeral, and the crowddisperses different ways, ALICE, MARIAN,and their Servants alone occupying thefront of the Stage.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. ^77MARIAN.Dear Alice ! how thou trembles every limb,As in an ague fit !ALICE.It was no dream jIt was no strong delusion of the fancy*MARIAN.This is indeed an awful confirmation.But stay no longer here : go to thy home jThou hast great need of rest.ALICE.I have more need,Within my closet, on my bended knees,To pray for mercy on my sinful self,And those to me most dear, poor sinners all.This is a sad and awful visitation.MARIAN.But didst thou not expect to find it so ?I thought thou wert prepared.ALICE.I thought so too ;But certainty makes previous expectationSeem, by comparison, a state of hope.MARIAN.We now are free to hold upon our waysLet us proceed : come on with me, dear Alice.[Exeunt.T 3278 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SCENE II.The House of the PROVOST, and the Apartmentof CLAUDE, 'who enters, followed &y CRAWFORD,and throws, himself back into a chair with theaction of deep distress.CLAUDE.Follow me not, my friend ; it is in vainThat friendly soothing would assuage my grief.CRAWFORD.Grieve not for that which is, indeed, mostgrievous,Beyond all measure.CLAUDE.Can we measure grief,And say, So much of it shall be my portion,And only this ? A prudent, lesson'd sorrow,Usurps the name it bears. She was the lightThat brighten' d every object ; made this worldA place worth living in. This beauteous flameHath in the socket sunk : I am in darkness,And no returning ray shall cheer my sight.This earth, and every thing that it contains,Is a dull blank around me.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.CRAWFORD.Say not so !It grieves my heart to hear thee. Say not so.CLAUDE.I will not grieve thee then ; I *11 hold my tongue jBut shall I feel the less ? Oh, had she lived !CRAWFORD.Perhaps she had but caused thee greater sorrow ;For how would'st thou have brook'd to see herhand,Had it so been, bestow' d upon another ?CLAUDE.Why should I entertain a thought so painful ?(Raising his head proudly, after a thoughtfulpause')Yes, I can entertain it, and believeThat, even as another's, it were happinessTo see her yet alive ; to see her stillLooking as never eyes but hers did look ;Speaking such words as she alone could speak,Whose soften'd sounds thrill'd through thenerves, and dwelt,When heard no more, on the delighted fancy,Like chanted sweetness ! All is now extinct !Like some base thing, unmeet for mortal eye,The sod hath covered all. (After a thoughtfulpause Hath cover' d all !280 THE PHANTOM: A DRAMA.CRAWFORD.Dear Claude ! why wilt thou dwell on things sodismal ?Let me read to thee from some pious book ;Wilt thou permit me ? (He remains silent andthoughtfully Dost thou hear me, Claude?CLAUDE (muttering to himself, without attendingto CRAWFORD).The sexton has the key ; and if he had not,The wall may yet be clear'd.The banded mourners scatter to their homes,Where kinsfolk meet, and social hearths blazebright,And leave the grave in midnight loneliness ;But should it be ?CRAWFORD (listening to him).I understand these words :But if he go, he shall not go alone.Enter a Servant.CLAUDE (impatiently).What brings thee here ?SERVANT.A gentleman desires to see you, Sir.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 281CLAUDE.Tell him I am gone forth. Such ill-timed visits !Is the sore heart a sear'd and harden'd thingFor every fool to handle ? [Exit.CRAWFORD.I '11 follow him : he should not be alone.[Exeunt.SCENE III.A large Room, with rich furniture, and the wallshung with pictures.Enter the PROVOST and MARIAN, by differentdoors.PROVOST.How is poor Alice ?MARIAN.She is more composed ;For tears have flow'd un check' d, and have relievedher.I have persuaded her to take an hourOf needful rest upon her bed ; and Jessie,That kindly creature, watches her the while.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.PROVOST.Ay, that is right. And now, my right good lady,Let me in plain but grateful words repeat,That your great kindness, leaving thus yourhome,And taking such a journey for the comfortOf my poor child, is felt by me most truly,As it deserves. May God reward you for it !MARIAN.I will not, Sir, receive such thanks unqualified ;They are not due to me. Regard for Alice,And who that knows her feels not such regard,Was closely blended with another motive,When I determined on this sudden journey.PROVOST.Another motive !MARIAN.Has not Claude informed you,That Malcolm left Dunarden secretly,The night before we did ourselves set forth ?PROVOST.He has not. Ha ! and wot you where he went ?MARIAN.I wot not, but I guess : and it was he,As I am almost confident, who walk'dThe last of all the mourners, by himself,In this day's sad procession.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 283PROVOST (pulling a letter hastily from his pocket.Madam, sit down ; I '11 cast mine eyes againO'er this your father's letter. Pray sit down !I may not see you thus. (Setting a chair withmuch courtesy, and obliging her to sit,whilst he goes aside and reads a letterearnestly. He then returns to her.}My friend has many words of courtesy ;It is his habit ; but subtracting from themThe plain unvarnished sense, and thereto addingWhat, from this secret journey of your brother,May be inferred, the real truth is thisAt least it so appears to my poor reason(Preventing her as she rises from her seatedNay, sit, I pray you, Lady Auchinmore ;We '11 talk this matter over thoroughly,And leave no bashful doubts hid in a corner,For lack of honest courage to produce them.(Sits down by her.)MARIAN.Proceed, good Sir, I listen earnestly.PROVOST.As it appears to me, the truth is this,That Malcolm, whom your father doth admit,Albeit a great admirer of my daughter,To be at present somewhat disinclinedTo give up youthful liberty so early,As he from more acquaintance with her virtues284* THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.Ere long will of his own accord desire,(Pointing to the letter') so he expresses it.MARIAN.And with sincerity.PROVOST.Well, grant it, Lady !The truth doth nevertheless appear to be,That this young gallant, Malcolm of Dunarden,With all her virtues, loves not Alice Denison,And loves another.MARIAN.Rather say, hath loved.PROVOST.I '11 not unsay my words. His heart is with her.Low as she lies : arid she who won his heartFrom such a maid as Alice Denison,Will keep it too, ev'n in her shroud. No, no fWe've spread our vaunting sails against the wind,And cannot reach our port but with such perilAs will overmatch the vantage.MARIAN,Say not so.Time will make all things as we wish to havethem.PROVOST.Time works rare changes, which they may abideWho are intent upon them. Shall I carryMy vessel where her cargo is not wanted ?THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.Tobacco to th' Antipodes, and waitTill they have learnt to use and relish it ?Shall I do this, when other marts are near,With open harbours ready to receive her ?MARIAN.Dear Sir, you must not think I will assentTo what would mar the long and cherish'd wishOf me and mine. And we had fondly hopedThat you had been desirous of this unionBetween our families.PROVOST.Your father won my friendship years ago,When with his goodly mien and belted plaid,His merry courtesy and stately step,He moved amongst our burghers at the Cross,As though he had been chieftain o'er us all ;And I have since enjoy'd his hospitality,In his proud mountain hold.MARIAN.I recollect it : proud and glad he wasOf such a guest.PROVOST.Dost thou ? Ay, then it was,That, seeing his fair stripling by his sideA graceful creature, full of honest senseAnd manly courage I did like the notion,That Alice, then a little skipping child,With years before her still to play about me,286 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Should in some future time become the ladyOf that young Highland chief. But years bringthoughtsOf a more sober and domestic hue.Why should I covet distant vanities,And banish from my sight its dearest object?(Rising from his chair') Have you observedthose pictures ?MARIAN (rising also).I have. They are the portraits of your parents :Their features bear resemblance to your own.PROVOST.My mother's do : and look at her, dear Madam !With all the bravery of that satin dressClasp'd up with jewels, and those roses stuckAmongst her braided hair, she was the daughterAnd sober heiress of a saving burgher,Whose hoarded pelf in my brave father's handsRaised such industrious stir in this good city,As changed her from a haunt of listless sluggardsTo the fair town she is. What need have ITo eke my consequence with foreign matches ?Alice shall wed, I hope, some prosperous merchant,And live contentedly, my next door neighbour,With all her imps about her.MARIAN.Wed whom she may, I hope she will be happy.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 287PROVOST.I do believe that is your hearty wish :And having plainly told you what I thinkOf this projected match, as it concernsMy daughter and myself, I will proceedTo that which may concern my ancient friend.Should any mortgage press on his estate,Or any purchase of adjoining landsMake money a desired object with him,He need but speak the word ; at easy int'restHe shall receive what sums he may require,And need not fear that I shall e'er distress himWith hard ill-timed demands. In faith, he neednot!MARIAN.Dear Sir, he knows full well your gen'rous heartHath for its minister a liberal hand :In truth, he would not fear to be your debtor.PROVOST.Not all the rum and sugar of Jamaica,In one huge warehouse stored, should make mepress him,Though apt occasion offer* d e'er so temptingly.Then why should Malcolm bend his youthfulneckTo wedlock's yoke for sordid purposes ?The boy shall be my friend ; and when his mindIs free to think upon another love,I'll guide him to a very comely lady288 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Yea, more than one, that he may have a choiceWho may prove both a match of love and profit;But, hear you plainly, not to Alice Denison.MARIAN.Oh, you are kind and noble ! but my fatherPROVOST.Say nought for him ; he '11 answer for himself :And through his maze of friendly compliments,I '11 trace at last his veritable thoughts.(Taking her hand kindly')Now, having thus so plainly told my mind,Look on me as a man to whom againYou may as freely speak.MARIAN.And so I will :The happiness of one, dear to us both,Requires that I should do it.PROVOST (surprised).How so ? is it of Alice you would speak ?MARIAN.Yes, but another time j for here comes Jessie.Enter JESSIE.(To JESSIE.) How is she now ? I hope she isasleep.JESSIE.She has not slept, but lies composed and easy,And wishes now to see you. [Exit MARIAN.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 289PROVOST.How art thou, Jessie ?JESSIE.Well, an' please your honour.PROVOST.I hear thou hast become a Highland lass ;But, if thou really like the Lowlands better,Thy native country, tell me honestly :I'll make thy husband, whomsoever thou choose,A freeman of this town. If he have brains,And some few marks beside, he'll thrive upon it.JESSIE.I thank you, Sir ; his marks are few indeed.PROVOST.Well, never mind ; let us but have the brains,And we will make the best of it. Poor Jessie !I well remember thee a barefoot girl,With all thy yellow hair bound in a snood.Thy father too.JESSIE.Do you remember him ?PROVOST.Yes, Saunders Fairly. Better man than SaundersIn factory or warehouse never bustled.VOL. II. U290 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Enter Servant.PROVOST.What is the matter, Archly ? On thy faceThou dearest a curious grin : what is the matter ?SERVANT.The bailie bid me to inform your honour,The country hucksters and the market wivesHave quarrell'd, and are now at deadly strife,With all the brats and schoolboys of the townShouting and bawling round them.PROVOST.Good sooth ! whene'er those wives with handsand tongueJoin in the fray, the matter must be look'd to.I will be with them soon.[Exit Servant.To think now of those creatures !Ev'n at the time when death is in the cityDoing his awful work, and our sad streetsBlacken'd with funerals, that they must quarrelAbout their worldly fractions ! Woe is me !For all our preaching and our Sabbath worship,We are, I fear, but an ungodly race.Enter another Servant.And what has brought thee, too ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SERVANT.There is a woman come from Anderson,Whose neighbour, on pretence of some false debt,Has ruined her good milch cow, her only cow.PROVOST.Is that a case to occupy my time ?Let her go with it to the younger bailie.SERVANT.I told her so, your honour, but she weeps,And says the younger bailie is so proud,She dare not speak to him.PROVOST.Poor simpleton ! Well then, I needs must seeher.Re-enter First Servant.Tut ! here again ! What is the matter now ?FIRST SERVANT.A servant all cross' d o'er wi' livery lace,As proud and grand as any trumpeter,Is straight from Blantyre come, and says, myLordWould greatly be obliged, if that your honour-wouldput off hearing of that suit tomorrow,As he must go to Edinburgh.PROVOST.Tell the messengeru 2THE PHANTOM ! A DRAMA.To give my humble service to his lordship,And say, I could not, but with great injusticeTo the complaining party, grant delay,Who, being poor, should not be further burden'dWith more attendance ; I will therefore hearThe cause tomorrow, at the hour appointed.Exit First, and re-enter Second Servant.Still more demands ! For what foul sin of mineWas I promoted to this dignity ?From morn till eve, there is no peace for me.[Exit PROVOST, speaking to tie Servantsas they go out.SCENE IV.Before the walls of a Churchyard, a narrow ironGate at the bottom of the Stage, behind whichthe gleaming of a Torch is faintly seen ; thefront of the Stage entirely dark. SolemnMusic is heard, as the Scene opens.Enter a SEXTON, with he's, followed by CLAUDEand CRAWFORD.CLAUDE.Music ! and from the spot ! what may it be ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SEXTON.Leave was requested that a solemn dirgeShould be this night sung by some grave ; butwhose,Or e'en by whom requested, I am ignorant.Some Papist, like enough : but what of that?CRAWFORD (/O SEXTON).How many graves thou 'st made in one shortweek !Thou hast been busy in thy sad vocation.SEXTON.I have, good sooth ! and knew it would be so,A month before the fell disease began.CRAWFORD.How knew it?SEXTON.He, the sighted man from Skye,Was in the town ; and, at the crowded cross,Fell into strong convulsions, at the sightWhich there appear'd to him.CRAWFORD.What did he see ?SEXTON.Merchants, and lairds, and deacons, makingbargains,And setting tristes, and joking carelessly,Swathed in their shrouds ; some to the very chin,Some breast-high, others only to the loins.u 394 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.It was a dismal, an appalling sight ;And when I heard of it, I knew right wellMy busy time was coming.CLAUDE (to SEXTON, impatiently).Didst thou sayThat leave has been requested for a dirgeTo be this night sung by some Papist's grave ?SEXTON.Papist or not I cannot surely say,I ask'd no questions.CRAWFORD.Having cause, no doubt,To be well satisfied no harm would ensue.SEXTON.No harm. In this retired nook it cannotAnnoy the living ; and for the departed,Nought can disturb their rest.CRAWFORD.Hast thou not heard of restless souls returning ?Perhaps thou 'st seen it, during thirty yearsIn which thou hast been sexton of this parish.SEXTON.In all that time I ne'er could say with certaintyThat aught of such a nature pass'd before me ;But I have seen uncertain shadows moveTHE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.As 't were confusedly, and heard strangesounds,Stranger than wind or natural cause could utter.CRAWFORD.And thou wert sure they were unnatural sounds ?And hast thou heard them often ?SEXTON.Many times :But that was in the first years of mine office.I am not now alarm'd : use makes me feelAs if no harm could e'er befall the sexton :And ev'n my wife will in dark winter nightsEnter the church alone and toll the bell.CRAWFORD.And ne'er has been alarm'd by any sightOf apparition or unearthly thing ?SEXTON.Yes ; she was once alarm'd.CRAWFORD (eagerly.And what appear'd ?SEXTON.It was, as nearly as I can remember,Upon a Friday night -CRAWFORD (quickly).Ne'er mind the night : what was it that she saw?u 4THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SEXTON.Nay, she herself saw nothing ; but the dogThat follow'd her bark'd briskly, then stopp'dshort,And, with a kind of stifled choking howl,Look'd in her face, and then cowered by her side,Trembling for fear ; and then right well she knewSome elrich thing was near her, though its formWas only visible to the poor brute.CRAWFORD.You think the dog saw something.SEXTON.Certes did he IAnd had he not been dumb, he could, no doubt,Have told a tale to set our hair on end.CLAUDE (who, during their discourse, has beenpacing to and fro impatiently, to SEXTON).You know not who it was ?SEXTON.The Lord preserve us, Sir ! for she saw nothing.CLAUDE.What dost thou mean ? Could'st thou not guess,at least,Who *t was who made request to chant the dirge?SEXTON.Ay, ay ! the dirge. In truth I cannot say,It was a man I never saw before.THE PHANTOM *. A DRAMA. 297CLAUDE (eagerly.Stately, and of a stature somewhat tallerThan middle size, of countenance somewhatyoungerThan middle age ?SEXTON.No ; short, and grave, and ancient, like a priestFrom foreign parts. (Music sounds againstCRAWFORD.Be still and hear the dirge.Dirge, sung by several Voices without.Dear spirit ! freed from earthy cell,From mortal thraldom freed ;.The blessed Virgin keep thee well,And thy dread passage speed !Quick be thy progress, gentle soul !Through purifying pain,To the saved Christian's happy goal,Thy Father's bright domain !Beloved on earth ! by love redeem'd,Which earthly love transcends,Earth's show, the dream that thou hast dream'd,In waking transport ends.Then, bathed in fountains of delight,May'st thou God's mercy prove,His glory open'd to thy sight,And to thy heart his love !298 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.There may thy blessed dwelling be,For ever to endureWith those who were on earth like thee,The guileless and the pure !Dear spirit ! from thy earthy cell,From mortal thraldom freed, &c. &c.CLAUDE (seeing the light disappear.They are all gone at last : unlock the gate.(The SEXTON applies the ~key> but in vainlyCanst thou not open it ? what is the matter ?SEXTON.I *ve brought a key made for another gate ;Woe worth my stupid head !CLAUDE.I '11 climb the wall.SEXTON.Be not so very hasty, please your honour.This key unlocks the southern gate : I pray youTo follow me, and you will soon have entrance.Woe worth my stupid head ! \ Exeunt.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 299SCENE V.The Churchyard, near the walls of St. Mungo'sChurch, which occupies the bottom of the Stage.A newly covered Grave is dimly seen near thefront ; the Stage darkened, but not entirely so ;a degree of light, as from a new-risen moon inacloudy night, showing objects imperfectly.Enter MALCOLM, who bends over the grave forsome time in silence.MALCOLM.And here beneath this trampled sod she lies,Stiffened, and cold, and swathed in coffin-weeds,Who, short while since, moved like a gleam ofbrightness,Lighting each face, and cheering every heart.Oh, Emma, Emma Graham, is this thy place ?Dearer than thee a lover's soul ne'er worshipp'dFairer than thee a virgin's robe ne'er wrapt ;Better than thee a parent's tongue ne'er bless'd.Oh, Emma Graham, the dearest, fairest, best !Pair'd with thee in the dance, this hand in thine,I've led thee through the whirl of mazy transport,And o'er thy chair have hung with wistful ear,Catching thy words like strains of melody,To be with fancy's treasures stored for ever.I've waited near thy portal many an hour,300 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.To see thy hasty transit from its stepsTo the grim gaping coach, that seem'd to swallow,Like a leviathan, its beauteous prey.And now, alas ! I come to seek thee here !I come to seek thee here, but not to find.This heart, which yearns through its ribb'd fenceto breakInto the darken' d cell where thou art laidIn Nature's thraldom, is from thee dividedAs by a gulf impassable. Oh, oh !So short a time ! such fearful, sad transition !My day is turn'd to night ; my youth to age ;May life to death be the next welcome change !(Throws himself on the grave in a burst ofsorrow')Sweet love, who sleep 'st beneath, canst thou nothear me ?Oh, if thou couldst ! Alas! alas! thou canst not !(After a pause, and half-raising himself from thegrave')But! is it well, and is it holy, thus,On such a sacred spot, to mourn the dead,As lost and perish'd treasure ? God forgive me !The silver lamp, with all its rich embossmentsOf beauteous workmanship, is struck and broken,But is the flame extinguished ? God forgive me !Forgive a wretched and distracted man,And grant me better thoughts ! The unclothedspiritIn blessed purity hath still existence.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 301Perhaps, in its high state is not unconsciousOf what remains behind ; perhaps, beholdsThe very spot. Oh, if she does! her pityHer pity, yea, her love now rest upon me.Her spirit, from the body newly freed,Was in my father's house, ere it departedTo its celestial home ; was it not sympathy ?O ! Emma, Emma ! could I surely knowThat I was dear to thee, a word, a tokenHad been to me a cherish'd, rich possession,Outlying all that martial chiefs contend forOn their embattled fields. Ha! who approaches?Enter CLAUDE.Come not, I warn thee, near this sacred spot.(Springing up from the ground.)CLAUDE.A sacred spot, indeed ! but yet to allWho loved in life the dead whom it contains,Free as the house of God.MALCOLM.I say it is not.In this, her first night of the grave, the manWho loved her best when living, claims a rightTo watch the new-closed tomb, and none beside.CLAUDE.Then yield to me that right, for it is mine ;For I have loved her longest, long ere thouHadst look'd upon her face, or heard her name.302 THE PHANTOM: A DRAMA.MALCOLM.'T is not the date, but potency of loveWhich bears account : I say, approach no nearer.CLAUDE.Must I endure such passion ? Frantic man !Are we not both in grief smitten to the earth ?May we not both weep o'er this sacred spot,Partners in wretchedness ?MALCOLM.Away, away ! I own no partnership ;He who hath spoke such word hath therebyprovedThe poorness of his love. Approach no nearer.I'll yield my heart's blood rather than resignThis my sad eminence in widow'd sorrow.CLAUDE.Dar'st thou to hinder me ? vMALCOLM.I dare and will.(TJiey grapple fiercelyEnter CRAWFORD.CRAWFORD (separating them.For shame ! for shame ! to hold contention here !Mutual affliction should make friends of foes,Not foes of friends. The grave of one belovedTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 303Should be respected ev'n as holy ground,Should have a charm to smother all resentment.MALCOLM.And so it should, and shall. Forgive me,Claude ;I have been froward in my wretchedness.CLAUDE.And I, dear Malcolm, was to blame, so suddenlyTo break upon thy sorrow.CRAWFORD.The provost hath despatch' d a messengerUpon our track, who found me out ev'n now,Requesting both of you to give your presenceOn an occasion solemn and important.CLAUDE.What may it be ?CRAWFORD.Within the late apartment of the dead,Your sister has a duty to perform,Enjoin' d her by the dead. And 'tis her wishThat ye should both be present.CLAUDE and MALCOLM (together).We will obey her shortly. Go before us.\JExit CRAWFORD and MALCOLM ; andCLAUDE, after bending in silence for afew moments over the grave, follows them.304 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.SCENE VI.An Apartment, the walls of which are lined withoak, and partly hung with arras.Enter a Maid Servant, carrying a lamp and abasket, <$c.MAID (speaking as she enters).I trow, when we have burnt this second parcel,The sickly air must needs be purified.But what does all this fuming signify,Since we must die at our appointed time ?What dost thou think (looking round and seemingalarmed') She has not followed me.I thought she was behind me. Lord preserve us !Here in this ghastly chamber all alone !(Going to the door and callingsArt thou not coming, Marjory? Where art thou ?I say, where art thou ? I have need of thee.Enter a Second Maid.SECOND MAID.Why didst thou call so loud ? What is the matter ?THE PHANTOM: A DRAMA. 305FIRST MAID.I thought thou wert behind me : mercy on us !A kind of qualm came o'er me, when I look'dOn all within this silent dismal room,And to that corner where the death-bed stood,A sudden qualm came o'er me.SECOND MAID.Let us be busy there 's no time to lose ;The provost and his daughter will be hereEre we have done our work.they take gums and dried herbs from thebasket, which they set Lire to by the lamp,and fumigate the chamber, speaking thewhile occasionally"]FIRST MAID.The Lord preserve us ! 't is an awful thing.SECOND MAID.It was a sudden call : so young, so good !FIRST MAID.Ay, many a sore heart thinks of her this night.SECOND MAID.And he, the most of all, that noble gentleman :Lord pardon him for being what he is !FIRST MAID.And what is that ?SECOND MAID.A rank and Roman papistVOL. II. X306 THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.FIRST MAID.The Lord forgive him that, if it be so !And quickly, too ; for this same deadly fever,As I hear say, has seized upon him also.Enter PROVOST.PROVOST.That 5 s well, good damsels ; you have done yourtaskRight thoroughly : a wholesome, fragrant smellIs floating all about. Where is your master ?FIRST MAID.In his own chamber. When he knows yourhonourIs in the house, he will attend you presently.SECOND MAID.And it will do him good to see your honour.PROVOST.1 fear, my joe, the good that I can do him,Or ev'n the minister, if lie were here,Would be but little. Grief must have its time.Some opiate drug would be to him, I reckon,Worth all my company, and something more.Howbeit, I '11 go to him. My good old friend !My heart bleeds for him. Ye have done enough jThe ladies are at hand.\JE*ocit by the opposite side.THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA. 307Enter ALICE and MARIAN.MARIAN.Take hold of me ; thy summon'd strength, I fear,Forsakes thee now. (She supports ALICE, andthey walk slowly to the middle of the room.)Ay, thou look'st round, as if in search of something?ALICE.They have removed it.MARIAN.What have they removed ?ALICE.The bed on which she lay. Oh, woe is me !The last time I was in this chamber, Marian,Becoming suddenly, from some slight cause,A passing sufferer, she laid my headOn her own pillow, and her own soft handPress' d me so gently ; I was then the patient,And she the tender nurse. I little thoughtSo short a time Alas! my dear, dear friend!MARIAN.Short time indeed for such a dismal change :I may not chide thy tears.ALICE.Here are the virginals on which she play'd j308 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.And here 's her music, too. (Taking up a bookfrom the virginals, and opening zY.) Ah,woe is me !The very tune which last she played to meHas open'd to my hand, and 'twixt the leavesThe little flower lies press' d which then I gaveher!MARIAN.'T is sweet to find it so.ALICE.But, oh ! how sad !She was she was (Bursting into tears.)Well may I weep for her !MARIAN.Be comforted, dear Alice ! she is goneWhere neither pain nor woe can touch her more.ALICE.I know I know it well : but she is gone !She who was fair, and gifted, and beloved :And so beloved ! Had it been Heaven's blestwillTo take me in her stead, tears had been shed,But what had been their woe, compared to this ?MARIAN.Whose woe, dear Alice ?THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 309ALICE.His woe their woe; poor Claude's, and Malcolm'stoo.Death seizes on the dearest and the best !MARIAN (embracing her).I will not hear thee say so, gentle Alice.A dearer and a better than thyself*T were hard to find. No ; nor do I believeThat she whom thou lamented did surpass thee.ALICE.Hush ! say it not ! I pray thee, say not so :In pitying me thou must not rob the dead.That he preferr'd a creature of such excellence,Took from the wound its sting and bitterness.Thou may'st not wrong the dead !MARIAN.I will not, then.ALICE (looking round).There is the arras which conceals the place :Her awful words are sounding in my ears,Which bade me search. I feel a secret awe !But that her spirit from the earth hath ta'enAs I am well assured its final leave,I could believe that she is near me still,To see the very act ! (Looking round herfearfully.'}MARIAN.Nay, check thy ardent fancy : 't is not goodx 3310 THE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.To let such dismal notions haunt thee soThy father comes, with his afflicted friend.Enter PROVOST, leading GRAHAM by the hand.[ALICE advances affectionately to GRAHAM,who opens his arms to receive her, and sheweeps upon his neck, without speaking.She then leads him to a chair, and seatsherself upon a stool at his feet, taking hishand in hers, and bending over it, whilethe PROVOST and MARIAN remain in thefront']PROVOST (looking at them).That poor old man ! he utters not a wordOf sorrow or complaint ; and all the moreI grieve for him. God help him ! in whose handsThe hearts of men are kept.MARIAN.And he is help'd, for he is weeping now.PROVOST.He did not weep when we for him were weeping,And he will weep when all our tears are dried.Our two young men, methinks, are long ofcoming.MARIAN.But are you sure your messenger hath foundthem?THE PHANTOM: A DRAMA. 311PROVOST.I scarcely doubt it. I have those in pay,But little better than the prey they follow,Who are expert in dogging stealthy rogues ;And it were strange indeed if artless menShould foil their skill.And I am right I hear their coming steps !Enter MALCOLM and CLAUDE.MALCOLM (after doing silent obeisance to thePROVOST and GRAHAM, who, with ALICE,comes forward to meet them, speaks in a lowvoice to CLAUDE).And here, night after night, in all her beauty,She took her curtain'd rest, and here she died !But that which I expected is not here :Is this the very chamber ?ALICE (overhearing him, and in a low voice).It is : but what thou look'st for is removed.(Pointing Upon that spot it stood.MALCOLM.Yes, thou hast read my thought, most gentleAlice !(Goes to the spot, where he remains in silence,covering his face with his handsPROVOST.Shall we not now proceed upon the businessTHE PHANTOM I A DRAMA.For which we are convened ?(To GRAHAM.) To you, my ancient friend, Ihave explained it.Malcolm and Claude, know ye why in thischamberYour presence has been solemnly requested ?CLAUDE.I guess it well. My sister has informed meOf Emma's last request ; and I to Malcolm,As we came hither, have repeated it.PROVOST (to ALICE).Now, dearest child ! it is for thee to act.(Leads ALICE to the bottom of the Stage,where, taking aside the arras which coversthe wall, a small door is discoveredCLAUDE (to MALCOLM, seeing him take a bookfrom a bookcase.Why dost thou snatch that book so eagerly ?MALCOLM.It is the book I praised to her so muchA short while since; and see, she has procured it !CLAUDE.Ah ! thou may'st well be proud. But how isthis?Thy countenance all o* the sudden changed ![MALCOLM lets the book drop from his hand,and CLAUDE takes it up eagerly, and opensit, readingsTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 313"The gift of one most dear." Of one mostdear !Thou didst not it give to her ?MALCOLM.No ; nor thou !MARIAN.Hush, hush ! words of ungentle rivalryDo ill become this solemn place. Be calm.See ! Alice in the cabinet hath foundThat which the vision form so earnestlyDirected her to search for.[ALICE, returning to the front with a smallbox in her hands, places it on a table, therest gathering eagerly round her, and endeavoursto open it"]ALICE.I know this box ; alas ! I know it well,And many a time have open'd it ; but nowPROVOST.Thy hands have lost all power, thou trembles so.(Talking it from her and from GRAHAM, whoattempts to assist her.)Nay, friend, thou trembles also : I will do it.(Opens the box, and takes out a written paper')OMNES.What is it ?PROVOST.Give me time to look upon it.THE PHANTOM *. A DRAMA.GRAHAM.Some deed or testament. Alas, poor childHad she prepared for such an early death ?PROVOST.It is no testament.MALCOLM (impatiently.What is it then ?CLAUDE.Nay, father, do not keep us in suspense !PROVOST.It is a formal contract of betrothment ;Vows sworn between herself and Basil Gordon.GRAHAM.That popish cadet of a hostile houseTo me and mine ! Let mine own eyes examineit.Contracted secretly ! to him contracted !But she is in her grave, and I - O God !Grant me with patience to endure thy chastening!Contracted! married!PROVOST.Not married ; no, a mutual solemn promise,Made to each other in the sight of Heaven.Thus run the words :{Reads.} " I, Basil Gordon, will no woman wedBut Emma Graham." Then follows her engagement:I, Emma Graham, will wed no other manTHE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 315Than Basil Gordon : yet will never marryBut with consent of my much honour'd father,When he, less prejudiced, shall know and ownThe worth of him I love."(Spreading out the papersThis is her writing, as you plainly see ;And this is Gordon's, for I know it well.GRAHAM (beating his breast.This blow ! this blow ! a Gordon and a papist !PROVOST.True, he is both : the last, I must confess,No trivial fault. Howbeit he is, in truth,A brave and noble gentleman.ALICE.Indeed he is, dear Sir. Your gentle EmmaCould love no other. Valiant in the field,As frequent foreign records have attested :Jn private conduct good and honourable ;And loving her he loved, as he has done,With ardent, tender constancyMALCOLM.Hold! hold!He loved her not by Heaven he loved her not !When all who ever knew her, drown'd in sorrow,Follow'd her hearse, he he alone was absent.Where was he then, I pray ?PROVOST.I '11 tell thee where :316 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Stretch'd on a sick-bed smitten by the sameMost pestilent disease that slew his mistress.MALCOLM.Ha! is it so! (Turning to CLAUDE.) Then wemust hold our peace.CLAUDE.And with each other be at peace, dear Malcolm :What is there now of rivalry between us?MALCOLM.Speak not so gently to me, noble Claude !I've been to thee so wayward and unjust,Thy kindness wrings the heart which it shouldsoften.(After a pause And all our fond delusion endsin this !We've tack'd our shallow barks for the samecourse;And the fair mimic isle, like Paradise,Which seem'd to beckon us, was but a bankOf ocean's fog, now into air dissolved !ALICE.No ; say not beckon* d. She was honourableAs she was fair : no wily woman's artDid e'er disgrace her worth : believe me, Malcolm.MALCOLM.Yes ; I believe thee, and I bless thee too,Thou best and loveliest friend of one so lovely !THE PHANTOM *. A DRAMA. 317Pardon me, dearest Alice ! generous Alice !Pardon the hasty error of a wordWhich had no meaning no intended meaningTo cast one shade of blame on thy dear friend ;For henceforth by no other appellationBut thy dear friend shall she be named by me.(Turning to GRAHAM.)And you, dear Sir ! look not so sternly sad.Her love outran her duty one short step,But would no farther go, though happinessWas thereby period. Though his house andyours,His creed and yours, were so at variance, still,She might expect his noble qualitiesWould in the end subdue a father's heart,Who did so fondly love her.GRAHAM.Cease ! I am weak, bereft, and desolate,A poor old man, my pride of wisdom sear'dAnd ground to dust: what power have I tojudge ?May God forgive me if I did amiss !CLAUDE (to PROVOST)Did Gordon see her ere she breathed her last ?PROVOST.He did. The nurse, who was her close attendant,318 THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA.Says, that he came by stealth into her chamber,And with her words and looks of tendernessExchanged, though near her last extremity.And there he caught the fatal malady.CLAUDE.A happy end for him, if it should prove so.Enter a Servant, who draws the PROVOST aside.PROVOST (aside to Servant).Thou hast a woeful face ! what has befallen ?[Servant speaks to him in a whisper']MARIAN (to ALICE).Thy father has received some woeful tidings.ALICE.I fear he has ; he stands in thoughtful silence.Father, how is 't ? your thoughts are very sad.PROVOST.Ay ; were this span of earthly being all,'T were sad to think how wealth and domination,Man's valour, landed pride, and woman's beauty,When over them the blighting wind hath pass'd,Are turned to vanity, and known no more ![The bell of a neighbouring Church tolls Jivetimes']MALCOLM.What bell is that?CLAUDE.Some spirit is released from mortal thraldom.THE PHANTOM : A DRAMA. 319ALICE.And passing on its way, we humbly hope,To endless happiness.PROVOST.I trust it is, though stern divines may doubt :'Tis Basil Gordon's knell ![The bell tolls again at measured intervals,and, after a solemn pause > the Curtaindrops]ENTHUSIASM:A COMEDY.IN THREE ACTS.VOL. II.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.LORD Barrymore.COLONEL Franklin.Blunt.SIR JOHN Croton.Clement.HUGH, a Boy.PATERSON, Servant of Colonel Franklin.MANHAUNSLET, a German Vagrant.Visitors, Servants, &c.WOMEN.LADY Barrymore.LADY SHREWDLY.Miss Franklin.MRS. BROWN.BARBARA, the Attendant of Miss FranJclandrVisitors, Servants, &c.ENTHUSIASM.ACT I.SCENE I. A Saloon, with a Glass Door openinginto a Garden in the bottom of the Stage.LORD Barrymore and LADY SHREWDLYare seen walking towards the House in earnestconversation, and enter by the said Door, speakingas they enter.LADY SHREWDLY.BUT, my dear Lord Worrymore, did you notknow all this before you married her ? and didyou not admire the charming ardour of hercharacter ?LORD Barrymore.Yes, Madam ; for things worthy of that ardourdid then engage her attention. The firsttime I beheld her, I believe I have told youbefore.ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.LADY SHREWDLY.True, my Lord ; I have heard you say thatthe first time you beheld her was in the paintinggallery of Mr. Rouge, where she stood rivettedwith admiration before the portrait of your Lordship; and that grace and expression attracted heratthat moment, I am not disposed to question.LORD Barrymore.Yes, my dear friend ; and in poetry also, andthe graver works of composition, nothing thatwas excellent escaped her. My speech upon theformer Corn Bill delighted her : not an argumentor happy expression in the whole that shecould not repeat with a spirit and action appropriate.She had a sound taste for eloquence ;nobody admired it like her.LADY SHREWDLY.How should they ? She must have had a capacitymade on purpose to admire that speech ;and a very rare one too, I assure you.LORD Barrymore.Not a word or observation fell from my lips,but she understood the sense and spirit of it soquickly.LADY SHREWDLY.Leaving any other listener far behind, I daresay.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.LORD Barrymore.And now, every learned oddity, every foolishcoxcomb who has gathered up in the world butashred of reputation for any thing, engrossesexclusively, for the time, her thoughts and admiration; and what / do, what / speak, what /write, is no more attended to, than if I hadchanged into a common-place person on herhands.LADY SHREWDLY.And that is what change could never make yourLordship.LORD Barrymore (bowing with affected modesty.To be sure, I then thought enthusiasm a verycharming quality.tLADY SHREWDLY.But not very constant to its object, my Lord ;you surely could not think that. You have hadyour turn, and should now with a better gracegive up some portion of her admiration to theother sages, orators, and poets with which thishappy metropolis abounds.LORD Barrymore.Sages, orators, and poets, Lady Shrewdly!She has been tearing the clothes off her back insqueezing through the crowd of a city conventicle,to hear the long-winded sermons of a press3S C 26 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.byterian parson. She has knocked up two setsof horses driving over the town after Italian and German philosophers. Her boudoiris studded round with skulls like a charnel-house; and bold dirty creatures from St. Gilescome into her very dressing-room, with theirrickety brats in their arms, to put their largemis-shapen heads under her inspection, as thefuture mighty geniuses of the land. Speakingbirds, giraffes, and lectures upon Shakspearehave followed one another in succession, to saynothing of her present little imp of a juggler;and all in their turn are the sole occupiers ofher ardent admiration. What a change! whata change for me ! With my poor deceasedMagdalene how different it was !LADY SHREWDLY.To be sure, in the first Lady Worrymore'stime it was very different; but you comparedher, not long ago, to a dull foggy day in Novem-member,and the present to a bright morning inspring.LORD Barrymore.So I did, so I did, my good cousin ; but thereare bright mornings in spring, when the windblows from every point of the compass in thecourse of ten minutes, bringing sand, dust, andstraws from every lane and corner, to blind one'sENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.poor eyes and annoy one. I am a miserableman! What can be done to reclaim her?LADY SHREWDLY.Very little, I believe.LORD Barrymore.Oh, oh !LADY SHREWDLY.But do not despair; she may get tired ofthis hurricane of enthusiasm, after two or threetricks have been played upon her credulity.LORD Barrymore.You think so.LADY SHREWDLY.And it would not, perhaps, be amiss for youto lie by for a time, and make no more attemptsto bring back her attention to your own merits.Or if you cannot forbear doing so, do it covertly.LORD Barrymore.How covertly ?LADY SHREWDLY.Write another eloquent speech upon someapproaching Parliamentary question, and let itbe submitted to her criticism, as the compositionof some young Irish orator of amazing genius,who has hitherto, from modesty, given silentvotes in the house, and you will see how prodigiouslyshe will be struck with the depth, the328 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.force, the brilliancy of the dear, delightful oration.LORD Barrymore.Now, my dear good cousin, are you serious ?LADY SHREWDLY.Serious or not, I can think of nothing so likelyto serve your ends, under the present untowardcircumstances. But somebody is coming.Enter Blunt.O, His a gay young sailor returned from a threeyears' station in the Mediterranean. You'rewelcome, dear Frank ! let me see you as oftenas you can while you remain in town ; it alwaysgives me pleasure. Permit me to present Mr.Francis Blunt to your Lordship : the son of anold friend and schoolfellow of mine.LORD Barrymore.I am glad to have the honour of meeting anyfriend of yours ; and hope he has returned safeand sound from the sabres of the Greek pirates.Blunt.I boast of no honourable scars as yet, myLord.LORD Barrymore.All in good time, young gentleman.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 329Blunt.Has your Ladyship any commands for Herefordshire?LADY SHREWDLY.Are you going so soon ?Blunt.In a few days, I believe.LADY SHREWDLY.What takes you there so soon ? Your nativeplace is changed since you left it; scarcely afamily remains of the old set.Blunt.Nay; my good aunt Hammond still holdsher state in the old mansion-house, and SquireGozling, with his pretty daughter, I suppose,is there still.(LADY SHREWDLY frowns to him significantly')LORD Barrymore (smiling.You will find your bird flown from that nest,I believe.Blunt.Is little Kate married ?LADY SHREWDLY.No, she is not; but Arabella'Blunt.O, as to her, she is welcome to marry for me,330 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.as soon as she can find any wiseacre to haveher.LADY SHREWDLY (who has been frowning andmaking faces to him behind LORD WorryORE'S back, but in vain')Out upon thee, Frank, for a very spiteful creature! Thou hast paid thy devoirs to her, I daresay,and she has scorned such a stripling as thouwert at that time.Blunt.My devoirs, to a dull formal prude, who spoketwo words in half a day, and those uttered asslowly and deliberately as if she were readingthem from the spelling-book!LADY SHREWDLY.We must be at cross purposes now, surely ;we are not speaking of the same lady.LORD Barrymore.Don't mind it, Lady Shrewdly ; it is clearly amistake, and is of no consequence whatever.I wish you good morning. Good morning, Sir.\Exlt.LADY SHREWDLY.O Francis Blunt! what hast thou done?Blunt.Nothing very bad, I hope.ENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY. 331LADY SHREWDLY.Didst thou not see me making faces to theeto stop thy foolish tongue ?Blunt.And how was I to know what all those grimaceswere meant for, when ladies, now-a-days,twist their features all manner of ways, as I amtold, for the sake of expression ?LADY SHREWDLY.Arabella Gozling, whom thou hast made sofree with, is now the wife of Lord Worry more,and a peeress of England.BLOUNT (holding up Ms hands, and laughingheartily).Every man to his own fancy ! This good peermust have admired her as the most prudentpiece of still life that ever wore mantua andpetticoat.LADY SHREWDLY.Quite wrong again, friend ; he married her asahigh-toned, ardent enthusiast.BLOUNT.When my grandmother links herself to a thirdhusband, I may believe that he marries her as around, dimpled Hebe of fifteen. An imaginativeardent enthusiast! How could the creatureso transmogrify herself? ay, or think ofsuch a change ?33% ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.LADY SHREWDLY.That, it must be owned, is difficult to explain.BLOUNT.O, now I have it ! She became tired of sittingin the corner unnoticed, and has heard nodoubt of some lady captivating every heart byher lively and generous enthusiasm ; so she hasrushed from her tackle of footstools and decorum,like a brig cut from the stocks, and set herselfafloat on the ocean of fashion. By my faith, andshe has made a good cruise of it too !LADY SHREWDLY.Perhaps your conjecture is not far from thetruth.BLOUNT.How came this goose of a lord to be taken inby it?LADY SHREWDLY.By that which has taken in many, both lordsand commoners, ere now; his own obtrusiveeagerness for praise, which had tired out everybody.BLOUNT.And received this new stream of flattery likerain upon the parched sands of Araby.LADY SHREWDLY.Even so : to say nothing of a wife lately dead,who would never say one civil thing of all theENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 333clever writings that his persevering talents produced.BLOUNT.He must be a happy dog now, I think : up inthe seventh heaven.LADY SHREWDLY.Nay, nay ! fallen from that exaltation deplorably.And if thou hast a mind, I'll engage theein a plot to restore the poor man to some part ofhis lost felicity, and mortify his affected spouseat the same time. Canst thou put a Brutus wigon thy head, and become a great orator for aseason ?BLOUNT.Can I not? I have danced upon deck, erenow, with a turban on my head, as a sultana ofthe royal harem.LADY SHREWDLY.Come, then ; thou art just the man I want.Let us go to my closet, where we may concertthe whole matter without interruption.(As they are going off, he stops and laughsheartily.)What tickles your fancy so ? Don't stop here.BLOUNT.Methinks she is now before my eyes, thissame ardent peeress who makes such commotion334 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.amongst you, seated on a high-legged drawing-roomchair, the back of which she would nothave touched on any account, for the ruffling ofher pinched frill and collar. And when youshowed her a butterfly or flower from the garden,and said, "Is not that beautiful?" she woulddraw herself up most precisely, and say, " I believeit is considered so." (Laughing again')LADY SHREWDLY.Move on, foolish boy.BLOUNT.She would not give her opinion, but with prudentreserve, on the merits of a beetle or a cock-chafer.LADY SHREWDLY.Go, go !BLOUNT.And that too was affectation ; for she was acareless hoyden first of all, and took to sense andpreciseness afterwards.LADY SHREWDLY.Move on, I say. We are losing time here,and may be prevented.[Exeunt, she pushing him gently off the Stage,and he still continuing to laugh.ENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY. 335SCENE II.COLONEL Franklin's House.Enter CLERMONT, looking round as if disappointed.CLERMONT.No, she is not here. She is with her uncle, Isuppose, reading to him some dull book or otherthe Sportsman's Guide, or the plans of Marlborough'sbattles, as cheerfully and contentedlyas if it were the most interesting story or poemthat ever was written.Enter Miss Franklin.I have interrupted some pleasant reading, I'mafraid.MISS Franklin.Not at all : we have got to the end of ourbattles, and he is now teaching me to play chess.CLERMONT.I have brought you a book that will delightyou.MISS Franklin.Are you sure of that ? I am no great admirer336 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.of poetry, of what is called sentimental poetry,at least.CLERMONT.Did you not like my friend's sonnets, which Ibrought you yesterday ?MISS Franklin.dear, no! I did not understand them.CLERMONT.Surely some of the thoughts they express arebeautiful and tender.MISS Franklin.1 dare say they are ; but why should beautifulthoughts be cramped up in such patterned shapesof versification, all rule and difficulty ? Ihave neither ear for the measure, nor quicknessof comprehension for the meaning.CLERMONT.Don't say so, Fanny. Neither ear nor comprehensionare in fault with you. I shouldrather fear I should rather say No matter !MISS Franklin.What would you say ?CLERMONT.Nothing*MISS Franklin.Nay, a blush passes over your face. Wereany of those sonnets written by yourself?ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 33?CLERMONT.Not one of them, I assure you. I wish someof them were.MISS Franklin.Now I'm sure you have been writing somethingof the kind. I see it in your face.CLERMONT.Well, then, since you guess so quickly, I confessthat I have ; but it shall never be put intoyour hands.MISS Franklin.O, do let me see it, Clement ! Give it menow.CLERMONT.I have it not about me.MISS Franklin.Has any body seen it ?CLERMONT.Only one imprudent friend, who has mentionedit to Lady Worrymore.MISS Franklin.I'm sorry for it.CLERMONT.Is it a great misfortune, that you should lookso grave upon it ? May I request to knowVOL. II. Z338 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.Say nothing more about it : there is companyat hand.Enter SIR JOHN Croton.SIR JOHN.But not disagreeable company, I hope. If itbe so, tell me frankly (looking significantly atthem both and I will retire.CLERMONT.You are too well aware, Sir John, that yourcompany is always agreeable.MISS Franklin.In this house I am sure it is. And you arriveat a lucky moment, too ; for I hear Lady Worry-morecoming.Enter LADY Barrymore.Good morning, Lady Worrymore : how kindyou are to call upon me, occupied as you arewith so many objects of interest.LADY Barrymore.Don't speak to me, dear creature.SIR JOHN (to LADY Barrymore).May I presume to say howLADY Barrymore.Don't speak to me, Sir John ; where is penENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 339and paper? (Running to a writing-table.) I mustwrite immediately ; I have been prevented by ahurry of engagements all the morning. (Sitsdown and writes very fast, speaking to them atthe same time.) The sweet, heavenly creature !it is two long hours since I heard of him.SIR JOHN (aside to Miss Franklin).The juggling boy, I suppose, who is sick witheating plum cake.LADY Barrymore (still writing as before).The dear little darling ! and he leans his achinghead on the pillow with such languid softnessthe 'kerchief twisted round it, too nomodel for an artist was ever so beautiful!SIR JOHN.Your Ladyship must have him painted so;and take care to keep him sick till the picture isfinished.LADY Barrymore.Unfeeling savage !SIR JOHN.A little more cake will do the business.LADY Barrymore.Don't speak to me. (Motioning him off withher hand, and muttering aloud as she looks overthe note she has finished.) Let me know in-340 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.instantly the health of the suffering angelevery minute particular since I saw him last.(Folds it up.} Who waits there ?Enter a Servant.Give this to my servant ; it is for the mistressof the house where Master Munhaunslet lodges.He must go with it immediately, and wait foran answer.SERVANT (taking the note.And bring the answer here, my Lady ?LADY Barrymore.Yes. No; to the exhibition of antiques inPiccadilly. No, no ! to the lecture-room of Mr.Clutterbuck ; there will be friends there almostas anxious as myself to hear how the little angeldoes.SIR JOHN.Mr. Clutterbuck must be a superlative critic,indeed, to attract your Ladyship at so anxious amoment as the present.LADY Barrymore.Have you not heard him ? You are incapableof appreciating two lines of our immortal bard,if you have not attended Mr. Clutterbuck.SIR JOHN.I am in very truth, then, an ignorant fellow ;and so are you, Clement, I believe.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 341LADY Barrymore.Clement ! Have I the pleasure of beholdingthe writer of that beautiful sonnet, which hasbeen mentioned to me with so much praise ?SIR JOHN (presenting CLERMONT).A poet who will think himself honoured indeedby the notice of such a critic as LadyWorrymore.LADY Barrymore.O no, Sir John ! an ardent admirer of theMuses, but no critic. To what a charmingdepartment of poetry, Mr. Clement, you havedevoted your pen ! The sonnet ! the refined,the tender, the divine sonnet ! O how it purifiesand separates the mind from all commonnessand meanness of Nature ! Methinks the happyspirits in Elysium must converse with one anotherin sonnets.SIR JOHN.What a happy time they must have of it, ifthey do !CLERMONT.It is a new and bright fancy of your Ladyship's,and never entered my mundane imaginationbefore.LADY Barrymore.Has it not ? O, I have worshipped Petrarch,z 3ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.dreamt of him, repeated in my sleep all his beautifulconceptions, till I have started from mycouch in a paroxysm of delight !SIR JOHN.Ah, Lady Worrymore ! you should have livedsome centuries earlier, and been the Laura ofthat impassioned poet yourself,MISS Franklin (aside tO SlR JOHN).I wish she had, with all my heart.LADY Barrymore.But I have not yet seen your sweet composition,Mr. Clement ; pray, pray, give it to me !this very moment O this very moment ! I dieto peruse it ! I am miserable till I see it ! it willhaunt my thoughts the whole day !MISS Franklin.Dear Lady Worrymore, will you shame thedivine Mr. Clutterbuck's lecture so much as tothink of it then ?LADY Barrymore.Ah ! my dear Miss Frankland, you are toosevere : Shakspeare should indeed be paramountto every thing. Dear Shakspeare ! dear Petrarch! I doat on them both. (Looking at herwatched Bless me ! I am behind my time.Adieu, adieu ! (To CLERMONT.) And you willsend me your sonnet? you will do me thatENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 343honour ? you will confer upon me that infiniteobligation ? Adieu, adieu ![J5>//, hurrying off, and passing BLOUNTwithout notice, who has entered towardsthe end of her rhapsody, and drawn himselfup by the wall to let her pass"]BLOUNT (coming forward).It is best to reef one's sails when a hurricaneis abroad.SIR JOHN.Why did you not speak to her, Blunt ? Sheis your old acquaintance.BLOUNT.I have known a lady called Miss Gozling, inwhose presence I have stood undismayed ; butI must take to my studies, I trow, before I accostmy Lady Worry more.SIR JOHN.That is prudent, Frank; you are rather farbehind in book-learning.MISS Franklin (glancing at CLERMONT).And have not yet penned a sonnet, I believe.BLOUNT.Faith, I don't know a sonnet from a roundelay ;but I shall qualify myself to compose both veryexpertly, before I become a candidate for herfavour.z 4<344 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.SIR JOHN.You look grave, Clement.CLERMONT.I confess you seem to me too severe on thislady. The ardour of her character very naturallybetrays her into exaggerated expressions ;but surely (glancing at Miss Franklin) it ispreferable to the cold decorum of insensibilityor indifference.BLOUNT.Of course, Clement, this fine sonnet of yoursis to be put into her fair hands.CLERMONT.I shall put it under cover, and leave it at herdoor in the evening.BLOUNT.It is out of your way ; I am sailing on theright tack for that point; give the packet tomy charge, and I will leave it at WorrymoreHouse as I pass.Enter a Servant.SERVANT.Colonel Frankland begs to have the honour ofseeing the gentlemen in his dressing-room.SIR JOHN.Does the gout still confine him up stairs?ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 345MISS Franklin.Indeed it does ; and it will be charitable inyou all to sit with him as long as you can.\ Exeunt SIR JOHN, CLERMONT, and BLOUNT.MISS Franklin (alone after a thoughtful pause).That he should be so taken in ! But is heso ? In some degree, I fear. Perhaps it isonly to vex me. (Walking up and down with ahurried step') No, no ! he is taken in. Is hea vain, conceited man, and have I never discoveredit till now ?. It cannot be : he has readme many compositions of his friends ; one of hisown, scarcely ever. Oh, oh ! I wish there wasnot such a thing as a sonnet in the world !Enter BARBARA.BARBARA.The jelly is ready, Madam, that you mean tocarry to the sick boy; and the carriage is waiting.MISS Franklin.I thank you, Barbara, for reminding me.Fetch my scar and we '11 go.BARBARA.You 're very right, Ma'am, to look after him,for he 's a poor peeping chit ; and Lady Worry-more,his landlady tells me, will be the death ofhim. exeunt.346 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.SCENE III.A poor-looking Chamber, with a Sofa near thefront of the Stage.Enter MRS. BROWN, with Hugh, whom sheleads to the sofa, then lays him along, andspreads a shawl over him, and then takes a notefrom her pocket.Hugh.Tank you, good modern. What is dat ?MRS. BROWN.Something to divert you, my dear ; a notefrom Lady Worrymore.Hugh.Something to torment me.MRS. BROWN.She is too good to you, indeed.Hugh.Not good not good. I was well ; she stuffme wit cream and comfit, and make me sick,and now she leave me no rest in my sickness.MRS. BROWN.Don't be disturbed, dear child ; she won'tENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 347come near you to-day. I bade the servant tellhis lady not to come.Hugh.You speak message to him ?MRS. BROWN.To be sure I did. Lord help me ! where wasI to find time, and words, and spelling to writeher an answer to all the particles she axed toknow about ? I just bade him say to her thatyou were no better, and must not be disturbed.Hugh.She will disturb me de more, and call it comfort.O, dat ladies would leave off comforting !MRS. BROWN.But there is one lady who is good and quiet,I J m sure, and does not torment you.Hugh.Ay, der is one, and she be very good.MRS. BROWN.She sends you what is fit for you to take, andwrites no notes at all.Hugh.I will dance, and play cup and ball to her,when 1 be well, and tell fader, when he returns,to take no money for it.MRS. BROWN.And will fader do so, think you ? It would348 ENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY.be no misfortune to thee, poor thing, if he shouldnever return.Enter Miss Franklin, and steals on tiptoe tothe back of the sofa.MISS Franklin (speaking softly to MRS.BROWN).He is resting, I see. I have brought the jelly,and will go away. (Retiring.Hugh.Who dere ?MRS. BROWN.Miss Franklin: but she is going away.Hugh.Not go, not go ; good Miss Franklin ![MRS. BROWN sets a chair for Miss FRANK-landby the sofa, and Hugh takes herhand and kisses it.~\MISS Franklin.Don't speak, Hughoo : I go away if you do.[He raises his head, and nods to her withoutspeaking"]MRS. BROWN.You start, Madam!MISS Franklin.That handkerchief round his head gives hima likeness I never observed before.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 349MRS. BROWN.Them wandering foreigners, Madam, have nonightcaps : they are no better than savages inthat and many other respects. (Pointing to thehandkerchief on his head's It is, to be sure, anunchristian-looking rag: I could scarcely bearto let him say his prayers in it.\ A loud rap is heard at the street-door, ,]Hugh (starting up in a fright).It is Lady Worrymore.MISS Franklin.Be quiet, poor child ! I '11 soon carry heraway with me : she shan't tease you long.Enter LADY Barrymore.LADY Barrymore (running up to the sofa, claspingher hands affectedly, and hanging over him).Lovely darling ! O how I grieve to find youstill so ill ! What can I do to make you well ?Hugh.Stay away : dat shall best make me well.LADY Barrymore.Stay away ! how can I do so, my angel, whenI am so interested so grieved ? Nobody knowshow much I grieve for him.350 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.Nay, a good many do, I should think ; foryou have been grieving all over the town.LADY Barrymore.You little know : how could words expresswhat I have felt for him ? Look at the lovelycreature ! There is soul and beauty in everyline of his countenance. Nay, don't frown atme, Hughoo : if you are suffering I '11 kiss awaythe pain. (Stoops and kisses him vehemently,while he struggles and pushes her off.}MISS Franklin.Do, Lady Worrymore, be quiet. You '11 putthe poor child into a fever.LADY Barrymore (per severing).No, no ! I will make him well : he must bewell ; for I have told Lady Tweedler, and LadyCockup, and Misshapen how beautiful he looksin his handkerchief turban ; and they are allcoming to see him.Hugh.O dear, dear ! to be so tormented ! I wishdat I was dead. (Bursting into tearsMRS. BROWN.Indeed, indeed, my Lady, your kindness isobstreperous : the poor child will die of it.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 351MISS Franklin.Let me entreat you, Lady Worry more, to leavehim in peace ; and forbid those ladies to comehere. He will have a night-cap on his headpresently, and then it will neither be worth yourwhile nor theirs to come near him.LADY Barrymore.What a heartless girl you are, Miss Frank-land! how unfeeling ! A night-cap on thatpretty classical head ! What would Mr. Palettesay ? what would our great sculptors say of sucha proposal ? They would call you a barbarian.MISS Franklin.Let them call me what they please ; we haveno right to torment the poor boy with our admiration.Do leave him in peace. See how heis weeping with vexation, and cannot get tosleep.MRS. BROWN.Which is quite necessary, my Lady, as yourLadyship knows very well. Neither beast norbody can do without sleep, as my good old mistressused to say, and she was a very sensiblewoman.LADY Barrymore.Well, then, be it so ; since even such a creatureas this is subject to the necessities of ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.ture. But let me wipe his tears before I leavehim, and cover him up close for repose. (Wipinghis eyes with her pocket handkerchief, and goingto arrange the shawls Bless me ! what a coveringis this for my darling ! (Pulling it off, andtaking a pine Indian shawl from her shoulders,which she spreads over him.} This is moreworthy to enfold such a being ; this will keephim better from the cold. Sweet rest to you,my pretty Hugh ! I must tear myself away.[Curtsies slightly to Miss Franklin, andhurries off.xMRS. BROWN.She has left him a good shawl, howsomever ;it will put a mint of money into his purse, whenhe has wit enough to dispose of it.MISS Franklin.You must not reckon upon that too securely.Re-enter LADY Barrymore, and beckons MRS.BROWN, who goes to her apart.LADY Barrymore (aside tO MRS. BROWN).You need take no trouble about the shawl,you know ; for my servant will call for it tomorrow7 . [Exit hastily.MISS Franklin.Call for it tomorrow ! The shawl, I suppose ?ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 353MRS. BROWN.Yes; deuce take her generosity! kisses andsweet words are cheaper than shawls.MISS Franklin.I guessed as much ; the mint of money won'tcome from that quarter. Let us move a littleto this corner, if you please. (Leads MRS.BROWN away from the sofa, more to the front')What do you know of the man who brought himto England this Manhaunslet? Do you thinkhe is really his father?MRS. BROWN.He says he is.MISS Franklin.Does he behave to him as if he were ?MRS. BROWN.He behaves to him as well as some fathers doto their children ; and that is indifferent enough.MISS Franklin.Poor boy ! indifferent enough, I fear.MRS. BROWN.He had a monkey, when he first came, thatdanced on its hind legs, and played quarter staffand them tricks ; and I never knew which ofthem he liked best, Hughoo or the ape : he gavethem the same food, the same kind of fondling,and the same education.VOL. II. A A354f ENTHUSIASM t A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.Did you not tell me, a few minutes since, thatthe boy said his prayers ?MRS. BROWN.True, Madam ; but he did so, because I toldhim he ought to do it, for all good boys did so.MISS Franklin.Did he pray in the German tongue ?MRS. BROWN.No ; God forbid, Madam, that he shouldspeak to his Creator in such a jargon as that !MISS Franklin.You taught him, then, what to say ?MRS. BROWN.To be sure I did, Madam ; for, as I said before,the ape and him had both the same learningfrom that heathenish vagrant, Manhaunslet.MISS Franklin.And what has become of the ape?MRS. BROWN.As soon as little Hughoo was so admired by thegentry, as to be sent for to great folk's houses,to show off his balls and his dancing, and allthem there pretty motions of his, he understood,somehow or other, that the monkey was notreckoned genteel, and so he sent him on hisENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY. 355travels with another outlandish vagrant, to go tocountry fairs and the like.MISS Franklin.But what has become of Manhaunslet ?MRS, BROWN.I don't know, Madam.MISS Franklin.Did he ever mention his wife to you $ or whowas Hughoo's mother?MRS. BROWN.No, Madam.MISS Franklin.Did Hughoo ever mention his mother ?MRS. BROWN.No, Madam.MISS Franklin.I thank you, Mrs. Brown. Take good careof the child. I'll see you soon again. (Goingto the sofas He is in a sound sleep now. Howstrong that likeness is ! even sleep seems to addto it.exeunt.A A356 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.ACT II.SCENE I. The House of COLONEL FRANK-land.He enters, with a letter in his hand,leaning on PATERSON. Sits down in an easychair, and sets about arranging books andpapers on a table at the bottom of the Stage.COLONEL Franklin (after looking at the letter].Let me again consider the request of this gayBaronet. (Muttering as he reads Disinterestedattachment only requests to be allowedto endeavour to gain her good opinion.Yes, yes! the plea and pretensions of them all.The days of our life wear on, and every pleasantsolace, after it has lulled and cheered us for aseason, drops away. I would rather have partedwith her to William Clermorit ; but what courseof events is ever fulfilled according to the foresightof our imagination ? (Speaking in a loudervoice, vehemently*) None ! no, none !PATERSON (advancing from the bottom.What is your pleasure, Sir?COLONEL Franklin.A thing which I never get, Paterson.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 357PATERSON.I'm sure t do all I can to content yourhonour.COLONEL Franklin.So thou dost, my old friend ; but thou canstnot make Fortune do the same thing. Thou artan old soldier, Paterson, as well as myself: tellme, now, if thou wert ever at siege, battle, oreven skirmish, in thy life, wherein every circumstancefell out as the general or commander hadreckoned upon ?PATERSON.No, surely, your honour. But what is thehead of a general good for, if it can do nothingbut plan, and cannot turn every unforeseen accidentthat casts up, to the furtherance of hispurpose some way or other ?COLONEL Franklin.Very true, my friend ; and thou art teachingme a lesson without being aware of it.PATERSON.I were a bold man, indeed, to pretend to dothat to your honour knowingly.COLONEL Franklin (sighing deeply).I wish I had had some such teaching tenyears ago. But no ; I suppose it would havedone me no good-then.A A 3353 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.PATERSON.Ay ; that was about the time when our youngladyCOLONEL Franklin.Don't speak of that ; I can't bear it.PATERSON.I crave your honour's pardon ; I might haveknown as much. But when you talk cheerilyto me, I always, somehow or other, forget myself.Enter SIR JOHN Croton, and Paterson retires.COLONEL Franklin.Your servant, Sir John. You are, in the trueetiquette of a lover, I see, somewhat before yourtime.SIR JOHN.Gall it not so, Colonel. What has made itetiquette to all, but the natural haste and ardourof real lovers ? and of my pretensions to be consideredas one of the last class, I hope in goodtime to convince you.COLONEL Franklin.Convince the lady, Sir John ; and if the convictionshould please her, I must be content. Iwill not thwart her inclinations.ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 3,59SIR JOHN.I thank you, my dear Sir, for this ready andhearty acquiescence in the first wish of myheart.COLONEL Franklin.Nay ; you rate my acquiescence somewhatbeyond its real worth : it is neither ready norhearty.SIR JOHN.I am very sorry if my proposals to your niecedo in any respect displease you, Colonel Frank-land.COLONEL Franklin.They do me honour, Sir John, and displeaseme as little as any offer of the kind couldhave done, with one exception ; for I will dealhonestly with you.SIR JOHN.I respect your sincerity, though it gives methe pain of knowing there is one whom youwould have preferred to me.COLONEL Franklin.But it is a preference arising more from thepartiality of my own feelings, than from anysuperior pretensions in the man.SIR JOHN.I thank you for this candour, and will notconceal from you that I considered Clement asA A 4360 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.an acceptable visiter in the family, which hasmade me hitherto conceal the nature of my feelingsfor your charming niece ; but, seeing hismind become so suddenly engrossed with theblandishments of Lady Worrymore, I havethought myself at liberty to declare my secretsentiments.COLONEL Franklin.Yes; I have had some intimation of it. (Startingfrom Ms chair, and walking lamely but rapidlyacross the floored Silly noodle! foolishsimpleton ! bewildered ninny hammer ! He hadbrains in his head once.SIR JOHN.They are gone a wool-gathering for the present,at least.COLONEL Franklin.And will return with a knotty handful of itfor their pains. O, the senseless gudgeon !SIR JOHN.Senseless enough, it must be owned. I shouldhave thoughtCOLONEL Franklin.Say no more upon this foolish subject. Thereis a fair field before you, Sir John : win the lass,if you can, and then T will do my part, and striveto give up my comfort as resignedly as may be.ENTHUSIASM *. A COMEDY. 36lEnter Miss Falkland.SIR JOHN (going eagerly up to her.How fortunate I am to see you thus, on thevery first conversation I have presumed to holdwith your uncle on the subject nearest to myheart ! (Taking her hand, which she endeavoursto pull away.)MISS Franklin.Your fortune, however, will be of short continuance,if my presence is concerned with it ;for I only wished to see my uncle for one moment,as there is a person waiting for me, belowstairs, on particular business.SIR JOHN.Some milliner or shop-woman, I suppose, whocan as well return tomorrow.MISS Franklin.And if it were so, I have no right to wasteher time, whatever I may do with my own.Good morning.SIR JOHN (still endeavouring to detain her.Call it not waste. Nobody rates time so highas those who will go.MISS Franklin.And nobody rates it so low as those who willnot.ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.SIR JOHN.Let us compromise the difference, then. Stayhere but one quarter of an hour, and I '11 giveyou my word of honour to go at the end of it.MISS Franklin.Even that promise cannot detain me.Exit hastily.COLONEL Franklin.What did the saucy girl say to you just now,when she frowned so ?SIR JOHN (conceitedly.O ! young ladies' frowns are like dreams, andmust be interpreted by contraries.COLONEL Franklin.Not those of Fanny Frankland, however ; shefrowns not on man, woman, or child, withoutbeing really displeased. This looks unpromising,Sir John.SIR JOHN.Not a whit not a whit, my dear Colonel.I have known a man refused by a fair mistressthree times in the course of one little month, andmarried to her at the end of it.COLONEL Franklin.Then let me freely tell you, Sir, that thewooer and the wooed were, in that case, worthyof one another.ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 3()<3SIR JOHN.Your irony, my good Sir, is rather too severe.I don't pretend to be romantic ; but in the sincerityand disinterestedness of my attachment toMiss Frankland, I hope you will do me thehonour and the justice to place confidence.I now take my leave, and I hope, with your permission,to repeat my visits.[Exit, COLONEL Franklin bowing coldlyto him.COLONEL Franklin (done).This won't do ; no, it won't do. O that thesilly fellow should have allowed himself to bebewildered with the rhapsodies of such a fool asLady Worry more ! Surely, writing verses musthave some power of intoxication in it, and canturn a sensible man into a fool by some processof mental alchemy. Thank God, I never hadany personal experience of the matter! I oncetried to turn a few common expressions of civilityinto two couplets of metre, to please a daintylady withal, but it would not do : so I e'en gaveit up, and kept the little portion of mother-witthat Nature had bestowed upon me uninjured.He-enter Miss Franklin.Art thou here again ?MISS Franklin.I waited till I heard him go away.364 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.COLONEL Franklin.And hast returned, with the curiosity of a verywoman, to learn what he has been saying to me.MISS Franklin.Nay, the vanity of a very woman has whisperedin my ear, and informed me of all thatalready.COLONEL Franklin.And was it welcome information ?MISS Franklin.Not very.COLONEL Franklin.He has rank, a fair character, as youngmen go in the world, and a moderately goodfortune.MISS Franklin.He has those recommendations.COLONEL Franklin,And is, moreover, free from the follies ofpoetry. What mayest thou, then, to such asuitor ?MISS Franklin.As long as you are not tired of me, dear uncle,I will not give up your society for that of anyother man. And I feel, my dear Sir, (takinghis hand tenderly?) I feel it sensibly and gratefully,that you are not tired of me yet.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 365COLONEL Falkland.Foolish child ! tired of the only comfort Ihave on earth !MISS Franklin.Let us say no more, then, on this subject.I came to speak to you of something else.COLONEL Franklin.And I will listen to thee most willingly.MISS Franklin (With emotion.I thank you I am going I would not giveyou pain I should not have venturedCOLONEL Franklin.What is the meaning of all these 7's, andwould noes, and should not's, and pauses, andpanting ?MISS Franklin.Bear with me a moment. I shall be able tospeak coherently by and by.[/^ pause, during which he looks earnestlyin her face J]COLONEL Franklin.Well, dear Fanny, what is it?MISS Franklin (in a hurried manner.Are you sure that your daughter left no childbehind her?COLONEL Franklin.Quite sure. I am confident of it. I have366 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.good reason to believe she did not Do notput racking thoughts into my head. What hastempted thee to tear open an ill-closed wound ?MISS Franklin.Pardon the pain I give. A strong sense ofduty compels me. You are confident, you say,and on good reasons, that she left no child behindher.COLONEL Franklin.Would not that Italian adventurer have informeda wealthy father-in-law that a child wasborn, and had survived its mother ? Would sucha plea for worldly purposes have been neglected ?No, there could be no child ; and, thank Heaven,there was none ! What can have put suchfancies into thy head ?MISS Franklin.I have seen a child to-day who strongly resemblesmy cousin.COLONEL Franklin.Thou art too young to have any distinct recollectionof her face.MISS Franklin.Nay, but I have : it was so pleasant a face,and she was so good to me.COLONEL Franklin.It was a pleasant face. If I could rememberENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 367her as she once was, and forget what she afterwardsbecame, it would be a recollection worthall my wealth to purchase.MISS Franklin.Should you like to see this child ?COLONEL Franklin.No, no, no ! I could not bear it.MISS Franklin.He shall not, then, be brought to you ; but Iwill often go and look at him myself. You willnot be offended with that ?COLONEL Franklin.Thou wilt go often to look at him ! Is thelikeness then so strong ?MISS Franklin.So strong, that in looking on him you wouldfeel that Louisa, or such a woman as Louisa,must have been his mother.COLONEL Franklin.Such a woman, an thou wilt. What kind offorehead has this child ?MISS Franklin.Somewhat broad and low.COLONEL Franklin.And the nose ?368 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.Rather short than long ; and the nostrils oneither side are curved so prettily, that they looklike two little delicate shells.COLONEL Franklin.Is it possible ! This was the peculiarity in herface.MISS Franklin.You droop your head, dear uncle ; youtremble. Let me bring this child to you.COLONEL Franklin.Not now, not now.MISS Franklin.But you will, some other time.COLONEL Franklin.Let me have a little respite. To look onaught like her like what she was like thecreature that played round my chair that followedme that Out upon thee, FannyFrankland ! thou hast stirred up vain yearningswithin me, and when I see him he will not belikeher after all.MISS Franklin.And if he should not be so like as you expected,will you not befriend a poor helplesschild, for even a slight resemblance ?ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 369COLONEL Franklin.I '11 do what thou desires, be it ever so slight.MISS Franklin.Thanks, dear uncle! Retire and composeyourself awhile. Let me lead you to your ownroom. [Exeunt, he leaning on her arm.SCENE ILLADY SHREWDLY'S Garden : the House seen inthe side Scene.Enter from a walk, at the bottom of the Stage,LADY Barrymore and CLERMONT, speakingas they enter.LADY Barrymore.And then, again, can any thing be more beautifulthan when, looking up to Juliet's window,he exclaims,Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,Who is already sick and pale with grief,That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she."O how fine ! You are silent : don't you thinkso?CLERMONT.There are many passages in the play which Iadmire more.VOL. II. B B370 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.LADY Barrymore.Nay, surely you admire it : positively youmust. I doat upon it; arid Mr. Clutterbucksays, no lover could have said any thing of hismistress so exquisitely impassioned so finelyimagined.CLERMONT.I believe, indeed, no lover would have saidany thing like it.LADY Barrymore.And again, which is, perhaps, more exquisitestill,Two of the fairest stars in all the heavens,Having some business, do entreat her eyesTo twinkle in their spheres till they return.Which, if her eyes were there, they in her head,The brightness of her cheek would shame those star sAs daylight doth a lamp : her eyes in heavenWould through the airy region stream so bright,That birds would sing, and think it were not night I"Is not that impassioned ? Is not that sublime ?CLERMONT.I dare not pretend to judge of what is sohonoured by your ladyship's approbation. Butyou have stopped short at the only lines in thewhole speech that appear to me, although withsome degree of conceit, to express the naturalfeelings of a lover.LADY Barrymore.Indeed ! Repeat them, I pray.ENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY. 371CLERMONT.O that I were a glove upon that hand,That I might touch that cheek I"LADY Barrymore (in a drawling voice).Yes, to be sure, a common lover might havesaid something like that Mr. Clutterbuck tookno notice of those lines. But, positively, youmust attend his lectures: you must, indeed.You cannot adore our immortal bard as youought, without hearing Clutterbuck. (Lookingat her watched Bless me ! how time flies ! Ishould, ere this, have been contemplating thedivine lineaments of that Madonna. You'llgo with me, I hope ?CLERMONT.I am sorry it is not in my power ; but allowme the honour of attending you to your carriage.\JExeunt> disappearing among the bushes, asLADY SHREWDLY and Miss Franklinenter from the house.]MISS Franklin.I see a lady and gentleman yonder ; who arethey?LADY SHREWDLY.Only Lady Worrymore and Clement.They left me some time ago ; and her carriagewaits for her at the wicket : but, I suppose theyB B 2ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.have found it agreeable to take a sentimentalsaunter in the shrubbery.MISS Franklin.They have become mighty intimate* Whocould have thought it ?LADY SHREWDLY.Vanity, as well as a city shower, occasionsmany strange acquaintances.MISS Franklin.But of a kind less transient. They do notpart at the mouth of a shed or gateway, andmeet again no more.LADY SHREWDLY.Not always ; but in the present instance theresemblance will hold good, even in this respect.MISS Franklin.I fear you deceive yourself.LADY SHREWDLY.I believe I do not ; but I will not be positive.You know Clement better than I do.MISS Franklin.I thought I knew him ; but I was mistaken.Re-enter CLERMONT from the shrubbery* andbows to Miss Franklin without speaking.LADY SHREWDLY.You are grave, Mr. Clement, and I traceENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.pondering lines upon your brow ; may one knowwhat engages your serious contemplation ?MISS Franklin.The composition, perhaps, of verses for theprettily-bound album of Lady Worrymore.CLERMONT.A book that will not have the honour of beingopened by a lady who dislikes poetry.MISS Franklin.Nay, a lady of such a character might readthat book, I believe, with very little offence.But when its pages are enriched with yoursonnet, Mr. Clement, the case will no doubtbe altered.CLERMONT.And, taking that alteration for granted, thissame lady will then very willingly abstain entirelyfrom reading it.MISS Franklin.Most willingly ; she will not even distrustyour pretensions so much as to examine thefact.CLERMONT.I believe so. Cards of invitation, billets froma gay baronet, perhaps, or letters from countryrelations, afford reading enough for a prudentyoung lady who knows so well how to-keepB B 3374 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.imagination in subjection to plain common sense,Ay, that, I think, is the phrase for the paramountvirtue you now so decidedly professplain common sense.LADY SHREWDLY.A virtue, setting professions aside, of whichthere is mighty little in this garden at present,excepting some little scantlings that may, perhaps,belong to myself. A truce with all thissparring! Cannot one person like poetry andanother prose, as one likes moor-fowl and anothermutton, without offence ?CLERMONT.No, not even so, Lady Shrewdly, if the moorfowlbe cooked by one's neighbour, and themutton by one's self.MISS Franklin.And Mr. Clement may add, that if the morselof one's own cooking has been honoured bythe approval of an epicurean palate, it weretreason to dispute its superiority.LADY SHREWDLY (putting her hand playfully tothe lips of Miss Franklin).No more of this, foolish child ! Go into thehouse, I beseech you, and look for my pocketbook,which I have left upon some table orother.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.I do your bidding willingly. [Exit.LADY SHREWDLY.Mr. Clement, when young people, like yourselfand Miss Frankland, quarrel together, I takeno account of it ; but if one can do the otherany service, propose the business just as freelyas if they were the best friends in the world.CLERMONT.Explain your meaning, Lady Shrewdly. CanI in any way be useful to Miss Frankland ?LADY SHREWDLY.You can j and I engage your services on herbehalf.CLERMONT.I thank you I thank you most heartily.But will she do so ? Would not Sir John Crotonprove a more acceptable agent? a more zealousone I defy him to be.LADY SHREWDLY.No, no ; it is a service he would never perform: not faithfully, I'm sure, standing, as itdoes, opposed to his own worldly designs.CLERMONT.O tell me what it is, my dear Madam ! I willdo it most gladly.B B 4376 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.LADY SHREWDLY.Go to all the resorts of low foreigners abouttown, and find out, if possible, the Germanjuggler called Manhaunslet.CLERMONT.The father of the boy Lady Worrymore admiresso much ?LADY SHREWDLY.The same.CLERMONT.What can she possibly have to do with such aman as that ?LADY SHREWDLY.What very few indeed would think of doing.CLERMONT.How so ? I beg pardon for questioning soclosely.LADY SHREWDLY.Indeed, you need not : it will bear to be questioned.She is seeking to strip herself of fortuneand all its advantages, for the sake of justice andaffection.CLERMONT.Of justice and affection ?LADY SHREWDLY.In short, she has taken it into her head, froma strong resemblance, that that boy is the son ofENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 377her unfortunate cousin, who died abroad someyears ago, and, consequently, the grandchild ofher uncle.CLERMONT.Generous creature ! I am sure her actionsare poetry, let her taste and fancy be what theymay.LADY SHREWDLY.Yes, somewhat too romantic for Sir John'spresent views ; so that we cannot trust the businessto him.CLERMONT.No, hang him ! I'll do it myself: I'll setabout it forthwith. There is not a gambling-house,spunging-house, nor night-cellar withinthe bills of mortality that shall be searched.LADY SHREWDLY.You take it up so eagerly that I cannot doubtyour diligence. Good bye, for the present : Imust return into the house, and release her fromsearching for what she will not find. \JExit.CLERMONT.To foster a quarrel with me so capriciouslyand pettishly at such a conjuncture ! I understandher now. She is a noble creature ; butsurely she might have done it less offensively.[Exit by the garden.378 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.SCENE III.The private Closet of LORD Barrymore.Enter his Lordship, with papers in his hand,followed by an Amanuensis.LORD Barrymore.Sit down at this table, and begin your task ;and take good care to copy correctly the periods,the pauses, and the notes of admiration. Eloquenceis wonderfully assisted in the reading bythose little auxiliaries.AMANUENSIS.I will, my Lord.LORD Barrymore.And when you come to any very striking expressions,be sure to draw a line under them so,(showing him how,) that the reader may do themjustice, with a correspondent emphasis and elevationof voice.AMANUENSIS.Certainly, my Lord : I shall mark all suchpassages as your Lordship may be pleased topoint out.LORD Barrymore.I should like you to mark also some passagesof your own selecting : for an unlearned personENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 379of common capacity will be struck with realeloquence surprisingly. When the former CornBill was brought into the House, and I had preparedmy speech,Enter BLOUNT.BLOUNT.Your speech, my Lord ?LORD Barrymore.Yes, Blunt: I am just telling this young personhere how surprisingly my own attorney wasstruck with some passages which I read to himfrom my first speech on the Corn Laws ; and aman, too, who has no more taste or cultivationthan a coalheaver.BLOUNT.I well believe it, my Lord. The want of bothcould never disqualify him from relishing thebeauties of such a production.LORD Barrymore.You have read it, then ?BLOUNT.I have heard of it. It was that effort of yougenius, I understand, which helped to win theheart of Lady Worrymore.LORD Barrymore (sighing).Ay, it was even so : in those happier days380 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.when her high-toned mind followed freely itsown dictates; ere caprice and love of changehad led it astray.BLOUNT.Never mind ; we shall bring it back again toas high tones as it ever uttered, and all upon theright string, too.LORD Barrymore.And you think she will be charmed with thisspeech ?BLOUNT.My life upon it, she will be charmed beyondmeasure.LORD Barrymore (with affected modesty).I think she will be reasonably pleased.BLOUNT.No, faith ! that won't serve our purpose at all :she must be charmed to a folly.LORD Barrymore.Ha ! ha ! ha ! thou art a cunning fellow,Blunt ; I'll get thee promoted in the navy forthis. (Going to the 'writing table, and overlookingthe A m anuen sis, who is busy writing. ) Le t m esee how far you have got. Aha! within twowords of the very passage. (Mutters to himselfas he looks at the papers, and making gestures ofdeclamation, very pompouslyENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 381BLOUNT (aside).What is the fool about? (Aloud.) Somestriking flowers of oratory, my Lord : one cansee it by the fire of your eyes and the vehemenceof your action. I am fortunate in witnessingthe grace of your delivery : it is well for me tohave a lesson.LORD Barrymore.You shall judge, my friend ! (Lifting the manuscriptfrom the table, and putting himself in a dignifiedattitude as he reads.) " That grain which,by the hands of our own ploughmen, whistlingin concert with the early lark, hath been depositedin the maternal bosom of our soil ; that grainwhich hath waved in the gentle breezes of summerand of autumn, and fructified under the salubrioustemperature of our native climate "(looking to him for applause.)BLOUNT.Very fine indeed ! Such grain as that is toogood for making quartern loaves of, to bemunched up by every dirty urchin that bawlsabout the streets.LORD Barrymore (chuckling with delight).No, no ! my argument does not lean that way.BLOUNT.You do it injustice : it will lean any way.382 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.LORD Barrymore.I only meant to prove that the lords of thesoil should be allowed to defend the produce oftheir soil from competition and depreciation.And that passage pleases you ?BLOUNT.Pleases me ! if I say, delights me, will youdoubt of my sincerity ? No, my Lord ; I amsure you will not.LORD Barrymore (with affected modesty.Why, I must frankly confess that I think it atolerable specimen of parliamentary eloquence.But here is something farther on, which has, perhaps,superior claims on your attention, if youwill honour me with some portion of it.BLOUNT.With it all, my dear Lord : can it possibly bebetter employed ?LORD Barrymore (spreading his right arm y andassuming dignity > as before).I am free to confess, my Lords, that thefruits of the earth have been given by the bountyof Providence for the sustenance of man."BLOUNT.That, the noble lords will certainly assent to ;and, so far, the speech must be effective.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 383LORD Barrymore.But hear it out. " The sustenance of man,"mark ye now ; " the pot of the labourer ;the oven of the cottager ; the board of the ,with all the fair faces surrounding it ;the christening, and the merry-making ; and eventhe sorrowful repast of those, who in the gravesof their forefathers have deposited their dead ;yes, I am free to confess, my Lords, that thereonsuch occasions, should the healthful produceof our native fields be found in abundance. Butwould you have the repasts of England's valiantsons and lovely daughters drawn from foreignclimes ? from fields unlike to those in whichthey have joyfully beheld the green blade shoot,and the poppy wave its gay head in the sun ?from fields barren to them of all dear associationsand sympathies which are the nurture of themind ? I will not wrong noble Lords so muchas to suppose it."BLOUNT.If they can allow, after that, one penny loafof foreign flour to thicken the pottage of a drover,they deserve to be choked with it themselves.LORD Barrymore.Ha ! ha ! ha ! it amuses me to see you take itup so heartily. Well, I love you the better forit ; though you do express your thoughts in yourown sailor-like fashion. I thought it would strikeyou. And you must do it justice, my young384 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.friend ; you must read it with emphasis and allappropriate action.BLOUNT.Neither emphasis nor action shall be spared,depend upon it ; but as to doing it justice, youknow that is impossible.LORD Barrymore.O ! you are too flattering too partial.BLOUNT.But are you sure, my Lord, that Lady Worry-morehas never heard any part of this speechbefore? no morsel of it, dropping from yourlips unguardedly ?LORD Barrymore.No : I have been too much offended with herof late to repeat to her one word of it. She doesnot even know that I have prepared a speech onthe subject.BLOUNT.A fortunate forbearance !LORD Barrymore.And I reckoned, too, that her surprise wouldbe the greater after its success in the House ; asno doubt it would, had the measure been broughtforward at the time that was appointed for it.BLOUNT.Then all is safe. There is a gentle knock atENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 385the door. Permit me. (Opens the door, andenter LADY SHREWDLY, with a box in her hand')LADY SHREWDLY (looking round her).In busy preparation, I see. And I, too, havebeen busy, and have found my way up the backstaircase without meeting any body. How doyou get on ?LORD Barrymore.I assure your Ladyship we get on famously.I think our plot sure of success. None of thefiner parts of the speech are lost upon this youngman. He has a native taste, though uncultivated: he will do justice to them all.LADY SHREWDLY.With the help of this wig, and a proper solemnity.(Taking a wig from the box, which sheputs upon BLOUNT's head.) There ; who butmust admire the sapient countenance of thegreat orator Mr. O'Honikin ? And has Clement'ssonnet been exchanged for the moreprecious gem of his lordship?BLOUNT.I have taken care of that, and it is now inLady Worrymore's own keeping, under promisethat the sealed envelope is not to be opened tillthe reading hour.LADY SHREWDLY.I 'm glad of it. Adieu, then, till we meet atVOL. II. C C386 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.the place of trial, and, I trust, of triumph, myLord. (Going')LORD Barrymore (preventing her).Nay, you must stay just to hear him read oneof his favourite passages.LADY SHREWDLY.I thank you very much ; but I am in a particularhurry.LORD Barrymore.Nay, nay ; but a short passage, and I Ml readit myself.LADY SHREWDLY.Indeed, I am in a hurry.LORD Barrymore.You must hear it. I'll detain you but a fewmoments. (Running her up to the wall, as shetries to make her escapeLADY SHREWDLY.Let me go, I beseech you : I hear LadyWorry more coming.[Exit hastily, while he looks round in alarm.LORD Barrymore (listening.I hear nobody coming.BLOUNT,It was but a trick to get away.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 387LORD Barrymore.What a desperate haste she must be in ! (Goingto the table, and seeing the Amanuensis at aloss.) Write on, my friend : what J s the matter ?AMANUENSIS.There 's something wrong here.LORD Barrymore.That 's impossible.AMANUENSIS.There must be a page wanting.LORD Barrymore (examining the papers).Truly, so there is. I must have dropt it inthe library. [Exit into the library.BLOUNT (aside, looking at the Amanuensis).Silly fellow, to mention such a discovery ! Itwould have made as good sense without the pageas with it.LORD Barrymore (calling behind the scenes,from the library).Bring light here : I can see nothing.Amanuensis, carrying a light, andBL Out following*c c388 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.SCENE IV.A narrow Ante-room or Hall; Servants seencrossing the Stage from opposite sides.FIRST SERVANT.Have you been listening, Tim ? You seemmightily diverted.SECOND SERVANT.I had no occasion to listen ; for I contrivedbusiness for myself, as it were, and stole quietlyinto the room, and saw all the company, and theoration-man busy in his vocation : and hard workit is, I'll assure you.FIRST SERVANT.Hard work ! it is only words out of his mouth,is it not ? A country curate would think nothingon't.SECOND SERVANT.Only words out of his mouth, say ye ? Bothlegs and arms are at work, like any weaver busyon the treadles : and for making of mouths, andgrinning and staring under the curls of thatblowing wig of his, it's impossible for me to gi*you any notion on 't. I would not undertake tosupply either lords or ladies wi' such a tertullianENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 389of roaring, and thumping, and winnowing ofarms, for a month's wages twice told. I've seenthe stage doctor at Bartholomew fair, but he isbut a joke to it. Listen, man ! you can hearhim through the wall.(BLOUNT's voice heard without.)FIRST SERVANT (listening*Faith, so I do ! And how does my Lady takeit?SECOND SERVANT.Ay, she has nearly as hard work in admiringhim, as he has with his eloquence, as they call it.Lord help her to a soberer way of commendingfolks, for her body's sake! She'll be in a feverby the evening.FIRST SERVANT.Never mind that ; she's an able-bodied personenough, for all that she casts up her eyes, andsmells at her bottle of salts so often. But herecomes Mr. Clement's Ned.Enter a Third Servant.THIRD SERVANT.Is my master here ?SECOND SERVANT.Yes, but he came last of all the company: myLady inquired for him twenty times over, beforehe appeared.c c 3390 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.FIRST SERVANT.What kept him so long, I wonder?THIRD SERVANT.It was more wonderful that he got here at all.FIRST SERVANT.How so ?THIRD SERVANT.He has been in all the raggamuffin places inLondon, after a raggamuffin foreigner.SECOND SERVANT.And did he find him ?THIRD SERVANT.No; it was all labour lost. But I have justdiscovered where he is certainly to be found ;and if you would let me into the room for amoment, that I may whisper it in his ear, Ishould be greatly obliged to thee, Tim.SECOND SERVANT.Let ye into the room ! Not till ye gr* me agood silver sixpence, I warrant ye.THIRD SERVANT.A silver sixpence, for speaking to my ownmaster !SECOND SERVANT.Ay ; and for seeing as good a show as anyENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.body ever paid half a crown to gape at. List !list ! he's roaring again.(BLOUNT's 'voice heard as before')THIRD SERVANT.Well ; I must speak to my master, be the costwhat it may.SECOND SERVANT.Come along, then. [Exeunt.SCENE V.The grand Library : BLOUNT is discovered standingon a platform, with a table before him andhis MS. oration in his hand, surrounded byLORD andl^AVY Barrymore, LADY SHREWDLY,Miss Franklin, CLERMONT, <$c. fyc., while ageneral murmur of applause is heard, as thescene opens.BLOUNT (in a low voice, as if much exhausted).Pardon me for a moment. ( Takes a glass ofwater from the table and drinks it slowlyLADY Barrymore (running about from one personto another.LADY Barrymore.Was there ever any thing so eloquent ? Is itnot sublime? And you love poetry, Ladyc c 4392 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.Tweedle ; is it not poetical, too ? A scholarlike you, Mr. Clement, must know how to appreciateits excellence.SIR JOHN Croton.His learning were of little value else. Thosewho have studied Demosthenes and Cicero willknow what to think of this, pretty accurately.LADY Barrymore.I am delighted to hear you say so, Sir John.Demosthenes ! Cicero ! Oh, it makes my heartstir within me to hear those names pronounced !and those only who love their immortal workscan do justice to the eloquence of Mr.O'Honikin.LORD Barrymore (going up to them, rubbing hishands and chuckling.And you like it, Lady Worry in ore ? Andyou like it, Sir John? Both very right: he'sa clever fellow ; both very right. What do yousay, Mr. Clement ?CLERMONT.Every one is right to be pleased when he can.LADY Barrymore.What an observation, applied to the fervourof our admiration !LORD Barrymore (laying his hand soothingly onCLERMONT's arm).Don't be so .grave, my dear Sir : have patienceENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 393have patience : your pretty sonnet will claimits own share of admiration presently. (Goingwith great complacency from one person to another*)I hope you like him ? I hope you like thespeech. Very good ; all very clever. At least,I am told so it does not become me to speak.LADY SHREWDLY (aside, pulling his sleeve.Have a care: you'll discover all with thatfalse modesty.LORD Barrymore (aside tO LADY SHREWDLY).No, no! I'm cunning; I manage very well.(Aloud My Lady Worrymore, what did youthink of that part about the Ploughman and theLark, and the waving of the poppies ? veryfine, was it not? No, no ! I don't mean fine,neither ; rather too fanciful.LADY Barrymore.You are a cold critic, my Lord. It requiresa kindred spirit with the writer's to admire suchexquisite imagery.LORD Barrymore.Very right ; so it does, and you are akin tohim, dear wife.LADY Barrymore.Hush ! he has recovered, and is going to resume.394 ENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY.BLOUNT (after having sipped the water andrubbed his forehead with an affected languor,takes up his paper and proceeds.I have now, my Lords I mean, my honourablefriends put you in possession of theviews, ideas, and opinions of a humble individual,who has cogitated on this momentous subjectwith a sincere, a pure, a vivid, an ardent desireto enlighten the understandings, to rouse theproper feelings, of others ; and I am free toconfess, that I feel it to be my duty, humbleindividual as I am : I feel it to be my duty, and amfree to confess, that it will give me the mostunfeigned delight and satisfaction, if I havebut roused one spirit to its duty warmed onebosom with the feelings which ought to be felton such a momentous subject loosened fromthe trammels of prejudice one intelligent, enlightened,and intellectual compatriot." (Bowsaffectedly r , and lays down the paper, whilst a murmurof applause Hills the roomyLADY Barrymore (tO CLERMONT).What a beautiful conclusion, Mr. Clement!Can one say more of it than that it is worthy ofthe divine passages which preceded it ?CLERMONT.That is exactly what I should say of it, andI am glad it will satisfy your Ladyship.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 3Q5LADY Barrymore.O that word satisfy! I'll speak no moreto you. (Running eagerly to BLOUNT as hedescends from the platforms O my dear Mr.O'Honikin ! you have laid us under eternalobligations. I shall now know what the ancientorators of Greece would have been, had theylived in our own times.SIR JOHN Croton.And spoken upon the corn laws.LORD Barrymore (with great pleasure andvivacity).And you are pleased, Sir John ? And youare enchanted, Lady Worry more ?LADY Barrymore.Yes ; rather more so, I believe, than yourLordship.LORD Barrymore.Very right ; I find no fault with you for that,my Lady ; it is right to be enchanted with aclever thing, let others feel as they may. Is itnot, Miss Frankland ? Is it not, Lady Tweedle ?(Clapping BLOUNT's shoulders O, my dearOrator ! you have done your part to admiration :you have given such expression to my thoughts.LADY Barrymore (to BLOUNT).What does he say ?396 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.BLOUNT.That I I his Lordship does me the honourto say that I have given expression to histhoughts ; graciously insinuating, that the poorideas I have just delivered are akin to thosewhich he himself entertains.LADY Barrymore (contemptuously ', and in a lowvoice to BLOUNT).Which are always akin to whatever he happensto hear last.BLOUNT.And must, in this bright metropolis, find agoodly clan of relations.LADY Barrymore.And, my dear Mr. O'Honikin ! what alternationsof humility and generous confidence ! Thehumble individual, who feels it to be his duty torouse to action, to warm with How did itgo?BLOUNT.O, dear Lady, you make me blush ! To rouseto duty warm to feeling loosen from thetrammels of prejudice my enlightened, intelligent,and intellectual compatriots. All that ahumble individual like myself could possiblyhope to achieve.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 397LORD Barrymore.And has he not achieved it ? has he not, mylove ?LADY Barrymore (aside).What, is he here again !LADY SHREWDLY (aside to LORD Barrymore).Be quiet, my Lord, or you'll betray thewhole.LORD Barrymore (aside to LADY SHREWDLY).Well, well! I'm as quiet as a mouse.LADY SHREWDLY.But you forget the sonnet, Lady Worrymore,in your admiration of the speech.LADY Barrymore.I beg your pardon, Mr. Clement ; I beg athousand pardons.CLERMONT.One, Madam, is more than enough.LADY Barrymore (taking a packet from herreticule.This most prized and precious packet. (Openingit and holding out a paper to CLERMONT.)Pray, dear Sir, do you now occupy the seat ofMr. O'Honikin, and paradise our souls withthe effusions of your divine muse.398 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.CLERMONT.Pardon me, Madam ; myself and my verses areutterly unworthy to occupy the place of suchsuperlative predecessors.LADY Barrymore.Nay, nay; you will read them yourself; noone else would give them their proper expression.CLERMONT.Excuse me : excuse me.BLOUNT.And excuse me, also, for presuming to offer myhusky voice for that service which Mr. Clementtoo modestly declines.LADY Barrymore.How delightfully obliging ! but I fear it willexhaust you too much.LORD Barrymore (eagerly.Not a bit, not a bit ! to it, dear Orator, andgive us the sonnet, too.BLOUNT (receiving the paper from LADY Barrymore: returns to the platform, and readsaffectedly as before.SONNET TO A YOUNG LADY.The pretty gadfly, sporting in the raysOf Sol's bright beams, is heedless of the painThe noble steed doth from its sting sustain.On his arch'd neck and sleeky sides it plays,ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 3 { J9Darting now here, now there, its pointed sting ;While he, impatient of the frequent smart,Doth bound, and paw, and rear, and wince, and start,And scours across the plain. But nought doth bringRelief to his sharp torment : So do I,Poor luckless wight ! by Love's keen arrows gall'd,From thee, my little pretty tease-fly.But, ah ! in vain ! there is in me no powerTo shake thee off; nor art thou ever pall'dWith this thy cruel sport, in ball-room, bank, or bower.LADY Barrymore.Delightful, delightful ! I expected to becharmed with your sonnet, Mr. Clement, butthis outdoes all expectation.CLERMONT.And all patience at the same time, Madam.LADY Barrymore.Nay, don't let the modesty of genius supposethat we could possibly think it tedious. Howdelightful the lady must have been to whom thatsonnet was addressed ! A young lady, as thetitle gives notice.CLERMONT.The younger the better, I 'm sure, for receivingsuch verses.LORD Barrymore.What does he say? Does his modesty shrinkfrom praise ?CLERMONT.My Lord, I can suffer this no longer : so400 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.much honour thrust upon me, to which I haveno pretensions, isLORD Barrymore (aside tO CLERMONl).Come this way, and receive a private word inyour ear.LADY SHREWDLY (aside tO LORD Barrymore).Let me speak to him, my Lord, and do youenjoy your secret triumph. (Draws CLERMONTaway to a corner where she continues speaking tohim in dumb showyLADY Barrymore.Was such beautiful poetry, with such a modestpoet, ever yet combined ?SIR JOHN Croton.He blushed deeply, indeed : and, methinks,(Fixing his eyes on MISSFRANKLAND) he has a fairfriend here who sympathises with his modesty,if one may judge from the colour of her cheeks.Ah ! when shall I receive such proofs of sympathy?MISS Franklin.When you blush at all, Sir John. You canscarcely expect from your friends this token ofsympathy till you give them an opportunity.BLOUNT.Yes, our poet blushed a little, I believe, as IENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY. 401read his verses ; he was scarcely aware of theirexcellence.LORD Barrymore.How should he ; how should he ? One makesbut slight account of one's own. It is a prettything enough in its way ; but you honour it toomuch, perhaps. He, he, he ! (Chuckling andrubbing his hands.) Don't you think so, LadyTweedle? Don't you think so, Miss Fussit?Don't you think so, my love ?LADY Barrymore (impatiently.You tread on my flounces, my Lord. Honoursuch a poem too much ? it is impossible ! I '11have a gadfly painted on my fan, and worship it.ALL THE LADIES (MlSS Franklin eXCCptcd)*So will I so will we all.BLOUNT.And what more will you do, dear ladies, tohonour your divine poet?LADY Barrymore.And our divine orator, too, Mr. O'Honikin.LORD Barrymore.Crown their busts with laurels, my Lady Worrymore, with your own fair hands.LADY Barrymore.Charming ! that is the classical tribute whichVOL. II. D D402 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.my heart pants to bestow. I would not live anhour without doing it, if I had but their bustsand a garland.LORD Barrymore.I'll find the busts this very evening, my love,if you'll find the laurels.LADY Barrymore.Thank you, my Lord ! How amiable it is inyou to be so ready in honouring the merit ofothers ! Let it then be so arranged, and thisevening in the garden, before sunset, the tributeshall be paid ; to which solemnity (curtseyingaround her I bid ye all.LORD Barrymore.Bravo, my dear wife ! Done like a most courteousand graceful lady. He! he! he! Ithought it would please you. Did you mark thelast line of it, ending thus " Ball-room, bank,and bower?" It cost the poet some trouble, nodoubt, to find such alliteration as that.BLOUNT.Unless it came by the Muse's inspiration, whichis a convenient help for any poet, and saves thefrail bark of his fancy a plaguy course of tacking.But you say nothing of the beginning ofthe piece, which shows such richness of expression:ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 403** The pretty gadfly, sporting in the raysOf Sol's bright beams"steeping, as it were, the brightness of the sun inhis own brightness. This is what may be calledsupererogation or opulence of language.LADY Barrymore.So it is : a most ingenious and judicious remark,LORD Barrymore.You are a clever fellow, O'HonikhuSIR JOHN Croton.As good a critic as an orator.Enter a Servant, announcing something in dumbshow.LORD Barrymore,Ay, there is some little refreshment, I suppose,in the next room. Pray do us the honour.(Offering his arm to a lady') exeuntD D404 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.ACT III.SCENE I. COLONEL Franklin's House.Enter Miss Franklin, with a scarf or shawl onher shoulders, as if going out, meeting BARBARA,who enters by the opposite side.BARBARA.Sir John Crofton is below, madam.MISS Franklin.And have you not told him that I am goingout?BARBARA.I did so, my dear lady ; but what use is therei n denying you to a gentleman who says he willreturn an hour hence, or an hour after that, oranhour after that again, should it be more convenientto you ?MISS Franklin.Does he request to be admitted so earnestly ?BARBARA.Yes, indeed ; and his requests are like thesails of a windmill, always returning.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 405MISS Franklin.Very likely, Barbara, when there is breezeenough to swell them.BARBARA.How so, madam ?MISS Franklin.You smile on him when he comes, perhaps, asif you would say, " My mistress is going out,but I know she will be pleased to see you, SirJohn."BARBARA.Indeed, indeed, I did not, madam ; and forany little presents he has given 1 mean offeredme, I scorn them as much as any body. But, Imust needs own, madam, that I likes to see agenteel titled gentleman enter the house, whospeaks to a poor servant cheerily, better than agrave stately Mr. Thingumy, who passes one asif one were the door-post.MISS Franklin.Don't be so discomposed, Barbara; I begpardon if my suspicions wrong you. Be this asit may, I believe you wish me well.BARBARA.Ay, that I do ; I wish you well, and rich,and every thing that is good. And lady soundsbetter than mistress at any rate. I little thought,after serving you almost twenty years as dry.D D 3406 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.nurse, school-nurse, and own maid, to be but theattendant of a plain gentlewoman at last.MISS Franklin (laughing.For thy sake, then, I had better look out forapeer. However, since it must be, desire SirJohn Crofton to come up stairs.[Exit BARBARA.It is an unpleasant moment, and I shrink fromit, but the sooner it is over the better. Ay,and to settle the matter with a good grace forhim, and without mortification to myself, it mustbe done quickly.Enter SIR JOHN Croton,SIR JOHN.I thank you, Miss Frankland, for this condescension: five minutes of your company is preciouswhen one cannot obtain more. But areyou, indeed, obliged to go out?MISS Franklin.I really have business which obliges me to go.SIR JOHN.And I have business (pardon me for calling itby that name) which requires you to stay. Willyou honour me so far? (Setting chairs andsitting down by her.} Miss Frankland, thereare situations which must plead a man's excuseENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 407for abruptness for precipitancy for forin short, you understand me. I see by theglance of her eye, that Miss Frankland understandsme to be in the most awkward situationthat a man of feeling can be placed in.MISS Franklin.And is it on that account the more likely toembarrass Sir John Crofton ?SIR JOHN.That sarcastic question does me the greatestinjustice. (Laying his hand on his hearty Couldyou read the real sentiments which are hereembosomed, you would know how ardent, howdisinterested, how unalterable is that attachmentto your cruel self which you seem so inclined tosport with.MISS Franklin.In that case I should certainly know it, andregulate my gratitude accordingly.SIR JOHN.What frigid formal words may come from thefairest lips on the most interesting subjects !Gratitude ! Oh, Miss Frankland ! you knowthat it is something far more precious than gratitudewhich I would gladly earn from you bythe whole affections of my heart, the wholedevotion of my life and of my fortune.D D 4408 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.And if I can give you no more, your suit ofcourse is at an end, and free to be preferred insome more worthy and favourable quarter.SIR JOHN.O, do not say so! a more favourable, I painfullyfeel, may be easily found ; a more worthy,never.MISS Franklin.You set upon me an imaginary value.SIR JOHN.Call it not so : I repeat my words ; and permitme to add, adorable girl, that where worthis, favour deserves to be waited for. Say, thatin a fortnight hence, I may have some chance ofsubduing your reluctance.MISS Franklin (shaking her head).I cannot.SIR JOHN.In a month, then ?MISS Franklin (as before.That would make no difference.SIR JOHN.Say two months, then six months -, ay, awhole year, if you can be so cruel as to withholdyour consent to make me happy for so long aperiod.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 409MISS Franklin.That is a cruelty I shall never be guilty of.SIR JOHN.You delight, you transport me ! on my kneesI thank you, most bewitching of creatures !MISS Franklin.Rise up, Sir John, and waste no thanks on sosmall an obligation ; but hear me out. Withholdingmy consent is a cruelty, as you arepleased to call it, of which I shall never beguilty, since what will never be given, cannotbe said to be withheld for any period.SIR JOHN (rising from his knees angrily).Upon my honour, Miss Frankland, you are apractised angler, a very practised angler, nodoubt ; but do not think to hook a trout withbait that suits a gudgeon.MISS Franklin.You are angry, Sir John, and that admonishesme that I should be plain that I should behonest.SIR JOHN.Ay, very honest, no doubt. (Going hastilyaway, and returning') Nay, nay, nay! I amnot angry; and you shall be as honest as youwill, but kind at the same time.410 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.MISS FllANKLAND.As you understand the word kind, the two areincompatible.SIR JOHN.And how does Miss Frankland understandit, pray?MISS Franklin.That to put a speedy end to all suspense,even by a flat refusal, is kind in every thing thatregards the affections ; if I am not too presumptuousin supposing the present proposal tobe a case of that nature.SIR JOHN.Faith, it is at least one of an extraordinarynature, and may excuse all concerned with itfrom the common rules of ceremony and etiquette.(Crossing the floor, then returning witha conceited smiles Pardon me, Miss Frankland ;I feel myself still at liberty to watch for somemore propitious moment.MISS Franklin.Your patience will be tired out ere you findit ; and so will the patience of my friend (lookingat her watch, whom I promised to meetnearly half an hour ago.(Curtseying to SIR JOHN, who retires tardily,and lays his hand on his heart as he disappearsENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 411MISS Franklin (alone).self-conceit, self-conceit ! how is the mostdownright person in the world, restrained by thecommon rules of society, to deal with thee?And if thou art the cause of perseverance, whatshall we say of the high-lauded virtue of constancy?Enter LADY SHREWDLY.LADY SHREWDLY.Is it possible, Fanny Frankland ? I could nothave believed it.MISS Franklin.What is it that so thwarts your belief?LADY SHREWDLY.That you should encourage the addresses ofSir John Crofton, because Clement for a seasonwas cajoled by the affected ardour of LadyWorrymore. You might have seen very wellthat he was ashamed of his sonnet, and enjoyednot the praises she lavished on it.MISS Franklin.And what puts it into your head that I haveencouraged his addresses?LADY SHREWDLY.1 met him just now on the stairs, smiling tohimself very knowingly, and when I asked him,ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.with a significant look, how affairs prosperedwith him here, his answer was a nod of complacency,which wanted no words of explanation.MISS Franklin.I have given him as decided a refusal as myknowledge of civil language could provide mewith.LADY SHREWDLY.My poor simple creature ! what dictionary inthe world will furnish language sufficiently explicitto make a vain puppy understand that awoman will not have him ? I should have understoodhis foolish smile better ; pardon me, dearchild.MISS Franklin.But it does not signify ; he will understand itdistinctly enough tomorrow without a dictionary'shelp, for I am convinced that our little boyis the son of poor Emma.LADY SHREWDLY.We shall know that soon, for the German willbe here to answer the questions of your uncle inaquarter of an hour. Clement was indefatigablein finding him out.MISS Franklin.Was he ?ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 413LADY SHREWDLY.Yes, he was; and why do you say this solanguidly?MISS Franklin.To speak sincerely, then, I but half like hiseagerness in helping to make me a poor woman*LADY SHREWDLY.Fie, fie, Fanny Frankland ! your heart is anunfit place for unworthy thoughts to harbour in.MISS Franklin.They sometimes harbour in better hearts thanmine.LADY SHREWDLY.Ay, they are subtle imps, that for a momentwill find shelter anywhere ; but they are quicklyturned adrift, and have rest and entertainmentonly with the unworthy.MISS Franklin.I thank you ! I thank you most gratefully,my dear Lady Shrewdly, for this friendly correction; I cast the base thought from my breast.I have given him cause by my petulance to supposethat I am not a fit companion for him, andtherefore every thing particular between us isjustly at an end. Why should I suppose thathe has served me on this occasion from any butamiable motives?414 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.LADY SHREWDLY.Indeed you ought not to suppose it.MISS Franklin.Alas, my dear friend !LADY SHREWDLY.Why that sigh ? .MISS Franklin.Do you know that I am afraid of myself?LADY SHREWDLY.And why, dear child ; of what are you afraid ?MISS Franklin.I fear that, when I am comparatively poor, Ishalt bear the neglect of the world and my owninsignificance as I ought.LADY SHREWDLY.Nay, that very fear is a voice from heaven forthy preservation.MISS Franklin.May it prove so ! I feel I shall be supportedin doing what is right ; and feeling what is rightmay at length follow (raising her eyes to heaven,if my humble sacrifice be accepted.LADY SHREWDLY.And it will be accepted, my own honest girl !But you were going out, I know, and I will notENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY.detain you : pray permit me to get into the carnagewith you, that I may enjoy your companythe longer.MISS Franklin.You are very kind.VExeunt arm in arm.SCENE II.COLONEL Franklin's Apartment.Enter PATERSON with books, which he lays upon atable, and then wheels his master 9 s easy chair toits proper place.PATERSON (alone.Ay, this here book of maps has had a longrest in the old bookcase ; I wonder what campaignsand battles he has got into his head now.Howsomever, it signifies little, so as they cankeep his notions of his own constitution, as hecalls it, and ill-formed gout and affection of thekidneys, and the Lord knows what ! out of it.Enter COLONEL Franklin, leaning on his stick.COLONEL Franklin (after seating himself, andlooking at his hand).I think this stiffness in my joints must be416 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.somehow connected with this uneasy feeling inmy back : dost thou not think so, Paterson ?yet the doctor says it is not.PATERSON.And should not he know best, sir? Lordbless your honour ! my joints are stiff, as mostold men's are ; and my back aches often enough,God wot ! but I never think of asking the doctorabout it. Take a musket in your hand and paceabout the gallery a bit, and I'll warrant yourback will get better.COLONEL Franklin.Thou 'rt a rough physician, Paterson.LAURIE.But a kind one, your honour, and that is morethan can be said of some that are smoother.COLONEL Franklin.Well, well; there's no changing thy nature,and I must e'en receive such sympathy as thouhast to give.Enter Servant.SERVANT.The German foreigner is come, Sir, that youwished to see. Miss Frankland desired me totell you.COLONEL Franklin.Let him come to me here.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 417SERVANT.And the little master too, sir ?COLONEL Franklin (agitated.No, no ! let him come by himself; Miss Frank-landwill look to the child. \ Exit Servant.Hast thou any notion, Paterson, what this outlandishfellow has been sent for ?PATERSON.I have a kind of notion, I know not how, aboutit. Does your honour wish me to leave theroom ?COLONEL Franklin.Stay where thou art ; I would rather havethee by me.Enter MANHAUNSLET,(To MANHAUNSLET.) You are a foreigner, Iunderstand, and have brought a little boy withyou to this country.MANHAUNSLET.Yes, honorable sur.COLONEL Franklin.Is he your own son ?MANHAUNSLET.He be good as son to me.COLONEL Franklin.That is no direct answer. Tell me the honestVOL. II. E E -418 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.truth, and whatever it may be, I will rewardthee for it. And if you say what is false, I amnot such a dunderhead but I shall find it out.PATERSON.Ay ; his honour will find you out, so you hadbetter speak the plain truth at once.COLONEL Franklin.The boy, then, is not your own son ; is heyour relation ?MANHAUNSLET.Do not know.COLONEL Franklin.Whose son is he ?MANHAUNSLET.Do not know.COLONEL Franklin.Where was he born ?MANHAUNSLET.Do not know.COLONEL Franklin.How did he fall into your hands ? Answerme plainly ; don't hesitate.PATERSON.Nay, your honour ; he'll say "do not know"to that too. Just let him tell his story after hisENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 419own fashion, and pick the truth out of it thebest way you can. If it does not hang together,you can question him afterwards.COLONEL Franklin.I believe thou art right, Paterson. Tell meyour story your own way, my friend. I have acuriosity to know how you came by the child,and I will pay you handsomely for satisfying it.And you need not be afraid of my taking theboy from you,' till I have made you willing topart with him.MANHAUNSLET.Der be eight years ago, dat I passed trou desmall town in Bohemia, in de night. When inone moment de large inn house burst into flame,and somebody wit two long arms rowed dechild out from window, which I did catch in mygaberdine.COLONEL Franklin.And did you not learn what strangers were inthe inn, and to whom he belonged ?MANHAUNSLET.One poor gentleman, who was taken ill in dehouse, and died of illness and of de burnings ondat night.COLONEL Franklin.What countryman was he ?E E 2420 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.MANHAUNSLET.Do not know.COLONEL Franklin.What papers, clothes, or goods did he leavebehind him ?MANHAUNSLET.All turned to cinder.COLONEL Franklin.What clothes had the child upon him, whenyou caught him in your gaberdine ?MANHAUNSLET.One littel shirt.LAURIE.Had it any letters marked upon it?MANHAUNSLET.No.LAURIE.Where is that shirt now ?MANHAUNSLET.It lie wit many oder rags to manure de cornfieldsof Bohemia.COLONEL Franklin.And this is all you have to tell us of the boy ?MANHAUNSLET.Not all.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.COLONEL Franklin.Tell me the rest, then, quickly.MANHAUNSLET.Dere be no better boy for de tight rope, andde tumbling, and de jugglery, in all de world : andhe never felled no lie no, not at all.COLONEL Franklin.Hang the tight rope and the jugglery ! Thouhast given him a notable education, no doubt ;and a fine varlet he will be to receive into anyfamily. So you have nothing more to tell meabout the child ?MANHAUNSLET.Netting more.COLONEL Franklin.What a romantic visionary track that dear girlhas pursued! Call her in, Paterson ; I'll seethepoor child now with more composure.[Exit PATERSON.He is profitable to you, I suppose?MANHAUNSLET.He earn money for me ; he is my living.COLONEL Franklin.I understand you, friend* and have no wish todoyou any wrong.E E 3ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.Enter Miss Franklin, leading Hugh, andfollowed by MRS. BROWN and PATERSON.MISS Franklin (advancing to her uncle withHugh).See, my dear uncle.COLONEL Franklin (starting from his seat).Very like ; ay, very like, indeed. Look up,my pretty child; look in my face steadily.Would I could certainly know who was thymother! (Turns away from him, and then returnsand looks at him again') Be whose childthou may, thou art a creature worth cherishing.Give me thy hand. (Takes his hand and examinesit") The very form of her fingers andnails ; they were particular. (Staggers back andsinks again into his chair, quite overcome')MISS Franklin.My dear uncle, bear up cheerily. You see Ihave brought you what was well worth the bringing.COLONEL Franklin.Thou hast indeed, dear Fanny ; and for thysake, were the resemblance less, he shall live asachild in my family, and be taken from his presentway of life.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.MISS Franklin.I thank you, dear uncle.COLONEL Franklin.We have no reasonable proof of his parentage.MISS Franklin.I know not what you have learnt from Mr.Manhaunslet ; but if this statement from theGenoese ambassador, in answer to the queries ofClement, agree with it, you will have somethingof evidence to rest on. (Offering him a papersCOLONEL Franklin.Read it thyself ; I cannot no, don't readit ; tell me the substance of it ; that will suffice.MISS Franklin.It says that Madame Martini became themother of a boy a few weeks before her death,and that Martini, with the child, left Italy theyear after to go into Bohemia, but from thattime was never heard of more.COLONEL Franklin (catching Hugo in ilsarms and kissing him).If thou art her boy if thou art, indeed.O, that I were assured of it !MISS Franklin.Mrs. Brown, you said something about a goldheart which you took from his neck.E E 4424 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.MRS. BROWN.Yes, madam, I put it up when he was sick,for I thought Lady Worrymore would lay herhands upon it. Here it is. giving a locket toMiss Franklin, who shows it to the COLONEL).MISS Franklin.Do you know it, Sir ?COLONEL Franklin (shaking his head).I do not. (To MANHAUNSLET.) Was it onthe child when you first found him?MANHAUNSLET.It was round his neck. It is ornament datour women and oder countries' women do wear ;de are sold in Italian and German fairs notgreatly dear.COLONEL Franklin.It must be hollow ; does it open ?MANHAUNSLET.Not open.PATERSON.Let me look ; perhaps it does. (Turning itround.) This little ornament may be a spring.(Presses and opens it.)COLONEL Franklin (eagerly).Hast thou found any thing ?ENTHUSIASM *. A COMEDY.PATERSON.A small bit of paper enclosing this lock ofhair. There, your honour.COLONEL Franklin (taking the paper fromPATERSON and reading.A lock of my father's hair." It is writtenin her own small hand, and this is the very lockwhich she cut from my head when Oh, oh !and she loved me to the last, though she woundedme so grievously ! (Embraces Hugh again andagain, then crosses the room hastily Come tomy room presently, Fanny, and bring the boywith thee. exit.MANHAUNSLET.Ha, Master Hughoo ! you be one gentlemannow.MRS. BROWN.And right glad to leave you, I think.Hugh.No, Dame Brown ; he fed, he clothed me, anddid beat me very seldom.MRS. BROWN.Except when the monkey and thee quarrelled,and then he always took part with that odiousbrute.MISS Franklin.Say no more of this, good Mrs. Brown : letevery thing unpleasant be forgotten. Colonel426 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.Frankland will settle every thing to your satisfaction.(To PATERSON.) Lead them to thehousekeeper's room, and take good care of themboth.[As PATERSON is leading them cwoay Hughruns to them, kisses MRS. BROWN'S hand,and gives his hand kindly to MAN-gauntlet.]Hugh.See you bote again : see you often, and gladof it.MISS Franklin.That is right, Hughoo. And now you mustcome with me, and be a good child to your oldgrandfather.Hugh.And good boy to you always; to love you,and bide wit you, and do all your bidding. O !I will tumble, and juggle, and sing to you allday long, if you will. ( Wrapping himself fondlyin the skirt of her gown, and clinging to her asthey go off.} [Exeunt.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 427SCENE III.LORD Barrymore's Garden. Two Busts, coveredwith linen, in the back-ground, and Companyassembled, amongst whom are discovered LORDBarrymore, LADY SHREWDLY, fyc. 8fC.LORD Barrymore (to Servants).Move the busts this way ; this is the best possiblespot for them. [Servants move the busts ontheir pedestals to the front of the Stage] Shewill be here in a moment. But where is Blunt ?(Retires amongst the crowd at the bottom ofthe Stage, whilst LADY SHREWDLY andSIR JOHN Croton come forwardsSIR JOHN.So the fair lady has unseated herself with herown busy hands, and torn from her own brow allthe grace and honours of an heiress ?LADY SHREWDLY.It has indeed been her own doing.SIR JOHN.And a very foolish one, too : the age of romancehas been long passed.428 ENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY.LADY SHREWDLY.And will not be revived, I perceive, by SirJohn Croton.SIR JOHN.No, faith ! the world, as it stands, is goodenough for me.LADY SHREWDLY.I have the honour to agree with you entirelyupon that point.SIR JOHN.Find out a puny urchin to disinherit herself!I have made a very narrow I mean, anyonewho has thought of offering to her, has hada narrow escape.LADY SHREWDLY.And if it be honourable, as well as narrow,you have reason to be pleased.SIR JOHN.Did she know of this brat and his birthrightsthis morning when 1 saw her?LADY SHREWDLY.She suspected it then ; and the expression youwore on your face, as I passed you on the stair,of a favoured lover, showed me plainly enoughthat you did not.SIR JOHN.Nay, Lady Shrewdly ; you mistook that expression.ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.LADY SHREWDLY.I should have understood it to mean, then,that you were not favoured.SIR JOHN.When it is necessary that Lady Shrewdlyshould be informed of my private affairs, I shallhave the honour to answer her queries.LADY SHREWDLY,And when such information can reflect anycredit upon Sir John Crofton, I presume he willdeem it necessary.Enter BLOUNT.Ha ! Blunt come at last : and not far behindcomes Colonel Frankland and his niece.Enter COLONEL Franklin, leaning on Clementand Miss Franklin ; and SIR JOHNCroton, making them a distant bow, retiresto the bottom of the Stage.COLONEL Franklin.I thank thee, Clement : thy arm makes agood support for an old man.CLERMONT.And is one always at your service, my dearSir.430 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.COLONEL Franklin.1 thank thee, my good fellow. Thou art askind as ever, and as simple, too, methinks ; buthow comes it that thy bust, as they tell me, is tobe crowned with laurel for that sonnet of thine,which Fanny, to say the honest truth, has notpraised much.LORD Barrymore (now advancing to the front,and overhearing there).How so? Not praised much. Ha! ha! ha!maiden prudery : just as it should be.COLONEL Franklin.It may be so ; but she generally speaks as shethinks.LORD Barrymore.Not praised it much ! What faults does shefind with it ?COLONEL Franklin.There was something at the beginning, I forgetwhat, which she said was very bad ; and allthat ball-room, bank, and bower business in thelast line, she thinks is but wordy and cumbersome.LORD Barrymore.Poo ! poo ! poo ! all maiden prudery, Colonel.She will not she will not be pleased with thepoetry of a young fellow.ENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY. 431COLONEL Franklin.It may be so : and how comes he to have hisbust made out so cleverly ? To write rhymesone day, and be crowned for it the next, ismarching quick-step time on the route of reputation.Enter LADY Barrymore, followed by her maid,carrying a basket with two laurel wreaths.But here comes the Lady Paramount, and Bestowerof Reputation, who should be paintedwith a trumpet in her mouth, like my LadyFame.LORD Barrymore.And so she ought. When her mind is unweariedby prejudice, nobody knows so wellwhere praise is due.LADY Barrymore (looking round on the company,and bowing graciously).Most punctually assembled, and most welcome! I thank ye all, and beg your pardon forbeing so long in joining such friends ; but, intruth, I could not be satisfied with the wreaths,which have been platted and unplatted, I don'tknow how often. And see there (pointing tothe basket) ; they are not yet what I could wish.Laurels for this sublime circlet should have beenfresher and brighter than our poor English climateENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY.did ever produce ; the myrtles for the otherculled in the valley of Vaticluse itself. Indeedthey are not worthy of their high destination.LORD Barrymore.But from your fair hands, my Lady, is thereeither orator or poet who would not prize a garlandof the simplest herbs ?BLOUNT.Yes, saintfoin, buttercups, or any thing.LADY Barrymore.O, Mr. O'Honikin ! could any one but yourself,undervaluing your own excellence, havetalked of this touching solemnity ! O dear !what shall I say ? My heart pants within me !Tears are forcing their way into my eyes ! (Layingone hand on her breast affectedly, and theother on her eyes.}BLOUNT (aside to LADY SHREWDLY).Forced work, indeed, I believe.LORD Barrymore (to LADY SHREWDLY).She is really touched. This is very amiable,my dear cousin.LADY SHREWDLY.Assuredly, my Lord, she has a true feeling ofthe honours belonging to genius.ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 433LADY Barrymore.You are right, my dear Lady Shrewdly : youunderstand me. O ! did ever creature feel it sosensibly as I do ! The very word genius sometimesmakes me weep. (Putting her handkerchiefto her eyes affectedlyLORD Barrymore.Well, my dear wife ! it is very affecting ; italmost brings tears into my own eyes. (Runningfrom one person to another Is it not so? Isit not very affecting ? Could almost cry myself.Don't you feel it ? But come, my dear love !you delay the ceremony.LADY Barrymore.It shall be delayed no longer. Happy moment! sublime point of time ! (Talking a wreathfrom the baskets Thus, by an unworthy hand,is crowned the bust of personified Eloquence.BLOUNT (to Miss Franklin).Unveil that bust, fair lady : nothing but thehand of beauty, I suppose, must take part in suchministry.(Miss Franklin removes the veil from oneof the busts, as LADY Barrymore raisesthe garland to crown it, but starts back,uttering a faint cry, on perceiving it to bethebust of her lordlyVOL. II. F F434 ENTHUSIASM '. A COMEDY.LADY Barrymore.There is some mistake here. What a stupidblunder to bring this bust here, instead of theright one !LORD Barrymore.Ha! ha! ha! it is the right one, dear lady!it is the right one.LADY Barrymore.Do you think to persuade me, my Lord, thatis not the very bust which was taken of yourselfsix months ago by Mr. Thumb ?BLOUNT.And is not the bust taken of his Lordship sixmonths ago very fit to receive the honour earnedby a speech written by him, probably about thesame period?LADY Barrymore.Fie ! fie ! Mr. O'Honikin ! to attempt to deceiveme, and wrong yourself; to pluck theeagle's feathers from your own outstretchedwings, to stick them in the pinions of aBLOUNT.Indeed, Madam, that very eloquent speechwhich I had the honour of reading to your Ladyshipand this good company, is no more my ownthan this wig (taking off the wig), which I oweto the bounty of Lady Shrewdly.ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 435LADY WORHYMORE (staring at him.Frank Blunt of Herefordshire ?BLOUNT.The same, and your very humble servant.LADY Barrymore.You were always full of nonsense and tricks ;but this is past endurance.BLOUNT.My dear Madam \ can't you endure that theeloquence you have so ardently admired shouldbelong to your own accomplished lord ; shouldbe the produce, as one may say, of your ownflesh and blood ?LORD Barrymore.Yes, my dear life ! you must pardon both himand me : for, had you known the speech to beof my composition, you would not have done itjustice, I fear. Don't pout so, my dear! (in asoothing voices nay, don't pout. I like you foradmiring what is good, let the author of it bewho he may. He! he] he! he!BLOUNT.And because the orator has received his due,must the poet go unhonoured ? Mr. Clementthere is waiting to see his bust served with itsgarland also ; and as there is no wig on his headyour Ladyship cannot be deceived in that quarter.F F 2436 ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY.LORD WORK YM ORE.And ladies, you know, my love, are reckonedbetter judges of poetry than speeches ; thoughthe present company, I believe, will reckon yourather a capricious, than a bad judge of either.LADY Barrymore (holding her head to one side,and assuming an air of diffidence).I feel, what I ought to have acknowledgedbefore, that the tremor of my nerves has renderedme quite unfit, for the last twelve hoursO, much longer! to judge of any thing. It isbetter for me to take care of my own fragileframe, than to concern myself with what is, perhaps,beyond the power of my poor capacity.BLOUNT.Why, your Ladyship's capacity never showeditself more undoubtedly than on the present interestingoccasion. Had you praised the speechwhich I had the honour of reading, as the compositionof Lord Worrymore, the partiality of awife might have been suspected.LORD Barrymore.Very true, he ! he ! he ! Well urged, Blunt.And now, Mr. Clement, come nearer to us, andwitness the honour conferred on the writer ofthe sonnet. My dear love ! where is the otherwreath ?ENTHUSIASM I A COMEDY. 437BLOUNT (following LADY Barrymore, as sheturns away moodily.Nay, my Lady, don't let the writer of thatbeautiful sonnet be curtailed of his honours, becauseof my delinquency. It were an insult tothe whole nine Muses to send poetry awayuncrowned, when prose has been so noblyrewarded.CLERMONT.Pray, don't urge it. Her Ladyship, perhaps,thinks such poetry unworthy to be ranked withsuch prose ; and we ought not toLADY Barrymore.By no means, Mr. Clement ; by no means.The merit of that beautiful sonnet cannot beaffected in my estimation by any adventitiouscircumstances.LORD Barrymore.That 's right, Lady Worry more ; let everythingrest on its own merit, he ! he ! he ! Thatis the golden rule to go by.BLOUNT (as before.Now do you unveil that bust, Miss Frankland.Ha ! you retire behind backs, and won't do it.I '11 do it myself, then, though I be but an F 3438 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY,seemly minister in such elegancies. (Gives LADYBarrymore the wreath, and then, as she is raisingif, uncovers the other bust of her Lordly Putit on ; put it on, my Lady. This is also the bustof the real poet who penned that delectablesonnet, and must not be defrauded of its due.LADY Barrymore (dashing the wreath in hisface.I can bear such provoking insults no longer.BLOUNT.Devil take it ! You have scratched my facewith your twigs.LADY Barrymore.I wish they had all been thorn and bramblefor your sake. turns away indignantlyLADY SHREWDLY (Following her soothingly.My dear Lady Worrymore 1 how can you takeit so much to heart ?LADY Barrymore.And you too, Madam, have been in the plotagainst me. A very becoming occupation for aneighbour and a friend !LADY SHREWDLY.My dear Ma'am ! was it possible for us toENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY. 439suppose that we prepared for you any other thanan agreeable surprise ? You won the heart andhand of your dear Lord by sensibility to hismerit , and has that merit become less dear toyou, when the glory derived from it is reflectedupon yourself?LORD Barrymore (following LADY SHREWDLYand LADY Barrymore).Ay, very sensible ; very well put, my goodcousin. The glory is reflected on herself, andshe casts it from her, like a spoilt child who likesevery urchin's playthings better than his own.Come, come, dear life ; you did think that sonneta clever thing, and you do think it, I knowyou do.LADY Barrymore.Keep that knowledge to yourself then, myLord ; it will but make us both very absurd.LORD Barrymore.Nay, nay, nay ! (Following her to the bottomof the stage, speaking to her in dumb show tillthey disappear amongst the company therebyCLERMONT (advancing to Miss Franklin, whois now returned to the front.You did not appear very sorry for my disappointment.MISS Franklin.It cost me few tears, I confess. And you440 ENTHUSIASM : A COMEDY.take it composedly, too, considering how muchenthusiastic admiration you have been deprivedof at one stroke. But was there not really asonnet of your writing sent to Lady Worrymore ?CLERMONT.I blush to say there was. But Blunt's waggeryhas proved my friend. He gave her thatwritten by her own husband in its stead.MISS Franklin.And what has become of it?CLERMONT.It is burnt, gentle friend, and shall disturb youno more.MISS Franklin.And of what importance can it now be,whether I am disturbed by it or not ?CLERMONT.Of more importance than ever ; since yourgood opinion is more necessary to my happinessthan it has ever been before. I know the generosityof your feelings, which has stirred up aquarrel between us, that I might on your changeof circumstances feel myself a free man, withoutreproach or censure. But you will not find itso easy to get rid of me, dear Fanny, as of yourfortune.ENTHUSIASM: A COMEDY. 441COLONEL Franklin (who has been listeningbehind backs).And who says she has got rid of her fortune ?CLERMONT.I beg pardon, Colonel Frankland, for alludingto such matters ; but you have now found anheir in your own descendant, and it is naturalthat it should be so.COLONEL Franklin.And I'll wager a crown, now, you both wishto have it so, that you may make a romanticmatch of it, and Jive on that bare estate on themountains of Cumberland. But I hate romance ;and unless you make up your mind to have herwith the half of my moveable property as herdowry, you shalt have her at all.CLERMONT.My dear Sir, the boy is your grandchild.COLONEL Franklin.And if he were so ten times over, shall Iever surfer a little imp like him to be dearer tomethan this generous girl? (Putting theirhands together.) Now, keep ye good friends,and quarrel no more. And but a truce togood advice at present ; for here are our twobubbles of vanity returned again, inflated stillwith air enough to keep them buoyant on the442 ENTHUSIASM ! A COMEDY.whirlpool of vanity for months or years tocome.(LoRD Barrymore and his Lady, hand-infancyadvancing from the bottom of thestageLORD Barrymore.Give me joy, give me joy, my friends ! LadyWorrymore has pardoned our frolic ; and I believethere is nobody here, who will think lessfavourably of her taste and her judgment forthe mistakes of this day.LADY SHREWDLY.Assuredly not. A wife who has taste andcapacity enough to admire the talents and geniusof her own husband, is most happily endowed.LORD Barrymore.Well said ; he he he ! very happily endowed.(To LADY Barrymore.) Don't youthink so, my love ?LADY Barrymore (gravely and demurely.I suppose she will be reckoned so.\ scene closes.END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.LONDON :Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE,New Street Square.