DRAMAS,BYJOANNA Bailie.IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, &L Hangman,Paternoster ROW.1836.I'llV, \ADVERTISEMENT.THE greater number of. the Dramas containedin the following volumes have been written manyyears ago ; none of them very recently. It wasmy intention not to have them published in mylifetime ; but that, after my death, they'shouldhave been offered to some of the smaller Theatresof our Metropolis, and thereby have achance, at least, of being produced to the publicwith the advantages of action and scenic decorations,which naturally belong to dramaticcompositions. But the present circumstancesconnected with our English Theatres are notencouraging for such an attempt ; any promiseof their soon becoming so is very doubtful ; andI am induced to relinquish what was at one timemy earnest wish. This being the case, to keepthem longer unpublished would serve no goodpurpose, and might afterwards give trouble tofriends whom I would willingly spare. Theyare, therefore, now offered to the public, with aVi ADVERTISEMENT.diffident hope that they may be found deservingof some portion of its favour and indulgence.The first volume comprises a continuation ofthe series of Plays on the stronger Passions ofthe Mind, and completes all that I intended towrite on the subject: for envy and revenge are sofrequently exposed in our Dramas, the latter,particularly, has been so powerfully delineated,that I have thought myself at liberty to excludethem from my plan as originally contemplated.The two following volumes of MiscellaneousPlays will complete the whole of my DramaticWorks.In thus relinquishing my original intention,there is one thing particularly soothing to myfeelings, that those friendly readers who encouragedmy early dramatic writings (alas,how reduced in numbers ! ) will see the completionof the whole. This will, at least, gratifytheir curiosity; and it would be ungrateful inme not to believe that they will, also, take someinterest in the latter part of a work, the beginningof which their partial favour so kindlyfostered.With the exception of two Dramas, " TheMartyr," and The Bride," the matter of theADVERTISEMENT. Vllfollowing volumes is entirely new to the public ;but, as only one edition of the former, andtwo small editions of the latter, have been circulated,there are few persons who can be possessedof either. Besides, as they are on subjects particularlyfitted to interest and improve a youngmind, they may be given away to youthfulreaders, disjoined from the general stock ; and,in that case, will scarcely be considered as uselessduplicates.VOL. i. * A 4WORKSBY THE SAME AUTHOR.PLAYS on the PASSIONS. In Three Vols. 8vo. PriceU. lls.6d. Boards.MISCELLANEOUS PLAYS. 8vo. Price 9s. Boards.The FAMILY LEGEND. 8vo. Price 3s. 6d.METRICAL LEGENDS of EXALTED Characters.2d Edition, 8vo. Price 14-5. Boards.ALSO,A COLLECTION of POEMS, chiefly Manuscript, andfrom living Authors. Edited for the benefit of a Friend,by JOANNA Bailie. 8vo. Price I/. Is. Boards.Romeo:A TRAGEDY.IN FIVE ACTS.VOL. I.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.DON Romeo, a noble Spaniard.DON GUZMAN, his Friend.DON MAURICE, a Youth in love with Beatrice.DON SEBASTIAN, Father ofZorada.JEROME, \ DomesticsPietro, jMariners, Passengers, Domestics, $c.WOMEN.ZORADA, the Wife ofRomiero.BEATRICE, her Friend.Nurse.Scene in or near the Castle of Romeo, by theSea Shore of the Mediterranean.Time, during the Reign of PETER the Cruel, Kingof Castile, towards the Middle of the FourteenthCentury.R O M I E R O.ACT I.SCENE I. The Sea Shore after a Storm, withthe Masts of a wrecked Vessel seen above theWater at a Distance, and Casks and variousChests, Boards, fyc. floating on the Waves.Enter shipwrecked Mariners and Passengers,followed by SEBASTIAN, who keeps apart fromthe others.FIRST PASSENGER.WELL, sirs! to tread on firm dry earth againMakes the heart glad and thankful.FIRST MARINER.And with good cause ;For a dry grave at home is, after all,The secret wish and prayer of every seaman,Ay, even the boldest of us.None hath so long or roughly lived at seaAs to be careless where his bones are laid,In sacred ground, or in the gulph deep.And thou, too, think'st so, if I read thee right.(To Second Passenger.)4 Romeo: A TRAGEDY.SECOND PASSENGER.Ay, so in truth thou dost ; I said my prayersDevoutly as the tempest louder waxed,Nor am ashamed to own it.SECOND MARINER.Nor needs to be so ; seaman as I am,Let me, as oft as fortune beckons me,On summer seas or rough December's waves,Career it boldly with my jolly mates ;But let me die at last in mine own cot,With all my kinsfolk round me. My poor wife !She listens to the winds when others sleep,And thinks. Well, well! we are all safe on shore.THIRD MARINER.But, saving this, what have we else to cheer us?Men on dry land are hungry and lack food ;We cannot live on safety only. See,Here comes a countryman. Hoi friend, I say!(Calling off the stage(Voice answering withoutWhat dost thou say ? I cannot hear thy words.THIRD MARINER.Come hither, if thou hast a Christian heart,Or any chanty ; come near, I pray thee.Enter PIETRO.PIETRO.What is your will with me?Romeo : A TRAGEDY.THIRD MARINER.I pray thee, friend,What shore is this ? Be there or food, or shelter,Or Christian pity in these parts ? Thou see'stWhat miserable shipwreck' d men we are.PIETRO.Yes, ye are cast upon a shore where shelterAnd Christian pity never are withheldFrom those who want them. See'st thou throughthe treesThat castle ? There a noble lady dwells*Who will have pity on you.THIRD MARINER.Thank Providence for this ! Your noble ladies,When once they take to goodness, are most bountiful:The best of all; the men to them are nothing.FIRST PASSENGER*She hath no lord then ?PIETRO*He is absent now,Kept at the King's high court, as it is said,But my opinion isTHIRD MARINER.Whatever it be,That is not our concern. What is his name ?B 36 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.PIETRO.They call him Don Romeo.SEBASTIAN (advancing hastily).What said'st thou? Is he absent?PIETRO.He is, but his good lady will relieve you,Ye need not fear for that.SEBASTIAN.We will not fear. Ye love that lady, then,Who is, ye say, so good ?PIETRO.How should we else ? A very brute would loveher.SEBASTIAN.Yes, thou say'st well; she was ev'n from herbirthI mean, all ladies sprung from noble bloodAre, from their birth, to generous actions train'd ;At least, it should be so.PIETRO.And is so, friend ; for I have oft observedGood birth and breeding, as in my own lady,With gracious kindness joined.SEBASTIAN.What is her name ?PIETRO.Donna Zorada. Thou hast heard, belike,How her poor fatherRomeo: A TRAGEDY. 7SEBASTIAN (turning away).No ; I hear no stories ;I am a man withdrawn from worldly coil,Who hears or cares for nothing.PIETRO (to third Mariner.This is no mariner ? and he speaks strangely.THIRD MARINER.The strangest thing is that he spoke at all.We took him up at sea from a small boat,Which, by the moonlight, we descried afar,Like a black cockle on the shimmering waves ;But whether earth or hell had sent him to us,We doubted much.FIRST MARINER.Nay ; when the hurricane waxed to its pitchWe scarcely doubted, and were once resolvedTo cast him overboard. Yet, nevertheless,He hath escaped ; and, God be praised, we didnot.PIETRO.Hush ! he returns again. Go on, poor souls,In lucky hour ye come ; for in that woodNot many paces hence, amongst the trees,Donna Zorada takes her morning walk ;You '11 find her there. Come, I will lead you toher;And, as we go, there are some words of counselWhich I shall give to you. They may be useful ;B 48 ROM1ERO : A TRAGEDY.For age, and some small share of shrewd observance,*Have made me, though I say it, fit to counsel.FIRST MARINER.Do so, good man, and Heaven reward thy kindness!exeunt all but SEBASTIAN.SEBASTIAN (alone).So near her ! Led, as by the hand of Heaven,Even to her very door ! And I shall shortlySee her again, and hold her to my heart !My child ! my child ! Oh ! when those gentle eyesLook on my woe worn face and alter'd form,And these coarse weeds, how will thy piteousheartSwell ev'n to bursting ? In that wood hard by,So near me ! Blessed Heaven hath brought mehere.SCENE II.A Wood t with various Walks and Alleys cutthrough it. Enter ZORADA and BEATRICE,speaking as they enter.BEATRICE.In truth, I slept it out At times, indeed,A sound came to my ears, as it had beenThe distant roar of wheels, and then I dreamtRomeo : A TRAGEDY.Of coursing chariots and approaching crowds,And courtly tournaments, and tried in vainTo cast my richest mantle o'er my formTo meet the coming show.ZORADA.Thy mantle for the show !BEATRICE.Yes, but perversely,Still, as one tassel end across my shouldersI had composed, the'others to the groundFell dangling all awry. Then I look'd down,And, O sight of confusion ! Canst thou guessWhat saw I then ?ZORADA.Some fearful thing, no doubt.BEATRICE.My own bare feet unslipper'd and unhorsed,That on the checkered floor began to moveIn dancing measure. Yea, the very bloodRush'd to my cheeks ; I felt it in my dream.ZORADA.How could a dream so vain find harbourageIn thy fantastic brain, my little friend,On such a dreadful night?BEATRICE.It was the tempest's sound that brought thedream.ZORADA.So grand a cause producing thoughts so vain !10 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.BEATRICE.Who takes account of that? Thou wert awake,Else thou, belike, hadst ta'en the mighty blastFor the quick waving of some gallant's hatTo cool thy glowing cheek, or the soft winnowingOf outstretch' d pinions Cupid's wings, perhaps;Or those of downy swans, as I have seen them,Scared from the sedgy margin of the lake,Bending their hurried flight across thy path.ZORADA.I was, indeed, awake, and heard with aweThe war of elements, whose mingled roarBrought to mine ear the howl of raging fiends,The lash of mountain billows, the wild shrieksOf sinking wretches ; and at intervalsCross'd strangely with the near distinctive soundsOf clatt'ring casements, creaking beams anddoorsBurst from their fastenings, swinging in the blast.It was a fearful night ; and many a soul,On sea and land, have found a dismal end.BEATRICE.Ay, we shall hear sad tales of this ere long,When seated round our evening fire. Alas!It will be piteous ; but, the ill then past,It will be soft and pleasing piteousness.ZORADA.Sad tales, I fear! O how my sympathyRomeo : A TRAGEDY. 11Follows the seaman's hardy, perilous life ;And the poor passengers, torn from their homesTo toss upon the rude and fathomless deep,Who shall no more on the dry land set foot,Nor find a peaceful rest ev'n for their bones.It is a dismal thought.BEATRICE.Andyet how fair and bright the morning shines,As if it laugh* d at all the late turmoil.There 's not a cloud in the whole azure sky.ZORADA.None, save those little wanderers, pure as snow,That, like bewildered things, are hasting onLike sea-birds to their rock. What men arethese?Enter Mariners, $c.FIRST MARINER.We are, an* please ye, good and noble lady,Poor shipwreck'd seamen, cast upon your shore ;Our all is lost ; and we are spent and faintFor want of food.ZORADA.Ye shall not want it long.Go to the Castle, where all needful succourWill be provided for you. From what port ?But stop not now to answer idle questions.Are ye all mariners ?FIRST MARINER (pointing to Passengers).Those men are merchants12 Romeo *. A TRAGEDY.And he who lingers yonder 'midst the bushes,Is one we found at sea, some leagues from shore.We know not what he is.ZORADA.Why keeps he thus aloof? Call to him, friend.FIRST MARINER (calling off the Stage).Ho! there; come this way, sir; the lady calls ye.ZORADA.He has a noble air, though coarsely clad.How is it that he moves so tardily ?THIRD MARINER.He 's wayward, lady ; neither moves nor speaksLike other men.ZORADA.Nay, do not speak so harshlyOf one so circumstanced ; your fellow-sufferer.(Enter SEBASTIAN, bending his heady and keepinghis eyesjixed on the ground.)Good stranger, be assured you're welcome here,And be not so desponding.(He bows in silence, and she seems agitated.)(To the Mariners, $c.) Pass on, my friends;this lady will conduct you.Wilt thou, my Beatrice, do this kind office ?And I will follow shortly. Tell my peopleTo serve these shipwrecked strangers bountifully.MARINERS, $c. (speaking all together).God bless your liberal heart, my noble lady ![Exeunt' all button. and SEB.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 1ZORADA (eagerly).Who art thou ?SEBASTIAN.Hush, till they be farther off.ZORADA.Oh ! is it thou ?SEBASTIAN.Stand from me ; no embrace ;They may look back and see us.ZORADA.How slow they move! Will they ne'er gainthe thicket ?My yearning heart will burst ; how slow theymove ! (Stands looking after them impatientlyand trembling all over for a few minutes')Now they are out of sight (rushing into his arms).My father ! my dear father !SEBASTIAN.My dear child !ZORADA.Oh! art thou here in dread? come here tosee meIn peril of discovery ? too, too kind !Dear father ! kind, and good, and dear to me,How and where'er thou art. I fear, I fearThou art not as I would : tears in thine eyes,And anguish on thy face ! How hast thou fared?SEBASTIAN.Thou shalt hear all when I have words to tellthee.14 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.ZORADA.Not now ; take breath awhile, and be composed.Lean on the grass and I will fetch thee nourishment.SEBASTIAN (preventing her from going).Not now, dear child.I am composed again, and from my sideThou shalt not move, till I have told thee all.(After a pause.} Thou know'st the bitter wrongsand foul affrontWhich my ungrateful monarch put upon me,As meet reward for many years of service.Ay, though I say it, valiant, faithful serviceIn field and council.ZORADA.I know it all too well ; a burning shameThat he should so requite thee ! Some basewretchHath tempted him withSEBASTIAN.Say his noble nature,I think it once was noble, was abusedBy the base machinations of my foes.Say what thou wilt ; I was a man, a soldier,And sought revenge, that baleful remedyFor bitterness of heart.ZORADA.Nay, pause, I pray you ! do not tell it now :Thou art too much distressed.Romeo *. A TRAGEDY. 15SEBASTIAN.No, hear it now ; 'tis short, and when oncetold,One misery is past. Leagued with three chiefs,Resentful as myself, we did in secretDevise the means, and soon had reach'd ourmark.ZORADA.Your mark ! O what was that ?SEBASTIAN.I see the fearful meaning of thine eye ;But be not so disturb'd. Our mark indeedWas vengeance, but not murder. On his throneWe meant to place a nobler prince, whose handHad even justice to his subjects dealt.We meant to place on Pedro's worthless browThat which became it better than a crown.ZORADA.I understand ; a monk's unseemly cowl.I 'm glad you did not mean to shed his blood.SEBASTIAN.My gentle child, we meant but as I say.And while revenging my especial wrongs,We should have freed Castile from a hard master,Who now sheds noble blood upon the scaffoldAs lavishly as hinds the common waterOf village pool cast o'er their arid fields.And yet to kindle in our native landThe flames of civil discord, even for this,10 ROM1ERO : A TRAGEDY.Has often rack'd my mind with many doubts,Recoiling thoughts, and feelings of remorse.ZORADA.Ha! that indeed had been a fearful consequence,Had your concerted enterprise succeeded.But speak not now of this. How did you fail ?SEBASTIAN.Amongst our number, one accursed traitorLike Judas lurk'd, and to the royal earDivulged the whole. But we were warn'd of this,And fled, each as he might. I gain'd the coast,And lay disguised till I could find a boat,In which I reach'd last night that founder'd bark,Whose slender mast just peeps above the surgeLike some black wizard's wand, token of ill.ZORADA.No, not of ill, dear father, but of good.'Tis Heaven hath sent thee here.My Lord did write to me some distant hintsOf your sad story. When he shall return,He will protect you. Cherish'd here with us,You shall in secret live, till fair occasionShall offer to convey you where you would,Some land of safety.SEBASTIAN.Thy Lord's return ! no no ! beware of that !He may not be my friend. Nay, it is saidThat he and others, from their kindred tiesRomeo I A TRAGEDY. 1?Suspected as abettors of our treason,To clear themselves, have sworn unto the King,Dead or alive, wherever they may find us,Our bodies to deliver to his power.ZORADA.'Tis false ! thou wrongest Romeo.Do not believe it. Some false Judas alsoHath, in this point, deceived you. No, he didnotHe swore no oath so cruel and so base.Do not believe it. Hark ! the castle bell !(Bell soundsSEBASTIAN.Some traveller of note must be arrived.ZORADA.And I must quit my dear and honour' d parentWith heartless ceremony to receiveA most unwelcome guest.Enter that tangled path ; it leads to shelter,An aged woman's cot, where thou may'st restAnd have refreshment. She will ministerTo thy necessity. O woe is me !That any hand but mine should have that office!SEBASTIAN.When shall we meet again ?ZORADA.At fall of eve, beneath the castle wall,VOL. i. c18 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Near to the northern postern. Heaven watcho'er thee !There's some one coming ! part as we werestrangers,Without one sign of love. That is the path.exit SEBASTIAN, and after a pause DONMAURICE enters by the opposite side.MAURICE.Good tidings ! Don Romeo is arrived.ZORADA.My lord return'd? and art thou sure 'tis he?MAURICE.Yes, I am sure ; why should I doubt it,Madam ?His train is in the court; and joyful vassals,Hearing the notice bell, crowd in to greet him.I have not seen him yet, but am in hasteCome to apprise you of it.(Observing ZORADA motion with her hand, andpoint as to something at a distance. )What man is that to whom you motion so ?ZORADA.A shipwreck'd stranger, who inquired his way,But was about to take the erring path.MAURICE.He has a stately air, though mean his garb ;I'll go myself and guide him through the wood.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 19ZORADA.No, no ! I pray thee, let us to the Castle.MAURICE.I '11 follow thee : but, 'faith, I fain would goAnd hold some parley with that stranger. SurelyHe is no common man.ZORADA.I do beseech thee !MAURICE.I'll soon return. (Going.)Doradostay, Don Maurice, stay.MAURICE.Why ? How is this ?ZORADA.I cannot stir without thee.MAURICE.What is the matter, lady ? You are pale.ZORADA.I've wrench'd my foot: I'm lame; I'm faintwith pain.I pray thee let me lean upon thine arm.MAURICE.Ay, to the world's end. Nay, lean thy weight,And let me bear thee up : thou dost but grasp meAs if to hold me fast. The pain is violent20' ROMIERQ I A TRAGEDY.ZORADA.No, it is better now ; 't is almost gone,But I walk lamely still. Let us proceed.[Exeunt.ACT II.SCENE I. An open Entrance Hall in theCast. JEROME, Vassals, and Domestics arediscovered in waiting. Enter PIETRO.PIETRO (to JEROME).So, our good master is returned in safety :May I not see him ?JEROME.No, not now, good Pietro.PIETRO.Not now ! how so ? It is my privilege,Which hellas granted to this hoary head,To see him, unreproved, whene'er I list.I needs must greet him.JEROME.Thou hadst better not ;Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 21Donna Zorada is not in the CastleTo welcome his return : till he hath seen her,I think thy courtesy would have small chanceOf courteous reception.PIETRO.Well, be it so : what changes wedlock makes,That Don Romeo should be so possessed !He should have wedded earlier, as I think,Or not so young a bride. For, as they say,Let all things be in right and due proportion.Let not the hart play gambols with the fawn.Plant not a sapling olive by the sideOf the broad oak. Link not the bony stag-houndJEROME.Truce with thy wisdom, now! see, lie is coming.Enter Romeo, in a hurried impatient manner,followed by GUZMAN.Romeo.Not yet returned ! Go, Jerome, to the wood,That is her favorite walk.JEROME.Please you, my Lord, I have sent Bias alreadyTo search the wood, and now he is returned.Enter Alas.Romeo.Hast found her, Bias ?c 3#2 ROM1ERO I A TRAGEDY.Alas.Yes, she will soon be here ;She's coming from the wood.Romeo.With steps, I warrant,Light as the bounding roe.Alas.Nay, good my Lord,Donna Zorada, somewhat lame, I guess,Comes with slow steps, supported on the armOf young Don Maurice.Romeo.I'll bear her in my arms : she is in pain.The very pressure of the velvet turfWill do her injury. \JExit hastily.GUZMAN (tO PIETRO).Thou dearest a surly smile upon thy face,Good Pietro, mine old friend ; what may it mean ?Thy Lord, methinks, is a right tender husband.PIETRO.Ay, marry is he ! I remember wellHis lady mother urged him oft to wed.Become a woman's toy !" quoth he : " am IOf such soft matter form'd, that you, forsooth,Would make a husband of me?" Then he 'dspeakOf women, even the fairest and the best,With such sharp taunts, that she, good lady,sigh'd,And in despair forbore all further plea.Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 23GUZMAN.But dost thou think he spake unfeignedly ?PIETRO.Why should he feign with her who gave himbirth ?She was a woman of good parts, well taught,Sober, and wise.GUZMAN.And yet it might be so.PIETRO.I cannot tell ; for now, as I remember,His love for Donna Laura none suspectedTill he was found at midnight in the vaultLamenting o'er her grave.'Twas said that many a night a sheeted spectreHaunted the spot : that spectre was Romeo.GUZMAN.It might be so ; and yet he is not close,Concealing what he feels, but with his friendsFree and confiding.PIETRO.Yes, St. Lawrence bless him !His thoughts must have their vent; but yet I say,And know it well, none did suspect his loveTill he was found lamenting o'er her grave.Ah ! many a cheerful face hides careful heart !This is a saying well approved by all.For sound experience teaches many things,c 424 Romeo 1 A TRAGEDY.Which, as my mother, Heaven rest her soul,Was wont to sayGUZMAN.Excuse me now, good Pietro ;I'll stay and hear it all another time ;I am in haste. [Exit.PIETRO (looking after him with displeasure).He too in haste ! That light and heedless youth,Full of their youthful sports, should be impatientWhen sober serious men begin to speak,Is nothing marvellous ; it was always so.But now the evil still goes on increasing,And men of middle age and understandingAre ev'n as light and foolish as the young.An evil sign, I trow, of evil times.Should it go on increasing, by my certes !Ere I have spoken half a sentence, offEach foolish varlet I address will run,And leave me most discourteously to find,As it may chance, another auditorFor the remaining half. O foolish times !Foolish and evil too ! exit*UOM1ERO I A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.ZORADA's Apartment. Enter Romeo andZORADA.Romeo.Feel'st thou no pain, my love ? Thou art fatigued.Ah ! why didst thou refuse thine own support?These arms that to the earth's far verge wouldbear,Blessing their toil, so sweet, so dear a burthen.ZORADA.Indeed, my Lord, I needed no support;The pain had pass'd away : I walk with ease.Romeo.The foolish envious pain which cast thee. Sweet,Upon another's care. Thus, thus, and thus(Kissing her cheeks, and then both her hands, oneafter the othersI pay thee my devotion. Nay, look on me,Smile on me thy sweet smiles, and raise thine eyes,Sweet mate, sweet play-fellow, pretty Zorada !ZORADA.Nay, good my Lord, these words are full offondness,And yet they please me not. What shall I say ?Speak to me as a wife, companion, friend,26 ROM1ERO I A TRAGEDY.Not as a petted darling. Art thou well ?How has it fared with thee since last we parted ?My father too what dost thou know of him ?Romeo.Thou need'st not fear for him ; he has escaped ;He is in safety in a foreign land,Where he, I hope, will end his days in peace.ZORADA.And shall I ne'er behold his face again ?she shakes his headyO but I will ! I '11 go to comfort him,And so wilt thou. Why dost thou turn from me ?May it not be ?Romeo.Oh ask me not ! I 've swornZORADA.What hast thou sworn ?Romeo.I cannot tell thee now.ZORADA.Then it is true ! (Turning from him with violentgestures of distress and displeasure to the end ofthe chamber then returning and looking in hisface upbraidingly.}How could'st thou? Oh! how could'st thouSwear to deliver to the tyrant's vengeance,Dead or alive, wherever thou shalt find him,My father, thine old friend, the brave Sebastian ?Romeo *. A TRAGEDY. #7Is it not so ? If thou hast sworn an oathLess terrible than this, tell it me quickly.Romeo.Dear love, he is in safety far from hence.This oath, as to his life, is nugatory ;And, but for it, thou ne'er hadst seen thy husband.Thou knowest the cruel nature of Don Pedro.Ah ! why that face of sorrow and displeasure ?Alas ! I see I am not welcome here.ZORADA.No ; say not so.Romeo.How can I then explainThy sad averted looks ? Where art thou going ?ZORADA.I 'm faint ; I am not well ; I 'm sick at heart.I long to be alone.Romeo.Life of my life ! Indeed, thou art not well ;Then wherefore leave this chamber ?pointing to a couchesHere lay thee down, and I will watch by thee.ZORADA.I '11 rest me in my closet for a while ;I 'm wayward grown, and love to be alone.Romeo.No ; say not so ; I know thou art not wayward j28 Romeo *. A TRAGEDY.It is not in thy nature ; but distress,From filial duty, strain'd, perhaps, too far,Have made thee so. Remain, my love, with me ;Thou wilt forgive me when thou hast consider' d.ZORADA.I cannot now consider, with a heartGored to the quick. I pray you, then, my lord,Permit me to retire.Romeo.I '11 lead thee to thy closet : lean on me.(She waves him off with her handyWilt thou not deign to do it ?[Exit ZORADA, still motioning him not to followher ; (stopping, with clasped hands, in athoughtful posture, after having paced severaltimes rapidly across the roomyAn absent father and a present husbandI' th' scales are put, and, to all outward seeming,The last doth kick the beam. Is it for thisFor this that I have given my freedom up,Drawn every strong affection of my heartTo one dear point? and this the poor return !(After a second pauseMy life in such a perilous circumstance,And now restored to her and to my home,This is of small account. O woman, woman !One corner of a gallant's passing fancyPleaseth thee well ; the whole devoted heartOf man matured is to thee as a yoke, [escape ;A cumb'rous weight from which thou would'stRomeo I A TRAGEDY.And friendship, filial duty, every tieDefrauds thy husband of his dear-earned rights,after pacing again through the room as beforeI am a fool ! I knew the heart of womanKnew what she had to give, and, Oh ! too well,What might, at price of many an inward pang,To her be given ; yet, nevertheless, forsooth !I murmur at my lot. (These last words spokenwhile DON GUZMAN is entering behind him')GUZMAN.What art thou mutt' ring ? Murmurs at thy lot !Were these the words I heard thee utter nowIn such a smothered voice ? With fair ZoradaWithin that lot comprised, would* st thou exchangeitFor any other man's ?Romeo.No ; not for his who fills th' imperial throne.GUZMAN.What ails thee, then, possessing such a treasure ?Romeo.Ay, if I did possess it.GUZMAN.Dost thou not ?Romeo.The heart I do not. Call ye it possessing,When any tie of friendship or of natureCrosses the vows which she has given to love ?30 Romeo: A TRAGEDY.Humanido not understand fantastic notionsAnd fine-spun niceties of sentiment.I '11 comprehend thee better presently.Romeo.'T is plain and simple matter. My return,Though from a perilous state, gives to ZoradaSlight pleasure : her affections and concernAre all engross* d by what is duty call'dTo her unhappy father. I am nothing.GUZMAN.And is this all, indeed, that troubles thee ?Romeo.Should there be more ? Why dost thou smile sostrangely ?GUZMAN.At thy most simple folly, noble friend.Surely the men in these degenerate days,When every high-plumed youth and idle striplingHath leave to play his gambols in the sightOf maids and married dames without reproof,And pour bewitching nonsense in their earsAt feast or tourney, is most fortunate,Who can but charge a young and lovely wifeWith too much duteous love for her old father.(Laughing heartilyI needs must laugh : thou art fantastical.Romeo.No; thou art light of heart and canst not judge:Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 31Having no care thyself, thou art incredulousOf any cause which others have for care.To speak to thee of what I feel is folly,Though, from long habitude, I needs must do itThou hast no sympathy, and yet my heartClings to thee as a friend.GUZMAN.Nay ; fie upon thee !Thou knowest full well that to the world's endI 'd run to serve thee, though my pliant lipCannot approve of all thy fleeting notions.But we '11 debate no more on things so irksome.I came to say that Maurice hath invited meTo see some curious cave which yesterdayHe first disco verd, as along the shoreIn quest of sea-birds' eggs he idly wander'd.Romeo.Has he been here so long ?GUZMAN.Doubtless he has. It is a curious sightThis fairy cave, as he described it to me :I shall be absent for an hour or so ;Perhaps, a little longer. [Exit.Romeo (alone).He is fortunate,Who can but charge a young and lively wifeWith too much duteous love for her old father!The smile that followed too, that had itsmeaning.3% Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Lame and not lame, and leaning on his arm !The stroke darts through me like an adder'ssting,Though but so slightly given.Re-enter GUZMAN with MAURICE.GUZMAN.Maurice is come with me to tempt thee out,If we may be so bold. The fairy caveIs a short ride from hence, the day is cool,And we will wait thy pleasure.MAURICE.I pray you be entreated, good my Lord.Romeo.I thank ye both ; I mean to stay at home.MAURICE.What ! here alone, the ladies being retired ?On such a day as this, when the blue wavesHeaving and sinking in the sunny gleam,Show all the changes of their cried sidesLike the seam'd foldings of a silken robe ;When every sea-bird is upon the wingSkimming and diving for his finny prey ;When distant vessels, tacking to the breeze,Seem dames whose snowy kirtles are stretch 'doutTo the slow measure of some courtly dance;On such a day as this to stay at homeIn gloomy chambers pent -Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 33Romeo.Surprises thee.MAURICE.In truth it does. Methinks on such a day,Did we not see above the glassy brineThe mast of that wreck' d vessel still appearTo tell the dismal tale of last night's storm,One would with buoyant heart say to the ocean,Let us career it o'er thy surge fieldsTo every coast o* th' earth.Romeo.I doubt not, Sir, J t is a fair sight to thoseWho come so far afield to look upon it.Is thine old tutor dead, or Dame Magera,That thou art rambling gallantly at largeIn this our distant province ? Dost thou blush ?That is a folly, if thou hast no cause.MAURICE.I fear, my Lord, I have offended you.I am as free to ramble now at largeAs any he who reckons twice my years ;Nor should my visit to this distant provinceBe deem'd an idle ramble j Don Hernandez,My aged kinsman, claims some duty of me ;I am an inmate of his lonely tower.GUZMAN.Pooh ! boy, thou 'st said enough, and somewhatmore :Who cares about thy visit to thy kinsman ?VOL. I. D34 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Romeo.Who does not care ? It is an age of duty ;Nought now is cherish'd in the tender breastBut ties of blood ; and his good company,With all his lore and saws and thrice-told tales,Will well reward the virtue of this youth.Go to your cave, and see it in its beauty :The billows else may wash its shelly sides,And make it bare and little worth tomorrow.(Aside to GUZMAN.) Take him away : why doye linger here ?GUZMAN (aside to him).Why speak'st thou so unkindly to the youth ?Romeo (aside).Spoke I unkindly ? Then 't was unawares.I meant it not.GUZMAN (aside).Be civil to him then, and make amends ;He stares and wonders at such taunting words.Romeo (aloud).A pleasant ride, my friends. (They turn to go,and he calls after them.) And hark, DonMaurice !If thou preferred a wayward captious host(For such I do confess myself to be),With two fair ladies (both methinks are fair),To thine old kinsman's company, return,And be one night at least our honoured guest.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 35MAURICE.I do, with thanks, accept your courtesy.exeunt MAURICE and GUZMAN.Romeo (looking after MAURICE).The very eye arid visage, light and thoughtless ;A woman's varying blushes with the tintOf sun-burnt hunter mix'd ; the very form,Slight as a stripling, statured as a man,Which have detested spell ! so oft beguiledThe female fancy, prizing worthless show.(After a pause Can it be so ? O no ! it cannotbe;I but distract myself. I '11 crush within meAll thoughts which this way tend, as pois'nous assThat sting the soul and turn its bliss to bane.(After another pause. To think of it no more,indeed, were good,If it were possible. And yet to knowThe truth, if fair or foul, were better still ;They are both placed beneath my observation ;'T is well I did invite him for the night. (Ringsa bell violently .)Enter JEROME.(A pause, Romeo seeming unwilling to speak.)JEROME.What do you want, my Lord ?Romeo.Thyself good Jerome.Who followed thee ? I heard a creaking step.36 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.JEROME.It was mine own, my Lord.Romeo.'T is well ; come nearer, man. How many oaksHave by my brawny foresters been felPd,Since I left home ?JEROME.I do not know, my Lord.Shall I inquire?Romeo.Of what would'st thou inquire ?JEROME.The oaks which you have just been speaking of.Do you not wish to knowRomeo.True ; but I have another thing to say.How many times hath this young Don been hereTo visit Donna Beatrice ?JEROME.To visit her ?Romeo.Yes, fool ! to visit her.Why dost thou look so strangely at the question ?Answer it in few words and faithfully.JEROME.He hath, for some days past, come to the gateAt noon-tide hour or so, but whom to visitIt suits not me to say.Romeo: A TRAGEDY. 37Romeo.Then ! 't is not Beatrice he comes to visit ?JEROME.It does not so appear ; it may, it may not.Romeo.Why dost thou hesitate and stammer thus ?Art thou afraid to speak ? What is the matter ?JEROME.Nothing, my Lord, but you did fix your eyesWith such a keen intenseness on my face,I fear'd I might offend.Romeo.How fear'd, unless the thing thou hast to sayShould be of bad import ?JEROME.As I breathe life,Nothing of good or bad import have ITo tell your honour.Romeo.Well, well ! be it so.Thy strange bewilder' d face made me suspectthee.Why dost thou wait ?JEROME.Your further pleasure, Sir.D 338 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Romeo.There's nothing else. Yes, yes! go bid myhuntsmanPrepare him for tomorrow's early chace.JEROME.Why, good, my Lord ! he died the very dayBefore you left the castle.Romeo.Ay, true, I had forgot it. Get thee gone.\ Exit JEROME.(Alone') I like not his scared face and warywords :Something is always wrong when such as heStammer, and stare, and weigh their phrases so.exit.SCENE III.Night. A Grove near the Walls of the Castle,which is seen in the Background, the Moonappearing behind it.Enter MAURICE.MAURICE (after listening).No footstep near, no stirring of the boughs,Which cast their darkened forms, distinct andmotionless,Athwart the paly lustre of the moon !No gentle messenger to meet my hopes !Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 39Ah, Hope ! who makes the lover still thy fool !Do I not know that she would give her presenceTo no man living at an hour like this,In such a spot as this, yet twice alreadySome birch's shiny stem or blossom'd shrubHave been to me her very form and semblance.She may despise my billet tear it burn it,Yet my heart beats as though Ha ! here comesJerome.Enter JEROME.What news ?JEROME.Good news.MAURICE.I'd smother thee with kisses,But that thou art such an unseemly hound.How look'd she ? Was she angry ? Was shepleased ?Will she vouchsafe to hear me plead my suit ?JEROME.She will.MAURICE.And where-jerome.In the long gallery,Now unfrequented. I will be on watchThat no intruder break upon your meeting.D 440 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.MAURICE.Prince of Castile, go doff thy hat and plume ;I am a prouder, happier man than thou !JEROME.Hush, hush! begone, I hear a noise without.MAURICE.Where ?Jerome.To the right. We'll take the other path ;Though I must needs return by this again.[Exeunt.Enter ZORADA and Nurse by the opposite side.ZORADA.Stand thou aside, good Nurse; I'll on some paces,And softly call ; if he be near at hand,He'll know my voice. (Coming forward to athicket near the front of the StageHo ! art thou there ? come forth ; come forthand fear not.Perhaps he has mistaken thy direction,I think he is in cover farther on.I hear a rustling, yonder, to the left. (Returnsagain to the bottom of the Stage, andenter SEBASTIAN. They embrace eachother, while Nurse stands apartSEBASTIAN.My child ! my dear Zorada !ROMIEIIO '. A TRAGEDY. 41ZORADA.Dear, dear father !SEBASTIAN.And thou must meet me as a man proscribed :Child of a parent reft of name and honours,Banner by the church, and by the laws condemn'dEv'n to the traitor's death of degradation :One whom to name were pain and insult to thee ;One now despised of all, forgot, accurst.Doradonot accurst ! for I will bless thee, father,Though every other tongue should blast thyfame.O not forgotten ! I '11 remember thee ;Ay ; nightly, daily, hourly, in my thoughtsShalt thou have place ; more cherish' d moreendear'dFor that all hearts besides have shut thee out.not despised ! for I will honour thee,And in my pious thoughts, as now in act,Kneel at thine honour' d feet in faithful duty.SEBASTIAN.Rise, dearest, kindest, best, mine own Zorada !Yes, child ; thou shalt be all the world to me ;But it must be a faint, ideal world.1 may in dreams, in thought, in musing fancyBehold thy face, thy form, may hear thy voiceBut many a league of ocean and of land42 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Must lie between us. Ev'n my dying dayWill not be lighten'd with one look of thine.ZORADA (after weeping on his neck).We do not know what Heaven appoints for us.SEBASTIAN.Has Don Romeo spoken aught to theeRespecting my sad fate ?ZORADA.He has : 'tis true the horrid tale is true.The King has bound him by the horrid oathWhich thou did'st mention to me. Base compliance!SEBASTIAN.Nay, blame him not ; he took it in the faithThat I was safe, beyond the reach of power.But this being so, I needs must rest in hidingSecure and close, till thou canst find a vesselTo take me from the coast.ZORADA.There is within the precincts of this woodAn old abandon' d chapel, where the deadRest undisturbed. No living tenant there,But owlet hooting on the ruin'd tower,Or twittering swallow in his eve-screen' d nest,Will share the dismal shelter : for a timeThou may'st be there secure. My good oldNurseHas all things duly stored for food and rest,Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 43And will conduct thee to it. Come, dear Nurse !Greet thine old master in his time of sorrow,And take of him good care.NURSE.Yea, that I will ; for unto me and mineHe hath been ever kind and bountiful.O woe the day ! that I should have occasionTo do him such a service !SEBASTIAN.Ay, Nurse ; there be sad changes in men'sfortunes.The day when first I saw thee to thy breastLay this dear child, a little toothless infant,Whilst o'er ye both bent with fond beamingeyes]The best and fairest lady of the land.For so she was, that was indeed a dayA day of brightness. Ah ! how differentFrom this most dismal hour !NURSE.She was a noble lady, fair and gentle !This wicked world did not deserve to hold her,And so her time was short. And for her babeMy babe ; I call'd her mine, and still will callher,A very cherub, peeping from the clouds,As our fair pictures show them, is less beautifulThan she half-covered with her cradle-clothes,44 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.When waking from her morning's sleep, appear'd.Ah me ! the pleasant days that I remember !ZORADA (alarmed).1 hear a noise.SEBASTIAN.Thou art, my dearest child, alarm'd for nothing.ZORADA.Yes ; I fear every thing. But, right or wrong,Go instantly, nor linger longer here.Nay, go : we do not part : I '11 see thee soon.SEBASTIAN.Heaven bless thee, then! Come, Nurse, I'mnow thy child,Cherish me kindly.NURSE.Ay, bless your honour ! I will do my best.I 'd give the life-blood in this poor old heartFor you and yours.[Exeunt SEBASTIAN and Nurse $ ZORADA goesby the opposite side, meeting JEROME, whoenters at the same time, and hurries along,covering her face as she passes him.JEROME.Who 's that who starts aside with guilty haste ?(Following her.) Ho! damsel, mistress, whosoe'eryou be,Let me have words of thee. I swear, good faith !I '11 take thee safely to thy rendezvous,Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 45If thou wilt trust me. (Following her off thestage, and then returning')What have I done ? What have I seen ? No face,For that was closely cover'd, but the figure,The robe, the air, if it be not Zorada,I am a fool a purblind, mazy fool,And do not know my right hand from my left.What brings her here ? Weren't any other woman,It were an easy thing to guess her purpose.Well, who lives long may see strange things,they say ;And if I needs must give my thoughts the rein,I '11 curb my tongue. [Exit.ACT III.SCENE I. An outer Room in the Apartmentsof ZORADA, with a wide Door opening in theBottom of the Stage, which shows a magnificentBedchamber, where Romeo is discoveredwalking to and fro in a distracted manner ;he then rushes hastily from it to the Front of theStage, and bends his ear to listen.Romeo.No footstep yet : all 's still : 't is past endurance.So late ! the first night, too, of my return !46 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Is it the tardiness of cold aversion ?'Tis more than that; some damned conferenceElsewhere detains her. Ay, that airy foolWore at the supper-board a conscious look,Glancing in concert with the half-check'd smileThat moved his quiv'ring cheek, too well betrayingHis inward triumph : 't was a cursed smile ;I would have cast my javelin at his throat,But shame withheld me. She the while did sitWith pensive fearful eye, that always fell,Beneath my keen inquiring look, reproved.Is virtue thus demure, restrain'd, mysterious ?She, too, who was as cheerful as the light,Courting the notice of my looks ! no, no !Some blasting change is here. What can bedone?For something must be done. (A pause and listening.)Ho there without !Who walks at this late hour ? A heavy step jHave they their emissaries on the watchTo give them notice of my movements ? Ho !Ho there without !Enter Servant.What dost thou up ? Why art thou not abed ?SERVANT.My Lord, it is not yet our hour of rest.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 4*7Romeo.Thou lies ! 'T is late ; 't is past the midnightwatch.SERVANT.I do believe scarce half an hour has pastSince I did light your Honour from the hall.Romeo.Peace ! thou art fool or knave, I know not which.I 've pass'd since then two hours as truly toldAs sun on dial moves. Why shrinks thou back ?SERVANT.I hear my lady coming.Romeo.Coming at last! Haste! leave me; go thy ways.\JLxit SERVANT.(Putting out a lamp which stands on a side tableOut light 1 The partial gleam from yonder doorWill, as she enters, fall upon her strongly ;I '11 stand aside, and mark her face unseen.Enter ZORADA, who stops short to wipe tearsfrom her eyes, fyc., as if preparing herself toappear composed; whilst Romeo, in theshade, after eyeing her suspiciously, burstssuddenly upon her.Have done with all this smoothing of thy features,And look as sad and rueful as thou wilt.48 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Thy tardy, slow unwillingness, and allThe strange demeanour of this day, too wellSpeak that which ev'n the smiles of Hebe'scheek,Hadst thou more female art such smiles to copy,Could not gainsay. Where hast thou been solong?Wilt thou not answer me?ZORADA.You frighten me, Romeo, as I reckon'T is little past our usual hour of rest.Romeo.Thou dost evade the question. Not the time jWhere hast thou been ?ZORADA.Have patience O have patience !Where I have been I have done thee no wrong :Let that suffice thee.Romeo.Ha ! thou J rt quick, methinks,To apprehend suspicion. Done no wrong !What call'st thou wrong ? Yea, by that sacredbandWhich linked soul to soul in wedded love,Pure, fervent, aud confiding, every thought,Fancy, and consciousness, that from thy husband,Unfitting for his ear, must be withheld,Is wrong to him, and is disgrace to thee.Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 49ZORADA.Then woe is me ! Since wives must be so perfect,Why didst thou wed Zorada de Iodine ?Romeo.Dost thou upbraid me for it ? Then too wellI see the change. Yes, I will call it change,For I must still believe thou lowest me once.ZORADA.Yes, yes ! I loved thee once, I love thee now,And will for ever love thee, dear Romeo,If thou wilt suffer me.Romeo.Suffer thee, dear Zorada ! It is paradiseTo think thou lowest me, hell to doubt of it.ZORADA.Then doubt it not. If I am cold and sad,I have a cause, I must repeat my words,Which does to thee no wrong. Some few dayshenceThou shalt know all, and thou wilt pity me.Did I e'er tell thee that which afterwardsThou soundest to be untrue ?Romeo.Thou never didst.ZORADA.Then why suspect me now ?VOL. i. E50 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Romeo.Give me thy dear, dear hand, my own sweet wife!Yes, I will trust thee, and do thou the whileThink charitably of my stern rebuke.Love can be stern as well as tender, yetBe all the while most true and fervent love.But go to rest, dear child, and I will follow thee ;For it indeed is late. (Stands musing as she retires,then turning suddenly.)Zorada !ZORADA (returning')What, my Lord ?Romeo.Forget not, Love,That soothing ointment of such efficacy.ZORADA.For what, I pray ?Romeo.Didst thou not wrench thy foot ?ZORADA.O, not at all.Romeo.Didst thou not say thou hadst ?Doradothat was but a feint to cheat Don Maurice.Romeo.To cheat him! wherefore cheat him ? for whatend?Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 51Was it a time for childish freaks like that ?And the deep colour crimsoning thy cheekWhat does it say ? Go to ! thou needs notspeak.ZORADA.Indeed, indeed you err ; my heedless wordsRomeo.Were very, very heedless. Go to bed ;Go, go ! my hour of rest is distant still.Linger not here, I say ; retire to rest,\ Exit ZORADA into the chamber.(After musing some time') I do not think herwicked, but there lurksWithin her fancy vain and dangerous things.Those striplings, those light, beardless playfellows!The devil himself hath not an imp more subtleThan one of these. They laugh, and mock, andmimic,And cast upon the lovely face of virtueThe gloomy veil of cloister' d melancholy,Whilst vice is all so gay and deftly trick'd,That who can choose but range them on herside?To break down every sacred tie, what is it ?'Tis but a merry trick !Ay, she was wary, too, in her expressions:Did I e'er tell thee that which afterwardsThou roundest to be untrue." Equivocation,52 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.A half-corrupted woman's poor device.(Muses and mutters to himself a few momentslonger, and then paces up and down withslow irresolute steps')A half corrupted woman !If it be come to this, who shall restrainThe hateful progress, which as rapidlyRestrain it ! No! to hell's profoundest pitLet it conduct her, if she hath so farDebased her once pure mind, and injured me.I dare not think on 't, yet I am compell'd ;And at the very thought a raging fireBurns in my head, my heart, through every veinOf this distracted frame. I '11 to the ramparts,And meet the chilness of the midnight wind ;I cannot rest beneath this hateful roof. [Exit.SCENE II.An old Gothic Gallery, with Doors leading todifferent Apartments.Enter JEROME, carrying a light, and followedby DON MAURICE.MAURICE.I am the first at our appointed place,Which is beseeming in affairs of love.I hope, meantime, she is upon the way.List, dost thou hear a step ?Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 53JEROME.My ears are not so quick.MAURICE.Am I again deceived? and hear'stthou nothing?JEROME.I hear the swallows stirring in their nests,Disturbed with sudden light. Such creaturesbuildIn ev'ry crevice of those mouldering arches.MAURICE.Did'st thou not tell me these adjoining chambersAre all untenanted, and no one near us.JEROME (pointing).Yes, all are empty but that further room,In which Don Guzman chooses to abide,That from its lofty windows he may seeA more extensive prospect.MAURICE.Would he were at the utmost verge of allThat may be thence survey'd ! I like it not :He is a dangerous neighbour.JEROME.But he is tired and gone, ere this, to rest :You need not fear to be disturbed by him.MAURICE.I hear a footstep now : she comes, she comes !O she is good and punctual to my wish !Do thou retire, good Jerome.E 354 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Enter BEATRICE attended, and JEROME with herFemale Attendant keep on the background,while MAURICE, running eagerly to her, leadsher nearer the front.My charming Beatrice ! may I indeedBelieve that thou art here? that thou vouchsafesTo come with thoughts of favour for thy slave ?BEATRICE.Perhaps I do but dream I am so bold.It is so strange, my mind is so bewilder' d !MAURICE.And why bewildered, Love ? There 's nought tofear.BEATRICE.I've heard sounds of alarm, and seen faint forms,That seem'd to follow me, and yet were nothing.I thought the very stones of the old wallsDid call my name and know me as I pass'd.MAURICE.Fear nothing, Love : this place is unfrequented :Swallows or bats may whisper of our meeting,But naught besides. Oh ! how I have desiredTo tell thee all my heart ; on bended kneeTo plead my cause ! My fate is in thy hands;And since thou hast such pity of my painAs thus to listen to me, may I hopeThou wilt be better still ?EOMIERO : A TRAGEDY. />5BEATRICE.Go not so fast : perhaps I am but comeTo chide thee . for thy most presumptuous message.MAURICE.And if thou dost, I'll bear it all so meekly,That thou wilt say within thy cunning self,"This man, in truth, is made to be a husband."BEATRICE.It were no cunning but a foolish selfCould hold such inward parley. Every gallantWould laugh most certainly within himself,On hearing such a sober, grave conclusionJoined to the noted name of gay Don Maurice.MAURICE.Nay, do not twit me now with all the freaks,And levities, and gambols charged upon meBy every lean-faced dame that wears a hood.I will be grave, and dismal, and punctiliousAs heir at miser's funeral, if thou wilt,And all the while as blithe o* heart as he.I have as many fashions and demeanours,As mantles in a lady's wardrobe j choose,I '11 be whate'er thou wilt, if in returnThou wilt obey me but for some few hours.BEATRICE.I hear a noise.MAURICE.Only the wind that moves yon creaking door.E 456 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Step farther this way. (Leading her to theopposite side of the Stage, near the door ofGUZMAN's chamber')The time is precious, my most charming mistress!Let me speak plainly in few words. Thou know'stHow much I fear Romeo's apt suspicion.Delay were dangerous : therefore by the dawn,In the dark grove of pines, meet me, preparedTo quit with me the castle, and for lifeTo share my lot. Deny me not : time presses :O let me urge thee ! As for life I plead.BEATRICE (after a pause).What can I say ? I feel I should not say it.And yet I feel thou dost not plead in vain.MAURICE.Thou 'It meet me then, do not retract thywords.There is no time for slow deliberation.Thou 'It meet me by the dawn ?BEATRICE.Yes ; 1 will meet thee in the grove of pines.Enter at the bottom of the Stage a SERVANT, whowhispers to JEROME, and then retires, uponwhich JEROME advances hastily to MAURICE.MAURICE.What is the matter ?Romeo I A TRAGEDY. $7JEROME.Romeo is not yet in bed. A spyWho stood on watch without has given me notice.He wanders through the house like one possessed,And may at last invade your privacy.MAURICE.He is not yet so near us. We shall hear himEre he approach.JEROME.His motions oft are sudden.BEATRICE.Retire, retire ! I '11 meet thee by the dawn ;So, till that time, adieu. [Exeunt.SCENE III.DON GUZMAN's Chamber, who is discoveredsleeping in his Chair.Enter Romeo.Romeo.Not yet abed ! Ay, but he is asleep.Happy unwedded ! Thou canst soundly sleep ;Nor woman's fickleness, nor woman's guilt,Can bring disgrace or agony to thee.I '11 not disturb him. (After remaining for a whileon the front of the Stage musing and mutteringto himself he speaks, but in a lowvoices58 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.The heart, the heart ! What prize we but theheart ! (Mutters again, then breaks outin loud and vehement utterance")No ; though his lips had never touch' d her hand,If that be lost, I 'm wretched !GUZMAN (waking).What sound is that ? Who 's there ? Ha ! thou,my friend !Romeo.What has so startled thee ?GUZMAN.The voice that woke me.Thou must have heard it; 'twas a human voice.Romeo.It was mine own, Don Guzman.GUZMAN.What has befallen? Why wert thou so alarm'd?Or was it some sharp pang of bodily pain ?Romeo.No, no ! it was not that ; and I am hereOnly to share thy chamber for the night.GUZMAN.And why ? I am amazed.Romeo.I 've paced o'er ramparts, halls, and galleries,Till I have need of rest.GUZMAN.And thou would'st find it here? What strangecapriceROM1ERO : A TRAGEDY. 59Debars thee from the fair Zorada's chamber ;That place which gives the rest of paradise ?Romeo.Ah ! so it did to me. It was a pleasureWhere every lovely every sweetest thingIn seeming shelter, bloom'd i' th' early sun,Till the first sultry breath of southern windsBlasted its freshness, leaving naught behindBut tainted fragrance served and faded flowers.It was the magic palace of a dream,Changed in an instant to some dismal den :It was a bower of healthful innocence,Changed to a lazar's vile and loathly ward:It was Oh, oh ! I know not what I say,Thinking of what I was and what I am.GUZMAN.Nay ; give thy ruffled thoughts a little pause ;Be well assured things are not as thou fear'st.She did appear so good.Romeo.Alas ! she did.If I but droop' d or look'd a little pale,The stroke of her soft hand, her kindly words,Her sweet breath on my cheek, O ! it did turnThe hour of pain to bliss ! And all this happinessWas but delusion but a hov'ring vapourThat covers for a while the fenny pool.CO Romeo I A TRAGEDY.GUZMAN.No, say not so ! Is it not far more likelyThat the delusion rests with thee, my friend ?Romeo (after musing, and without heeding whatGUZMAN has said).Ay, if I did but droop, her look of sympathyWent to my soul. Or if I parted from her,Though only for a week a dayGUZMAN.Cease, cease !Be well assured it is not as thou fear'st.Try to compose thyself: what are thy proofsThat she has been unfaithful ?Romeo.No ; what a worldly judge would deem unfaithfulI trust she has not been ; but what avails it ?He whom her fancy follows, he who pleasesHer secret thoughts and wishes, is her Lord,Let who will, by the power of legal right,Her body hold in thraldom. Not unfaithful !If I have lost her heart, I've suffer' d all.No further outrage can enhance my wretchedness.(Turning quickly and taking holdof him.}But thou believes that, ev'n in this, my fearsAre mere extravagance. (Pausing and lookingearnestly in his facesDost thou not think so? Dost thou not, DonGuzman ?Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 6lHumanihope they are.Romeo.That hope implies a doubt ;Ay, and a doubt which, when I saw thee last,Did not exist. Speak, speak ! If thou mistrusther,It is on no slight grounds.GUZMAN.Be more composed, and I will tell thee all.Romeo.There 's something then to tell ; some damnedthing.GUZMAN.Nay, think not so ; for, when I 've told thee all,'Twill make no certain proof against Zorada.And since thou think'st her love for thee ischanged,Caring but for her love, thou may'st the betterEndure to learn the worst, if such should follow.Romeo (in a faint voice),I understand thee.GUZMAN.Two hours since, perhaps,I 've been asleep, and cannot say how longBut pause we now. Thy quiv'ring lips are white,Thine eyes are fix'd : lean upon me, my friend.62 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Romeo.A sickly faintness passes o'er my heart.GUZMAN (supporting him to the chair).Lean here a while j thou canst not hear me yet.Romeo.I 'm better now.GUZMAN.But we will pause a while.Romeo.Proceed, proceed ! I '11 listen, though thy wordsWere each the spiked tooth of a martyr's wheel.Proceed : Some two hours sinceGUZMAN.Some two hours since, as, not disposed to sleep,I was perusing that old book of stories,I heard, and, as I judged, close to the door,Two persons speaking in the gallery.The voice of Maurice I could recognise,The other was a woman's.Romeo (starting from the chair.And Zorada's.GUZMAN.Use not such frantic gestures of despair ;I say not it was her's : perhaps it was not ;Perhaps 't was Donna Beatrice.Romeo.No, no!It was Zorada. Absent from her chamberRomeo 1 A TRAGEDY. 63I found her at that time. When she return'd,At a late hour, we had some wrangling words,Glozed o'er, but poorly glozed, with female fraud,Which soon betray'd itself, and then I left her.GUZMAN.'T is very strange ; and what I heard them sayRomeo.Ay, ay ! proceed with that ; and make no pauseTill thou hast told the whole, though it shouldmake meA very fiend of agony and shame.GUZMAN.Thou grasped my throat so hard, I cannotspeak.Romeo.Well, well, then ! Out with all their damnedwords,Till they have proved the blackest tint of guilt,And then will come the fatal end of all ;The sabre clutched in strength ; the stroke ofvengeance ;The horrible joy, that casteth for a moment!Let all this be ; let horror be unstinted !Let every misery light upon the headOf that most wanton No, the word wouldchoke me ;I will not utter it.(J4 Romeo: A TRAGEDY.GUZMAN.Thou art beside thy wits ; thou canst not hearme.The words they spoke, prove against her nor nooneAn act of guilt, but only the intent.Romeo.Intent ! O monstrous ! foul deliberation !If life blood warm his heart another day,I am bereft, debased, and gratified,Unmeet to wear the outward form of manhood.GUZMAN.Wilt thou not hear my story ?Romeo.I have heard it,Knowing the cursed purport ; nevertheless,Tell it all, as minutely as thou wilt,I '11 listen to the end.Humanidrew close to the door, and heard these wordsDistinctly spoken in Don Maurice's voice :Thou knowest I fear Romeo's apt suspicion ;Delay were dang'rous; therefore, by the dawn,Meet me beneath the grove of pines, preparedTo quit the castle. We will fly together : "Or words to this effect, which indistinctlyFell into softer whispers, till, alarm'd,As I suppose, they left the gallery.'T was my intent to give thee early notice jRomeo I A TRAGEDY. 65Therefore I shunn'd that tempting couch, andsoughtHere, in my chair, to snatch a little sleep,And be in readiness ere break of day.Romeo.Thou hast done well. (After a pauseCome to this pitch of secret profligacy,Who was so modest and so timid once !Was I a tyrant, that she is so readyTo doff the virtuous and respected wifeFor the base mistress of that minion too ?Some spell, some devilish witchery, hath subduedher,Ere it could come to this.GUZMAN.Ay, so I think, if that in verityIt be Zorada.Romeo.O 't is she ! 't is she !Think'st thou I am a fool to be deceivedBy such affected doubts, in pity utter'd ?Speak truly, plainly, treat me as a man.Call them yea call that woman, an* thou wilt,GUZMAN.Fy, fy ! Zorada is not yet aRomeo (putting his hand on the lips ofGUZMAN).Hold!VOL. I. F(j(j Romeo '. A TRAGEDY.Speak not the word; I 'm weaker than I thought.Is it not near the dawn ?Humanithink 'tis distant still.Romeo.Surely it is not.We'll to the eastern turret, and look forth :Should they escape! My brain burns at thethought. [Exeunt.ACT IV.SCENE I. A Grove of Pines, and the Ski ofMorning, before Sunrise, seen through them.Enter Romeo and GUZMAN from a thicket atthe bottom of the Stage.Romeo.The dull light through yon bank of misty cloudsHath changed its fanny hue for silver grey ;'T is near, 'tis actually, 't is past the time.GUZMAN.Have patience ; for the sun, I guess, is stillBehind the eastern hills.Romeo.Should they escape ! Some cursed emissary,Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 67Upon the watch, perhaps, hath given alarm.Should they escape us by some other path !It must not be : I will look out.GUZMAN (drawing him back to the thicket as heis about to advance.Keep still.I see them now ; but let us be conceal'dTill they are nearer.Romeo.They move tardily,With their damn'd dalliance. So very fondThat they forget the peril of their state,Lost in the present bliss.Ay; smile with lips which shall, within an hour,Be closed in death ; and glance your looks ofloveFrom eyes which shall, ere long, in coldness glareLike glassy icicles.GUZMAN.Stay ; rush not on them now.Romeo.See that ! see that ! her hand, and then her lips !Shall I look on, and give another momentTo such abhorred transport. Where 's myweapon ? (Snatching his sword from GUZ-MAN, who attempts to remove it.)GUZMAN.Be not a madman in thine extacy,And foil thine own intent. See, they advance.68 Romeo *. A TRAGEDY.Enter MAURICE, leading BEATRICE muffled inher mantle.MAURICE.Come, sweetest mistress mine, move we morequickly ;Our horses wait us some few paces off;And by the baiting hour, when labouring hinds,Under some tree, sit round the loosen* d scrip,Holding on homely fare a merry feast,We will, like them, in all security,Enjoy a welcome rest.Romeo (rushing forth.Which shall to doomsday last, thou damnedvillain ! (Draws fiercely upon him, 'whileBEATRICE runs away. They fight \ but shepresently returns and rushes between them,favoured by GUZMAN.)Romeo.Forbear, thou shameless woman. Beatrice !BEATRICE.It is, my Lord ; and O have pity on me !It is myself who am the most to blame.Pardon my dear, dear Maurice. Yes, you will.Your look of strange amazement, changed to joy,Emboldens me. Our hearts have long beenjoin'd ;O do not sever us !Romeo *. A TRAGEDY. 6QRomeo.No, simple girl :Sever ye ! by the holy rood I will not !I am right glad that ye are so united.Stick to it then ; be thrifty of your love,To make it last ; be doves in constancy.Good sooth, young fools ! I will not sever ye.BEATRICE (hissing his hand).Thanks, noble, kind Romeo !MAURICE.Thanks for this frank and unexpected pardon !I fear'd, my Lord, that you might deem it rightTo thwart my suit with Beatrice, who lived,Protected, as her friends might haply think,Beneath your roof.Romeo.And thou though test justly too.In cooler blood so ought I to have felt.Beshrew me ! whither fled my wits the while ?I have most freely given what is not mine.(To GUZMAN.) Do thou, my friend, untie thistravelled knot.'Turning again to MAURICE.) I'll plead thycause, at least, and prove, perhaps,A powerful advocate. Speak to them, Guzman ;And promise in my name, without reserve,All that my honour warrants. I, meantime,Must make my peace where I have need ofpardon. \ Exit in eager haste.F 370 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.MAURICE.How placable and kind beyond belief!Would I had fairly own'd to him my love,Since he is thus inclined ! But he appearedHostile, and stern, and fretful at my stay,Unreasonably prolong' d. I had not courageTo risk my happiness, which his caprice,Stern sense of honour call it as you pleaseMight in a moment blast.GUZMAN.J blame thee not ; had'st thou at first declared it,Thou would'st have found him hostile.MAURICE.Then, pray, Don Guzman, what strange freakhath changed him ?GUZMAN.That he is changed, is your good luck; improve it,Without inquiring why you are so favoured.MAURICE.And so we will, sweet Beatrice ; we willDelay our happiness, to make it surer.BEATRICE.Yes, Maurice ; run no further risk ; we '11 bothReturn again and bide within the castle.GUZMAN.No; be advised: (to BEATRICE) do thou returnalone ;Some foolish freak may yet disturb his mind.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 71I know he '11 favour Maurice most when absent.(To MAURICE.) Dost thou not comprehend me ?MAURICE.Not very clearly : jealousy of oneWhose love is fix'd on an acknowledged mistress,So fair, so lovely, were absurd impossible.GUZMAN.Nay, only say absurd; for there be husbands,Ay, lovers too, who, should you cross their way,New-mated with the Queen of Love herself,And their own dame or mistress were in formBlack as an Ethiopia, would neverthelessSuspect you of designs against their peace.Then wonder not, Zorada being fair,If fanciful conceits disturb his brain.MAURICE.But I '11 be circumspect.GUZMAN.Go, foolish boy !Thy very shadow on the wall will showSome indication of sinister wishes,School thou the substance as thou wilt. Go, go !And be assured I '11 prove thy friend when absent.MAURICE (to BEATRICE).And must we part?BEATRICE.We shall not part for long.F 472 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.MAURICE.No, not for long, sweet maid : beneath thy windowI '11 hold my midnight watch ; and when thy casementMoves slowly on its hinges, I '11 look up,And see thy beauty, by the moon's pale light,Sending sweet smiles to bless me.When thou walks forth, I '11 in some thicketlurk,To see thee pass perhaps to touch thy robe.Wilt thou not give me, dear, before we part,Some token of thy love ?BEATRICE.Yes, gentle Maurice, thou shalt have a token,Which every hour thou 'It look upon, and thinkHow dear, how trueHumani'11 leave you for a whileTo settle all this nonsense as you will ;That done, we '11 meet again in yonder alley,And I '11 conduct the lady to the castle.\ Exeunt severally.Romeo : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.The Apartment of ZORADA. She enters withNurse, who carries a basket in her hand.ZORADA (speaking as she enters).And see, good Nurse, that where the cold windenter'dThou stop the crevice well. Oh ! that his head,His dear and honour' d head, should so be laid,While I am couch'd on down ! Thou say'st hisfaceLook'd not so sadly as before.NURSE.Indeed I thought so, Madam : he spoke cheerily,And listen'd to my stories of past days,As if he liked to hear them.ZORADA.Alas ! the very sound of human words,Address'd to him in peace, is now a solaceEnjoy'd but rarely. I must talk and smile,And keep my station at the social board,While my sad heart is thinking of his silentAnd lonely state. There is my picture then,Since he desires to have it. (Giving her a picture,which he puts into the basket.)74 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.NURSE.Yes, Madam, he did earnestly desire it.He bade me say to you, no lover everGazed on the features of a plighted mistressWith such intense and yearning love as heWill gaze upon this image.ZORADA.Yes ; he will look, and think that in returnIt looks with love on him ; but woe is me !He cannot know how dearly in my heartHis image is impress'd. I call to mindHis kind caresses in my infant years ;His noble form in warlike harness braced,When he returning caught me to his heart,And heard my simple welcome with delight,Filling his eyes with tears. I well rememberDost thou not also, Nurse ? the voice of fondnessWith which, ev'n when I cross'd his graver mood,He call'd me little Zada. O 't was sweet !I thought so then; but now it haunts mine earLike portion of some broken melody,Which mocking bird is so enamour* d of,He will not learn the whole. And say, goodNurse,That I will surely see him ere he go,If it be possible. [Exit Nurse.(After a thoughtful pause.) " My little Zada !tush, my little fool !I will not have thee for my playfellow,If thou art so perverse."Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 75No more than this ; this was my worst rebuke.He set no heartless stepdame o'er my head,Though many ladies strove to win his love.He was both sire and mother to his child,Gentle as her I lost.Then for his sake I '11 willingly endureThe present misery. O my Romeo !Wilt thou not trust my conduct for a day?Absent all night ! To what a state of passionHis brooding fancy must have work'd his mind!Alas, alas ! 't is his infirmity.Enter Romeo.Romeo.My dear Zorada ! dear, dear wife ! thy pardon :I crave it on my knees. O pardon oneWho has offended from excess of love.I might have thought all eyes that look'd uponthee,With more than admiration look'd ; but. Oh !To think that thy pure mind could e'er be movedTo aught which blessed saints might not approve,Was monstrous, vile yea a most vile suggestionThough all the while 't was an offence of love.Thou art amazed, I see, and well thou may'st.I have but now discover'd what my fearsZORADA.Fears ! What hast thou discover'd ?76 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Romeo.Be not alarm'd ; naught that can injure thee.For if thou hast been privy to their love,Though I might chide thee as a cunning wife,Who from her husband hath a secret kept,The bane of confidence ; yet being myselfSo deep in trespass, I must needs be meek,And say thou art not very, very naughty.ZORADA.Thy words are wild ; I do not comprehend them.Romeo.Dost thou not know thy fair but thoughtlessfriendHas to young Maurice's suit such favour given,That she this morning, short while since, wascaughtEscaping in his company ?I watch' d and stopp'd them in the grove of pines.How glad a sight it was to me, when, wild,With terror wild, she rush'd between our weapons,To find it was but Beatrice.ZORADA.But Beatrice ! whom did'st thou fear to find ?Romeo.Oh! spare me! Crimson shame upon my cheek,Betrays too plainly that for which alreadyI've craved forgiveness.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. JJZORADA (drawing herself up proudly.Yes, I comprehend thee.Romeo.Oh ! but that look, that air, that flush of angerWhich ne'er before so stain' d thy lovely face,Speak not of pardon. (She turns away, and hefollows her.) I have much offended.But he who like offence hath ne'er committed :Who ne'er hath look'd on man's admiring eyeFix'd on the treasure of his heart, till fear,Suspicion, hatred hath bereft his soulOf every generous feeling ; he who neverHath, in that state of torture, watch'd her faceTill ev'n the traits of saintly innocenceHave worn the shade of conscious guilt ; whoneverHath, in his agony, for her dear sakeCursed all the sex j may, as the world conceives,Be a most wise, affectionate, good husband ;But, by all ecstacy of soul, by allThat lifts it to an angel's pitch, or sinks itEv'n to perdition, he has loved but slightlyLoved with a love, compared to what I feel,As cottage hearth where smouldering embers lie,To the surcharged unquenchable volcano.ZORADA.What creed is this which thy perturbed mindRepeats so boldly ? Good my Lord, discard it,78 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.As a false faith. I have believed true loveOf such a noble, high, confiding nature,That neither scandal's breath, nor seeming showOf fitful change, could shake its gen'rous trust.'T were agony for me to think thee false ;But till thou front me with a rival yea,Till thine own words have own'd that thou artfaithlessI will believe thee true.Romeo.Believe, believe it ! and on these dear hands,A thousand times caress'd, let me be vow'dNe'er to offend again thy noble natureWith ev'n the slightest movement of suspicion.Dost thou relent, Zorada? Dost thou love me?ZORADA.Indeed I do ; have I not often said it ?And yet, it seems, thou did'st mistrust my words.Romeo.Fy on that gibe ! let me have perfect pardon.ZORADA (embracing him).Thou art forgiven. Now ; art thou satisfied ?Romeo.I were a Tartar else, or sullen Turk.Sweet partner, lovely mate, my gentle wife !O the soft touch of this dear hand thrills throughme,So dear ! as dear as when thou first wert mine.Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 79(Stroking her hand, and then pressing it to Itsforehead and cheeks If word, or look, orcircumstance, againE'er tempt me to conceive unworthy thoughts,I am a vulgar wretch, debased and mean,Unworthy even to look thee in the face,Or hold myself akin to virtue. No ;I will no more offend.Re-enter Nurse, who is busy arranging herbasket and then looking up, starts on seeingRomeo.Nay, start not, worthy Nurse ; pray thee advance.NURSE.I came I thought my Lady was alone.Romeo.And so she is ; for we are so unitedIn every thought and wish, that thou should'streckon,When with each other, we are still alone.Is it not so ? Thou comest for some goodpurpose,I '11 swear. To whom bear'st thou that temptingfruit?NURSE.To no one, Sir ; I come to show its beauty :It is my Lady's basket.80 ROM1ERO : A TRAGEDY.Romeo.Thought cull'd the best: my lips are parch'dand dry.May I (Putting his hand to the basketsNURSE.Nay, good my Lord, I'll choose you one.Romeo (rejecting what she offers).Not that : the further peach my fancy courts.(Putting his hand into the basket')But there be dainty viands and cakes besides !ZORADA.A charitable dole for age and want. (Looking tothe Nurse significantly')That is the reason why I bade her show it,Ere she should take it to the poor distress'd.Romeo.Ha ! let me then restore my robbery ;And here, to make amends. (Putting money intothe basketsWhat have we here ?(Taking out a picturesIs this a present for your villager ?NURSE.Yes, please you. No, she but desired to see it.Romeo (with hither irony.A most refined and sentimental gossip !Or does she mean to use it as a charmTo cure old aching bones ?Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 81NURSE.You've guess'd it well, my Lord. Quoth she tome,Could I but see your Lady's blessed face !Quoth I to her, Thou canst not, by good reason :My Lord is now return'd. Quoth she again,Could I but see her picture, lack a day !Romeo.Have done : I see thy drift. Be not so eagerTo tell me how it is. I 'm satisfied.ZORADA.Come to my closet, Nurse ; there is besidesWhat I must charge thee with.[Exeunt ZORADA and Nurse, the lastspeaking loudly as she retires.Ay, ay, quoth she, poor soul ! I have a longingTo see that picture. Foolish man, quoth I,'Tis but a painted (Her voice still heard asshe retiresRomeo.Foolish man, quoth I ! The cunning jadeHath made a slip : it was a woman first.(A pause, and he stands musing and muttering tohimself before he speaks aloud, then in a lowsmothered voice) Ay, and such thoughtsWhich in the breast had perish'd unreveal'd,Are by these cunning beldame brought toutterance.VOL. I. G82 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Words follow thoughts, acts follow words, and allThe steps of infamy, from which the mindBy nature shrinks, are thus familiar made.A blighting bane, corroding to its coreBeauty and innocence. (Mimicking the voice ofa nursery " My dearest child !Thou need'st not fear to tell thy thoughts to me;I know thy tender heart, I know thy fears."Would the whole race were blasted from theearth ! (In his own voice, and stamping onthe groundsEnter JEROMEWhat brings thee here ?JEROME.Old Pietro is below,And craves to speak with you.Romeo.The irksome fool !He grows that I am always in the humourTo hear his prosing proverbs.JEROME.He does, my Lord ; and oft presuming on it,Has grown familiar.Romeo.Art thou his judge ?Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 83Tell him I cannot see him now. To-morrowI'll find him in his cottage.JEROME.But what he has to tell you, please you, Sir,He bade me further add, is of importance,And may not be delay'd.Romeo.I'll see him, then, since it must needs be so.\ Exeunt.SCENE III.An Antechamber.Enter PIETRO and a Domestic.PIETRO (speaking as he enters.A blessing on thy simple head ! impatient !I have, good sooth ! been wont to speak with himAs though he were my fellow. Much shrewdcounselHe hath received from me right pleasantly.He looks not grave or proud when poor menspeak ;At least I'm sure he was not so inclinedBefore he married.Enter JEROME behind him, and listens archly.Ay, he knows mankind,With all their knavish arts j ay, and he knowsI know them also. Bless the day ! full often84 Romeo *. A TRAGEDY.He listen' d to me with a merry face :Much shrewd discoursing we have had together.JEROME (advancing).True, but such shrewd discoursing, as thou call'stShould only upon rainy days take place, [it,When idle folk, from field and sport debarr'd,Are glad to while away the weary timeWith aught to save the kicking of their heels.PIETRO.Will he not see me, then ?JEROME.I said not so.He'll see thee presently ; but do not teaze himWith a long-winded tale, choked up with saws ;He is not in the humour for it now.It would, to say the least on't, be a presentMore prized by him who gives than who receives it.PIETRO.Go to ! I have no need of thee to school me :I know as well as thou dost when to speak,And when to hold my tongue.Enter Romeo and GUZMAN, and theDomestics withdraw.Romeo.Good morrow, Pietro ! thou would'st speak withme.PIETRO.Yes, please your honour, I'm a simple man ;Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 85That is to say, I am not school* d or learn'dAs many be, who set great store by it ;But yet, I think, I can, as well as others,Scent mischief in its covert. Ah, good lack !This is a wicked world.Romeo.I know it well.Thought told me so a thousand times, "good Pietro.What is the matter now ? Rehearse it briefly,And plainly too, my friend : enough of commentWill follow after. Speak, what is the matter?PIETRO.Ay, something is the matter, take my word for 't.For there be ill enough in this sad world,In court and cot, in city and in village.Romeo (interrupting him impatiently.There is amongst your villagers, I hear,A person much afflicted.PIETRO.We were all well, both young and old of us,When I left home scarce half an hour since. No ;My story is of other matters ; villagersAre not therein concerned, unless it beAs hired emissaries : for, I trow,No wealthy devil e'er lack'd some poorer imp.No rich man ever wantsRomeo.A truce with proverbs !What is it thou would'st tell me ?G 386 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.PIETRO.Many, that mischief, in or near your castle,Is hatching secretly.Romeo.Why dost thou think so ?PIETRO.A ghost was seen by some benighted fools,As they report it, near the ancient chapel,Where light pour'd through the trees, andstrangely vanishedThey know not how. I much suspect yourghosts.J Tis said they're ominous of death ; but weddings,Or worse than weddings, oftener follow after.You have a rich and beauteous ward : DonMauriceIs young, ambitious, and cunning : - No !It is no ghastly spectre haunts your woods.Romeo.Was it a female form those fools beheld ?PIETRO.Yes, by Saint Ago ! and it wore, they say,Donna Zorada's air, who is, you know,Not much unlike, in size and gait, to Beatrice.GUZMAN.We know all this already, worthy Pietro ;Naught ill will follow it ; be thou content.Romeo.If Beatrice hath in the shades of nightRomeo : A TRAGEDY. 87Gone forth to meet her lover, she hath err'dBeyond what we believed. (Catting loudly Ho !Jerome there !Re-enter JEROME.Thou wert the secret agent of Don Maurice ;In this thought sinn'd against thy master ! Say,And I'll forgive thee all, if thou speak truly,Did Donna Beatrice e'er, by night, steal forthTo meet him in the forest ?JEROME.No, good my Lord ; that I will answer truly ;She never did.Romeo.Good Pietro tells a storyOf frighten' d villagers, who have, at night,Seen wand'ring in the wood a female form.Thou seem'st confused ; thou, too, hast heard ofthis ?JEROME.Not heard of it, my Lord.Romeo.Then thou hast seen it.JEROME.I must confess I saw a form, last night,Glide hastily before me, through the wood :The face I could not see.Romeo.It was a woman ?G 488 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.JEROME.It was, my Lord.Romeo.Its stature tall or short ?JEROME.Neither, my Lord.PIETRO.Did I not say it seem'dGUZMAN (pulling PIETRO bade.)Hush, thou art wise, and should not waste thywords.Romeo (to JEROME).Did it resemble any female figureFamiliar to thine eye? Why dost thou hesitate?Speak truth ; speak freely; think not to deceiveme :Seem'd it a form familiar to thine eye ?JEROME.I was confused I knew not. No, my Lord,It was no well-known form.Romeo.Thy words are false !Walks perturbed to and fro, then returning tothem.) Why stand ye here to gaze uponme? Go!GUZMAN (to PIETRO).Retire, and do not speak to him again.Save thee, good Pietro ; and thou, too, Jerome.exeunt PIETRO and JEROME.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 89(Going up to Romeo.) Thou art bereft ofreason. In the darkA gliding form is seen, nor tall, nor short,Nor having any mark by which to proveIt is or is not any woman breathing ;And thou in thy diseased conceit hast shapedRomeo.Thou speak'st in ignorance : I have good causeCause which thou know'st not of. I '11 tell theemoreWhen I have breath to speak.My dame, my wife, she whom I made my wife,Hath secret myst'ries hath a beldame NurseHath one conceal'd to whom she sends Oshame !Outrageous, frontless shame ! the very pictureWhich I have gazed upon a thousand times,Tears in my eyes, and blessings on my lips.How little thought I once vain, vain remembrance!It is a thing most strange if she be honest.GUZMAN.How strange? that thou thyself shouldst bedeceivedAs many men have been, which is a marvelOf daily note, amongst the sons of Adam.Romeo.Deceived ! be there witch-powder in mine eyes,To make that seen which is not j in mine ears,90 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.To make them hear false sounds ? I 've seen ;I 've heard :I am deluded by no gossip's tale.would I were ! I loved I worshipp'd her ;She was the thing that stirr'd within my soul,Which had no other life. Despise me not ;For tears will force their way. She was to meWhen I have power to speak, I'll tell thee all.GUZMAN.Yes ; pause a while, my friend. Thou art toovehement.Romeo (lowering his voice).Have they overheard me ? Has it come to this,That such as they should know my misery.1 will match wiles with wiles, and borrow of herThat damn'd hypocrisy. Come thou with me,And give me counsel : thou thyself wilt ownIt is no weak conceit disturbs me thus.But stop, and stand aside. (Stops on seeing Nursepass by a low window on the outsideGUZMAN.What wouldst thou now ?Romeo.Here comes the beldame Nurse of whom I spoke ;Returning from her mission, as I guess.Stand thou aside whilst I engage with her,And, with her own deceits, deceive the witch.Do thou observe her visage as I speak.Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 91GUZMAN.Nay ; trust not to deceit ; for at this momentThou hast not o'er thyself as much controlAs would deceive the simplest soul on earth.She will outwit thee ; leave the task to me,And do thou stand aside. I hear her steps.Enter Nurse, while Romeo goes behind thearras.Ha ! my good Nurse ; thou art a stirring person,And one of service in this family,If I mistake it not. How could fair damsels,And dainty dames, and other tender soulsEndure the thraldom of stern lords and masters,Brothers, and jealous guardians, and the like,Were it not for such useful friends as thou ?NURSE.I know not what you mean by service. Sir ;I serve my mistress honestly and fairly.GUZMAN.And secretly, when it must needs be so.Do I not know it well, and well approveThy wary vigilance? Take this broad piece 5(giving gold)A token of respect for all thy virtues.Thou art, I know, the agent of Ordainall her secret charities : how fares itWith that poor invalid ?NURSE.What invalid ?92 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.GUZMAN.To whom thou cook's that basket of fair fruit.Let me attend thee when thou goes again ;I have some skill in med'cine.NURSE.I thank you, Sir ; I have some skill myself,And that suffices. She will soon be well.GUZMAN.It is a woman, then. Look in my face :Look at me stedfastly. I know it is not.It is a man ; ay, and a man for whomThy Lady hath some secret, dear regard.And so, perhaps, hast thou : where is the harm ?NURSE.And if there be, where is the harm of lovingThose near akin to us ?GUZMAN.Yes, fairly said ! Who can find harm in that ?NURSE.Whom should we love I mean, whom should Ilove,But mine own flesh and blood ?GUZMAN.Thy flesh and blood! lies flesh and blood ofthineSo near us, and conceal'd? A son, perhaps?NURSE.I have a son ; but where he is conceal'd,Or far or near, I know not.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 93GUZMAN.Nay, nay, good Nurse ; think of next month'sconfession.When lying must be paid for. Father ThomasFor a small penance will not let thee off. (HereRomeo appears from behind the arras,with gestures of impatience, but drawsback again')GUZMAN.Know'st thou not where he is, this son of thine ?A handsome youth, no doubt.NURSE.As ever stepp'd upon the blessed earth.When but an infant, he with fair ZoradaPlay'd like a brother. Such a pretty pair !And the sweet children loved each other dearly.Would he were here ! but where he is I know not.Romeo (bursting out upon her).Vile wretch ! thou lies ; but thou shalt tell thetruth.I'll press the breath from out thy cursed body,Unless thou tell me where thy son is hid.NURSE.My son, my Lord !Romeo.Ay, witch ; I say thy son ;The ugliest hound the sun e'er looked upon.Tell me, and instantly, if thou wouldst breatheAnother moment. Tell me instantly. (Shakingher violently, while GUZMAN interposes,94 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.and Romeo, struggling with him, Jailsto the ground, and Nurse escapes off theStage')GUZMAN (endeavouring to raise him).1 pray thee, pardon me, my noble friend !When passion led thee to disgrace thyself,This was an act of friendship. Rise, Romeo.Romeo.No ; here upon the ground, my bed of agony,I will remain. Sunk to this deep disgrace,The centre of the earth were fitter for meThan its fair surface and the light of heaven.Oh ! this exceeds the worst imaginationThat e'er found entrance to this madden'd brain !That he this hateful, vulgar, shapeless creatureFy,fyiGUZMAN.If thou canst harbour such a thought,Thou art in verity beside thyself.It is not possible that such a oneCould please Zorada, were she even unfaithful.Romeo (rising Fiercely).Not please her ! every thing will please a womanWho is bereft of virtue, gross, debased.Yea, black deformity will be to herA new and restful object.Enter ZORADA behind him.GUZMAN (making her a sign to retire.O Lady ! come not here.Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 95ZORADA.I heard Romeo loud ; what is the matter ?Romeo.O nothing, Madam ; pray advance. O nothing !Nothing that you should be surprised to hear.That ladies can be fair and delicate,And to the world's eye as saints devout,Yet all the while be coarse, debased, and stain' dWith passions that disgrace the vulgar kind.ZORADA.Alas ! what mean you ?Romeo.Thou 'st play'd me false 5 thou art a worthlesswoman ;So base, so sunk, that those whose appellationBrings blushes to the cheeks of honest womenCompared to thee are pure. Oft'! do not speak !It is a sick'ning sight to look upon thee,Fair as thou art. Feign not to be surprised :Begone, I say, I cannot for a momentSay what I may not do. (Taking his daggerfrom his side, and giving it to GUZMAN,who snatches it hastily from him.}Now thou art safe ; but go, thou shameless creature!GUZMAN.Madam, I pray you go, for he is furious,And would not listen to a saint from heaven.[Exit ZORADA wringing her hands']96 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.Come, leave this spot, Romeo ; some few hours,I am persuaded, will reveal this mystery.Meantime, let me constrain thee as a friend ;Thou art not fit to speak or act with reason.Romeo.Think'st thou to bind and lead me like a maniac ?Womanlikewhat thou art : but here comes Beatrice.Wouldst thou to her expose thy sorry state ?Enter BEATRICE.Romeo.To her or any one, what boot they now,Fair seeming and fair words ?BEATRICE.Are you not well, my Lord ?Romeo.No, damsel ; well was banish'd from the worldWhen woman came to it.BEATRICE.Fy! say not so.For if deprived of women, what were men ?Like leafless elms stripp'd of the clasping vine ;Like unrigg'd barks, of sail and pennant bare ;Like unstring' d viols, which yield no melody.Banish us all, and lay my life upon it,You will right quickly send for us again.Romeo ! A TRAGEDY. 97Romeo.Ay, as for parrots, jays, and kirtle apes,To make vain sport withal. It makes me sickTo think of what you seem and what you are.BEATRICE.But say not all, because there are a few.GUZMAN.Fair lady, hold no further parley now.(To Romeo.) And come with me, my friend.[Exeunt Romeo and GUZMAN.BEATRICE (looking after him).What strange tormenting fancy haunts him now?She leads a life worse than an Islam slave,Who weds with such as him. Save me from that !Enter MAURICE by the window, having previouslypeeped in to see if she were alone.MAURICE.Dear Beatrice ! to find thee thus aloneBEATRICE.Good Heaven preserve us! what has broughtthee back ?MAURICE.To see and hear thee, Love, and yet againTo touch thy fair soft hand.BEATRICE.An errand, truly,To make thee track thy steps so many miles !VOL. I. H98 Romeo *. A TRAGEDY.MAURICE.An errand worth the toil ev'n ten times told.To see thy figure moving in thy veil,Is worth a course of five good miles at least ;To see thy glowing face of welcome is,At lowest reckoning, worth ten score of leaguesBy sea or land; and this soft thrilling pressure,O! 'tis worth all the leagues that gird the globe.(Taking her hand.)BEATRICE.What idle words ! how canst thou be so foolish?I needs must chide thee for it, thoughtless boy !MAURICE.Chide me, indeed, who am two years thy elder,And too good months to boot ! Such highpretension !Have sixteen summers and a woman's robeMade thee so very wise and consequential ?BEATRICE (giving him two mock blows on hisshoulder).Take that, and that, for such discourteous words.MAURICE (catching both her hands and kissingthem separately.Ay, marry will I, and right gladly too,When this and this are added to the gift.BEATRICE.Forbear such idle rapture, 't is a folly :Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 99So tell me truly what has brought thee backTo this disturb' d and miserable house.MAURICE.What, miserable still ? Not yet convincedThat thou, and not Zorada, is the queenOf my passion' d heart ?BEATRICE.Of this, indeed,He is convinced ; but what doth it avail ?Some other fancy, yet I know not what,Again possesses him. Therefore depart ;Quickly depart, nor linger longer here,When thou hast told me wherefore thou artcome.MAURICE.When some way off, it came into my headThat Don Romeo the occasion past,Which has excited him to favour usMay be remiss, or may repent his promise.I therefore quickly turn'd my horse's head,Nor drew I bridle till within the forestI found me once again, close to the postern.BEATRICE.What would' st thou do ? for in his present stateThou may'st not speak to him.MAURICE.But I would speak to Guzman ; he has powerTo keep Romeo stedfast in his promise.H 2100 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.I should have thought of this before I went,And urged him earnestly that no remissnessWith thy relations may retard our bliss.BEATRICE.Are we not happy now ? Is marriage bliss ?I fear to think of it.MAURICE.Why should'st thou fear ?Shall I be jealous ? O my gentle Beatrice !I never will believe thee false to me,Until such proof as that heaven's sun is brightShall flash upon me, and the agonyWill be my death-blow and prevent upbraiding.BEATRICE.And art thou, then, so tender in thy nature ?In truth it makes me weep to think thou art.MAURICE.Let me wipe off those tears, my gentle Love.Think hopefully and cheerfully, I pray thee.I feel within my breast a strong assuranceThou never wilt prove false, nor I suspicious.Where may I find Don Guzman ? [Exeunt.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 101ACT V.SCENE I. The Scene dark ; the Forest.Enter JEROME and another Domestic, by oppositesides of the Stage.JEROME.Hast thou seen any thing ?DOMESTIC.No ; but I spy a distant moving lightFar to the left.JEROME.Then run and see who bears it.Exit Domestic.Here come my Lord and Guzman, slow andsilent.Surely they have not seen it ; and, perhaps,My comrade is deceived.Enter Romeo and GUZMAN.Romeo.Ha ! Jerome ! is it thee ?JEROME.It is, my Lord.Romeo.Hast thou seen aught? hast thou heard anysound ?H 3102 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.JEROME.Nothing, my Lord.Romeo.Yet still be on the watch :Revisit every path ; let naught escape thee.JEROME.No, nothing shall. I'll use both eyes and earsIntently ; nothing shall unnoted be.An owlet shall not turn him in his nestBut I shall be aware of it, nor hareScud 'cross the path without my observation.Romeo.Well, say no more : I trust thee. To thy duty ![Exit JEROME.Humaniam persuaded we shall range this woodThe livelong night, nor meet with any thingBut such small denizens as Jerome mention'd,Or these benighted trees that skirt our path,So black and motionless.Romeo.Oh ! if the light of day return again,Naught being found to justify my fears,I'll hail it as the wretch whose op'ning dungeonReceives the light, as through its portal passesSome glad friend, bearing his reprieve. Oh,Guzman !The felon, chain'd to meet his shameful doom,Hath not more agony of thought, nor startedRomeo I A TRAGEDY. 103With greater horror from the brink of death,Than I do from that moment of despairWhich shall make manifest the thing I dread.Humanitrust that moment never will arrive.Romeo.Dost thou, my friend ? dost thou, in very truth ?I bless thee for that noble confidence :Would I could feel it too ! Repeat thy words.Humanido believe that moment will not come.Romeo.No, no! it was not thus: thy words are changed ;Thy tone of voice is changed ; thoughts of recoilPass o'er thy mind, and turn their force toweakness.Thou dost not trust, no, nor believe it neither.GUZMAN.Indeed, I think I hope thou art deceived.Romeo.Shame on such timid camp' ring with my passion,Provoking it the more ! If she is guilty,I am prepared with dreadful preparation.If she is innocent, tears choke my voice :To say, " if she is innocent ! "Her look, her smile, her easy lightsome gait,H 4104 Romeo: A TRAGEDY.She was th' embodied form of innocence ;The simple sweetness of a cottage child,Join'd to a lady's grace.GUZMAN.Her's seem'd, indeed, the loveliness of virtue.Romeo.Even so ; but that is changed. She cannot nowSo look, so smile, so step ; for if she could,I should defy all proof of circumstanceTo move me to suspicion.GUZMAN.Nay, good Romeo, know thy nature better.A circumstance as trivial as the glanceOr meaning smile of some young varlet pageWould tempt thee to suspect a saint of heaven.But cease debate ; your scout returns in haste.Enter Domestic.DOMESTIC.My Lord, they 're in the wood : I've seen them.Romeo.Whom ?DOMESTIC.The Nurse, my Lord, went first, and close behindherDonna Zorada stole like one afraid.Romeo ! A TRAGEDY. 105Romeo (seizing him by the throat.Hell choke thy blasted breath, thou croakingfiend !Thou dearest not say 't was she.DOMESTIC.I did not say so, certainly.Romeo.Thou didst.DOMESTIC.I spoke unwittingly ; I will unsay it.Romeo (casting him away from him withviolence).And be a damned liar for thy pains.All that my darkest fancy had conceived !Uncover' d shame, degrading infamy !Come quick, unstinted, terrible revenge !If the base wantons live another hour,I am as base as they.GUZMAN.Be not a maniac : think before thou act,Before thou do what cannot be undone.Romeo.Think ere I act ! Cool, sober, gentle friend !Had'st thou not better say, " Good Sir, bepatient.Thy wife is faithless, and her minion bless* d jBut pray, good Sir, be patient." Oh, my heart !The seat of life will burst ere it be done :106 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.Hold, hold till then! (To Domestic.) Wherewere they ? near the castle ?DOMESTIC.No ; in the beechen grove beyond the chapel,To which we did suspect their steps were bent,Taking, no doubt, that further winding pathThe better to avoid detection. See,There's light now faintly peering from its window.They must be there already. (To GUZMAN.)Look, Don Guzman !Humanido ; it vanishes and re-appears,And vanishes again, and all is dark.Romeo.Yes ; all shall soon be dark :That flame of guilt, those glow-worms of thenight,That bright deceitful sheen of foul corruption,Shall be extinct, trod out, earth bray'd withearth.Which of these paths leads to th' accursed spot ?(Rushing into a path, and then turning back andtaking another.) I am bewilder'd ! thiswill lead me right. \JEtxit.GUZMAN.We must pursue his steps, and try, if possible,To keep his unrein' d ire from desp'rate acts.[Exeunt.Romeo I A TRAGEDY. 107Enter, by the opposite side, BEATRICE and herWOMAN.BEATRICE.He should be here, or somewhere near this spot.I am afraid in these dark forest paths.Each crooked leafless stump or dwarfish bushSeem beast or man prepared to pounce upon us jAnd then to make a vain and short amends,Each slender, graceful sapling is my Maurice.I dare not venture further.WOMAN.Perhaps we're wrong, and have mistaken theplace ;Let us turn back, and try some other alley.BEATRICE.Turn not ; I hear his foot. (Listening).WOMAN.My ear then must be dull, for I hear nothing.BEATRICE.Yes, they are dull ; thou hast not in thy heartThat which doth quicken mine. It is his footstep ;I know it well !WOMAN.Indeed, I should have guess'dBEATRICE.Nay, hush, Theresa ;108 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.I love to bend mine ear and listen to it. (Listensagain as before, and presently enter Maurice.)Isn't thou, my friend ?MAURICE.Yes, dearest ; further onI waited for thee, and became impatient.BEATRICE.How glad I am to hear thy voice again !MAURICE.What hast thou done? How hast thou spedwith Guzman ?Since thou would'st take that office on thyself,I trust thy parley with him was successful.BEATRICE.As heart could wish, although it was but short.He '11 be our friend, and keep Romeo so ;And will, besides, to my stern uncle speak,Who, as thou know'st But here comes onein haste.Enter JEROME.JEROME.Remain no longer here ; for Don Romeo,And Guzman with him, wanders through thewood :You may encounter him in any path.MAURICE.What shall we do ?JEROME.Be still, and follow me,Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 109And I will lead you to a safer spot,Free from intrusion, near the ruin'd chapel.[Exeunt.SCENE II.The Inner Porch of a ruined Chapel.Enter Nurse and a Sea Captain, meeting.NURSE.Are all things ready then ?CAPTAIN.The breeze is faint,But it is fair ; my seamen are on board ;We shall weigh anchor by the early dawn,And bear us out to sea. Go, tell my passengerTo join us presently upon the beach.NURSE.I will, good Captain : 'tis no thoughtless youth,Who grows the very winds should wait his bidding;He will be punctual. He hath seen good days,Although I may not tell thee who he is.CAPTAIN.Nor do I ask thee.NURSE.He hath seen good days,And evil too, and hath been buffetedBy wayward fate.110 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.CAPTAIN.Good mother, so have I.But what of that ? The foul, the fair will blow,And we must weather it even as we may.Speak not in such a lamentable tone ;I will be kind to him.NURSE.I hope thou wilt.Heaven will reward thee, and Saint Ago too.CAPTAIN.Tut, woman ! wherefore make so much adoAbout some kindness to a fellow sinner ?I shall expect him ere the morning break ;And give him notice, for the time is near. [Exit.NURSE (alone).I will not yet break on their sad farewell,But in the outer porch remain on watch.Ah, woe the day! that they must thus, by stealth,Take their last leave. I fear 't will be their last.[Exit.SCENE III.An old Gothic Chapel : SEBASTIAN and ZORADAare discovered in earnest conversation.SEBASTIAN.And wilt thou bear these lessons in thy mind ?ZORADA.I shall forget to say my daily prayersRomeo : A TRAGEDY. IllWhen I forget to think of thee, dear father !And, when I think of thee, thy words of kindness,And words of counsel too, shall be remember'd.SEBASTIAN.Sweet child ! stand back and let me look uponthee.Ay 5 so she look'd. O ! it is sweet in theeTo look so like thy mother, when mine eyesMust take their last impression, as a treasureHere (his hand on his heart) to be celled forever.Many looksThy varying face was wont to wear, yet never,But in some sad or pensive mood, assumedThe likeness of that countenance ; to meThy loveliest look ; though, to all other eyes,Thy mother's beauty never equall'd thine.ZORADA.I still remember her : the sweetest faceThat e'er I look'd upon. I oft recall it,And strive to trace the features more distinctly.SEBASTIAN.Be good as she was ; and when I am gone,Never again let myst'ry and concealment,Tempting the weakness of thy husband's nature,Which but for this were noble, break the peaceAnd harmony of marriage. For this oathRomeo I A TRAGEDY.This fatal oath he was constraint to take it.Then so consider it, nor let it rankleWithin thy gentle breast : that were perverse.When I am gone, all will again be well,And I will write to thee and comfort thee.Our minds shall still hold intercourse, dear Zada,And that should satisfy.ZORADA.Alas! alas!When I shall read thy letters, my poor heartWill but the more yearn after thee, dear father!And pine to see thee. Suffer me to hopeThat we shall meet again. Call it not vain,But suffer me to thinkEnter Nurse in alarm.What is the matter ?NURSE.You are discover 5 d : Don Romeo comes ;I heard his voice approaching through the trees.I heard the hollow tread of many feet.ZORADA (to SEBASTIAN).O fly ! farewell !SEBASTIAN.Farewell, my dearest child !Heaven bless and guard thee ever ! O farewell ![Embraces her, and exit.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 113ZORADA.If he should be discovered !NURSE.Fear it not.He knows the nearest path, and on the beachThe Captain will receive him. Ere 'tis light,He will be safely in the vessel lodged.O all good saints of heav'n ! he *s here already.Enter Romeo.Romeo.Most wretched and degraded woman ! NowThy shameful secret is discover'd. Now,Vice unveil' d and detestable must haveIts dreadful recompence. Where is thy minion?ZORADA.cease! you frighten me with such fierce looks.1 have done thee no wrong.Romeo.Provoke me not with oft-repeated words,Which I do know are false as his who fellApostate and accursed. Where is thy minion ?(Ina still louder voice, and stamping on the groundsTell me without delay : speak briefly, truly,If thou hast hope to live another hour.VOL. I. I114 Romeo I A TRAGEDY.ZORADA.pity, pity ! be not so enraged !Thou shalt be told the truth a few hours hence ;Then, to that time, detest me as thou wilt,But spare my life.Re-enter SEBASTIAN, while Romeo has, in hisrage, strode to the front of the stage. ZORADA,uttering a shriek, runs to her father, and throwsher veil over his face, endeavouring to push himback.SEBASTIAN.What ! fly and leave thee in a madman's power ?1 heard his stormy voice, and could not leavethee.Romeo turns round, and, running furiouslyat them, stabs ZORADA in aimingat SEBASTIAN, GUZMAN, who enters inalarm, followed by MAURICE and Beatrice,endeavouring in vain, to preventhim.)GUZMAN.Hold! hold! thou wilt not strike a cover* d foe!ZORADA (still clinging round her father.Strike me again ; I will not quit my hold.I'll cling to him ; within my dying graspI'll hold him safe : thou wilt not kill him there.(Sinking to the ground, while the veil dropsfrom the face of SEBASTIAN.)110MIERO : A TRAGEDY. 1 1,5Romeo.Her father !ZORADA.Yes ; my father, dear Romeo!Thou wilt not slay us both. Let one suffice.Thou lowest me once j I know thou lowest menow:Shall blood so dear to thee be shed in vain ?Let it redeem my father ! I am faint,Else I would kneel to thee.(Endeavouring to kneel, but prevented andsupported by Nurse and BEATRICE.)NURSE.Do not, dear murder' d child !BEATRICE.My dear, dear friend, forbear. He heeds theenot.GUZMAN.Romeo, dost thou hear her sad request ?Romeo.I hear your voices murm'ring in mine earConfused and dismal. Words I comprehend not.What have I done ? Some dreadful thing, I fear.It is delusion this ! she is not slain :Some horrible delusion.ZORADA (aside to SEBASTIAN).Fly, fly, dear father, while he is so wild.He will not know and will not follow thee.116 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.SEBASTIAN.No, dearest child ! let death come when it will,I'll now receive it thankfully. Romeo,Thou wretched murd'rer of thy spotless wifeRomeo de Carton !Romeo.Who is it calls me with that bitter voice? (Gazingon him ; and then 'with a violent gestureof despairI know thee ; yes, I know what I have done.GUZMAN.Forbear such wild and frantic sorrow now.And speak to her while she is sensible,And can receive thy words. She looks on thee,And looks imploringly.Romeo.Zorada, my Zorada ! spotless saint !I loved thee far beyond all earthly things,But demons have been dealing with my soul,And I have been thy tyrant and thy butcher,A wretch bereft of reasonBEATRICE.She makes a sign as if she fain would speak,But her parch'd tongue refuses. (To MAURICE.)Fetch some waterTo moisten those dear lips and cool that brow.[Exit MAURICE.She strives again to speak.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 117Romeo (stooping over her).What wouldst thou say? What means thatgentle motion ?ZORADA.Come close to me ; thought pardon'd, Love,thought pardon'd.Romeo.No, say that I am blasted, ruin'd, cursed,Hateful to God and man.Re-enter MAURICE with wafer, which she tastes.ZORADA.Thou art not cursed; O no! then be more calm.(Endeavouring to raise herself up.) Look here;he is my father : think of that.Thought pardon'd, Love ; thought pardon'd.[Dies.Romeo.She calPd me Love. Did she not call me so?GUZMAN.Yes, most endearingly.Romeo.And she is gone, and I have murder* d her !(Throws himself on the body, and moaningpiteously ; then starts up in despair,and looks furiously at SEBASTIAN.)Thou restless, selfish, proud, rebellious spirit !Thy pride has work'd our ruin, been our bane ;i 3118 Romeo : A TRAGEDY.The bane of love so bless'd ! Draw, wretchedman,I've sworn an oath, which I will sacred hold,That when Sebastian and myself should meet,He should to royal justice be deliver'd,Or, failing that, one of the twain should die.(Drawing his sword fiercely upon him).GUZMAN (holding him back).Hold, madman, hold ! thy rage is cruel, monstrous,Outraging holy nature.Romeo (breaking from him).Off! think'st thou to restrain or bind despairWith petty strength like thine ? Proud rebel,draw.I am thy daughter's murderer, and thouDestroyer of us both.SEBASTIAN.Yes, Don Romeo, we are match'd in ruin,And we will fight for that which cures despair.He who shall gain it is the conqueror. (Theyfight, each exposing himself rather thanattacking his adversary.)Romeo.No ; tort in earnest, if thou would'st not have meDeliver thee a felon to the law.Romeo : A TRAGEDY. 119Defend thine honour, though thou scorn thylife. (They sight again, and Romeofalls.)I thank thee, brave Sebastian : O forgiveHarsh words that were but meant to urge contention.Thought brave and noble; so my heart stilldeem'd thee,Though, by hard fate, compelled to be thy foe.Come hither, Guzman : thou hast sworn no oath.Give me thy hand ; preserve Sebastian's life,And lay me in the grave with my Zorada.(The Curtain drops.)I 4,THEALIENATED MANOR:A COMEDY.IN FIVE ACTS.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.CHARVILLE.Grafton.SIR ROBERT FREEMANTLE, Nephew to Croton.SMITCHENSTAULT, a German Philosopher.SIR LEVEL CLUMP, an Improver.DICKENSON and ISAAC, Domestics ofCharville.SANCHO, a Black.WOMEN.MRS. CHARVILLE.MARY, Sister to Charville.MRS. SMOOTHLY.DOLLY.Scene, Charville's House in the Country, and theWoods, 8$c. belonging to it, or near it.THEALIENATED MANORACT I.SCENE 1. A Wood, with a View of cavillersHouse in the background, seen throughthe Trees.Enter CRAFTON, who immediately stops short, asif looking earnestly at something off the Stage.CRAFTON.WHO can it be ? Ho ! paper and pencil inhand ; and the broad-brimmed hat, too, with itsgreen lining ; I heard he was with them. Fitcrow for such a rookery !Enter SIR LEVEL CLUMP.Your servant, Sir Level Clump ; I wish yougood morning.SIR LEVEL.Good morning, Mr.Crafton; I am delighted tosee you. Do you often, in your morning rambles,trespass thus far on your neighbour's premises ?THE ALIENATED MANOR.CRAFTON.I trespass not at present, I hope, being directlyon my way to pay my compliments to Mr. Char-villeon this happy occasion.SIR LEVEL.Right, Mr. Grafton ; you are above any Mettleresentment for the extravagant demand withwhich he so ungraciously met your late reasonableoffer regarding this manor. I know allabout it ; and the very unfair advantage whichthe late Mr. Charville took of your uncle's distressesto get possession of it, I know all aboutit. Mr. Charville is my friend and employer,but I am too candid not to feel and to perceive :indeed he was wrong much in the wrong, inthat matter.CRAFTON.And in other matters too, perhaps. But onemust keep up some intercourse with the worldas it is 5 the grass would grow on my threshold,were I to confine my visits to the immaculate.You are come down, I presume, to improve thepleasure grounds. He means upon his marriageto have every thing in the modern taste.SIR LEVEL.And shall have it, if I can do any thing ; buthe is so conceited of his own notions, so suspicious,he will trust nobody but by halves.THE ALIENATED MANOR.CRAFTON.What ; not trust Sir Level Clump implicitlyin matters of taste ! Conceited indeed ! Butwhat are your own ideas, Sir ? Have you surveyedthese woods, with all their winding paths,and ferny dells, and dark covert nooks, andtangled thickets ? I am, perhaps, too partial tothe ancient possessions of my forefathers, butthis place seems to me full of sylvan beauty.SIR LEVEL (tardily.Yes, O yes.CRAFTON.Don't you think so ?SIR LEVEL.Assuredly : it is at least practicable ground.If you saw my plan, you would be astonished atwhat may be made of it. A few hundred poundsspent in clearing away the underwood, and cuttingout that heavy mass of forest trees into separategroups, would give it a very elegant, tasteful,parkish appearance.CRAFTON.Cut out the mass of forest trees into separategroups ! I should be astonished indeed.SIR LEVEL.Ay, ay ! I knew you would. Lightness,variety, and plan these are the grand principles; there is nothing like these. For you126 THE ALIENATED MANOR.know very well, my dear Sir, if there be no plan,there is no meaning in what you do; ergo, notaste ; and if there be no taste, it is all one as ifthere were no plan.CRAFTON.Not exactly, Sir Level.SIR LEVEL.Nay, you don't exactly comprehend me. You'llcatch it by and by, when I show you my sketch.Why, these woods, as they now are, compared towhat they will be when the plan is completed,are as a rude, untamed clown to a gentleman.CRAFTON.Say, rather, a savage chief to a posture master.But you have been in the North lately, SirLevel. What progress is taste making inLochaber ?SIR LEVEL.O lud, lud ! totally impracticable ! Whatcould I do for them there ?CRAFTON.I'm sure I can't pretend to say ; but you didattempt something, I suppose.SIR LEVEL (shrugging up his shoulders).Ay ; the Laird of Glenvorluch, who is latelyreturned from Calcutta, with a large fortune atcommand, did indeed take me over his estate andput a carte blanche into my hands ; but in vain.THE ALIENATED MANOR. 127There was a burn (as they call it) running past thehouse, with water enough in it to have beautifiedthe domains of a prince ; but with such an impetuous,angry, perverse sprite of a stream,spade or shovel never contended. It wouldneither serpentine, sweep, nor expand in anydirection, but as it pleased its own self.CRAFTON.And having no plan, Sir Level, it would, ofcourse, have no taste.SIR LEVEL.Ah ! sad discouraging work there for improvers!CRAFTON.Was there nothing to be done ?SIR LEVEL.I could, no doubt, have collected its stores inthe dell beneath, and made as fine a sheet ofartificial water as heart could desire ; but whatpurpose could this have answered with a lakefronting the house, in which you might havefloated half the small craft of the British navy ?CRAFTON.A perverse circumstance, indeed.SIR LEVEL.In short, all that I could do was to removesome rough woody knolls that intervened, and,instead of a partial view of the lake, open it128 THE ALIENATED MANOR.entirely to the mansion, as a grand, unbrokenwhole. A hundred sturdy Highlanders, withwheelbarrows and mattocks, made it, in a shorttime, a very handsome, smooth, gradual slope,that would not have disgraced the finest park inMiddlesex. This piece of service I did for him.CRAFTON.And had you done as much for me, Sir Level,I should have acquitted you from all furthertrouble.SIR LEVEL.Ay; you are a reasonable man, Mr. Grafton.Why, what could I have done better for suchan obstinate place ?CRAFTON.Nothing that I know of, unlessSIR LEVEL.Unless what ? Pray let me have your idea.Successful as I have generally been, I hope Istill bear my faculties too meekly not to bewilling to profit by a friendly hint from a personof discernment. Unless what, my dear Sir ?CRAFTON.Unless you had let it alone altogether.SIR LEVEL.O no, no, no ! that was impossible. TheLaird had a lady, a young bride, too; she wasnew, the house was new, the furniture was new,THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 129and the grounds also were to be made suitable :I was obliged to operate upon it.CRAFTON.A hard necessity.SIR LEVEL.However, since no better could be, they havemy plan hanging in the library, to show whatthe place ought to be, if it will not ; and thismust even vindicate their reputation for taste toall the strangers and travellers who may visitthe house of Glenvorluch.CRAFTON.Very good, Sir Level ; the lady must besatisfied with that. But pray let us talk of anothernew-married lady. How do you likeMrs. Charville ? Is she handsome ?SIR LEVEL.She is very fond of my plan.CRAFTON.O, no doubt ; and this would have been adecided answer, had I inquired after her mentalperfections. But being a plain country squire,and pretending to little refinement, I simplyinquire if she is handsome.SIR LEVEL.I believe people do think her so, though therules of art are against her.VOL. i. K130 THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.CRAFTON.Never mind the rules ! I beg pardon.is handsome then ; and gay, I suppose.SIR LEVEL.Yes, yes : she is too gay; perhaps the world willsay thoughtless ; but I must still think there isa fund of good sense at bottom. She reallyperceived the beauties of it with great quickness,and took to it wonderfully.CRAFTON.Took to what?SIR LEVEL.To my plan.CRAFTON,O very true ! how could I lose sight of that ?And how will a gay thoughtless wife suit a manof Charville's disposition? He is very suspicious,you say.SIR LEVEL.They jar a little, as other married folks sometimesdo ; but if they put my plan into execution,it will occupy them more pleasantly for atime at least.CRAFTON.If separating the trees will unite them, thereis sense in the plan, and its taste is, of course,unquestionable. And how do you like Char-theALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 131ville's sister, who is so much admired thegentle Mary?SIR LEVEL.She is gentle enough ; but she has no quickness,no perceptions, no brains at all.CRAFTON.Poor girl ; I fear she has not wit enough tocomprehend the plan. But here comes mynephew j he is going with me to the mansion.Enter SIR ROBERT FREEMANTLE.Come, Freemantle ; I have waited for youhere some time, and am indebted to this worthygentleman for not finding it tedious. Let mepresent Sir Robert Freemantle to you, Sir Level.FREEMANTLE.Sir Level Clump, I presume. We shall have aparadise about us presently, were we but worthyto enjoy it.SIR LEVEL.You do me honour, Sir Robert. You have apretty place in the West, I am told, though thepark is somewhat in disorder : but, no doubtyou mean to improve it.FREEMANTLE.I must improve my corn-fields in the firstplace, to get money for other improvements.K 2132 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.SIR LEVEL.The readier and more common method, nowadays,is to cut down the wood on one part ofthe ground, to pay for beautifying the other.FREEMANTLE. .A good device, Sir Level; but my worthymother likes the old woods as they are ; and youmight as well bring her own grey head to theblock, as lift an axe against any veteran oak onthe estate.SIR LEVEL.Ah ! those old people, with their prejudices,are the bane to all taste and improvement.Good morning; I see Mr. Smitchenstault insearch of me.CRAFTON.Is that the German philosopher we haveheard of?SIR LEVEL.Yes ; so he calls himself. I only pretend tomake these grounds visibly beautiful ; he willdemonstrate, forsooth, that they become at thesame time philosophically so. Poor man ! thoughmighty clever in his way, he is altogether occupiedwith his own notions; and to indulge hima little, I have promised to meet him in thefurther part of the wood. Have you a mind foralecture ?THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 133CRAFTON.Not at present, my good Sir ; excuse us.SIR LEVEL.Good morning to you. [Exit.FREEMANTLE (running after him.I have a mind for the lecture, though. (Checkinghimself and returning No, no ; we will go toour visit : she may possibly be there ; she is probablythere ; she is certainly there : the brightnessof the sunshine, the playful fanning of thewind, the quick beating of my heart tells me so.Uncle, are you going ? You are in a deep reverie,methinks.CRAFTON (aside y "without attending to him).His suspicions, her thoughtlessness, the ideafastens itself upon me strangely.FREEMANTLE.Ha ! speaking to yourself Sir ! What is it thatfastens upon you ?CRAFTON.A thought for your good too.SIR ROBERT.Pray let me have it then, for very few suchthoughts have any immediate communicationwith my own brain.K 3THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.CRAFTON.Charville has got a pretty wife, whom he lovesto a folly.FREEMANTLE.And a pretty sister, too, whom he loves butmoderately j yet some other good person mightbe found, who would be willing to make up thatdeficiency.CRAFTON.I understand thee well enough, But she hasno fortune unless she marry with her brother'sconsent ; and his robbing (I must call it so) thypoor simple cousin at the gaming-table showsplainly how much he loves money.FREEMANTLE.Nay, nay ! Since I have seen the sister, I wouldforget that unhappy transaction entirely.CRAFTON.I only mention it now to show his disposition ;and surely thou art poor enough to justify his refusalof thy suit to his sister.FREEMANTLE.I have never made any suit to her.CRAFTON.I know thou hast not ; but if thou shouldst,how wouldst thou relish a flat denial from hisformal importance ? Therefore, if thou hast anythingof this kind in thy head, I would counselTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 135thee to begin with paying thy particular attentionsto his wife, who will afterwards plead thycause with her husband. Come, come ; it is avery good thought ; let us speak of it as we go.FREEMANTLE.But not so loud ; we may be overheard.CRAFTON.Very true ; give me thine arm. exeunt.SCENE II.CHARVILLE's House ; a Saloon opening into theGarden.Enter MR. and MRS. CHARVILLE, speaking asthey enter.MRS. CHARVILLE.No, no! I can't wear them so of a morning,my dear Charles : positively you shan't makesuch a witch of me. pushing him gently away asheendeavours to stick Flowers amongst her hairyCHARVILLE.And art thou not a witch, little Harry? withspells enough about thee for any man's perdition,if thou wert not at the same time a good avery good little witch, mine own little Harry !Do wear them so ; they look pretty.K 4136 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.MRS. CHARVILLE.They look awkward, and affected, and silly ; Ican't endure them. Why will you be so teasing ?CHARVILLE.And are my expressions of attachment becometeasing ? A cold indifferent husband, then, wouldplease you better. You reject the simple offeringof a devoted heart : as my fondness increases,yours, alas ! declines.MRS. CHARVILLE.Come, come; don't look so grave ! I'll stickthose foolish roses into my hair, if you will, thoughI am sure they are only net for a holiday nosegay.CHARVILLE.I gathered them, Love.MRS. CHARVILLE.And I am sorry, Love, you had not the wit togather better. They are such as a village schoolmistresswould strew in her drawer to sweetenher kerchiefs and aprons. They are too fullblown for the flower-pot on her window. Butnever mind ; I '11 wear them.CHARVILLE.I knew you would, for all your saucy words,mine own little Harry : and I '11 tell thee whatI '11 do in return for all thy sweet condescension.MRS. CHARVILLE.And what may that be, I wonder?THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 137CHARVILLE.You objected to my going to Middlemost thismorning.MRS. CHARVILLE.No, I did not.CHARVILLE.Nay, but you did. I read it in your eyes,gentle Harry. But now I set that journey aside :I will not leave thee a week ; not half a week ;no, not a day.MRS. CHARVILLE.what a tide of goodness flows upon me now !I shall be drowned therewith. Not a day ! Doyou think I wish to have you always by my side ?No, my dear Charles : go from home when youplease j and when you return you will bring yoursister and me all the news, and let us know howthe world is moving. All the married folks, Iknow, are sometimes separated.CHARVILLE.And are they as happy as you would wish tobe?MRS. CHARVILLE.They are happy enough, I suppose.CHARVILLE.1 suppose ; suppose. The cold, formal, miserableword ! I hate the very sound of it. I maygo from home, then, as often as I please. My138 THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.absence, I suppose, would be no interruption toyour happiness ?MRS. CHARVILLE,Your occasional absence, perhaps, might increaseit. The most wretched pair of all myacquaintance is the only one always togetherCHARVILLE.Who are they, pray ?MRS. CHARVILLE.Lady Bloom and her jealous husband. Theodious man ! She can't stir, but he moves too,like her shadow. She can't whisper to a friend,nor examine a picture or gem with an old cognoscenti,but he must thrust his nose betweenthem. But how is it now ? You are as grave asajudge, and twisting off the heads of those veryflowers, too, that have occasioned all this commotion.How is it with you now ?CHARVILLE.You take part against the husband very eagerly,I perceive.MRS. CHARVILLE.Not very eagerly ; but I hate a man who is soselfish that he must engross his wife's attentionentirely. What do you think of the matter?CHARVILLE.It is indifferent to you what I think of it ; Iam no longer your care your only care.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 139MRS. CHARVILLE.Did I ever tell you that you were ? God forbidI should be so uncharitable, so narrow, so confined! I have cared for some people in the worldbesides you, and I have told you so.CHARVILLE.Yes, Madam ; I should have remembered howlong Henry Devonford disputed with me theprize of your heart : you favoured us both.MRS. CHARVILLE.True, Charles ; but where would have beenthe merit of preferring you, had I cared for nobodyelse ? If I did show some favour to him,it was you whom I married.CHARVILLE.Very true, very true ! It was me whom youmarried, married, married.MRS. CHARVILLE.Nay, foolish man ! If you will stride aboutthe room so, let us give something of a figure toit.We are too grave for a rigadoon, so we hadbetter make it a minuet. (Holding out her gown,and always facing him, as he turns away, with somuch coaxing good humour, that he is at last overcome,and clasps her in his arms.)CHARVILLE.My dear, dear Harriet! you treat me like afool, but I must bear with it. I know thou lowestme better than thou professes to do.140 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.MRS. CHARVILLE.not a whit !CHARVILLE.Nay, but thou dost. I know it. (Putting hishand fondly on hers')MRS. CHARVILLE.Indeed you know a great deal that nobody elsedoes. You study deeply for it ; you are fond ofoccult learning.Enter a Servant announcing Company.CHARVILLE.And we must be pestered with such interruptions.MRS. CHARVILLE.Don't fret ; I like to see new faces,Enter CRAFTON and Sir R. FREEMANTLE.CRAFTON.1 am happy, Mr. Charville, to offer you myhearty congratulations, and to have the honourof paying my respects to this lady.CHARVILLE.I thank you, Sir. I am happy to have thehonour of seeing you and Sir Robert Freemantlein my house ; and Mrs. Charville too we areboth glad to have that honour.THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 141MRS. CHARVILLE (after making a formal courtesyto CRAFTON, and then turning to FREEMANTLE.And must I do my ceremonies to you too?(Makes a very affected stiff courtesy, and thenholding out her hand to him with great vivacity')My old friend and playfellow, I am delighted tosee you. So unexpected ! Do you belong tothese parts ?FREEMANTLE.No; but my good fortune makes me a temporaryresident at present.MRS. CHARVILLE.It is good fortune to us all. Is it not Charles ?He is brother to my friend Charlotte. (CHAR-villebows gravely And how does dear Charlotte? is she near us too ?FREEMANTLE.No ; she is in Shropshire.CRAFTON.I could not prevail upon my niece to come tomeat this time.MRS. CHARVILLE.O but she will come, when she knows that I amhere : do write to her : it is so long since wemet. Do tell me about her, Sir Robert ; I havemany things to ask. drawing him asideTHE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.CRAFTON (to CHARVILLE).What a charming frank disposition ! a mostcharming woman ! You are a happy man, Char-ville,and a bold one too, after the dealings youhave had with this wicked world, to become responsiblefor such a treasure. But you will tellme she is all perfection, and I will believe it.CHARVILLE.Nay, good Sir, if you are disposed to think wellof my choice, I had better trust to that for doingher justice.CRAFTON.Ay, ay ; I understand this grave restraint : youhave applied the point of ridicule to many a poorBenedict ; and when it comes to your own turn,you shrink from it. You are but a new recruitin this service of matrimony, and still belong tothe awkward division.CHARVILLE (smiling faintly).Perhaps so. It is a pleasant morning : didyou come by - (Here MRS. CHARVILLE andFREEMANTLE pass from the bottom of the Stageinto the gardens) - by the common ?CRAFTON.Why, that lies miles off on the other side, youknow.CHARVILLE.True ; I mean the garden.THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 143CRAFTON.When you are kind enough to give me a keyto it, I may come that way.CHARVILLE.No, no ! I mean the woods.CRAFTON.You have named my way my favourite way,at last. But I fear it will not long be so ; forSir Level Clump pronounces it to be practicableground, and that is a death-warrant to natureand simplicity.CHARVILLE.Nature and simplicity are very antiquated personages;and Mr. Grafton is particularly kindin taking any interest in the latter, who hasassuredly no kindred claim to his protection.CRAFTON.And is it for the same reason that you woulddrive her from yours ? But let us both befriendher on more liberal principles : I shall be proudat all times to follow your good example.CHARVILLE.You expect to keep up with me on some ofthe easy-pacing virtues.CRAFTON.I don't know; even so mounted, you mayrun me harder than I like. But I may strive todoit, were it only out of spite.144 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.CHARVILLE.I '11 trust you for that.CRAFTON.Do so, by all means : trust me or any bodyfor any thing, if you can, and you will cultivate adisposition of mind that is good for man in everycondition, particularly in the married state.Under another name, you know, it is one of thecardinal virtues.Enter SMITCHENSTAULT.SMITCHENSTAULT.O you talk of de vertues cardinals, de great,de grand, de sublime vertues ; dat be de ting, deone only ting.CRAFTON.Mr. Smitchenstault, I presume. (Bowing)SMITCHENSTAULT.Yes, yes ; hear you me : my name is Smit-chestnut.Hear you me. De sublime vertueis de grand, de only vertue. I prove you dis.Now we shall say, here is de good-temperedman ; he not quarrel, he not fret, he disturb nobody.Very well ; let him live de next door tome: but what all dat mean ? O, dat he is degood-tempered man. Den dere is de industriousman, hear you me, de industrious man ; hedon't love idle, he work, he toil, he do everyting dat be to do ; very well, all dat very well :THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.let him build my house, let him make my shoe,let himCHARVILLE (who has been all this while watchingwith his eyes MRS. CHARVILLE and SIR R.FREEMANTLE, as they walked to and fro in thegarden, seeing him now take a letter from hispocket, calls out, off his guard).A letter ! (Moves towards the garden.)SMITCHENSTAULT (pulling him back).Letter ! I say no letter : I say make my shoe.O, let him make let him do all dat ; dis bewell too. And dere be de sober man : he notlove wine ; wine make him ill ; and he havealways de great commendations, O, he be desober man ! But, I say, now hear you meCRAFTON.We do, Mr. Smitchenstault ; and no disparagementto your argument, it is a virtue of necessity.SMITCHENSTAULT.No, he don't hear. (To CHARVILLE.) Whatyou always look dere for? (Turning round himselfeO, de lady is in de garden !CHARVILLE.Shall we join her, Mr. Smitchenstault ? She isfond of your reasoning.SMITCHENSTAULT.No, no ! She love de flowers and frivolities.VOL. I. L146 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.I say, hear you me. I say, let him make myshoe.CRAFTON.But you had got beyond that, my good Sir.SMITCHENSTAULT.O, very well den, you understand. But* 'ofwhat value is all that giggling, niggling, youcall little thing giggling, niggling ?CRAFTON.Sometimes we do, perhaps.SMITCHENSTAULT.Very well : what is it, I say, but de giggling,niggling driblets of virtue ? But de grand, desublime, is in what you call not de heart(Striking his breast*) not de heart.CRAFTON.Stomach ?SMITCHENSTAULT.No, no ! Soul (Striking his breast withgreater energy ay, de soul, dere be de sublimevertue. My sentiment, my enthusiasm, mylove for my friend do flame here ; what tough inmy rage I do cut his troat ?CRAFTON.That were but a trifle. But suffer me totranspose the matter, and make the sublimity ofsentiment to belong to your friend, and thethroat to yourself.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 147SMITCHENSTAULT.Pardon, pardon! you do turn upon me devery vulgar reply. Observe well de turn ofmy argument. Actions be noting : it is de highsoaring of de soul. (To CHARVILLE.) Butyou don't attend ; you don't look at me.CRAFTON.Pardon him, Sir ; his eyes follow a still moreagreeable object. Shall we join the party inthe garden, Charville ?CHARVILLE.no ! 'pon my soul, I was looking at thatwindow frame ; the ideot of a carpenter hasbungled it abominably.CRAFTON.1 see no fault in it. But you are difficult ;Mr. Smitchenstault's giggling virtues are not infavour this morning. Good day.CHARVILLE.Ha, ha, ha ! 'Pon my life, I am in the besthumour imaginable. You will not go withouttaking leave of Mrs. Charville.CRAFTON.I am a person of no ceremony.CHARVILLE.But your nephew.CRAFTON.He will walk home when he likes it : I takeL 2148 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.no charge of him. Good day, Mr. StitchingSMITCHENSTAULT.but you have not hear where de sense ofmy argument lies.f 1CRAFTON.1 have not indeed.SMITCHENSTA Lt.But you must, tough. I go wit you. (Takinghim by the arm, and speaking busily as they gooff.} De soul is de sublime energy ; it is desubtile matter, de, &c. &c, &c.exeunt CRAFTON and SMITCHENSTAULT.CHARVILLE (now looking without restraint toMRS. CHARVILLE and FREEMANTLE in thegarden).Very good friends, truly, with their letters andtheir confidences. That coquettish animationtoo : they must have some merry joke to laughthus. No, hang it! 'tis their own damned pleasurein being together. (Rims to them in thegarden, and the scene closes.)THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 149ACT II.SCENE I. MRS. CHARVILLE's Dressing Room.She is discovered with MARY, sitting by atable at work, fyc.MRS. CHARVILLE.And you have seen him at Lady Belford's ?MARY.Yes.MRS. CHARVILLE.And at Harrogate ?MARY.Yes.MRS. CHARVILLE.And have danced with him ?MARY.Yes.MRS. CHARVILLE.And have found him very agreeable ?MARY.Yes.MRS. CHARVILLE.Well, fair befall thee for answering Yes to thisL 3150 THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.last question ! for I did believe thee hypocriteenough to have answered No.MARY.Your opinion of me is flattering.MRS. CHARVILLE.How could it be otherwise, seeing you receivehim as you did when I called you into the garden?You came forward like a blushing schoolgirl,sent into her governess's parlour to speak to herTown cousin of the fifteenth degree. I 'm sureI think Sir Robert Freemantle a Godsend to us,in our present condition.MARY.In your present condition ! Is not this yourhoneymoon with my brother ? At least, I shouldthink it is not yet entirely at an end.MRS. CHARVILLE.O dear no ! But would it had less honey andmore shine ; we want lemon juice for our sweetness.MARY.And you are in the way to have it. Indeed,my dear Harriet, if you are not aware, you willsoon have too much of it.MRS. CHARVILLE.Then, if you are afraid of this, do you applythe remedy.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. i51MARY.Willingly, if it be in my power ; but what canI do?MRS. CHARVILLE.Give me something to amuse and interest me.I know Freemantle will be in love with you, ifyou take any pains with him. Nay, don't lookso proud, Lady, I don't mean disingenuouspains ; and then I shall have something to thinksomething to talk of.MARY.Have you ever been without this last resource ?MRS. CHARVILLE.O no, Heaven bless me ! I can talk of the lastforeign mail, or the changing of an old turnpikeroad, or any thing, rather than hold my tongue.MARY.But you are not reduced to this necessitysurely, with Sir Level's taste and Mr. Stitchingult's philosophy at command.MRS. CHARVILLE.But I mean something that is worth talkingabout. Something that one whispers in theear ; something that one watches an opportunityto communicate j something that one speaks ofbusily in the twilight, in some private alley, withthe bats wheeling over one's head ; somethingO dear, O dear ! I can enjoy this nowonly by sympathy.L 4THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.CHARVILLE enters by a door behind the Ladies,but stops short on hearing their conversation.MARY.What a long sober face you put on ! What areyou thinking of now ? i*MRS. CHARVILLE.Matrimony is a duller thing than I took itto be.MARY.Indeed !MRS. CHARVILLE.I was too foolish : I might have had my amusementfor another good winter at least, and havemarried him after all, if I liked it.MARY.So you married to amuse yourself?MRS. CHARVILLE.My dear girl, what could I do ? I was withmy stiff grave cousins in the country: I was disappointedof a trip to the Continent ; the Bathseason was still distant, and there was neithercounty ball, horse-race, nor strolling players inall the country round : so when Charville presentedhimself again, and renewed his addresses,I was ready to have flown with him to the moon.And now, my dear little sister, if there be anygrace in thee, let us have some amusement.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 153MARY.Willingly, if I knew how.MRS. CHARVILLE.Get into some attachment, and difficulties, andcorrespondences ; for, next to receiving a love-letterone's self, there is nothing so delightful aspeeping into the love-letters of one's neighbours.MARY.Ha, ha, ha ! You might be easily satisfied ;for I have only to give Mr. Smitchenstault a littleencouragement, and we shall have love-lettersenough to peep into.MRS, CHARVILLE.Somebody is coming. (CHARVILLE retires softlywithout being perceived, and SMITCHENSTAULT, bythe opposite door, enters, with heavy creaking stepsMARY.See ! the old proverb verified ; speak of him,and he appears. Mr. Smitchenstault, you comein good time to give us the benefit of your exquisitesensibility. My sister there is painting arose, and two buds which seem newly separatedfrom it ; and she must not put dew-drops uponeach, you know, because that would be formal :now, whether should the rose appear to be weepingfor the buds, or the buds for the rose ? theparental or the filial affections prevail ?THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.SMITCHENSTAUDT.O de nice question ! de sweet affection ! dedear sympathy ! de pretty affection ! What youwish me to say ? |I am no modern ; I am no bud ;but I have de tender heart.MRS. CHARVILLE.So my sister knows Mr. Smitchenstault.SMITCHENSTAULT.She know? O de incredible delight! (ToMary') Do you know mine heart ? de heartof one who feel all de sublime delicacies, all depretty commotion, all de genteel ecstasies of desoul of one lover. (Ogling her absurdly Havemine eyes told you all ?MARY.Not entirely, my good Sir; for that wouldhave been using your tongue exceedingly ill.SMITCHENSTAULT.O no ! no tongue, no tongue ! all heart, trueheart, devotion heart. (Laying his hand on hisbreasts It be all here trills, trills, like de stringsof an instrument, de poor instrument dat youwill play upon.MARY.Not I, Mr. Smitchenstault ; I want skill.SMITCHENSTAULT.Let me teach you den. O de sweet tuition :THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 155MRS. CHARVILLE.O the charming preceptor !SMITCHENSTAULT (bowing conceitedly).O, dear Madam ! I am de poor unworthy.MRS. CHARVILLE.Say not unworthy, my dear Sir ; don't, I prayyou, do yourself that wrong.SMITCHENSTAULT (bowing again).You are very good. But if dere be in meanyting good, any ting noble, any ting amiable,it be all from de passion of mine heart, datdear passion dat do make me, one poor philosopher,become like de lofty hero.MRS. CHARVILLE.the surprising transformation ! if one's eyeswere but gifted enough to perceive it.SMITCHENSTAULT (turning again to MARY).And you do know dat I have de tender heart?MARY.1 have not quite so much penetration ; but Ireally know that you are very polite and obliging;and perhaps you will have the goodness to holdthis skein of silk whilst I wind it.SMITCHENSTAULT.De very great honour. (Holding out his hands,upon which she puts the skein156 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.MRS. CHARVILLE.Yes ; that rose-coloured silk looks, indeed,like the bands of love ; but those don't look quiteso like the hands of love : you have been makingtoo free with your snuff-box this morning.SMITCHENSTAULT. *O it is always so ; when I am in de great agitations,I take de great snuffs.MARY.So, by this, one may guess at the strength ofyour passion.MRS. CHARVILLE.And I am sure, for these few days past, thereis no man in the kingdom who has been withinhalf a pound of tobacco so fervent a lover asMr. Smitchenstault.SMITCHENSTAULT.You do me de great honour.Re-enter CHARVILLE.CHARVILLE.Ha, Smitchenstault ! What do I see ? Herculeswith Omphale ! A philosopher forgettinghis dignity, and condescending to amuse himselfwith girls !SMITCHENSTAULT.O, dere is de potion dat put all dignity to sleep.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 157CHARVILLE.I believe so ; and, by my faith ! yours is sometimesdrugged pretty handsomely. But bewareof this potion, which you have, I presume, receivedfrom one of these ladies ; it may be dangerous.SMITCHENSTAULT.O nol it be only for de sweet mutual enjoyment.CHARVILLE.Well, let it be so ; that 's prudent ; as much ofit as either of them will share with you, may betakenwith safety. But if this potion shouldhave the same effect upon your genius as on yourdignity, what will the admiring and expectingpublic say to it ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Let it have patience ; I will give de public,by and by, all dat it will desire.MRS. CHARVILLE.And a little more into the bargain, no doubt,to do the thing handsomely.CHARVILLE.Yes, I '11 be bound for it ; your doctrine ofenergies will not be dealt out by such a scantymeasure. And pray, amongst all your powers,have you discovered any that can bind the ficklefancy of a woman ?158 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.SMITCHENSTAULT.O no ! no bind ! I do bind nothing, looseall : dat is my plan ; de free plan of nature : soI do teach my pupils.CHARVILLE.A most agreeable lesson, truly : and you Millfind some ladies very willing to become yourpupils; if, indeed, they are not already morequalified to teach than to learn.MARY.Dear brother, how severe you are ! But a truceto philosophy ! It is in matters of taste that wehave been craving Mr. Smitchenstault's instruction,though he has not yet told us whether thedew-drops emblems of sensibility should behung upon this rose, or the buds which havebeen torn from her. (Pointing to the flowersMRS. CHARVILLE has been painting.)CHARVILLE (eagerly to MRS. Cavillersit the flower I gave you this morning ?MRS. CHARVILLE.O dear, no ! It is the one Sir Robert Free-mantlewore in his button-hole : we have notone in the whole garden of the same species.Come, do you tell us where these same dewdropsshould be disposed of on this drawing ?CHARVILLE.Dip it into the well, if you please, and it willhave drops enough.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY, 159MRS. CHARVILLE.Dear me ! you are angry.CHARVILLE.No, faith ! It should take a thing of more importanceto make a man angry.MRS. CHARVILLE.Indeed, I think it should.Enter SIR LEVEL CLUMP, shipping joyfully.SIR LEVEL.Huzza, huzza ! Come out to the lawn withme ; come out to the lawn with me, gentles all,and I will show you a thing.CHARVILLE.What is the matter ?SIR LEVEL.Such a discovery! Such a site for a ruin!Such a happy combination ! A dilapidated washhousefor the foundation ; an old stag-headedoak, five Lombardy poplars, and a yew tree insuch skilful harmony, the rules of compositioncould not offer you a better. You must have anerection there, Mr. Charville; you positivelymust. There sat a couple of jackdaws upon theoak too, in such harmony with the whole ; butthey would fly away, hang 'em !MRS. CHARVILLE.That was very perverse of them ; I suppose160 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.those same days belong more to Mr. Stitchingschool than to yours, Sir Level.SIR LEVEL.But you lose time, my dear Madam : comeaway, come away! a hundred pounds or twolaid out on the ruin would make it a morsel f forthe finest Ducal park in the kingdom.MARY (to SMITCHENSTAULT, as they are going).But we shall interrupt your instructive conversation.SMITCHENSTAULT.Never mind : de poor good man ! I always indulgede good peoples in dere little folly.[Exeunt all but CHARVILLE.CHARVILLE (after musing moodily on the front ofthe Stage).Such a craving for dissipation and change !A curious busy imagination. " Next to receivinga love-letter of one's own, nothing delightsone like peeping into the love-letters ofone's neighbours;" the true spirit of intrigue!Ay, but receiving love-letters of one's own ;that is the best. A married woman and love-letters! How should she think of love-letters ?A bad, a suspicious, a dangerous disposition.I think I know myself; I am not prone tosuspicion; but for those strange words, I shouldnot have cared a maravedi for her painting thatcursed flower. (Dashing his hand over the papers,and scattering them about.)THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 161Re-enter SIR LEVEL CLUMP.SIR LEVEL.My dear Sir, why do you stay behind youwho are most concerned in this piece of goodfortune ? You must come out and behold it. Afew hundreds a mere trifle laid out upon it.If I could give it the form of an ancient mausoleum,it would delight you.CHARVILLE.Not a jot, unless you were to bury yourselfunder it. \ Exit the other way.SIR LEVEL.What is the matter ? What is the matter ?How can I have possibly offended him ? I amsure nobody is less teasing or obtrusive than Iam. [Exit.Re-enter CHARVILLE.Cavillershe gone ? He will suspect something :they will all suspect. I must join them, and pretendit was only a feigned displeasure. Married,married ! \JExit.VOL. I. M162 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY,SCENE II.MRS. SMOOTHLY'* Room. She enters speaking,and taking a Bandbox from a Servant, whoimmediately retires. ^SMOOTHLY.All nonsense ! if you had waited for it lastnight at the waggoner's, you would have got it.(Alone.) 'T is well it comes at last : my lady'spresent bonnet will surely fall to my share now.(Opening the box.) Let me see. O how smartand pretty! Did it but fall to my lot, now, to wearsuch things with their best new face upon them !(Going to the glass, and putting the bonnet onher head, and then curtsying to herself affectedly')Indeed, I beg ten thousand pardons : I thoughtfor to have come for to ride in the park withyou earlier ; but my Lord, Sir John, (ay,that will do) would not allow me ; for you knowI have not always command of my own horses,and them things we married ladies must submitto. O lud, lud! will it ever come to this?Such fine clothes, such a carriage, such a husbandsome girls have got, who are not, I 'msure, half so handsome.Enter SMITCHENSTAULT softly behind her, andlooks over her shoulders.O mercy on me ! (Shrieking out.)THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 163SMITCHENSTAULT.Hush, hush ! What is de matter?SMOOTHLY.O, it is only you, Sir !SMITCHENSTAULT.Why, who did you think ?SMOOTHLY.Lud, Sir ! they say that when people are vain,the devil is always near to take his advantage ofit ; and when I saw in the glass such a facestaring over my shoulder, O dear ! I wasfrightened out of my wits.SMITCHENSTAULT.Fy, fy ! dere is no devil nor nonsense. I willteach you better dan dat. But dere be de littleGod of Love : you have heard of him, prettyminx ?SMOOTHLY.With his bow, and his quiver, and all thatthere ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Ay ; he it be who do take de advantage,who do tempt you, who do tempt me, who dotempt every body.SMOOTHLY.Old, Sir!SMITCHENSTAULT.Now, be you quiet ; be not so fluster. YouM 2164 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.call dat fluster ? (She nods') Very well ; it behim who do tempt every body. Do you knowany body in dis house dat he is tempting now ?Think well before you answer me.SMOOTHLY,You said yourself, Sir.SMITCHENSTAULT.Yes, but beside me dere is anode.SMOOTHLY (coyly.- La, Sir ! how should I know ?SMITCHENSTAULT.What you think now of your pretty mistress, desweet Mary Charville ?SMOOTHLY.O Sir ! if that is your point, I know nothingof that (sulkily).SMITCHENSTAULT.Come now, be free wit me : dere is for you.Buy ribbon, or de shoe buckle, or what youplease. Now you tell me ; don't she sometimesspeak of me ? make de little confidences ?SMOOTHLY.O lud, no ! ha, ha, ha !SMITCHENSTAULT.Come, come, no laugh ; you not mock me. Iknow very well ; tell me de truth. Dere is moremoney; dat will buy de little gown, if you please.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 16,5Don't she sometime speak of me when you arealone ?SMOOTHLY.You are so insinuating ! O dear ! to be sureshe sometimes does.SMITCHENSTAULT.I knew it ; I knew dat she did. Now, prettyminx, when she speak of me again to you, andsigh, and do so (languishing affectedly den doyou speak of me too, you know.SMOOTHLY.And what shall I say, Sir ?SMITCHENSTAULT.All dat you think.SMOOTHLY.I fear, Sir, that would be of little service toyou. You had better tell me precisely what Iam to say.SMITCHENSTAULT.Why why, you may say dat I am handsome.SMOOTHLY.Very well, Sir : if she is in love with you, shewill believe me. And what more shall I say ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Say, dat in her place you would love me too.SMOOTHLY.O dear, Sir! that would be presumptuous.M 3166 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.SMITCHENSTAULT.Poo, poo, poo ! not presumptuous. Say youdat, pretty minx, and I tell you a secret : whenI marry your lady, I can love you bote.SMOOTHLY.Dear, Sir, would not that be wicked ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Wicked, pretty fool ! what be dat ting wicked?I tell you dere be no devil in de world.SMOOTHLY.Truly, Sir, he does not seem to be wanted,while you are here.SMITCHENSTAULT.Come, come, don't be afraid : I will love youbote. ( Bell rings. )SMOOTHLY.My lady's bell : I must go to her immediately.She is in a hurry for her new bonnet.SMITCHENSTAULT.Remember, den, and take dis wit you. (Offeringto kiss her.)SMOOTHLY.O no ! I am in a great hurry : we J ll put thatoff for the present. (Bell rings again.)Exeunt severally.THE ALIENATED MANOR*. A COMEDY.SCENE III.The Wood near the House.Enter MARY and SIR ROBERT FREEMANTLE byopposite sides.MARY.Sir Robert Freemantle !FREEMANTLE.Yes, even so ; both morning and noon, alwaysSir Robert Freemantle. However, I don'tmake this second visit entirely without pretence.My uncle sent me a very willing messenger,I own to inform Mrs. Charville that the botanicalwork she mentioned this morning is outof print, so she need not take the trouble ofwriting to town for it : but he has it in his library,which is entirely at her service, and willtake the liberty of sending it to her.MARY.He is very obliging ; and so are you. Shall Iturn with you, and meet Mrs. Charville ? She isjust coming out to walk.FREEMANTLE*This spot is very delightful : had we notbetter wait for her ? Do you begrudge me onemoment of your company, which will so soonM 4168 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.pass away? How fleetly that time passes inreality, which from the imagination passes never !MARY.Ay, so it does.FREEMANTLE.Do you remember the evening when wedanced together at Lady Milford's ? And themorning when I met you on your sorrel mare,crossing the heath at full speed, with your locksscattered on the wind like the skirts of somedrifted cloud? And that little party to thecottage too ?MARY.Yes, I remember it all very well.FREEMANTLE.Very well ! I remember it too well. But Idistress you, Miss Charville ; for you guess whatI would say, and my motives for remaining silenton a subject so closely connected with every ideaI have formed to myself of happiness. I willnot distress you : yet permit me to see yousometimes. Let me call myself your neighbouror your friend. Ha ! Mrs. Charville already !Enter MRS. CHARVILLE.MRS. CHARVILLE.I saw you at a distance. How good you areto come to us again ! for I have been thinkingTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 169of many inquiries I should have made after myfriend. However, I need not scourge my poorbrains to remember every thing at once j for youare our neighbour, and we shall often meet.MARY.Mr. Grafton has sent by Sir Robert a veryobliging message to you. The book you wishedto see is out of print, and he will send it fromhis own library.MRS. CHARVILLE.Good, dear, sensible Mr. Grafton, to keep suchdelightful books, and such a messenger to dohis errands withal. To-morrow he will send me anovel to read a very scarce, clever work ; andthe day after that, some verses by a friend (wearegreat critics in poetry, I assure you) ; andthe day after that, a charade ; and the day afterthat, a riddle, of his own writing perhaps ; andthe day after that O, we shall make a greatmany days of the riddle ! We need not guess itall at once ; that would be improvident.FREEMANTLE.But, my dear Mrs. Charville, will you trustnothing to my own ingenuity in finding outreasons for doing what is so agreeable to me ?Enter CHARVILLE.MRS. CHARVILLE (to her husband).You saw Sir Robert at a distance too, I THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.pose. We are all gathering round him, I think,like pigeons round a looking-glass.CHARVILLE (to her.I heard your voice at a distance, and guessedyou had some cause for such lively animation.MARY.Is my sister often without it ?MRS. CHARVILLE.If I am, it is but of late. When you lookgrave (to CHARVILLE), it would be undutiful inme to be merry.CHARVILLE (peevishly).You are dutiful, and that makes you grave.(Striding away from him, muttering to himself')I comprehend it ; it is all plain enough. (Checkinghimself, and returning to FREEMANTLE.) Thisbeautiful morning, Sir Robert, has tempted youto prolong your rambles in the wood : but whathas become of Mr. Grafton?FREEMANTLE.He went home some time ago: he dislikessitting down to dinner fatigued.CHARVILLE.He is right ; it is not good for any body.MRS. CHARVILLE.Then Sir Robert will stay and dine with us,and go home in the cool of the evening. He hasTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 171walked a great deal, and must be fatigued, if hereturn now. (Looking wistfully to CHARVILLE,who is silent.) This would be a most agreeablearrangement. (Looks to him again, and he stillremains silent. ~) Don't you think it would ?CHARVILLE.Undoubtedly, if Sir Robert will do me thehonour.FREEMANTLE.I am very much obliged to you and Mrs. Char-ville; but my uncle expects me : it is near hishour. I must deny myself a very great pleasure :I must return immediately.CHARVILLE.Since we are so unfortunate, perhaps you areright. The clouds seem to be gathering forrain.MRS. CHARVILLE.It is only the shadow of the trees overhead :the sky is as clear as a mirror.Cavillersit the trees? There are shadows somewhere.MRS. CHARVILLE.So it seems : but blow them away, pray. Ican't endure shadows.MARY.Yet you like moonlight and twilight, I think.172 THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.MRS. CHARVILLE.O, to a folly ! When owls are hooting, andbeetles humming, and bats flying about, makingas many circles in the air as a summer showerdoes on the pool. Did you (to CHARVILLE) seethebat we caught last night ? ( iCHARVILLE.A bat?MRS. CHARVILLE.Yes, a horned bat ; the ominous creature, youknow, that fanciful people are frightened at. Oyes, you must have seen it, for you are drawingin the muscles of your eyes and face at thisvery moment in mockery of the creature.MARY.Did you not see it, brother? It was verycurious.MRS. CHARVILLE.He looks at no creatures but those which arebred in his kennels and his stable. I '11 describeit to Sir Robert. (Going to SIR ROBERT, andwalking with him to the bottom of the Stage,talking, and demonstrating with her hands, whileCHARVILLE and MARY occupy the front')CHARVILLE.So fond of natural curiosities : this is a newfancy, methinks.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 173MARY.No ; she is fond of painting butterflies, youknow.CHARVILLE.So it seems, so it seems. (Striding away, andpacing round the Stage with his eyes fixed uponSIR ROBERT and MRS. CHARVILLE, till he getsclose behind them, while they move towards thefrontsMRS. CHARVILLE (continuing to speak as she andFREEMANTLE come forward).But that kind is larger, and speckled like awilding's egg, or a cowry, or the back of a trout,so pretty, and so minute.CHARVILLE (thrusting his head between them.My Love, you are too minute. You forgetthat Mr. Grafton is waiting for Sir Robert.MRS. CHARVILLE.Bless me ! is your face there ? I thought youwere on the other side of us.FREEMANTLE.I am just going, Sir.CHARVILLE.O ! Sir Robert, I beg that you will not gosooner than Mr. Grafton, I know, is apt tobe impatient.MRS. CHARVILLE.And you have a fellow-feeling for him.174 THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.FREEMANTLE (to MRS. CHARV1LLE).So 1 may venture to tell my uncle that youreceive the liberty he has taken in good part.Good day. (Going. ")MRS. CHARVILLE (calling him back. ,But when do you write to your sister ? Thereare many things which I wish to say to her.FREEMANTLE (returning.I shall have the honour to receive your commandson that subject whenever you please.(She walks with him, again busily talking, to thebottom of the Stage.)CHARVILLE.Does she mean to detain him the whole day ?MARY.He has been here but a very short time.CHARVILLE.A long half hour by the clock.MARY.It is a clock of your own keeping, brother,and the wheels of it are in your own brain. Ireckon it ten minutes.CHARVILLE.Are you bewitched to say so ? He goes ; seehe goes now. No, hang it ! he does not go yet.MARY.Why are you so impatient ?THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 175CHARVILLE.I am not impatient : let him stay till doomsday,if he will ; but I hate people who are alwaysgoing and going, and never go. stepping ontothem hastily It will rain presently : it rainsnow ; would you stay here to be wet ?MRS. CHARVILLE.Rain!CHARVILLE.I felt a drop on my hand this moment: lookthere.MRS. CHARVILLE.It fell not from the clouds then ; but verily,I think, from your own forehead, How warmyou are ! (Turning to Freemantle.} Good day,then, I will not detain you. \JLxit FREEMANTLE.(To CHARVILLE.) Well, dear Charles, sinceyou are so afraid of the clouds, let us go into thehouse. But I must visit my bower first.\ TLxit swiftly among the trees.CHARVILLE (after stalking slowly away in anotherdirection, stops short, and returns to MARY,who stands on the front, looking after FREE-mantle).MARY.Well, brother !CHARVILLE.My dear Mary !176 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.MARY.Well, brother ; what would you say ?CHARVILLE.I am going to ask a very foolish I meanan idle I should say, an unmeaning question.MARY.Never mind that ; what is it ?CHARVILLE.Has Freemantle really a sister ?MARY.Is it passible that you have forgot the younglady whom you used to think poor Mordant resembled?CHARVILLE.Very true ; it went out of my head strangely.MARY.Strangely indeed ! Could you think he wouldtalk of a sister, if he had none ?CHARVILLE.O no, no, no ! I have not an atom of suspicionabout me; but I thought it might be asister-in-law, or a brother's wife, or there isno saying how many intricate relationships peoplehave, now-a-days.MARY.He could have no sister-in-law ; for poor Mordant,though distant, is his nearest male relation.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 177CHARVILLE.Don't mention that poor wretch. He wouldbe ruined : it was not my doing.MARY.Did you dissuade him from playing ? and wereyou obliged to receive all that he lost ? My dearbrother, let me speak to you on this subject whenyou are composed and at leisure.CHARVILLE.I am composed enough, but certainly not atleisure. \JEixeunt severally*SCENE IV.An outer Court adjoining to the House.Enter ISAAC with a Letter , and immediatelyfollowed by MRS. SMOOTHLY.SMOOTHLY.Where are you going with that letter, Isaac ?ISAAC.To Squire Grafton's.SMOOTHLY.Is it for the Squire himself ?ISAAC.I bien't good at reading handy writ, as how mywit never lay that way ; but I guess that it isVOL. I. N178 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.either for the Squire himself, or some of thegentle folks of his family.MRS. SMOOTHLY.A clever guess truly; thy wit, I think, mustlie that way. Give me the letter ; I '11 take jt ;I *m going there, at any rate.ISAAC (giving her the letter.There it is : I knows you like an errand to thathouse to see somebody.SMOOTHLY.Dost thou think I would go to see nobody,foolish oaf?ISAAC.Ha, but a favourite somebody. Ay, ay ! Iknows what I knows. John, the butler, is amighty fine man, and goes to church dressedlike a squire of a Sunday, and the poor silly titsof the village courtesy as he passes, and call himSir." I knows what I knows. [Exit.SMOOTHLY.Do they suspect me, then ? I '11 hide this inmy bosom, and nobody else shall know where Iam going.Enter CHARVILLE.CHARV1LLE.What letter is that you are hiding so carefully?SMOOTHLY.O lud, Sir !THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 179CHARVILLE. -What, you are nervous, are you ? I say, whatletter is that ? Who is it for ?SMOOTHLY.Lud, Sir, I never read the direction, it *s forthe post.CHARVILLE.Why need you go out with it, then, when theletter-box is in the hall ? Give it to me, and I'llput it in.SMOOTHLY.O Sir, that wont take it to the place it isgoing to.CHARVILLE.Did you not tell me this moment that it is forthe post ?SMOOTHLY.Did I, Sir ? I was wrong, Sir ; I must take itmyself.CHARVILLE.Come, come ; no more waiting-maid prevarications! Give me the letter, I charge you, andI '11 take it where it should go. Give me theletter this instant.SMOOTHLY (giving it unwillingly).There, Sir.CHARVILLE (looking at the direction).By heaven and earth just what I expected.(Sternly to her.) And you did not know to180 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.whom this letter is directed ? (Motioning her togo as she is about to speaks Away, away ! Tellme no more lies : I '11 take care of this letter.exeunt severally.SCENE V.The Butler's Room.Enter DICKENS ON with a Paper in his Hand,which he looks upon ruefully.DICKENSON.Ay, this was the state of the cellar : what itwill be soon, if all these palavering people, withtheir improvements and philosophy, stay muchlonger in the house, the Lord knows ! That goodbin of claret is melting away most piteously.Who 's there ?Enter CHARVILLE.My master. I beg your honour's pardon.CHARVILLE.Hush ! Let me be here for a little while.DICKENSON.What is the matter, Sir? you are very pale.CHARVILLE.Nothing, nothing. Watch on the outside ofthe door, and prevent any body coming in: thereis not a room in my own house where I can beatpeace for a few minutes to read a letter.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 181DICKENSON.Are they in your study, Sir?CHARVILLE.Yes, yes ! Sir Level is there with his cursedplans : they are in my dressing-room too ; theyare every where. Watch by the door, I say, forafew minutes. [Exit DICKENSON.(Taking out the letter 'with agitation.)To Sir Robert Freemantle." Her own handwriting: that fair character for such foul ends 1What man on earth would not do as 1 do?(Breaking open the seat.) A cover only. The enclosed.(Reads again.) " To Miss Freemantle."Is this all? (Examining the .envelope.) What'shere? A coarse scratched drawing of a hornedbat. (Reads again.) " You will understand whatI mean by this, though it is but a scratch."No more ! By Jove there is some mischievousmeaning under this I It is my likeness she wouldgive under that of a bat, and she will add thehorns to the original, if she can. (Reads again.)To Miss Freemantle," If this should be a devicenow, lest the letter should be opened ! I '11pawn my life it is. " To Miss Freernantle." Weshall see ; we shall see. (Tears open the enclosedletter.) Mercy on us ! three pages and a half soclosely written]DICKENSON (without).You shan't come in, I say.N 3182 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.CHARVILLE.Who's there? (Huddling up the papers') Imust have time to read all this. (Noise of voiceswithout') What f s that ?Re-enter DICKENSON.DICKENSON.They are inquiring for you, Sir. Ladies andgentlemen, and all ; they are going to walk.CHARVILLE.Let them go where they please. I '11 take mywalk elsewhere.DICKENSON.You may go out by the back stair, Sir.CHARVILLE.So I will ; that is well thought of thee, goodDickinson. [Exeunt.ACT III.SCENE I. CHARVILLE's private Library. Heis discovered sitting by a table with the letter inhis hand.CHARVILLE (reading.My dear Charlotte, I rejoice so much in thehappy chance." Pshaw ! I have read it a hundredTHE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. 183times since yesterday. I'll look upon the hatefulscrawl no more. (Tosses it from him, paces in adisordered manner about the room, then returnsto it again.} What, does it take hold of me still ?the fascination of a snake is about it ; I cannotkeep away from it: I must read that passageonce more. (Sits down again and reads " Ahthe cross fate that separates us so cruelly ! Wewere once, as you know, within an ace of comingtogether, of consummating that dearest wish ofmy heart. Those dear woods of Openly ! howdear they would then have been ! The tendergreen boughs of spring with all their lovelyblossoms would have smelt more fragrant ; thebirds would have sung more melodiously; thefair face of nature would have smiled moresweetly." These the sentiments, these expressionsof one woman to another ! It is as evidentlya lovelier, as that my clenched fist presses thistable. Some part indeed seems irrelevant ; butfar less ingenious commentators than our ancienttext books have been handled by would find nodifficulty in it at all. Ay, plain enough : hereis a good rule to try it by : substitute Robertfor Charlotte, and there is sense in it ; withoutthis, it is a mass of absolute absurdity. All thispains ! Why not ? I have heard of most intricateciphering made use of in such clandestinematters. This is simple and more ingeniousstill and yet pest take these tormentingN 4184 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.incongruities ! Go, vile scrap ! I must tearthee to atoms or thou wilt craze my brain.(Tearing the letter furiously')Enter DICKENSON.(Angrily Who's there ?DICKENSON.Mr. Grafton wishes to speak with yourHonour.CHARVILLE.Let him speak with the devil ! are not theladies below ?DICKENSON.Yes, Sir; but he has express business withyourself, and would follow me up stairs.CHARVILLE (in a whisper.Is he behind thee ?DICKENSON.Yes, Sir, close at hand.CHARVILLE (in a low 'voice).Let him come then, since it cannot be helped.(Gathering up the torn papers hastily whileCRAFTON enters.)CRAFTON.Good morning, Sir ; pray let me assist you.CHARVILLE.O Sir, I beg I shall do it myself in amoment.CRAFTON.(Stooping.) Pray allow me ; the pieces are asTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 185numerous, as if you had been plucking a goose,yet from your countenance I should rather haveexpected it to be a crow.CHARVILLE.No, nothing ; an old tailor's bill that gave metrouble once, and I had a spite at it.CRAFTON.And you have wreaked your vengeance on itunsparingly.CHARVILLE.I think Dickinson said you were come to meon business. Have the goodness to be seated.CRAFTON.No I thank you ; it can be settled in a fewwords.CHARVILLE.Well, Sir.CRAFTON.Our neighbour Dobson is going to sell hislittle farm ; now it is a desirable possession foreither of us, and I should like to add it to myown estate ; yet I would by no means enter intocompetition with a purchaser of your calibre.CHARVILLE.I am very much obliged to you, Mr. Grafton jI '11 consider of it ; it is a very good aspect forapple trees.CRAFTON.For apples ! you surely mistake me : it is186 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.Dobson's farm I mean ; it is not my own littlepaddock, I assure you ; that I will never partwith.CHARVILLE.I beg your pardon : I heard you imperfectly.The farm! well, I shall consider of it. I *mgreatly obliged to you. Are you alone thismorning ?CRAFTON.Yes, my nephew is gone.CHARVILLE.Ha ! gone ! It is a delightful day for hisjourney : I am glad I mean glad of the fineweather he is getting. I wish him a pleasantjourney with all my heart.CRAFTON.He is not gone a journey ; he is only sportingwith Squire Riddle ; I expect him to dinner.CHARVILLE.That's all I was afraid I thought somebodyhad told me he was going to leave yousoon.CRAFTON.Myself, perhaps ; for I had no idea when hecame to me that he would have staid so long.But he has been so happy since he came, and youhave become such a kind and agreeable neighbourto him, that I don't know when he will go.However, it is all very well, he has no agreeableTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 187home to go to, and I am the better for hiscompany. I should not wonder now if he wereto spend the best part of every summer with me.CHARVILLEoA very bad I mean a very extraordinaryarrangement. Why does he not marry ?CRAFTON.Why, in the first place, he has little money tokeep house upon, and he is so whimsical andscrupulous that he will marry no woman, forsooth,unless he be in love with her; and a young man'sinclinations, you know, Charville, will not becontrolled by prudence and propriety : they willwander here and there. O dear ! every where,where they should not. (After a long pauseWell, you say you will consider of it. (Anotherpause*) Yes, I see you are considering of it.CHARVILLE.no, not at all. The orchard-field that youwish me to purchase.CRAFTON.No no, my dear sir ; the little farm which Ido not wish you to purchase.CHARVILLE.1 mean so, I mean so; I'll think of it atleisure.CRAFTON.And when you have done so, you will havethe goodness to let me know the result.188 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.CHARVILLE.Certainly.CRAFTON.Good morning : I Ml intrude upon your timeno longer.rCHARVILLE.Good morning. [Exit CRAFTON.(Alone, after musing for a little.) " Everywhere,where they should not." Did he not glanceat something in these words. " Young men'sinclinations will not be controlled." " Everywhere,where they should not." I '11 go live inthe Hebrides at John Grote's house I '11travel for improvement to Kamschatka, ratherthan live here with such a neighbour as this atmy elbow. What noise is that ?Enter DICKENSON.What do you want ?DICKENSON.Would you have the closet doors set torights, Sir ? the locksmith is here. ^CHARVILLE.Who sent for him now ?DICKENSON.My mistress, Sir.CHARVILLE.For what purpose ?THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 189DICKENSON.To have a better lock put upon the northdoor of her dressing room.CHARVILLE.On that door ? has it not been nailed up for along time ?DICKENSON.Yes, Sir, but she has a fancy to have it opened.CHARVILLE.A fancy ! I '11 have no locksmiths : I '11 havenone of his jobs done here.DICKENSON.It would be so convenient for my lady, Sir ;for it leads to the back staircase.CHARVILLE.It leads to the black devil ! Let him takehis smutty face out of my house, I say ; I '11have none of his jobs done here.[Exit DICKENSON.Preparations making for some damned plotor other. O, if I could but devise somemeans of coming at the bottom of it ! Wonderfullyanxious that I should go from homenow and then ; to amuse myself; to bring herthe news, forsooth. Could I but devise anymeans. (Stands a while considering, then takesa turn across the room with slow thoughtful steps,then rouses himself suddenly, and rings the bell')190 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.Re-enter DICKENSON.Yes, it is you that I want. I have somethingto say to you.DICKENSON.At your pleasure, Sir.f*CHARVILLE.It is the little cottage by the brook which youwished to have for your sister ?DICKENSON.Yes, please your honour, but you said it couldnot be spared ; so I would not tease you aboutit any more.CHARVILLE.She shall have it.DICKENSON.Bless your honour ! and the widow's blessingshall be upon you also. It is so very good ofyou to think of that just now : it is more than 1could have expected.CHARVILLE.Well, say no more about it; the cottage ishers. (DICKENSON bows gratefully, and is gotas far as the door, to go away.} Come back,Dickinson.DICKENSON.Your honour ?CHARVILLE.This is not all I have to say, my good Dick-theALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY. J91benson. {A pause, DICKENSON expecting whathe is further to say.} Hast thou ever been frolicsomein thy youth ?DICKENSON.Sir!CHARVILLE.I don't mean in any bad way, Dickinson.Don't look so surprised, man : yet I think thouwilt be somewhat surprised when I tell theewhat has come into my head.DICKENSON*It is not for me to judge of your honour'snotions.CHARVILLE.Thou wilt hardly guess what I am going tosay.DICKENSON.No, Sir, but something for your own good, Idoubt not.CHARVILLE.Nay, don't look so grave ; I am only going totry a little frolic.DICKENSON.That is what I should never have guessed, Iconfess.CHARVILLE.O ! only a mere whim ; every body has theirwhims : it is a whim in your mistress, now, tohave that door opened.THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.DICKENSON.Belike, Sir.CHARVILLE.But then you must hear what my whim is.I am to go from home, you know, this morningwith Sir Level ; but I shall soon leave him andreturn again, unknown to every creature in thefamily but thyself. Now, couldst thou providesome disguise for me that I may not be known ?DICKENSON.Lord, Sir ! every body in the house will knowthat anxious look of yours, and the sound ofyour voice.CHARVILLE.Do I look so very anxious, then ?DICKENSON.Of late, Sir, you have ; just, if I may be sobold, as though you thought somebody werehatching a plot against you.CHARVILLE.Ha ! dost thou know of any plot ?DICKENSON.Lord forbid, Sir! I'm sure that claret hasbeen as honestly drank at your tableCHARVILLE.Hang the claret ! thou art as honest a butleras ever drew cork. But as I said, Dickinson,I should like to remain for some time in theTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 193house disguised : is the new servant, who iscoming to be trained under thee, known to anyonein the family ?DICKENSON.No, Sir, not a soul has ever seen him.CHARVILLE.Let me put on the livery intended for him,and prevent him from coming till my turn isserved.DICKENSON.Lord, Sir ! would you so far demean yourself?CHARVILLE.Never trouble thy head about that. Comeand show me the livery, and I'll tell thee moreabout it afterwards. [Exeunt.SCENE II.The Drawing-room. A Table for Tea set out.Enter DICKENSON carrying a Tea-board,which he places on the Table ; and on the oppositeSide MRS. SMOOTHLY, who goes pryingabout the Room.DICKENSON.What are you looking for, Mrs. Smoothly ?SMOOTHLY.Only my mistress's work-bag : she desired meto finish the collar she has been working at soVOL. i. o194 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.long. We poor waiting gentlewomen have allthem tedious matters to finish as it is called ;that is to say, to do two thirds of the whole.DICKENSON.Yonder it lies : I desired my new man to clearthe table for tea, and he has put every thitigupon the chairs, I see, which he should not havedone. But he '11 know better by and by.SMOOTHLY.It will always be by and by with him, I fear,poor stupid oaf. I wonder you could bring sucha creature into the family. Isaac tells me he hasspilt a plate of soup on my mistress's gown atdinner, which is very hard upon me, Mr. Dickensson. To have the fingerless fool spoiling myperquisites !DICKENSON.You '11 get the gown all the sooner for that :why, he 's serving you, child.SMOOTHLY.Serving me ! I should have had it in a fortnight,and not a smutch upon it. And whatdo you think of his sneaking behind doors, andlistening too ? Speak of the devil and he appears: I see him at this very moment lurking inthe passage. (Calling off the stage.) Come in,sirrah ; it is you I am talking o and I '11 sayall I have said to your face. (Enter CHARVILLE,disguised in livery, and a silver waiter in hisTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 195hand') I say, sirrah, you are a dirty, sneaking,curious fellow. What business had you to standlistening at my lady's door when I was dressingher for dinner ?CHARVILLE.I mistake the door, gentlewoman, judging ashow it was the parlour.SMOOTHLY.Take you care again, lest I mistake your nosefor the handle of the door, and give it such aturn as shan't be for the beautifying of thatknave's face of yours.DICKENSON.Fy, Mrs. Smoothly ! don't rate him so for amistake.SMOOTHLY.Mistake truly! he mistakes every nook andcorner in the house, where he can stick himselfup to listen, for the parlour. Take care, sirrah ;for if I catch that snout of yours again where itshould not be, I '11 take the tongs in my hand,and treat you as St. Dunstan did the devil.I '11 teach you to sneak, and to pry, and tohaunt one so : I'll teachDICKENSON.Nay, nay, Mrs. Smoothly, perhaps he is inlove with you : you should have pity on theyoung man.196 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.SMOOTHLY.In love, indeed ! Such a creature as that inlove with me ! I wonder, Mr. Dickinson, thata man of your sense and discretion should takeupon you to bring such an oaf into genteel service.Wait till your master return; he'll potsuffer such a shambling fellow in his house, I'llassure you.CHARVILLE.Mayhap master may think better of methan you trow, gentlewoman.Smoothly.I trow this, however, that he '11 make thee payfor thy prying. He likes that business himselftoo well to share it with thee, I can assure thee.DICKENSON.For shame, for shame ! to put yourself in apassion for such trifles. Don't you hear thecompany coming from the dining room ?Smoothly.Are they ? (Snatches the work-bag from thechair, and exit*)CHARVILLE (looking after her).The fair, obliging, pretty-spoken Mrs. Smoothly!Heaven preserve us ! What creatures we mayfind women to be when we get behind the curtain! (To Dickinson). They're coming, yousay. I'll retire to the darker end of the room ;for Smitchenstault gave me such a look of ex-theALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 19?animation at dinner, that I began to dread detection.DICKENSON.You need not fear him now, for he has takenhis coffee below, and is retired to his room forthe rest of the evening.CHARVILLE.Did my wife give him a hint to retire ?DICKENSON.No, Sir? Why should she ?CHARVILLE.nothing ! No reason at all. I onlythought she might have done so. He is tiresomeenough sometimes, and O no, no reasonat all.DICKENSON.1 think he has got some stones in his pocket,and is going to write something about his jollity.CHARVILLE.He said that himself, did he? Ha! Herethey come.DICKENSON.I think you had better retire till they ring.[Exeunt CHARVILLE and DICKENSON, andenter MRS. CHARVILLE and MARY, followedby SIR ROBERT FREEMANTLE.MRS. CHARVILLE.But, Sir Robert, you have never said a wordto me the whole day of the letter I sent to youro 3198 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.care, and the elegant drawing on the envelope.You have surely received it.FREEMANTLE.I most surely have notMRS. CHARVILLE. fI gave it to the servant early in the morning.Can he have been so negligent ?FREEMANTLE.The fault lies with my own man probably :he is a careless knave : I shall find it on mytable when I go home.MRS. CHARVILLE.You will have a great loss, else, I assure you.FREEMANTLE.A drawing too !MRS. CHARVILLE.Yes a most beautiful sketch of the curious bat,which you thought might be of the same kindwith that which you caught last summer inCornwall.MARY.But the greatest loss of all Would be MissFreemantle's.MRS. CHARVILLE.Hush, child ! keep my secret.MARY.It wont keep.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 199MRS. CHARVILLE.Then, I '11 tell it myself. Long ago, Charlotteand I wrote romantic sentimental letters to oneanother, in imitation of the novels we were thenso fond of j and now I have commenced mycorrespondence with her again in style, that will,I know, afford her a good hearty laugh, if shedon't think my head turned altogether.FREEMANTLE.Is it sealed up ? Could not one have a peepat it?MRS. CHARVILLE.Not for the world. But if you have greatpleasure in reading curious letters, Mary canindulge you with one. She has a curiosity inher possession that is worth the gold of Ophir.Pray go and fetch it, my dear sister, if there beany good nature in thee, and I know thou hastagreat deal.MARY.So entreated, how can I resist?FREEMANTLE.Must you have the trouble of going for it?O ! no, no. I '11 see it another time.MARY.Indeed it is no trouble ; I shall find it presently.exit.FREEMANTLE.And in the mean time shall we examine thato 400 THE ALIENATED MANOR *. A COMEDY.bust with the light cast down upon it? Youwill find that it has, so viewed, a beautiful effect.(Takes a candle from the fable, and goes behinda large screen at the bottom of the room, followedby MRS. CHARVILLE, when, from the door leftajar by MARY, enters CHARVILLE.) *CHARVILLE.So, so, so! The philosopher sent off, andmy sister sent off, and the screen to befriendthem besides. (Hearing them speak indistinctlybehind the screened Speaking low, too. Cautiousenough, I find. Something bad in so muchcaution. (Drawing softly near the screenedFREEMANTLE (behind the scenerySuch beauty and expression !CHARVILLE.Ay, ay, ay ! The devil himself hath no needof the forbidden fruit, if he will talk to a womanof her beauty. (They speak again indistinctlyWhat are they saying now? It sounded likehusband. O virtuous lady ! she recollects thatshe has a husband. Some little impediment tobe sure.FREEMANTLE (CLS before.And that look of modesty, too, forbidding all(the rest of the sentence spoken indistinctly.CHARVILLE.Her modesty indeed ! that wont stand in theway They speak low again: they are whistleALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 201peering now. They are ; flesh and blood canendure it no longer ! (Running to the table, andthrowing some of the china on the floor, whenFREEMANTLE and MRS. CHARVILLE, alarmed bythe noise, come hastily from behind the screenedMRS. CHARVILLE.That awkward fellow again breaking morechina. (To CHARVILLE). This seems to beyour only occupation in the family, Barney !Ha, ha, ha ! how bewildered he looks ! Whatbrought you here now ? You should nevercome but when the bell rings.CHARVILLE.Lud ! They be always ringing in my ears,bells here and bells there, and silver cups a clattering.I does not know when I be wanted.MRS. CHARVILLE.I'm sure, Barney, I does not know neither ;for I know nothing on this earth that one couldwant thee for, unless it were, for spite, to handa cup of tea at a time to scald a neighbour'sfingers. (To FREEMANTLE as CHARVILLE re-tires Did you ever see such a looking creature?FREEMANTLE.I don't know ; he puts me strangely in mindof somebody or other, and I can't recollect who.Where does he come from ?MRS. CHARVILLE.Dickinson says from Yorkshire.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.FREEMANTLE.It may be so, but his dialect belongs to nocounty in England that I am acquainted with.(MARY heard speaking without). Don't standhere, young man ; keep below till you are calledfor. *'Re-enter MARY.MARY.Here is the letter, a love-letter from an oldschoolmaster to his mistress : but you must readit, sister, for I can't do it justice.MRS. Cavillersyou please, but make us some tea first ;the cramp words that are in it require a readyarticulation.MARY begins to prepare tea, when enter Dickinson,and CHARVILLE peeping behind him.DICKENSON.Ladies, I am sorry to alarm you, but there isa man below who says, he has found a person atthe foot of a tree, not far from the house, whoseems to be in pain, and that when he spoke tohim the voice which answered him again resembledmy master's.MRS. CHARVILLE.Foolish fancy ! but let us relieve the poorman whoever he may be. (Exeunt MARY andFREEMANTLE hastily It is a cold night, sister jTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 203stay and put on a shawl. (To DICKENSON.)Bring me that shawl from the next room.(CHARVILLE gives a sign to DICKENSON, and goesjbr the shawl himself') Surely, Dickinson, youdon't believe that it can possibly be Mr. Char-ville: you would be more alarmed if you thoughtso. There is some trick in this : I know it bythat smile on your face. (DICKENSON retireswithout answering, and CHARVILLE re-enters withthe shawls That is a lace shawl, foolish fellow,bring me the other. That would keep nobodywarm, and be torn on the bushes besides.CHARVILLE (rending the shawl in anger, andspeaking in his natural voice).And let it be torn into a thousand pieces!A bit of paltry lace, or any thing, is of moreimportance to you than the fate of your miserablehusband.MRS. CHARVILLE.Ha ! is it you ?CHARVILLE.Ay, you may start as if you saw an apparitionfrom another world.MRS. CHARVILLE.Nay, there is nothing like the other worldabout you. That coat and wig, and that ludicrousvisage of yours, belong neither to angelnor demon, and are altogether earthly, I assureyou ; much more an object of laughter than ofTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.fear. Ha! ha! ha! What made you put onsuch a ludicrous disguise? If I were a vainwoman, now, I should think you were jealous.CHARVILLE.Call it by what name you please, Madam ; butthe levity of your conduct, the unblushing partialityshown on every occasion to that minionof your fancy, your total want of regard formyself, but poorly concealed under the mask ofeasy general carelessness, has raised up thatwithin me which every man must feel, who isnot as insensible as the earth on which he treads.MRS. CHARVILLE.And you have, in serious earnestness, thusdisguised yourself to be a spy upon my conduct.And you have, no doubt, made some notablediscovery to justify your suspicion.CHARVILLE.Madam, madam ! this is no time for trifling.It is for you to justify I mean explain thoseappearances, if they have indeed deceived me.Why is Sir Robert Freemantle so often in thishouse, and received by you with such indecorouspleasure and familiarity ?MRS. CHARVILLE.Had you asked me that question before withopen and manly sincerity, you should have hadan answer as open and sincere ; but since youhave preferred plots, and disguises, and conceal-theALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 205ment, even make it out your own way. It wouldbe an affront to your skill and sagacity to satisfyyour curiosity independently of them. (Going.)CHARVILLE.Do you mean to expose me to the wholehouse ?MRS. CHARVILLE.No, Charles; you can never be exposed, cruelas you are, without my sharing in the shame.Oh ! oh ! has it come to this. [Exit weeping.CHARVILLE.Ha ! does she weep ? (Running after her,and then stopping shortly No, no ! she does not :there is too much parade with her cambric handkerchieffor real tears : she does not weep ; andyet I could tear my hair for spite that she doesnot. [Exit.ACT IV.SCENE L A Back Court, belonging to theHouse ; SANCHO discovered waiting by theGate.SANCHO.Now, we see we see. White man greatdeal of money read book know all tat be206 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.good. We see we see. I wait long Ohere he come !Enter DICKENSON.Well, friend, what say your massa to my massa?DICKENSON. f*He has nothing to say to him at all. He isvery angry with your massa.SANCHO.Very angry ! Ay, my massa be poor, andevery body be angry wit him. Your massa notangry, your massa very fond of him when heshake a te dice, and take all te money from him.Te evil will shake him over te great fire for tat.You tell him, he be in prison ; he be cold ;he be hungry?DICKENSON.I told him every thing you desired me, but hehas nothing to say to you. He is very angry,and wont see you.SANCHO.Angry ! Wont see me ! He shall see me.I watch him ; I speak to him ; I deal wit him.Angry ! White man angry ! Black man angrytoo. (Going.)DICKENSON.Stay a little : he sent this for yourself to payyour way back again to London. (Offering himmoney, which he scornfully casts away.)THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 207SANCHO.None for myself; me will beg my way back ;me will take noting of him but his heart's blood,and tat I will take if I should give him mineown in return. May his money choke him !May te white evil tear him ! May his mothercurse him ! Angry ! Sancho be angry too.exit.DICKENSON.Poor creature ! I pity him : but he '11 beg hisway back well enough. He has been used to it,no doubt, in his own country. \ Exit.SCENE II.An old dismal-looking Chamber.Enter MRS. SMOOTHLY and DOLLY by a concealeddoor in the panelling of the walls,carrying lights, which they place on a table.DOLLY.What a dismal ghastly-looking place ! Itlooks as like a chamber where some wicked thinghas been done as any I ever see'd.SMOOTHLY.But no wicked thing has been done in thischamber, foolish creature ! though a wicked mandied here.208 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.DOLLY.Ay, no wonder he comes back again, since hewas so wicked. I marvel you thought of takingthe haunted chamber for playing your tricks inwith that poor 'losopher : I durst as soon thinkof taking the church or the vestry. What'sthat?SMOOTHLY.I heard nothing. Poor creature ! you are soignorant, Dolly, and that makes you frightened.Don't you know that ghosts and all them terriblethings never appear till midnight ?DOLLY.And if so be, why did you ax me to keep youcompany? Housekeeper wants me below topickraisins.SMOOTHLY.O la ! I aVt frightened ; but I thought Ishould weary somehow to wait by myself.DOLLY.Ah, Mrs. Smoothly, it don't become me to sayso, but I be feared that you and the 'losophermean to do somewhat that an't right.MRS. SMOOTHLY.Nothing worse than cajoling him out of a littlemoney, which he loves like his own life; andpunishing him for being so conceited as to believethat my mistress, forsooth, would make an appointmentwith such a ragamuffin as him.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 209DOLLY.Hark ; he 's coming now. Good luck to you.[JE*&Enter SMITCHENSTAULT (hastily and alarmed).MRS. SMOOTHLY.My dear Mr. Smitchenstault; dear deceiver!SMITCHENSTAULT.No honey words.SMOOTHLY.What 's the matter ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Some one pursues me : hide me somewhere.SMOOTHLY.Mercy on us ! (opening the door of a smallcloseted Go in there. (Puts him in.} I '11 get offaltogether. (Runs to the concealed door by whichDOLLY had gone out.} She has shut it so hard,stupid idiot, that it won't open. What shall I do ?O I remember. (Opens an old wardrobe press,and creeps into it.}Enter CHARVILLE, followed by DICKENSON.CHARVILLE (speaking as he enters.No ; I could not be deceived. I '11 take myoath it was he. If I had not stumbled in thegallery at that other cursed door, I should havegot up to him.DICKENSON.Surely, Sir, your eyes have deceived you : itVOL. i. p210 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.could not be Sir Robert Freemantle that yousaw.CHARVILLE.Deceived ! Do I not know his form, his size,his manner ? Fiends seize him ! I know themtoo well : they are before mine eyes all day Iqng.DICKENSON.Then, perhaps, they were only before your eyesnow in the same manner.CHARVILLE.No, no, no ! Thou makes me mad. Do I notknow one thing from another ? Cannot one knowone hateful face from another, though one be notabsolutely within arms' length of the pest ?DICKENSON.Nay, if your honour saw the face.CHARVILLE.Saw it or saw it not, I '11 be sworn it was him.Did you not say yourself that you saw a manrun hastily up stairs ?DICKENSON.Yes, Sir; but it appeared to me to be Mr.Smitchenstault.CHARVILLE.Smitchenstault! Think' st thou I should notknow a hog from a greyhound? Is Stitchingtall ?DICKENSON.I cannot say he is.THE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.CHARVILLE.The figure I saw was tall ? Is he slender ?DICKENSON.I cannot say he is.CHARVILLE.The figure I saw was slender. Has he, in anyrespect, the appearance of a gentleman ?DICKENSON.Not much of that, I confess.CHARVILLE.Then, teaze me no more by saying it wasSmitchenstault; it was the devil as soon. Wherecan he have disappeared ? There is no door forhim to escape by.DICKENSON.What if it should be some apparition that hasdeceived you ? This is the haunted chamberwhich has been shut up so long, and why it is opento-night, and lights burning, I cannot imagine.CHARVILLE.Ay, ay ! There is always a ghost or a hauntedchamber wherever intrigue and treachery are atwork. But if it be not a spirit, I will dislodge it.DICKENSON.The closet door seems to move.CHARVILLE (running to the door).I cannot open it ; somebody presses it to in theinside. Go fetch my pistols : I'll send a bracep 2THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.of bullets through it, and prove if the thing withinbe flesh and blood, or not. Run for my pistols,I say.SMITCHENSTAULT (bursting from the closet).Don't fire de pistol ! I am blood and flesh.CHARVILLE.You here ! Where is Freemantle ? It was himI followed along the gallery, if there be any truthin vision.SMITCHENSTAULT.Yes, dere be great true in vision : it is one ofsenses. I feel, I see, I taste, I smell, I hear;one of de laws of nature which do force belief.CHARVILLE.Pest take your philosophy ! Where is Free-mantle? Where is the man I saw before me inthe gallery ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Gone out by dat door. (Pointing to the panelsCavillersthere a door here ? (Searching for it.}DICKENSON (tO SMITCHENSTAULT.) 'Pray, Sir, how did you see him ?SMITCHENSTAULT.I peep tro* de chinks of de closet, and seehim pass.DICKENSON.And what brought you here, Mr. StitchingTHE ALIENATED MANOR S A COMEDY. 213SMITCHENSTAULT.Only to take de little pleasance wit Mrs.Smoothly, who is very fond of me.DICKENSON.How could that be, when there is no doorthere ?CHARVILLE (having just discovered).Faith ! but there is though, which confirmsevery word he has said. (Bursts open the concealeddoor, and exit, followed by DICKENSON.)SMOOTHLY (bursting from her hiding place in aragesO you lying serpent! Pleasance with Mrs.Smoothly, indeed ! Very fond of you ! Prettypleasance, indeed! I could burst with vexation.SMITCHENSTAULT.Dear, dear : what for all dis ?SMOOTHLY.And to take my name in your mouth too !Would not Dolly or the dairy-maid have suitedas well for your excuse ?SMITCHENSTAULT.Dear me, pretty mouth ! too pretty to speakde scold.SMOOTHLY (pushing him off.Keep your distance, I say. Pleasance with me,indeed ! Such a lie ; such an aggravated lie ; Idetest all lies ! Pleasance, indeed,p 3THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.SMITCHENSTAULT.Don't be so angry ; dere be no pleasance indat, and dere be no reasons eider : and everybodyought to speak wit reasons.SMOOTHLY. jYou provoke me worser and worser with yourreasons. Pleasance with such a creature asyou ! I shan't be able to hold up my head inthe family again ; no, never. I '11 let them allknow what kind of a man you are. I '11 let MissCharville know that you only court her for herfortune. I'll -SMITCHENSTAULT.Hush, hush, hush ! de poor pretty, angry,goody girl : here is de money for you.SMOOTHLY.I '11 have none of your money. (Going offdisdainfullySMITCHENSTAULT (following her.O but you will to' : it is gold money, my dear,pretty, honey mouth. [Exeunt.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.SCENE III.The Library.Enter CRAFTON and SIR LEVEL CLUMP, byopposite sides.SIR LEVEL.Good morning, Sir; you have followed myintimation pretty rapidly.CRAFTON.Sooner than you expected ? too soon ?SIR LEVEL.By no means ; I am heartily glad of it ; for itargues that you still bear the same partiality forthis delightful place, and now is your favourableopportunity.CRAFTON.Has Charville at length resolved to sell it ?SIR LEVEL.Resolved ! I should not say resolved.CRAFTON.Then say what you please, and I'll listen.SIR LEVEL.Mr. Charville, I don't know how, for I ambut just come from a little expedition in the wayof my profession, has taken a disgust to it. Idon't mean such as will incline him to sell it foran old song neither ; but, in short, I give youp4THE ALIENATED MANOR ! A COMEDY.notice as a friend, that you may have it now ifyou please.CRAFTON.And you do so with Charville's permission.SIR LEVEL.Yes no ay, in some measure I may sayI don't know that I can say so altogether.CRAFTON.Nay, my good Sir Level, you have taken somuch pains in matters of taste to make everythingplain, and smooth, and orderly, be soobliging as to infuse a little of this sameimproving simplicity into matters of business.It does not signify to me two straws whetherMr. Charville sends me this notice directly orindirectly. The same reasonable offer which Imade him for the property two years ago I amwilling to make him again, and more than this Icannot and will not give.SIR LEVEL.Property ! what a bargain-making .name yougive to it now ! the place of your nativity, thebeauty of which you so much and so justlyadmired. Can any thing of sylvan scenery bemore charming?CRAFTON.And your tone is somewhat altered also, mygood Sir Level : this same sylvan scenery wasonly practicable ground when you last spoke ofTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 217it to me. I must e'en repeat to you again, thatI will make the same offer for it which I madeto him two years ago.SIR LEVEL.But consider, my dear sir, how much it hasbeen improved since then. My plans havebeen already executed, and this, though it maynot become me to say so, should weigh with yougreatly.CRAFTON.I am sure it weighs heavily.SIR LEVEL.And look here at this sketch (unrolling a largeplan upon the table) look what groves, whatlawns, what sweeping declivities and acclivities,what harmonious undulations ! you shall havethis plan the benefit of all this tasteful designinto the bargain.CRAFTON.No, Sir Level ; I am not such a Jew as to cribthat in, along with the rest. I '11 first, if youplease, purchase the estate in my own plain way,and then you may ask as much as you like foryour plan afterwards. This is, in my simpleconceit, the best way of proceeding. (Sm LEVELturns peevishly away .) You think differently, I see.But here comes Mr. Charville himself.Enter CHARVILLE.SIR LEVEL (aside to CHARVILLE as he enters).He's a cunning hunks, can make nothing of218 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.him. Will only give the old price. Deal warilywith him.CRAFTON.I am greatly obliged to you, Mr. Charville, forcommunicating to me, through Sir Level, yourintention respecting this house and lands.CHARVILLE.You have a right to be first informed of it.CRAFTON (bowing).I shall be most happy to become the purchaserat what has been considered by competentjudges as a reasonable price.CHARVILLE.This estate is a more desirable purchase to you,Mr. Grafton, than to any other man.CRAFTON.I have, it is true, sentiments of affection forit, the old home of my forefathers, but I am notrich enough to indulge them to the injury of amoderate fortune.CHARVILLE.Sir, I ask no more, if we can agree upon whatreally is a reasonable price. I should not wishto exact exorbitantly from the amiable andtender feelings of your nature,SIR LEVEL (aside to CHARVILLE).Pshaw ! you may make him pay for all thoseamply enough, and take but little out of hispocket.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 219Enter MRS. CHARVILLE.MRS. CHARVILLE.Good day, Mr. Grafton.CRAFTON.And to you, Madam, this and many good days.CHARVILLE (tO MRS. CHARVILLE).We meet upon business (turning to CRAFTON).Let your agent and mine, Mr. Grafton, meet together,andMRS. CHARVILLE (drawing her husband aside).Are you wrong in the head to part with thishouse so suddenly, so unadvisedly ?CHARVILLE (aside sarcastically.Ay, you advise me to keep it, I suppose ; youhave your tender feelings too, and partiality forthe dear place (turning indignantly from her toCRAFTON). The place is yours, Sir, if our menof business can agree upon the terms, and Imake no doubt they will.SIR LEVEL (pulling him aside.Rash, very rash to say so : he'll cozen yourpoor attorney, depend upon it.CHARVILLE (turning again to CRAFTON).That is to say, Mr. Grafton, if after examiningtheir report, I myself approve.MRS. CHARVILLE (pulling him again aside.Do not be angry with me for interfering ; butwhere will you find such a pleasant residence ?THE ALIENATED MANOR .* A COMEDY.CHARVILLE (as before).Ay, Madam, and such pleasant verypleasantneighbours.MRS. CHARVILLE.What do you mean ? .CHARVILLE.you cannot possibly divine. (Turning toCRAFTON.) Sir, let the business be settled assoon as you please. You shall have it at theprice which you formerly offered.SIR LEVEL (pulling him aside as before).He laughs in his sleeve at your rashness. Isee too well by the smile on his face that hethinks he has locked you.CHARVILLE (turning to CRAFTON).1 mean with reasonable expedition ; I am byno means in any particular haste.MRS. CHARVILLE (going up coaxingly to CRAFTONas he is about to reply to CHARVILLE).Nay nay, my dear Sir ; you must not tempthim : come to my dressing room, and let Maryand I have a few words with you. You mustpositively say nothing more to Mr. Charville onthis business to-day. It is too bright, toopleasant a day for such ungracious dealings.Come with me, my dear Sir. You must notyou can't refuse me.[Exit leading off CRAFTON.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.CHARVILLE (looking after them).Yes, she will lead him as she pleases. Howcoaxingly, how bewitchingly she speaks to him !Ah, how it once bewitched me ! she is speakingso close to his face, to the old, withered, hatefulvisage of Grafton is she thus with every man ?is she altogether shameless ? Oh, oh, oh ! thisis not to be endured.SIR LEVEL (returning from the other end of theroom).It is provoking enough; I'm sure.CHARVILLE.Ha ! you are here : I thought you wereYes, I have been really provoked ; for he seemsindifferent, and I don't know how, in thisbusiness.SIR LEVEL.He wants to buy the estate as a profitablespeculation : he despises our improvements ; heeven laughs at my plan, and holds taste itself inderision. Look here ; I spread it out beforehimCHARVILLE.Well, well ; another time if you please : notnow, I pray (putting it ccway with his hand).SIR LEVEL.But do me the favour only to observe stone-headedfellow ! He would let the savage brushesTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.wood remain in the forest, and I '11 be hanged ifhe would not plant all my smooth shaven slopeswith potatoes.CHARVILLE.Let him plant them with nettles and wormwood,an he will.SIR LEVEL.Your servant, Sir : I beg pardon ; I intrude,I find. (Aside, as he retires There are nettlesand wormwood planted somewhere, that I wasnot aware of. [Exit.CHARVILLE (alone, pacing up and down in a perturbedmanner.Ay, ay, it is very plain, it is too plain, itis shamefully plain. (Stopping shortly Mightyfond of this residence of a sudden. To be sure,where will she find another house so convenient,with back stairs, and panelled doors, andhaunted chambers, and so many cursed conveniences? (After pacing up and down as beforeBecause I did not find him, I did not seewhat was before my face as plainly as my hand,and, forsooth, it was Smitchenstault. O woman,woman ! thy mysteries of cunning and contrivance! thou would'st deceive man as the evil onedeceives thee. But it shall not be. What canI do ? This torment of my mind ; this disgraceon my state I can disclose to no one. Thiscursed world is no place for a man like me toTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.live in : would I were out of it ! O woman,woman !Enter ISAAC.What do you want ?ISAAC.Please your honour, you are wanted in thejustice chamber.CHARVILLE.What 's the matter ?ISAAC.Goody Bullock is come to swear the peaceagainst her husband : he has beaten her all blackand blue.CHARVILLE.And he has served her right. Let him beather black and yellow next time.ISAAC.Why, please your honour, she is a good peaceablewoman.CHARVILLE.Out, fool ! she is a hypocrite, and a liar, anda jade. Let him beat her all the colours of therainbow, an he will. [Exit.ISAAC (looking after him in a bewildered astonishment).He's surely bereft of his wits altogether. Tocall poor old Goody Bullock all them bad names,THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.goes to church every Sunday, with her stuffcloak over her arm, and knits hose for the vicar !SCENE IV.A Summer Parlour, with a Door opening to theGarden.Enter MARY and SIR ROBERT FREEMANTLE^OWthe garden.MARY (speaking as they enter).And your uncle is bent upon purchasing thisplace.FREEMANTLE.He was born in this house.MARY.It is natural that he should wish to possess it ;yet I am sorry for it. I have an affection for ittoo, and so had my brother ; but he has takensome capricious dislike to it, I don't know how.(a pause). And you leave us so soon ?FREEMANTLE.I feel, my dear Miss Charville, that it is rightI should.MARY.How can that be ?FREEMANTLE.Have you not perceived your brother's growingdislike to me ?THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.MARY.He is of late more ungracious to us all ; butI must confess I have perceived something ofwhat you say.FREEMANTLE.I perceive it whenever I come near him, inevery gesture of his body, in every glance of hiseye. I perceive too well that he has discoveredmy secret, and disapproves, more strongly than Ihad apprehended, my attachment to you.MARY.His mind is sometimes warped ; he does notalways judge fairly.FREEMANTLE.My precaution in paying my chief attentionsto your sister-in-law, which, by my uncle's advice,I have practised, that I might not provokehim to discard me till a favourable turn in myaffairs, then daily looked for, should entitle nieto declare myself, and, I will also own, to engageMrs. Charville more heartily in my interest,all this precaution has been in vain ; and I findthat my own undirected, incautious conductwould have been the more successful of the two :at least, I am sure it could not have been lessso.MARY.Then pursue it, now, and retrieve your error.VOL. i. QTHE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.FREEMANTLE.That you permit me to do so, makes me aproud and a happy man. But you forget, mydear Mary, what I told you half an hour ago.MARY. fWhat was it ? I ought not to be so forgetful.FREEMANTLE.That the papers wanting to establish my rightto the Shropshire estate, which my attorney hasbeen searching for amongst our old family records,cannot be found. The letter I receivedfrom him this morning informs me, that he nowdespairs of finding them ; and this being thecase, I must despair of ever obtaining yourbrother's consent to our union.MARY.Despair is a strong expression.FREEMANTLE.But is it not a just one ? I have not now theface, poor as I am, and poor as I shall probablyremain, to propose myself as a match foryou.MARY.Well then, Sir Robert, what makes you timidmakes me bold. Have the constancy to waittill I am twenty-five : three years will bring thisto pass ; and then, if you still think me worththe having, and do not consider me as altogetherTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.antiquated, I am yours. My fortune will thenbe in my own power, independently of mybrother's consent.FREEMANTLE.Is it possible that I am so happy? Howfrank, how noble ! But should I take advantageof a sudden impulse of thy generous nature ?Alas ! I should be more virtuous than I feel Iam. My uncle has offered to settle his verymoderate fortune upon me : but in this case, mysister would be scantily provided for, and ourpoor cousin, who has ruined himself at thegaming-table, would be entirely destitute. Ihave therefore refused it.MARY.You have done right, and this refusal givesyou a value in my estimation beyond any acquisitionof fortune. (Noise without*) We shall beinterrupted here.FREEMANTLE.Let us return to the garden. My formidablerival, Mr. Smitchenstault, must, by this time,have left it.MARY.And I don't think he observed us as we fledfrom him. He was only passing on to hisfavourite haunt. [Exeunt into the garden.Q -2THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.ACT V.SCENE L A Grove of Trees, with a languidThicket in the Back-ground. CHARVILLE isdiscovered pacing to and fro, in a disturbedManner, SMIT CHEN Sault peeping behind him,through the Bushes.CHARVILLE (after muttering to himself confusedly.A cloak ! a convenience ! a provider for disorderlypassion ! Noosed for this purpose !Her cunning, her witchery, her wickednesswho could have imagined it? (After a pauseGain her affections from me ! Are his person,his manners, his intellects superior to mine ? Itis not so : comparison has not produced it.Any man might have had her who happened tocome in her way with baseness enough to attemptit. What can I do ? There is no corroboratedproof: the world would laugh me to scorn.Oh, it is ever thus ! Would I had done withthis envious, malicious world ! Ha !SMITCHENSTAULT (coming forward).Don't start, my dear front; I know all datyou do think, and I am your front.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.CHARVILLE.I have disclosed my thoughts to no one.SMITCHENSTAULT.Your tongue has not ; but when you come tomy room secretly to ask of me if it was reallySir Robert dat I did see pass trough dat chamber,and when I tell you dat mine own two eyesdo see him, your eyes, your visage, your body,your limb, every ting dat you have, speak for detongue, and tell me dat you love no Sir Robertin de house wit your wife.CHARVILLE (starting away from him).I cannot live and bear it. [Exit.SMITCHENSTAULTNot live ! Ah if he would be so kind ! Itwould be good ting for me and de dear Mary.He never give consent to our matrimony ; if hedie, she be free to marry me, and give me defortune. Very good ting ! ay, very good ting.Re-enter CHARVILLE.CHARVILLE.Forgive me, Smitchenstault ; I am a miserableman, and you have discovered it. But tellno creature the disordered state in which youhave found me. You are a stranger, and thereforeI am the less distressed that you do knowmy misery ; and you say you are my friend.Q 3230 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.SMITCHENSTAULT.Yes, de true front ; all dat I do for you, I dofor myself. Speak to me all dat you think.CHARVILLE.That is impossible ! I am miserable ; I live jntorture ; I wish I were out of this hateful world.Could it be without crime, I would have donewith it at once.SMITCHENSTAULT.What you call crime? Have you no morereason dat you mind all dat petty superstitions ?Very pretty ting, indeed, to live, if you don'tlike it : who tank you for dat ? I am free Ifeel dat I am free. I not come here to be unhappy; when I be so, I go away.CHARVILLE.Ay, but where, my friend ?SMITCHENSTAULT.To de good sound sleep ; to de netting.CHARVILLE.That were an effectual remedy. I am miserable!SMITCHENSTAULT.And what oblige you to be so ?CHARVILLE.Ha, tempter ! Would you have me destroymyself?THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.SMITCHENSTAULT.No ! I only wish you not to be miserable.CHARVILLE.How can I be otherwise ?SMITCHENSTAULT.I teach you. Do you consider now, and doyou think, and do you say to yourself, "Why beI unhappy ? I have de bad wife. O very true ;oder men have de bad wife also. Dey call mecoelum." What you call de man wit de (spreadingout two of his t fingers significantly) ay,ay, cuckold. " Very well, oder men "CHARVILLE (starting fr Qm him).I shall run distracted !SMITCHENSTAULT.Ay ; all dis not be pleasant, but it be foolishdat you let it make you miserable. But if youcannot help dis, where is de obligation dat youshould bear it ? Keep a your place, dey say :fol, fol ! de place where I am best is my place.CHARVILLE.If I could but leave them my misery as alegacy behind me !SMITCHENSTAULT.O you will leave dat to Sir Robert; he willget de bad wife to torment him.CHARVILLE.Marry ! Devil choke them ! I would live toTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.the age of Methuselah rather, were I wretchedas wretchedness could make me. Marry ! (tearinghis hair extravagantly :) it makes me mad tothink of it. (Striding rapidly to the bottom ofthe stage.rSMITCHENSTAULT (aside).Foolish wort ! I am all wrong here.CHARVILLE (returning).And you think they would marry ?SMITCHENSTAULT.O no, no ! I speak de joke : he be too wiseto marry her, and den she will say, Oh oh ! andthink of de good husband she had.CHARVILLE.Think of me ! Yes, she will then think of me.She must think of me then. If I could but rendher guilty heart with remorse ! If I could makeher miserable !SMITCHENSTAULT.O no doubt of dat \ she will be very miserable,and have de bitter misery.CHARVILLE.Ay, that were something ; that were worthdying for. She will think of me then in theagony of repentance. If I could be sure of thisbesure. (A pause of thoughts But are youa man, and advise me to such a desperate act ?THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 233SMITCHENSTAULT.I am a philosopher, and advise you to nothing.But dere is de good reason, if you will hear it ;de sober, well-considered reasons on bote sidesof de question ; and I will say dem all over toyou in good order. First, dere beCHARVILLE (impatiently).Not now not now. I am distracted. [Exit.SMITCHENSTAULT (looking after him with disappointments.He wont do it, after all, de chicken-heart, foras well as de English love to hang themselves.If he do, I have de sweet Mary, and all her fortune; but if he do not O I will say it be all ajoke dat I did say to him, and den dere will be nomore about it. Chick-hearted fellow ! (Starting.)A noise amongst the bushes ! What face is datpeeping through de leaves ? Dere is surely nodevil in daylight. My flesh creep foolishfear ! it was noting. exit, and presentlySANCHO comes from the thicket, creeping on handsand feet.SANCHO.Tat talky talky man chace him from tis spot,so convenient for it. But he no escape me.(Looking carefully roundly O still in te wood.Yonder he walk. I be near him again presently.[Exit again into the thicket.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDYSCENE II.A small Glade in the Wood, surrounded with highFern and Bushes.Enter CHARVILLE.CHARVILLE (after walking with hasty disturbedsteps to the front of the stage, stops short, andcontinues musing for some time before he speaks.She will think of all this when it is too late :it will embitter her days; she will then bearher torment in secret. She will know I haveloved her ; she will know it then. The timeruns on ; it should be done. O that it weredone ! But the doing of it is a fearful effort.(Pulls out a pistol, and looks at it ruefully Isthere no way of getting rid of this hateful worldbut by this miserable act of self-destruction ? Othat some friendly hand would rid me of mywretched life! I cannot do it. (Throws awaythe pistol, which SANCHO, bursting from the fern,fyc. takes up, and runs fiercely at him, presentingit to his headySANCHO.Me will do it for you, and tank you too.CHARVILLE.Hold, hold ! For Heaven's sake spare my life.THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 235SANCHO.Me spare you ! you who ruminated my massa !You kite, you rook ; you shall now be food forterooks ! (Snaps the pistol, 'which misses Lire ;then CHARVILLE wrests It from him, and they bothgrapple with one another stoutly, when SANCHObeing about to get the better of CHARVILLE, SIRROBERT FREE MANTLE enters, and rescues thelatterlyFREEMANTLE (keeping fast hold of SANCHO).Villain, or desperado ! keep still ; for I will notquit my hold till thou art in safe custody.CHARVILLE.Brave stranger ! How shall I thank Ha !Freemantle. (Turning away his headyFREEMANTLE.Did you not know me ? But that look ofdistress and displeasure ! What does it mean atsuch a moment as this?CHARVILLE.Do not inquire. Your own conscience willanswer your question. What has been your motivefor lingering about my house ?FREEMANTLE.You have discovered my secret, then, and thesight of me is hateful to you.CHARVILLE.What ! you own it : the poor covering of236 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.secrecy is done away ; you look in my face andown it. I am degraded even to this. [Exit distractedly.FREEMANTLE (still holding SANCHo).Is he mad ? I cannot follow him for this fellow.Ho, help there ! Holla, there !Enter CRAFTON.CRAFTON.Ha ! is it you, Freemantle ? What do you herewiththat black creature whom you collar sotightly ?FREEMANTLE.He would have murdered Charville. See, hispistol is on the ground.CRAFTON.Would you have murdered him, you rascal ?SANCHO.Me true man and no rascal. Me rascal if menot kill te base cruel rook dat ruminated mymassa.CRAFTON.Why, Sancho, my old friend Sancho, is ityou ?SANCHO.Me no your friend. You cruel to my massa.CRAFTON.Nay, nay, be pacified, faithful Sancho. I amTHE ALIENATED MANOR ! A COMEDY. 237a better friend to thy master than he is to himself,and I will prove it. He shan't remainlong in prison : be pacified. (To FREEMANTLE.)Let him go: I'll be his warrant that he shallfollow us quietly to the house. Wont you,Sancho ?SANCHO.Me not promise.CRAFTON.But I will trust you without a promise.FREEMANTLE.Be it so, then ; but he must not have thepistol again. (Lets go his hold, while CRAFTONtakes the pistol from the ground')CRAFTON.But where is Charville ? Let us go to him.FREEMANTLE.I cannot. He knows my secret, and is sosternly offended, it is impossible for me to speakto him in his present unaccountable frenzy.CRAFTON.Never mind that. Come along j here is aletter that will make you stand firmly beforehim.FREEMANTLE (snatching the letter.The long lost papers are found.238 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.CRAFTON.Even so ; read it as we go. Come along,Sancho. Thy master will be the better for ittoo 5 he will soon be a free man again.SANCHO. fYou say tat, you sure of tat, you sweartat?CRAFTON.Yes, yes ; I'll say it and swear it too, if thouwilt not take my word for it.SANCHO.O good Massa Grafton ! me tank you, meembrace you, me kneel to you.CRAFTON (raising him).Fy, fy, fy ! Let no man be on his knees butwhen he is at his prayers. Come with us andfear nothing; though this was a desperate attempt,a very wicked attempt against the lawsof the land.SANCHO.Me care for te laws when te laws care for me.CRAFTON.Well, well, come with us. exeunt.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 239SCENE III.A Library. Enter CHARVILLE, in violent Agitation,followed by MRS. CHARVILLE andMARY.CHARVILLE (speaking as he enters to MRS. CHAR-ville).No, madam ; do not follow me ; it is in vainto explain it. The secret is out the guiltysecret is out : he has had the boldness to acknowledgeit himself to acknowledge to myface. I am such a creature now as he needno longer keep measures with. Away, pervertedwoman ! Do you follow me still ? Do youlook me in the face ? (Beating his forehead.)He acknowledged it himself.MRS. CHARVILLE.Acknowledged it ?CHARVILLE.Yes, madam. You disdained explanation, forsooth.Your virtuous pride was offended, andsince I employed disguise in the matter, I mustfind it out myself. I have found it out, madam;he confessed it himself.MARY.My dear brother, what was it he did confess ?CHARVILLE.Art thou a fool ? Canst thou not comprehend ?240 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.That woman there, whom thou tallest thy sister,thy amiable sister, that woman whom Imarried, that woman whom I loved betterthan myself.MARY. jNay, that is a mistake of yours, brother ; forif you had loved any thing better than yourself,you would never have been in this condition.Your closeness and self-love have made youalways suspicious. I thought, indeed, that awife of her cheerful temper would have enlargedyour heart, andCHARVILLE.Hold thy tongue, simpleton ; she has enlargedmy head. (Stamping with his feet, and beating hisforeheads The whole world must know it now.Since he brazen it out himself, the shame ispublic. I shall be known to beMRS. CHARVILLE.Nothing but a fool, and that you must submitto, being a distinction which you have taken somuch pains to acquire.CHARVILLE.O woman, woman ! thy audacity is amazing.Enter CRAFTON and SIR ROBERT FREEMANTLE.CRAFTON.Excuse this intrusion, Mr. Charville. I bring aculprit in my hand, who fears he has offended you.THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.CHARVILLE.most courtly phrase ! That black villain whowould have murdered me, he fears, too, I suppose,that he has offended me. Sir Robert,you have saved my life, and I cannot turn youout of my house ; but you have made that lifehateful to me, and I hate it the more for beingpreserved by you.CRAFTON.Be more calm, my good sir. He has, indeed,gained the lady's affections unknown to you,and -CHARVILLE.And may take her and her affections also,and the devil give them his benediction.CRAFTON.Well, Freemantle, e'en take the lady as sheis offered to you, though it be not in the mostgracious manner. Fortune is no object now ;take her and marry her out of hand.FREEMANTLE.1 cannot follow more pleasing advice.CHARVILLE.Marry her without a divorce! I'll not divorceher. I'll be hanged if I give her up to any manalive.CRAFTON.Pray, good Sir, turn your eyes upon theVOL. I. RTHE ALIENATED MANOR: A COMEDY.party. I believe this match, which my nephewhas so long desired, may be accomplished withouta divorce.CHARVILLE (turning round and seeing SIR Robertwith MARY'S hand in his).My sister ! you bewilder me. Where is mywife ?CRAFTON.Most dutifully employed laughing at you inher sleeve at the other corner of the room.MRS. CHARVILLE (advancing.My dear Charles, I told you you would provea fool at last.CHARVILLE.But, Madam, you have not yet proved it.Sister, let go that man's hand, and answer meaquestion. How long is it since he first paidhis addresses to you ?MARY.His addresses have been short, but I havereason to believe he has been attached to mesince we first met, some months ago, in Shropshire.CHARVILLE.And I have reason to believe he has madethee a mere cat's paw of convenience, silly girl !(Turning to FREEMANTLE.) Let me ask you,Sir, why, in my family, your marked attentionsTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.were paid to that lady? (pointing to MRS. CHAR-ville.)FREEMANTLE.My dear uncle, you must answer this question.CRAFTON.Then, frankly and honestly, I'll tell you thewhole truth, which, in its full extent, even Free-mantlehimself is ignorant of. I counselled himto pay his chief attentions to Mrs. Charville, toconceal from you his design upon your sister,lest you should forbid him your house, and blastall his pretensions in the bud, being then illentitled to propose himself as a suitor. Andbesides thisCHARVILLE.Why do you hesitate ? Proceed. You willmake your tale hang together, some way orother, I suppose.CRAFTON.Besides, I thought it might engage Mrs. Char-ville(pardon me, Madam, you were a strangerto me, and I had heard that you were fond ofsuch attentions,) engage her to plead with youin his behalf.CHARVILLE.And this is your story ? A simple plot, truly,for a simple man to listen to.R %244 THE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY.CRAFTON.This is all my plot or story as Freemantle isprivy to it; but there was another part of itconcealed in my own breast, which shall be sonolonger. I hoped that by making you jealousof his visits here to incline you to leave myneighbourhood, and restore to me at a reasonableprice the possession of my forefathers.This sinister design has failed deservedlyfailed for I do not justify it; and now youhave my sincere confession without reserve. Iam sorry for the pain and trouble I have occasioned: can you forgive me, Charville ?CHARVILLE.I will try to do it. I 'm glad you have notgot the manor though. (To MRS. CHARVILLE.)And can you forgive me ?MRS. CHARVILLE.I '11 try to do it ; and if you are very good,and very penitent, and less suspicious, and lessteasing, and more docile, and more obliging, Imake no doubt but I shall succeed.CHARVILLE.So I find I have a great many changes tomake.MRS. CHARVILLE.Yes, Mr. Charville ; and in return I'll makesome too. I'll be grave, orderly, and demurebefore all men, smiling only on mine own weddedTHE ALIENATED MANOR I A COMEDY. 24,5lord, when he encourages me to do so ; threetimes in a week, perhaps, or oftener, as it maychance. I'll not whisper in the ear of my firstcousin, unless he be blear-eyed, or have a humpon his back ; and I'll neither go to grove, arbour,nor closet, till I have sent you before meto see that there be nobody there.CHARVILLE.Harriet, Harriet ! I thought this would havemoved you differently. You triumph, no doubt ;but less exultation, and more candour, wouldsurely have been as becoming. If lam more suspiciousthan other men I am not aware that Iam so you must at least acknowledge that itwas an extraordinary circumstance to have anhonourable suitor to a young lady concealed inafamily, and making his way through privatedoors, and by private stairs, to apartments whichshe did not occupy. This is no chimera of mybrain, Madam ; Mr. Smitchenstault saw it.MARY.I believe, brother, all that you really know ofthe matter is that Smitchenstault said so.MRS. CHARVILLE.But here he comes ; and if he says so again,when confronted with Smoothly, we shall yieldthat point to you entirely.R 3246 THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY.Enter SMITCHENSTAULT.Mr. Smitchenstault, do you seriously aver thatyou saw Sir Robert Freemantle pass through thehaunted chamber while you were in hiding there?ffSMITCHENSTAULT.Madam, I have eyes in my head ; I see whatI do see, and I know what I do see.MRS. CHARVILLE.We don't doubt that in the least ; but did youactually see a man pass ? and was it this identicalman ? (pointing to FREEMANTLE.)CHARVILLE.Answer me, Sir, did you see this man passthrough the chamber ?SMITCHENSTAULT.In de imaginations I see one man very likedat man.CHARVILLE.In the imaginations ! Then you have notreally seen it, and you have told me an untruth.SMITCHENSTAULT.What you call false? What you call true?De imaginations is all dat we do know : de veritablereal true is a foolish notion is a netting.In mine imaginations I see Sir Robert, and if inimaginations he was not dere, what can I helpdat?THE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 247CHARVILLE.Sir, go out of my house, and never enter itagain, as long as you live.CRAFTON.Unless it be in imaginations, Mr. StitchingSMITCHENSTAULT (to CHARVILLE).My good Sir, you are in de passion : dere beno good reason in dat. Be not in de passion :de sweet Mary will plead for me.MARY.Not I, Mr. Smitchenstault.SMITCHENSTAULT.What ! you wish me to leave dis house ? Ha !you only deceive ; you be ashamed to own detender thoughts of your heart. You riot wish megone. It was your sweet looks dat keep mehere so long.MARY.With the help of your imaginations.CHARVILLE.Out of my house, wriggling deceiver !MRS. CHARVILLE.Don't press him to go so immediately; forMrs. Smoothly has some matters to settle withhim before he leave the house.SMITCHENSTAULT.O devil ! I not wait for dat. exit hastily.R 4THE ALIENATED MANOR *. A COMEDY.CRAFTON.Now, Mr. Charville, this point being settled,let me crave your pardon for a poor criminal incustody below : he is a faithful servant to an unfortunatemaster.CHARVILLE.Speak no more of it : my heart has oftensmote me on that subject. I have renouncedthe gaming-table for ever, and I restore to poorHenry all I have won from him, though it was,by every rule of honourable play, fairly won.CRAFTON.I believe so, entirely. But I wish the rulesof honour came a little nearer to the good Bibleprecept, " Think not of your own matters, butthink also every one of his neighbour's." Yourisked a small part of your ample fortune againstthe whole of poor Henry's, and you took it fromhim. However, in restoring it, you do what hasseldom been done by men of honour ; and, onthe part of my thoughtless relation, I gratefullyreceive your generosity.MARY (after a pause.Charles, you look melancholy ; what are youthinking of?CHARVILLE.What I never suspected before that I havebeen a very selfish fellow Mr. Grafton, I knowthat this estate was purchased by my family atTHE ALIENATED MANOR : A COMEDY. 249an unfair price. I return it to you for the sumwhich was given for it.CRAFTON.No, Sir ; after the indirect means I have usedto wrest it from you, I feel that I do not deserveit. I too have been a selfish fellow.MRS. CHARVILLE.Nay, if you come to confessions, I must speakalso ; I have been a careless, thoughtless, vainand giddy wife.CHARVILLE.I forgive thee, Harriet ; and though I cannotown entirely that character of suspicion whichyou would all so decidedly fasten upon me, yetI will freely confessCRAFTON.Have done with confessions. We shall all bewiser, and, I hope, better, for what has justpassed, and therefore have no cause to regret it.Henries:A TRAGEDY.IN FIVE ACTS.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.THE KING OF CASTILE (ALONZO, surnamed theNoble).DON Henries, his General.DON CARLOS, a noble Soldier, attached to Hen-risques.ANTONIO, a young Gentleman in loveth Mercia.BALTHAZAR.BLAS, a Youth in the Service of Leonora.A FRIAR, Confessor to Denique z.DIEGO, Steward to Henries.COURTIERS, CONFESSORS, ATTENDANTS, Gaolers,fyc. $c.WOMEN.LEONORA, Wife of Henries.Mercia, Sister to Leonora.INEZ, an Attendant of Leonora.Scene, the Castle of Henriquez, a few leaguesfrom the Town of Zamora, and in the saidTown.Time, the beginning of the Thirteenth Century.HENRTQUEZ.ACT I.SCENE I. A Grove near the Castle.Enter DIEGO with a Letter, muttering to himselfbefore he speaks aloud.DIEGO.THE honour of the house of Altera,Of all those chiefs, whose bread I and my siresSo many years have ate without reproach,Must it be sullied now ? Diego FurnessMust take upon him, then, th* informer's office,With all its paltry baseness and concealment.To Altera's lords, with manly freedom,My fathers spoke, and so have I. But thenI did oppose this marriage which hath sunkHis noble pride so low. Such informationFrom me would be suspected ; and his anger,When so excited, might, perhaps, a blow !Diego Furness could not live disgraced,And, dying unrevenged, would die disgraced.Henries *. A TRAGEDY.Ay ; it must be ; necessity compels me. (Laysdown the letter, then looking hastily about,snatches it up againstSurely I hear a stranger's voice approaching.I '11 drop it farther on, and watch my time, fWhen Don Henriquez may be sure to find it.[Exit.Enter ANTONIO and Mercia, speaking as theyenter.ANTONIO.Forget thee, Mencia ! Yes, 1 will forget theeWhen means are found to make it possible.Thine image, independent of my will,Where'er I am, is with me ; night and dayBefore my fancy's eye it smiles or weeps ;Motions its arms as thou wert wont to do,When distance barr'd our intercourse of words ;Is present with me more than present things,And makes my wretched life a maniac's dream,Lost and unprofitable.Is there some potent spell to lay this spriteThat haunts me to my ruin ? Vain, vain words !Thou canst not be forgotten.Mercia.Thou but deceives thyself: there are two spells,Absence and time, which have to many a loverHis peace restored. Fate has between us nowHenries : A TRAGEDY. 255A barrier placed, which all my feeble strengthCould not overleap, therefore I have consented.ANTONIO.Consented ! O to what hast thou consented?To more than the rejecting of my love,Which thy ambitious sister, since the dayThat raised her, as the wife of Don HenriquezTo greatness, which she knows not how to bear,Regards as too presumptuous. Thou art silent.To more than this hast thou consented, Mencia ?Mercia.Question me not ; I cannot tell thee now ;Yet thou shouldst know. I have, alas ! I have,Overcome by prayers, and wearied with contention,Consented to bestow my luckless handOn one who tried, but could not win my heart,And I am boundANTONIO.Thou art not ! no, thou art not !Mercia.Alas, I am ! and so will hold myself.ANTONIO.Thou shalt not ! Hold'st thou sacred every tieBut those that bind thee to thy earliest friend ;To him who was thy playmate and thy guard ;Who through thy native woods ran by thy side ;256 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Played with thee, sung with thee, built thy firstbower,Where thou, his mimic mistress, kept thy state,Screen'd from the mid-day sun, when he, thewhile,Still pleased thee, as thou let's thine eager esf,With tales of wonderment and tales of love?All claims but his ! O say not so, sweet Mencia!Let me implore thee on my bended knee.Mercia.Hush ! rise ! we are observed ; this spot is nowTraversed by busy feet, in preparationFor a gay feast to-night, held at the castle,In honour of Henriquez' safe return.Leave me, I pray !ANTONIO.By unfrequented paths,Through rugged wilds I've travelled many aleague :Three irksome days and nights in that deepgrove,The ruin of an ancient sepulchre,Like some unhallow'd spirit, I have hauntedTo watch a lucky moment when thy stepsShould lead thee near the place ; and havingfound thee,Think'st thou to cast me off with f feverish haste,As thou wouldst shake an adder from thy robe ?Henries : A TRAGEDY. 257Mercia.Nay, nay ! for yonder Don Henriquez comes ;There's danger here.ANTONIO.And come who will, and let what will betide,Despair thinks not of danger.Mercia.Retire, retire, and we shall meet again.ANTONIO.When? where? this night? tomorrow? namethe time.Mercia.To-morrow by the early dawn I'll meet thee.No ; not tomorrow, but the following morn.ANTONIO.And at that early hour ?Mercia.Ev'n so : retire.ANTONIO.I have thy word for this ?Mercia.Thou hast, thou hast. [Exit ANTONIO.alone') Ay, he has loved me as no otherAnd thus he is requited. Woe the day !Why did my timid spirit yield so poorlyTo an ambitious sister ? Must it be ?VOL. i. s258 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Henriquez is a man whose native feelingsOf honour and of justice rise indignantAgainst the slightest breach of honest faith,The interests of his house to him were nothingOpposed to generous ties to simple right.I will to him ah, no ! I dare not do it. f(Looking out') He is at hand. That paperkeeps his eyeIntently occupied. What can it be ?Perhaps some letter dropped by poor Antonio,And then all is discover.Enter Henries.You twist that letter in your hand, my Lord,As a most worthless thing. May I presume ?I am not curious.Henries.Yet thou hast a mind,Not being curious, just to peep into it.Well ; it might case thy silken threads, perhaps,Or wrap thy scented comfits. Take it then.(Offering her the letter, and then drawing itNo ; spells lurk in such crooked lines as theseTo work unhappy fancies out of nothing.Perhaps some hateful witch has mutter* d o'er itHer blasting benison ; thou shalt not have it :I'll put it up to light my ev'ning lamp.Thou goes ?Henries I A TRAGEDY. 259Mercia.I have been too long truant here,And my neglected task calls me within. [Exit.Henries (alone).Why look I still upon this foolish scroll ?As foolish as 't is spiteful. LeonoraHas for her wicked solace in my absenceMy noble friend my second self received !Good likely tale ! (Reads again')An unknown friend cautions thee to bewareof Don Juen. He has played thee false in thineabsence, and destroyed thy wife's virtue andthine own honour. Look to it, if thou wouldstnot become the most contemptible of all doatinghusbands : for thy fond security will makethem bold, and the world will point at thee erelong."The common cant of all those friends unknown.Juen and Leonora ! blest, most blest,In friendship and in love ! This canker* d fiendIs stung therewith. Envy most devilish,Yet not uncommon in this wicked world.Well ; it shall serve to light my evening lamp ;God mend the wretch who wrote it. [Exit.260 Henries : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.A small ornamented Apartment in the Castle fEnter BLAS and INEZ, carrying different thingsin their hands, speaking as they enter,INEZ.I leave thee too these cases of perfume,And this small book of tales and warlike sports.Place them as I have said, and be thou secret :Be sure thou tell to no one for what guestThis chamber is prepared.BLAS.But if I should, I should not break my word.I guess' d it out myself; thou did'st not trust me.INEZ.Yes, but I did confirm thy guess, more surelyTo rivet thee to secrecy. Thy ladyWill greatly be displeased, should thou divulgeit;Therefore be prudent. When thy task is done,Thou 'It find me in the lower corridor. \ Exit.BLAS (murmuring to himself.Be secret tell to no one, and thy ladyWill greatly be displeased ! What isn't to me?Henries I A TRAGEDY. elandyet I do not like this strange concealment.(Employs himself in arranging differentthings, whilst he sings part of an old ballad.SONG.The watch-dog bays from the southern wall,And hounds and spaniels repeat his call ;The warders in the court are speaking,The merlin on their perch are shrieking.The dame she started from her seat,And her lover's heart did quickly beat.The wall is gain'd, the drawbridge crost,Your lord is return'd, and we are lost."Nay, fy upon thy witless fear ISee, quickly don this woman's gear ;And boldly cross the crowded hall,Mid serfs and grooms and spearmen all.They with glad greetings are, I trow,Too busy by far to heed thee now ;Yet word or answer give to none,But straight to the portal and swiftly be gone."The dame put on her joyous face,And she welcomed her lord with a hearty embrace.Quoth she to herself, * Some warlike frayWill call him forth another day."A fray full soon hath call'd him forth,And he is gone to the restless north ;But he beshrew the wayward wight !Returns again at the dead of nights3Henries I A TRAGEDY.The lover's face turn'd cold and pale,But never a whit did the lady quail.A friar's cowl and frock thou'lt findSecurely pent that chest behind :Be thou a friar instantly,And to the castle's chapel fly,And in the pale lamp's flickering shineBend lowly at Saint Martin's shrine."Enter Henries.Henries.And is it thou, good Bias, who king's so well ?I heard thee as I cross'd the gallery,And was led hither by the well-known tuneThat, when a boy, I have so often heard.But cease not ; sing the rest of that old story.BLAS.In sooth, my Lord, I have forgot the rhymes.Henries.But canst thou not, without the rhymes, rememberThe third escape which for her lawless loverThe wily dame devised?BLAS.Yes, in a groom's attire she sent him forthTo hold her husband's stirrup at the gate,As he alighted from his warlike barb.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 263Henries.Was not her simple lord at length revenged ?And how was that, I pray ?BLAS,She had a stepson, who from PalestineReturn* d, and hearing of his father's wrongsSwore to revenge them,Henries.E'en so ; I now remember it distinctly,And the concluding lines sound in my ears.They fought in the portal,They fought in the tower,They fought in the hall, and the lady's high bower,There they struggled and fought, till the lady at last,A pale bleeding horse, from the lattice was cast.Ay, many a time I Ve listened to that ditty :She was a wicked dame of whom it tells.Think'st thou the rhvmster knew of such a one ?Or be there any such ?iBLAS.I do not know : there may and there may not.Henries.May, or may not thou need'st not blush sodeeply.What 's thy employment here ? Some new arrangement.Thy lady's private closet so disturb'd !s 4Henries I A TRAGEDY.Ay, and this curtain'd couch ! For whom, Ipray,Prepare ye this, good Bias ?BLAS.I do not know, my Lord.rHenries.Thou dost not know !Why dost thou blush so strangely as thouspeak'st?Compose thyself; I do not seek to know.What scented thing is this? it smells mostsweetly.BLAS.It is a box of aromatic gums.Henries.It needs must be some dainty fair for whomSuch delicacies are provided. Ay,And learned too, I guess, for here are books.A soldier's book ! (Turning over its leaves.)Ha ! 't is mine own old friend.BLAS.His name is then upon it.Henries.Thou seem'st alarm'd, methinks: how's this?whose name ?BLAS.I do not know, my Lord. Your own old friend.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 265Henries.It was the book I call'd so : in my youthIt was my favourite study.BLAS.I had forgot ; the book is yours, my Lord,And only borrow'd now for his amusement.Henries.For hers, thou mean'st : isn't not a female guest?Blushing again ! What mystery is here ?Tell me for whom this chamber is prepared.(Pause')Thou wilt not answer. Nay, I will not forcethee;But tell me only is this guest a woman ?What ! silent still ! 't is not a woman then ?BLAS.No, good my Lord.Henries.Some fav'rite page, perhaps, who for the nightMust near his dame be lodged. It is not this.I do command thee tell me who it is ;(Taking hold of him roughlyFor by thy face I see too well thou knowest.What guest sleeps here to-night ?BLAS.Don Juen is the guest ; this is the roomWhere he is wont to sleep.266 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Henries.Is wont to sleep ! Has he been here of late ?BLAS.'Tis said he has been here; for me, I know note(Henries, turning slowly from him, walks tothe bottom of the stage.)BLAS (aside, looking after him).Surely he heard my words ; yet calm and silent !No further question following my reply!Fool that I was to be so much afraid,Since he regards it lightly.Henries (returning).Where is thy lady?BLAS.She gives directions in the pillar' d hall ;At least I left her there a short time since.Henries.Go, see, and bring me word. [Exit BLAS.Question a youth a menial any one,Of what regards the honour of my wife!I married her in the full confidenceThat she possess'd all good and noble virtuesWhich should become a brave Castilian's wife,And from herself alone will I be certifiedOf what this hateful mystery imports. ( After apause, and then muttering indistinct words.)HENR1QUEZ : A TRAGEDY. 26?Peace, bad suggestions, from mean basenesssprung !No ! till I hear from her own fait' ring tongueThe glossing poor pretences of the guilty,And see upon her once ingenuous faceThe varied hues of shame, I '11 not believe it.I am a fool to take it so intently.This casket here, which was my earliest gift ;And does it still contain that golden heart,The token of my love ? I fain would know.(Looking at it near, and taking it in his hands.)It is not lock'd ; the lid is slightly hatched :In mine own house, methinks, without reproach,I may undo the bauble. (Opens it.) What ishere ?Don Juen's picture, and a letter, too jI know the writing well.(Reads). " Dear mistress of my soul ! How shallI thank thee for that favour which has raised mefrom despair ! Though thy heart has not alwaysbeen mine, and I have signed long to subdue it,yet I cherish my present felicity as if thou hadstloved me always, and no other had ever touchedthy heart. I will come to the feast as a masquer,and for the reason suggested to me, unknown toHenriquez. The bearer of this will return withthe key of the private door to the grove, and Ishall come through the narrow path about nightfall.(After a pause).Things have been done, that, to the honest mind,268 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Did seem as adverse and impossibleAs if the very centre cope of heavenShould kiss the nether deep.And this man was my friend!To whom my soul, shut from all men besides,Was free and artless as an infant's love,Telling its guileless faults in simple trust.Oh the coiled snake ! It presses on me here (Jushand on his hearty As it would stop the centrethrob of life. (Returning to the casket ,and taking out other papersAnd sonnets, too, made on her matchless beauty,Named Celia, as his cruel shepherdess.Ay ; she was matchless, and it seems was cruel,Till his infernal arts subdued her virtue.I '11 read no more. What said he in the letter ?(Reads against The bearer will return with thekey, and I '11 come by the path at night-fall.Night falls on some who never see the morn.Re-enter BLAS.BLAS.My Lord, I Ve found her : Donna LeonoraHas bid me say she will be with you instantly.Henries.I cannot see her now ; I am not well.I shall be better shortly : tell her so.I '11 rest me in my chamber for an hour,Henries : A TRAGEDY. 269And would not be disturb'd. Prevent her coming;And say I would repose. Go, tell her quickly.[Exeunt severally.SCENE IlEnter LEONORA and Mercia, followed byDIEGO, speaking as they enter.DIEGO.It shall be done ; I understand you, Madam ;Those lofty plumes must grace the seat of honour,The chair of Don Henriquez.LEONORA.Yes ; and the chair of Don Henriquez's wife :See that they both be graced*DIEGO.Never but once,(Lady, forgive the freedom of my words,)Never but once before was chair of stateBeneath this roof so crested : years gone by,When Don Henriquez's father, from the king,Held in these parts, then threatened with commotions,A regent's power. And then his noble lady,Although the blood of kings ran in her veins,270 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Did at due distance humbly take her placeOn a low stool, unmark'd by any honour.LEONORA.Ay, good Diego, such meek humble damesHave lived, as we are told, in former days.Do as I have desired thee.DIEGO (aside, murmuring as he goes out).Lofty dame !Making so proud a stir, like some pert hedging,Chirping and fluttering in an eagle's nest \JExit.Mensa.Sister, you aggravate the mark'd dislikeThat old domestic bears you : be more gentle.LEONORA.O he dislikes me not ; it is his humour.Dislike me ! Have I not to him and hisBeen even profuse in gifts? The foolish thought !Mercia.Ay ; but the meekness of his former lady,She, too, who had a king's blood in her veins,Dwells in his heart, and beggars all thy gifts.LEONORA.Thou 'rt fanciful.Mercia.Nay, nay ! And why so fondOf splendid pomp? Compared to what thouwert,Henries ! A TRAGEDY.Thy marriage with Henriquez made thee great ;This doth not make thee greater; woe the day!Nor happier neither.LEONORA.Woe the day ! Poor dove !That would beneath the cottage eaves for everSit moping in the shade with household birds,Nor spread thy silver plumage to the sun.Mercia.The sun hath scorch' d my wings, which were notmadeFor such high soaring.He who would raise me to his nobler rankWill soon perceive that I but grace it poorly.LEONORA.Away with such benumbing diffidence !Let buoyant fancy first bear up thy merit,And fortune and the world's applause will soonSupport the freight. When first I saw Henriquez,Though but the daughter of a humble house,I felt the simple band of meadow flowersThat bound my hair give to my glowing templesThe pressure of a princely coronet.I felt me worthy of his love, nor doubtedThat I should win his heart, and wear it too.Mercia.Thou dost, indeed, reign in his heart triumphant;Long may thy influence last.HENRIQUEZl A TRAGEDY.LEONORA.And fear not but it will. These pageantriesGive to the even bliss of wedded loveA varied vivifying power, which elseMight die of very sloth. And for myself, .My love for him, returning from the wars,Blazon'd with honours, as he now returns,Is livelier, happier, and, methinks, more ardent,Than when we first were married. Be assuredAll things will favour thee, if thou hast spiritTo think it so shall be. Thou shakes thy head.It is not reason, but thy humble wishes,Thy low ignoble passion that deceives thee,And conjures up those fears. Weak, wav'ringgirl!Art thou not bound ?Mercia.Weakness in yielding to your will, indeed,Has fetter' d me with bands my heart disowns.LEONORA.Fy ! say not so. Hush ! let not that sad faceO'ercloud the joy my gen'rous lord will feelWhen he discovers what we have conceal'd,With playful art, to make his joy the keener.Hush ! here comes Bias again.Enter BLAS.How is my Lord ?Will he not see me now ?Henries : A TRAGEDY.BLAS.He will not yet.I have been watching near his chamber door,And when I gently knock'd, as you desired,He answered me with an impatient voice,Saying his head was drowsy, and lack'd rest.LEONORA.I '11 go myself.BLAS.Nay, Madam, do not yet.I guess that some cross humour has disturbedhim ;Sleep will compose it.LEONORA.Humour, dost thou say !He ne'er was cross with me. \ Exeunt.VOL. I.Henries '. A TRAGEDY.ACT II.SCENE I. The private Apartment of Henriwith his Chair and Table, and a Lampburning on the Table ; the Stage lighted onlyby this Lamp.Enter Henries with a sword in his hand,which he lays on the table in the light, shrinkingback as he looks at it.Henries.The blood ! this blood ! his blood ! O dismalchange !When rose the sun of this sad day; how gladlyWould I have shed mine own, to have sav'd onedropOf what was then so dear ! pushing it into theshades Be from my sight.It wrings my heart : and yet so black a stream,So base, so treacherous, did never stainThe sword of holy justice. after sitting down,and gazing some time on the groundsThis is a pause of rest from the first act,The needful act of righteous retribution.Oh ! is it rest ? The souls that fell from lightInto the dark profound, cut off from bliss,Henries : A TRAGEDY.Had rest like this. (Pressing his temples tightlywith both handsHow furiously these burning temples throb !Be still ! be still ! there 's more behind to do ;But no more blood : I will not shed her blood.(Knocking at the doors Who 's there ?VOICE.Are you awake, my Lord ?Henries.What dost thou want ?VOICE (without.The banquet is prepared, the guests assembled,Your grooms are waiting, and your vestmentsready.Will you not please, my Lord, to let them enter?Henries (to himself.The guests assembled ! Vile bewildering dream !I had forgot all this. I must appear.VOICE (without.Will you be pleased, my Lord, to let them enter ?Henries.Be still be still ; I '11 open to them presently.[Exit hastily into an inner chamber, takingthe sword with him.Henries *. A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.The grand Hall of the Castle lighted up magnificently.LEONORA, Mercia, CARLOS, and Companydiscovered ; Music t which presently ceases,.andEnter a SERVANT.LEONORA (aside to Servant.How is thy master? Has he left his chamber?SERVANT (aside to LEONORA).Yes ; he will soon appear ; he is preparing.LEONORAIndeed, indeed, I have been much concernedThat Don Henriquez has, from sudden illness,Been tardy in respect to noble guestsWhom he so truly honours ; but I hope -(Flourish of trumpets Ha! who is this? Someguest in princely state.Enter SERVANT.SERVANT.The King is at the gate.LEONORA.The King! a great surprise! unlooked-for honour.I'll to the gate. (To the musical Strike up aroyal welcome. [Exeunt LEONORA, Carlos,and others, while the music plays agrand martial air ; thenHenries I A TRAGEDY. 277Re-enter LEONORA, c. 9 conducting the King,attended, who receives the homage, and continuesspeaking in dumb'Show to many of theCompany r , till the music ceases.KING (to LEONORA).Fair hostess, I am come in homely trimFor such a gay assembly.LEONORA.Your poor servantsAre greatly honoured by this condescension ;A glad surprise, so far beyond our hopes.KING.Ay, and beyond mine own, fair dame ; but findingFrom wrecks of mountain torrents, or neglect,The straight road to Zamora was impassable,I took the wider compass, and proceedingThrough these domains by favour of the night,Your castle from its woods looked temptingly,And beckoned me afar to turn aside.The light from every lattice gaily streamed,Lamps starr' d each dusky corridor, and torchesDid from the courts beneath cast up the glareOf glowing flame upon the buttressed wallsAnd battlements, whilst the high towers aloftShow'd their jagged pinnacles in icy coldness,Clothed with the moon's pale beam.T 3278 Henries : A TRAGEDY.It pleased my fancy ;And here I am, a hasty visiter,Who must Zamora reach by early day ;-Where many a lofty lord, and learned clerk.And all the rogues and robbers of the districtAwait my coming.CARLOS.All of them, my Liege ?KING.I spoke at random, like a graceless layman :More than the church's portion were presumption,A tithe of them will do. Here is Henriquez.Enter Henries, richly dressed.Henries.My humble homage to your Highness : welcomeTo my poor house, so honoured by your presence.KING.I thank thee, brave Henriquez, but I fear'T is an untimely visit ; thou 'rt unwell.Henries.Nought but a passing ailment ; do not name it.KING.In faith your face is wan, and strangely changed,And would become a sober beadsman's frockMore than a festive mantle. How isn't with you?Retire again to rest.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 279Henries.My face speaks falsely, I am much recovered.Here is the cup of welcome ; will your GraceBe pleased to honour me. (Taking a cup froma servant, and presenting it on one kneeto the King')KING.All good be on your head, and this fair dame's.(Bowing to Henries and LEONORA, andthen drinking')Fair ladies and brave lords, well be ye all.(Sowing to the company, and drinking againstHenries (to the servant, 'who is pouring out acup for him).Up ; fill it to the brim.Health to the king, and a long happy reign.(Drinks.)To all my honour 5 d guests health and good welcome.(Drinks again')KING.A goodly company : here are, methinks,High blood enough, plumed hats and coronets,To furnish out a court.LEONORA.They honour this poor feast which I have fashionedTo grace my Lord's return.T 4Henries : A TRAGEDY.KING.You have done well ; and I should grace it loo,Who was the greatest gainer by his absence,When he with brave companions like himselfAgainst the Moors did for the state good serviceAs Alcantura, by their valour won,And now a noble hold for Christian knights,Can nobly testify.I speak not of the Naval de Tolosa,Where he upon that memorable dayBroke through the Moslem chain of armedguards,Changing their strength to slaughter and dismay :We are too apt to speak of recent services.Former or recent, would I could repay them !Henries.Your bounty has already done it nobly.KING.Fy, fy ! a trifle ; what would scarce maintainA rustic lord, who dozes life awayIn his perched hall, where hawks wink on theperch,Arid hounds lie sleeping round him. Take thisring,My royal father wore it many a day ;And whatsoe'er thou shalt request of me,Returning to my hand this pledge again,It shall be granted, were it half the realm.Henries : A TRAGEDY, 281Henries (receiving it on his knee).I thus receive it with all humble duty.(Rising with forced animation.)But let us now be gay : the time wears on.By early dawn I must attend your Highness,To reach Zamora by th* appointed hour.LEONORA.I am rejoiced to see you so recovered.(To Henries.)Henries.1 thank you, Lady ; let your guests receiveYour present courtesies. Where are the minstrels?Let them strike up a dance : we are too still.LEONORA.Doubt not we shall be gay j but we expectSome merry masquers here to join our revels ;They should have come ere now.Henries.Wait ye for such ? Are they not come already ?LEONORA.How so, my Lord ?Henries.The world is full of them :Who knows the honest unclothed worth of thoseThat by your side may stand, drink from yourcup,Or in your bosom lie ? We are all masquers.Henries : A TRAGEDY.KING.Your wine has cheer* d you to a gibing humour;You are severe, my Lord, on this poor world.Henries.If I have said amiss, ev'n let it pass : ^A foolish reveller may at random speak :Who heeds his idle words ? Music strike up.(Music : the King retires with Henriesto th bottom of the stage, and the guestsprepare to dance, when BLAS with a faceof horror enters the hall and beckonsCARLOS asideCARLOS.What dost thou want?BLAS.A fearful thing has happen'd ;And to my Lord, or Donna Leonora,It may not hastily be told.CARLOS.What is 't?BLAS.A murder' d body near the Castle lies,But newly slain ; and they who found it swear(For well they know his form and countenance),It is Don Juen's body.LEONORA.(JVho has stolen near them to listenedDon Juen's body, said'st thou ? Is he dead ?Henries: A TRAGEDY. 283BLAS.Yes, Madam, they have found him in the woodLifeless andLEONORA.Oh, I guess thy horrid look !And he is murder'd ? Dreadful, barbarous deed 1(Exclaiming aloud(All quit their places for the dance, and crowdround LEONORA, who is supported by Mercia,appearing also affected, whilst HEN-risques,at a distance, observes them intently.)LEONORA (recovering).Carlos ! tell my Lord the horrid tale.1 must retire.[Exit with MEN CIA and other ladies.KING (coming forward with Henries).Some strange commotion here !Henries (to CARLOS).What has befallen?CARLOS.What will most keenly rend your noble heart ;Yet to a soldier I should tell it plainly:Don Juen, from some secret villain's stroke,Has met his fate this night, and near your walls*Henries.Away 1 Howl not so wild a dirge to me ;Far distant from these walls, full many a league,Don Juen is. Ye are deceived.Henries I A TRAGEDY.BLAS (shaking his 'head).No, no.!CARLOS.I fear he tells us true.fHenries.He wrote to me, not many days ago,A letter, dated from his northern seat,Which made no mention of his visit here :If what you say be true, it is most strange.I '11 be assured if it, indeed, be so. (Goinghastily.CARLOS (preventing him).Retire, and I will see it ascertain'd :You shall not look upon so sad a sight.KING (to Henries).Retire, my Lord : it were not fit you went.Your noble guests beseech you to retire.Henries.I will obey your Grace. I thank ye all.[Exeunt Henries and CARLOS severally.KING (to the guests.Were it not well that we should all retire ?Our banquet to a funeral wake is turn'd,And cannot cheer us now. [Exeunt.Henries : A TRAGEDYSCENE III.An inner Court of the Castle, lighted by a Lampover the Gateway, the Stage otherwise dark.Enter DIEGO and two Servants, with dark lanterns,speaking loud and confusedly as theyenter.FIRST SERVANT.I could be sworn to it. Go tell my Lord :Why hold we here such idle altercation ?DIEGO.He must not be disturbed.FIRST SERVANT.How not disturbed ?Enter CARLOS above, looking down from an opencorridor.CARLOS.Ho ! who are ye who talk so eagerly ?What is the matter?FIRST SERVANT.The murderer is found: come down, Don Carlos,For we would fain pursue him through the wood,But thus unarm' d we dare not.\ Exit CARLOS above.286 Henries '. A TRAGEDY.SECOND SERVANT.Ay, he is coming : he will be our warrant,And tell us what to do.Re-enter CARLOS below.rCARLOS.Well, friends, what did you say ? the murderer ?FIRST SERVANT.Yes ; I can swear 'tis so: I would have followedhim,But, lacking arms, I durst not.SECOND SERVANT.So would I.FIRST SERVANT.Give us some stout companions and good weapons,And, scatt'ring different ways, we '11 scour thewood,And seize him shortly.CARLOS.In the wood ye found him ?SECOND SERVANT.Yes ; as we went out-stripping our companionsTo bear Don Juen's body to the Castle.CARLOS.How guess you 't is the murderer ?FIRST SERVANT.A youthful cavalier for several daysHenries I A TRAGEDY. 287Has been secreted in the wood. I 've seen him ;And the dark form that cross' d my light ev'n nowI could be sworn is he.DIEGO.It is not likely that the murdererShould be so near the slain. He would, methinks,Run from the spot forthwith.CARLOS.True, neverthelessA mind distracted in a wood so tangledMight run and make no way. (To ServantsGo ye forth ;I will myself assist your search. But, first,We '11 fetch our weapons. Ha ! what noise isthat ? (Noise without') 'T is voices atthe gate.FIRST SERVANT.It is the body.voice calling from the outer courtly Ho, there !Who watch within ? Lend us your aid,We know not where to bear it.OMNES.It is the body.[Exeunt , running eagerly through the gateway.Enter ME NCI A below, who has appeared beforelistening in the corridor.Mercia.He will be found and seiz'd : they '11 have nomercy.288 Henries I A TRAGEDY.The dreadful doom ! O Heaven have pity onhim!Enter INEZ.INEZ.What is the matter, Madam ? Whither go yrfu ?Mercia.I cannot tell.INEZ.Go in, I do beseech you,And stay in your apartment. I, mean time,Will be upon the watch, and bring you wordWhen they return. Think you that there hasbeen,For I have listened too, a cavalierSecreted in the wood ?Mercia.No j heed me not ;I know not what I say.INEZ.Yet stay not here, lest you should raise suspicion ;Return to your apartment ; be entreated.\ Exeunt INEZ, leading off Mercia.Henries I A* TRAGEDY.SCENE IV.Enter LEONORA and CARLOS by opposite sides.CARLOS.Madam, I have obey'd your summons ; sayWhatever my humble service may perform.How fare you after this most dismal shock ?LEONORA.As one who hath a friend and husband bothIn one dire tempest lost. And, noble Carlos,Grief triumphs over pride, when even to thee,Though knowing well thy friendly worth, Iown it.He was I mean Henriquez Oh ! he wasTo me most strangely alter'd ere this stroke.CARLOS.You are deceived ; expecting to retainThe undiminish'd empire of his heartBeyond the usual term of bridegroom weakness.It could not be.LEONORA.No ; I am not deceived.Sickness did yesterday for many hoursConfine him to his chamber ; yet in vainDid I entreat admittance I who usedTo soothe his saddest hours, if any sadCould pass when I was near him.And now again he is shut up alone,And has refused to see me. Worthy Carlos,VOL. i. u290 Henries*. A TRAGEDY.Do me a kindness : go thou to his door,And beg admittance j then in my behalf,Since by another's influence I must move him,Crave audience even for a few short moments.CARLOS.Nay, charming Leonora, urge him not :He will admit thee when he is disposedFor soothing sympathy ; to press it soonerWere useless were unwise.LEONORA.Yet go to him ; he will, perhaps, to thee,So long his fellow-soldier and his friend,Unburden his sad heart.CARLOS.You are in this deceived. His fellow-soldierI long have been. In the same fields we'vefought ;Slept in one tent, or on the rugged heath,Wrapt in our soldier's cloaks, have, side by side,Stretch'd out our weary length like savage beastsIn the same cheerless lair; and many a time,When the dim twilight of our evening campHas by my foolish minstrelsy been cheer'd,He has bent o'er me, pleased with the old strainsThat pleased him when a boy ; therefore I may,As common phrase permits, be call'd his friend.But there existed one, and only one,To whom his mind, with all its nice reserveAbove the sympathies of common men,Henries I A TRAGEDY.He freely could unfold ; and having lost him,Can I intrude upon his private thoughtsLike one who would supply a vacant place ?His heart, I know it well, would from such boldnessRevolt, even with disgust.LEONORA.Yet Juen's death did seem to move him lessThan such dear friendship might have warranted.CARLOS.It was his custom to restrain his looksWhen strongly moved, or shun all observation.LEONORA.And I am now become that humble thing,A wife shut out from equal confidence !CARLOS.Have patience, Madam ; take it not so deeply.LEONORA.I would have patience,CARLOS.Hush ! we 're interrupted,Enter BLAS.BLAS (to Leonora")Don Juen's secretary is arrived,Who brings with him so has he bid me sayPapers of great importance, which he begsMay, and without delay, to Don Henriquez,In presence of due witnesses, be read.Henries I A TRAGEDY.LEONORA.It is a happy thing ; this call will rouse him ;Be thou the bearer of this message, Carlos;He cannot think thee an intruder now.CARLOS. jfI will obey you.LEONORA.And be sure immediatelyTo give me notice how he has received it.CARLOS.I will not fail. \ Exeunt severally.SCENE V.A spacious Apartment.Enter BALTHAZER, followed by BLAS, carrying acase with papers, which he lays on a table.(BALTHAZER, after examining it.Is Don Henriquez ready, gentle youth ?BLAS.He '11 soon be here ; the Lady is at hand,With others, who will witness what you read.BALTHAZER.I 'm glad she comes to soothe his gloomy grief,For I have that to read will move him great 1 )'.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 293BLAS.I doubt it not : Don Juen loved him well,As it was thought.BALTHAZER.Say'st thou, as it was thought !I Ve often seen them spend whole days together,Neglecting all the sports of hall or field,In some sequester'd corner, side by side,Pacing, though young, with the slow steps ofage,Each like the other's shadow ; whilst, by turns,Such power of words flow'd from them, and theireyesWith pleasure or with gentle anger flush'd,As the keen wilful sporting of their mindsThrough some wild chace of thought pursuedthe game.I mark'd them oft : it was a pleasing sight.BLAS.Were they, indeed, such dear and loving friends ?BALTHAZER.Yes, gentle youth, they were. It seem'd, intruth,As though each kept his thoughts i* th' other'sbreast,Lock'd up even from himself, having when met,And only then, free use of his own treasure.BLAS.So closely knit ?u 3Henries I A TRAGEDY.BALTHAZER.Yes ; I have seen HenriquezBy Juen's sick-bed sit, night after night,Like tenderest nurse watching her infant charge ;And then I've seen the tears course down hischeeksHis youthful face all shrunk and pale with grief.Such dear and manly friendship knew I never.Enter LEONORA and CARLOS, followed by DIEGO,who then retires with BLAS to the bottom of theStage.LEONORA (after a pause).I think I hear him coming.CARLOS.I think so too ; yet grief is slow of foot,And those are rapid strides like one in haste.Enter Henries, who returns slight and sullenacknowledgments to their civilities, and goingdirectly to a seat prepared for him, sits downwithout speaking.BALTHAZER (to Henries, after a pause).My Lord, here is a will, with other papers,Which your deceased friend, my noble master,Committed to my keeping six days since,When he departed from his native home.His ancient fav'rite hound howl'd piteouslyHenries : A TRAGEDY.As from the gate we prick' d our steeds, and yetWe took no heed of it, nor thought, alas!That he would ne'er return. Please you, myLord,That it should first be read ?Henries.Proceed ; I '11 listen.BALTHAZER.From the great love, above all men besides,Which living he did bear youHenries.Nay, proceed;There needs no prologue to it.BALTHAZER (reading.The last will of me, Juen de Torva, writtenand signed by mine own hand, as these characterstestify, is this. I bequeath to my beloved, myearly, my only friend, Don Henriquez talavera,the whole of my lands, my castles, my dependencies,my treasures, to be possessed byhim and his heirs for ever ; and for as much as Ihave more confidence in the wisdom and generouspropriety of his judgment than my own, I leavethose whose names (also by mine own hand) areherein written, to be provided for, as he, thinkingand acting for me when I shall no longer beable to think and act for myself; shall deemright. These, with the last love and blessingof my heart I bequeath to him ; desiring thatu 4296 Henries : A TRAGEDY.my poor earthly remains may be laid in thesame spot where he himself shall be interred.May God have mercy on the soul of a humblesinner ! Done with mine own signature.Juan DE TORVA.'/Here follow names of many old dependents,And witnesses who saw him sign this deed ; >Shall I repeat them ?Henries (motions him to forbear, and aftercovering his face with his hands for a momentor two).You also spoke, I think, of other papers :The date of this is, as I guess, remote.BALTHAZER.Nay, it is recent only two months since.Henries.So late as that ! You mention' d other deeds.BALTHAZER.Yes, good my Lord ; entrusted to my keeping,Here is besides a marriage contract madeBetween himself arid the fair Mencia.Henries (starting from his chair with violentgesture.What did'st thou say ? The sister of my wife ?Say it again : I know not what thou said'st.BALTHAZER.It is, my Lord, a marriage contract madeHenries : A TRAGEDY. 297Between himself and Donna Mencia,The sister of your wife ; to whom by stealth,The Lady being somewhat disinclined,He has of late made frequent visits ; hopingLast night, with her consent, to have surprisedyou,When as a masquer he should join the guests,By asking from your love a brother's blessing.Henries falls back into his chair, utteringa deep groan')LEONORA (rushing to him in great alarm).Alas ! so strong an agony is here,The hand of death is on him.CARLOS.'T is but the pitch and crisis of his grief:Be not alarm'd ; he will recover presently.(DIEGO, coming forward, speaks aside toLEONORA.)DIEGO.Bid all withdraw, and be with him aloneWhen he recovers.LEONORA (aside.How when he recovers ?Alone with him ! I know not what thou mean'st.DIEGO (speaking to her aloud).My Lord has from his youth been thus affected,When press'd by grief; I've seen him so before.And when the fit goes off; I've known him also298 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Utter wild ravings. Solitude and stillnessAre necessary. Pardon me this boldness.LEONORA.Thought seen him thus before?DIEGO. ^It is a natural infirmity ;Let all retire and leave him.LEONORA (motions all to retire but Carlos).Don Carlos will remain. (To DIEGO.)DIEGO.None but yourself, I do beseech you, Madam ;And I will watch by you till he recover.exeunt all but DIEGO, LEONORA, and HEN-risques,who, while she hangs over him,groans as before.LEONORA.That groan again! My dear my dear Hen-risques!Alas ! that look ! thine agony is great :That motion too. (He rises.) Why dost thoustare around ?We are alone ; surely thou wilt not leave me.Where would' st thou be ?Henries.I' the blackest gulph of hell ;The deepest den of misery and pain ;Woe bound to woe the cursed with the cursed !Henries: A TRAGEDY. 299LEONORA.What horrible words, if they have any meaning !If they have none, most piteous !Henriquez ; O, my Lord ! My noble husband !I thought not thou would'st e'er have look'd onmeAs thou hast done, with such an eye of sternness.Alas ! and had'st thou nothing dear on earthBut him whom thou hast lost ?Henries.I had, I had ! Thy love was true and virtuous.And so it is : thy hand upon my breast. (Pressingher hand, which she has laid upon hisbreastsI feel it O how dear ! (Is about to kiss it, butcasts it from him')It must not be !Would thou wert false ! Would grinding contumelyHad bow'd me to the earth worn from mymindThe very sense and nature of a man !Faithful to me ! Go, loose thee from my side ;Thy faithfulness is agony ineffable,It makes me more accursed. Cling not to me :To taste the slightest feeling of thy loveWere base were monstrous now. Follow menot!The ecstasy of misery spurns all pity. \ Exit.300 Henries I A TRAGEDY.DIEGO.And do not follow him : O do not, Madam !This fearful fit will soon exhaust its strength,And leave his reason free.LEONORA. j|God grant it may ! It is a fearful fit.But thou thyself look'st strangely, and thyvisageSeems haggard with a passing consciousnessThou dost not thinkDIEGO.No, no ! what should I think ?Retire to your apartment : I meantimeWill watch my Lord, that none may cross hiswayTill he be safely lodged within his chamber.[Exeunt.SCENE VI.A narrow Hall or Passage.Enter CARLOS and BALTHAZER.CARLOS (calling to somebody behind him as heenters.Go, bid those spearmen from the armourerReceive their pageant suits, and let the warderHang o'er the battlements his sable flag.HENIUQUEZ I A TRAGEDY. 301BALTHAZER.And will not Don Henriquez, then, in personAttend the funeral rites ?CARLOS.His ancient stewardHas signified to me his Lord's desireThat I should fill his place in every thingRespecting this sad ceremony.BALTHAZER.Have you not seen himself?CARLOS.No ; grief so stern, so cover' d and profound,I never knew : he has refused to see me.BALTHAZER.They say his ghostly father hath been summon 'd :He'll try to soften his untoward grief.CARLOS.I hope he will ; but pass we on, I pray.BALTHAZER.The murd'rer has, I hear, escaped their search.CARLOS.He did escape, if it was any thingThose frighten'd peasants saw.BALTHAZER.In truth it is a black, mysterious deed ;And, as it strikes my mindHenries *. A TRAGEDY.CARLOS.Some other time :Pass on, I pray, our business must proceed.exeunt.ACT III.SCENE I. The grand Court of the Castle.Enter a pompous funeral procession by an archedway at the right side of the bottom of the Stage,and crossing it in a diagonal line, passes out bythe left side of the front ; which joins the massedrichness of a perspective to the distinctness of aside view.SCENE II.A small private Apartment.Enter LEONORA, walking thoughtfully across theStage; then enter DIEGO, upon which she turns,and goes up to him, without speaking.DIEGO (after pausing for her to speak first.They told me, Madam, you desired to see me.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 303LEONORA.Yes, good Diego, I would speak with thee ;Yet what I have to say comes of no sense,Mere curiosity, a woman's humour.Looking from my apartment not long since,Methought I saw thee in the inner court,Earnest in conversation with Balthazar.I mark'd you for a while, and his strange gesturesSeem'd those of anger rather than of grief.DIEGO.He was, in truth, somewhat intemperate.LEONORA.What has disturbed him ?DIEGO.He is a man by nature cross and captious,And hardly to be satisfied.LEONORA.How so ?Has aught been wanting in the funeral honoursPaid to his master?DIEGO.No ; it is not that.He rather thinks we have been more intentOn idle pageantry, than truly zealousIn finding out the murd'rer of his Lord ;And this did move him to unseemly warmth,And words which I may not repeat.304 Henries ! A TRAGEDY.LEONORA (eagerly.What words ?Does he suspect No ; what should he suspect?(Pausing and gazing on DIEGO, who issilentlyThy face looks pale and haggard. Did he namehim?DIEGO.Name whom ?LEONORA,No, no one. This bewildered brainWill run on things too wildly fanciful.I'll speak to him myself; he shall be satisfied.Search shall be made without delay, Go to him,And tell him I would see him privately.DIEGO.He is not here.LEONORA.What ! not within the walls ?DIEGO.Mounted upon his master's swiftest steed,He left the castle short while since ; ere thisHe must be near Zamora.LEONORA.Why such haste ?DIEGO.I know not; 'tis, perhaps, to gain admission,Before the opening of his royal court,To the King's private ear.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 305LEONORA (alarmed.Most strange ! some thought some dark imaginationHas work'd him to this frenzy. Tell me trulyWhere his suspicions rest : for he has spokenWords which thou would'st conceal. Spoke heinhints ?tell me all ! He did not name Henriquez ?DIEGO.No ; by the noble house of Altera,Had he so done, that word had been his last.Diego Furness, aged as he is,Had ne'er stood by with rapier by his sideTo hear his master's honour rudely stain'dWith horrid imputation.LEONORA.Hush ! speak low.1 meant not that : a thing too wild and frightfulEven for a hasty thought. But does he knowA lurking stranger in the wood was found,With scared and hasty fear, confessing guilt ?(Mercia, entering behind them, and listeningto the last words, rushes forward ingreat alarm*)Mercia.Confessing guilt ! O trust not his confession !Believe not what he says ! a frenzied dream !For mercy's sake, my sister ! O, for mercy !VOL. i. x306 Henries : A TRAGEDY.LEONORA.Mencia ; what sudden madness seizes thee ?Mercy ! for whom dost thou implore my mercy ?Mercia.Cruel thou art to ask ! My first, my dearest :had no other ever look'd upon me,This misery had not been.LEONORA.It is Antonio, then, for whom thou dearest ?Is he the stranger who escaped their search ?Mercia.Has he escaped ? Then Heaven be praised he has.LEONORA.And thou didst know that he was lurking here ?Mercia.Catch not so eagerly my foolish words ;1 think of him when any youth is mention'd.DIEGO.Lady, we only said, " a lurking stranger : "It is yourself who marks him as a youth.Mercia.I know not what I say ; I 'in most unhappy :I wil retire.LEONORA.Yes j thou hadst best retire ;And be appeased ; Antonio is not found,Though now we know on whom to fix the charge.[Exit Mercia.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 30J(Gladly to DIEGO.) Now it is clear : it is a blestrelief !My good Diego, faithful, kind, old friend ;Even for the love which thou dost bear thy lord,I call thee friend ; it is a blest relief. (Takinghis handy It comes upon my heart, a loadedheart,That was with horror press'd, and brings thesetears.DIEGO.God bless you, lady ! Had I sooner knownThe steady truth and kindness of your nature,It had been well, for I have been perverse ;But henceforth I will curb all wayward thoughts,And honour you as Don Henriquez's wife,And worthy so to be.LEONORA.Cease, friend; all thy perverseness is forgotten.Enter CARLOS.In a good time thou comest, my noble friend.CARLOS.How's this? Strange joy has lighten'd up youreyes,Unsuited to these hours of sable sadness.LEONORA.We have discover' d Juen's murderer.x 2308 Henries : A TRAGEDY.CARLOS.I 'm glad to hear it : have you certain proof?LEONORA.Antonio, M en cia's lover; a wild youth,Whose most presumptuous love, not long ago-shehad for Juen's nobler suit rejected,Is the mysterious stranger, here, by night,Found lurking in the wood, whose hasty flightSo well betrayed his guilt.CARLOS.I will, and instantly,Despatch a swift pursuit, to trace his flight.I 've seen the youth, and can describe his mien,And slender, graceful form. O most unlikeOne who could do a fell and bloody deed !LEONORA.A gentle form the fullest heart may shroud.DIEGO.I have known such to anger and to bloodMore prone than sterner men.CARLOS.You seem offended with me, but I meant notTo question what you say. The time is precious :I '11 send, without delay, on every tract,Those who, I trust, will shortly seize upon him,Guilty or innocent. I came to sayThose maids and holy men, as you appointed,Are in the chapel met, and wait your presence,Henries : A TRAGEDY. 309To sing a nightly requiem for the dead,Who, in the vault beneath, his first still nightOf the grave's rest doth pass.But we'll postpone these rites till we have doneWhat must not be delayed.LEONORA.Ay ; let us lose no time. [Exeunt.SCENE III.The burying Vault of the Castle, with Monumentsof the Dead ; and near the Front of the Stage,a new covered Grave, seen by the Light of aLamp placed on a neighbouring Tomb, theStage being otherwise dark. A solemn Requiemfor the Dead is heard at a distance, soundingfrom above. As it draws to a close, Henriquezappears at the further End of the Vault with aLight in his Hand, which he holds out from him,as if in search of some Object, and, seeing theGrave, casts the Light from his Hand, andrushes towards it.Henries (after gazing some time on the grave.And here thou lies with all thy noble parts,Thy lofty, liberal soul, and goodly form,And heart of love so thorough and so true !This is thy rest, the meed and recompensex 3310 Henries '. A TRAGEDY.Thy generous worth hath from thy friend received!Thy friend ! O savage heart and cruel hand !Fell, hateful, faithless, cowardly, and base !Of every baleful thing, by heaven cast off,Most cursed and miserable ! * fO that ere this the dust had cover* d meLike a crush' d snake, whose sting is yet unsheath'd!Would in the bloody trench some sabred MoorHad lanced this hold of life this latent seatOf cruelty ! or rather that some dart,Shot erring in our days of boyish sport,Had pierced its core ! Then by my early graveHe had shed over me a brother's tears ;He had sat there and wept and mourn'd for me,When from all human thoughts but his aloneAll thoughts of me had been extinguished. Juen!My Juen, dear, dear friend ! Juen de Torva !Thy name is on my lips, as it was wont ;Thine image in my heart like stirring life ;Thy form upon my fancy like that formWhich bless'd my happy days. How he wouldlook,When with his outspread arms, as he returnedAfter some absence ! Oh, it tortures me !Let any image cross my mind but this !No, no ! not this ! Sable, sepulchral gloom !Embody to my sight some terrible thing,And I will brave it (pausing and looking round.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 311It doth ! it doth ! there 's form and motion in it.Advance, thou awful shade, whatever thou art.Those threatening gestures say thou art not Juen.(Rubbing his eyes*)It was but fancy. No ; the soul to HimWho is the Soul of souls ascended hath,Dust to its dust return'd. There is nought hereBut silent rest that can be roused no more.Beneath this mould, some few spans deep he lies.So near me, though concealed ! Cursed as I am,The cords of love ev'n through this earth havepower,Like a strong charm, to draw me to him still.(Casting himself upon the grave.)Burst, guilty heart ! rend every nerve of life,And be resolved to senseless clay like this,So to enlap his dearer clay for ever.Enter CARLOS.CARLOS (looking round him).He is not here : nought see I through the gloomSave the cold marble of those tombs which,touch'dWith the wan light of yon sepulchral lamp,Show their scrolled ends to the uncertain sight,Like shrouded bodies rising from the earth.(Going towards the grave.)Ha ! something stirring on the new-raised earth !It is Henriquez, wrapped in frantic sorrow.(Advancing to him.)x 4Henries : A TRAGEDY.Henriquez ! hear'st thou not, noble Henriquez ?Nay, nay ! rise from the earth: such frantic griefDoth not become a man, and least of allA man whose firm endurance of misfortuneHas hitherto so graced his noble worth.Giv'st thou no answer but these heavy groans 1 ?Thou canst not from the tomb recall the dead,But rouse thy spirit to revenge his death.Henries (raising his head).What said'st thou ?CARLOS.Quit this dismal bed of death,And rouse thee to revenge thy murder' d friend.Henries .He is revenged ; Heaven deals with guilt somonstrous :The hand of man is nothing.CARLOS.Ay, but the hand of man shall add its mite.(Taking hold of his hand to raise him.)Up from the earth ! 1 5 ve found the murderer.Henries (springing up fiercely, and seizinghim by the throat).Latest thou thy hand on me ! What is or is not,The God of heaven doth know, and he alone.Dearest thou with mortal breath bestow that name,To the dishonour of a noble house,On one of ancient princely lineage born ?Henries I A TRAGEDY. 313CARLOS.Let go thy frenzied grasp ! Should brave CastiliansThus grapple hand to hand, like angry boys ?Fit time and place shall justify my words,If they indeed offend. Our watch hath seiz'dIn hiding near the castle, most suspiciously,A youth who hath to Mencia's love pretended,Whose hand, we cannot doubt, hath done thedeed ;But if he be of such high lineage born,'T is more than he hath claim'd or we will credit.Why drop your arms thus listless by your side ?Your eyes upon the ground ? Will you not goAnd see the prisoner, and hear him question'd?Henries.Ay, ay, this is required : I '11 go with thee ;I comprehend thee now.CARLOS.And yet thou modest not :Does any sudden pain arrest thy steps ?Henries.I am benumb* d and faint. I '11 follow thee.Exeunt.314 Henries I A TRAGEDY,ACT IV.SCENE I. A Prison in the Castle. ANTONIOdiscovered disconsolate near the Front of theStage. A high Door at the Bottom, with Stairsfrom it, leading down into the Prison.ANTONIO (after shifting his posture several times,and sighing heavily, raises his eyes on hearingthe door open gently.Another visit ! do they vainly think,By oft-repeated questions, to betrayA spent, enfeebled mind into confession ?It is a woman ! it is Mencia's self!Enter Mercia, descending the steps into theprison.And comest thou to visit me, to blessMy dismal prison-house with what were blissEv'n in the lowest state of human misery ?Sweet Mencia ! thou hast pity on me then.Pity embedded lies where love hath been,And love again doth from that pity spring,As the dropp'd seed of some fair faded flowerShoots its sheath'd bud from the cleft mould, firstpeepingHenries : A TRAGEDY.In timid beauty, after April showers,Then swelling, bursting, spreading its soft leavesTo the free air, more fragrant than before.Yes, I am happy, gentle Mencia,In spite of fate, if thou still cares for me.Mercia.This is no time for words like these. I dreadEv'n but to look upon thee, wretched man ! *Take this disguise ; it will insure escape.There is a faithful friend who waits without,And by the postern will direct thy flight.Speak not, but throw these weeds about theequickly ;The time is precious. (Holding out garmentswhich she bears over her arm')ANTONIO.Thou dreads to look upon me, yet thou comestTo save my life to save a murderer's life ?Mercia.I said not so in pity of thy state ;That bloody deed I know hath been the actOf frenzied passion : in some foreign landLive and repent : Heaven grant thee grace forthis !Let not man's hand, the brand of public shame,Be on thy wretched head.Sl6 Henries : A TRAGEDY.ANTONIO.The hand of man, the brand of public shame,Falls on the guilty head, by Heaven's appointment.Thou rises the salvation of thy soulIn aiding my escape ; and for my life,If of thy love bereft, I care not whetherThe headsman's axe, or the slow hand of nature,Shall rid me of it. Nay ; the first were best.Mercia.no! upon my knees I do conjure thee.(Attempting to kneel, but prevented by him.}If I offend in this, Heaven will forgive me :For, oh ! if thou art lost, I am most wretched.My misery or peace hangs on thy life ;Therefore, upon my bended knees, I beg.(Sinking from his hold to the ground")'T is for myself I plead ; fly instantly.ANTONIO (raising her).Ah dear, dear Mencia ! And cares thou thus,For a foul criminal, a man of blood ?What, then, had been thy care may I not sayWhat, then, had been thy love, had he beeninnocent ?Mercia.Alas, alas ! hadst thou been innocent,1 had defied .the world, with all its lures,Again to sever us. Yet, as thou artHenries : A TRAGEDY. 317ANTONIO.Misfortune thanks ! Thou hast done more formeThan the devoted care of many years.Come, then, defy the world to sever us,My generous Mencia ; I am innocent.Mercia.Ha ! dost thou say it ? Said'st thou innocent ?And say'st thou truly so ? Hast thou not doneit?Is it no mockery of joy ? O no !That look, that smile ! Yes, thou art innocent ;And, Heaven be praised, thou art.ANTONIO.I am, indeed, of Juen's death most innocent.And though some circumstances do at presentAccuse me strongly, yet, I trust in Heaven,That on my trial so it will appear.Mercia.Nay ; do not trust. O no ! for Don Henriquez,Made savage by despair, will have a victim,And catch with eagerness at every proof,How slight soe'er it be. Fly ; quickly fly,And I will follow thee and share thy fortune,Or be it good or ill.ANTONIO.O blessed words ! my dear, my gen'rous love !318 HENRTQUEZ : A TRAGEDY.My heart throbs at the thought, but cannot thankthee.And thou wilt follow me and share my fortune,Or good or ill !Ah ! what of good can with a skulking outlawIn his far wand'rings, or his secret haunts, *'E'er be ? O no ! thou shalt not follow me.Mercia.Good may be found for faithful, virtuous love,In every spot ; and for the wand'ring outlaw,The very sweetest nooks o' the earth are his.And be his passing home the goatherd's shed,The woodman's branchy hut, or fisher's cove,Whose pebbly threshold by the rippling tideIs softly washed, he may contented live,Ay, thankfully ; fed like the fowls of heavenWith daily food sent by a Father's hand.ANTONIO (pressing both her hands to his heart,and then kissing them).Thanks, gentle, virtuous Mencia; but, alas!Far different is the hapless outlaw's homeFrom what thy gentle fancy fashion eth.With lawless men he must protection find.Some murky cavern where the light of dayHath never peered where the pitch'd brand,instead,Sheds its red glare on the wild revelryOf fierce banditti ; or the pirate's bark,Henries : A TRAGEDY. 319Where stalks the sabred ruffian o'er the deck,Watching his distant prey some home-boundship,With all its stores and freight of precious souls,Who ne'er shall greet their native shores again,Must be his guilty home.Mercia.Alas, alas !ANTONIO.Thou shalt not follow me, nor will I fly.Sever'd from thee I will not live, sweet love,Nor shalt thou be the mate of one disgraced,And by the good disown'd. Here I'll remain,And Heaven will work for me a fair deliv'rance.Mercia.No, no ! the present means for thy escapeAre sent to thee by Heaven. Be not so stubborn!With or without me fly, even as thou wilt,But do not linger here.(Looking to the door on hearing it move.)The door O misery ! we are surprised.It is Henriquez ; Heaven have pity on us !Enter Henries, while Mercia shrinks behindANTONIO.Henries (advancing.Ha ! not alone ! Who is it ? Wretched Mencia.320 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Mercia (rushing forward).Oh he is innocent ! Have pity on us !Turn not away from me, noble Henriquez.(Catching hold of him eagerlyHeaven knows that he is innocent, ,Henries.Then, pray thee, be at peace; Heaven will protecthim.Mercia.Frown not ; my wretchedness has made me bold.Henries.Away, away ! I do not frown on thee.Thou art the baleful cause of all this misery,And yet I blame thee not. Away, and leave us.ANTONIO.Retire, dear Mencia ; to thy chamber go ;It is not fit that thou should'st tarry here.(She retires unwillingly ; Henries waving hishand to quicken her retreat, and waitingin gloomy silence till she is gone.}Henries.Unhappy youth ; thou hast to thine accusersThine innocence asserted with the earnestAnd simple manliness of truth ; yet truth,Supported only by the word of himWho is accused, will nought avail. How is it?If there be any circumstance that mayHenries I A TRAGEDY.Support or prove thy words, I do entreat theeTo tell me freely, and I will, with speed,Use every means that may unfold it fullyTo aid thy exculpation. (Pauses.) Is therenone?Bethink thee well : how slight soever it be,It may to others lead of more import.ANTONIO.Thanks, generous man !Henries.Nay, nay ! What is thine answer ?ANTONIO.Alas ! four days within that fatal woodI have been hid ; unseen of every oneBut Mencia, and those hinds who did pursue me.What circumstance can then avail me ? No ;Heaven, in its justice, will unfold the truth ;In this I put my trust ; proofs I have none.Henries.Take the deliv'rance, then, which Heaven hassent thee.Fly, save thy life. (Offering a purse.) This willprocure the means,When thou hast clear' d the precincts of theforest.All now is still, and favours thy escape.ANTONIO.My Lord, like one stunn'dwith astonishment,VOL. I. YHenries : A TRAGEDY.I thank your gen'rous care. But, Don Henriquez,Though born of blood less noble than your own,An outlaw's fate, from friends and country banish'd,My honest fame blurred with imputed guilt,Is not deliv'rance such as I accept, t'Such as a true Castilian can accept.You offer it in pity of my youth,Therefore I thank you ; but I '11 here abideSuch vindication as becomes mine honour.Henries.But should it fail thee, canst thou better brookA malefactor's death, the public gaze,The scaffold's open shame, the executioner,All the degrading ministry of death ;Even that which so attain teth noble bloodThat ages wear not out th' abhorr'd blot,Disgracing all thy line ? Ay, think of this :It makes me shudder as I utter it,Who have in battle faced all dreadful things.ANTONIO.In truth, it makes your strengthen'd features wearA ghastly hue of horror. How is this,That such strong sympathy should move you so ?You think me guiltless in the very frontOf proof that should condemn me : then, belike,Some shrewd suspicion of the actual handThat did th' accursed deed lurks in your mind.Henries I A TRAGEDY. 323Henries.Ha ! Cast an accusation on mine honour !ANTONIO.No, Don Henriquez ; with a friendly wishTo do me service cam'st thou here, and sacredIs all that thou in privacy hast doneOr uttered. Yea 5 though thou shouldst nowconfessThat thou thyself wert Juen's murderer(Start not, these are but words of argument) ;Yea ; ev'n supposing this, and that my rescueFrom the uplifted axe depended on it,Yet would I not betray thee.Henries (turning away haughtily).Thou art incorrigible : take thy will. (Returningand laying down a key.}I leave thee this ; thou wilt consider of it.Say, is there aught that thou wouldst have me do?ANTONIO.Send me a priest. Though only such transgressionsAs youthful folly prompts rest on my mind,Yet would my soul, shrived by some holy man,His ghostly counsel take, and be at peace.Henries.And be at peace ! Ay, ghostly counsel mayTo such as thou give peace. O could it also .Henries I A TRAGEDY.I know an aged friar, wise and prudent :Thou shalt be satisfied. [Exit.ANTONIO (after following him with his eye as heascends the stair at the bottom of the stage).But that it were so horrid and unnatural, fA thing at strife with all consistent thoughts,I could believe No ; *t is impossible.(Retires to the bottom of the stage, andthe scene closesSCENE II.An Antechamber.Enter CARLOS and FRIAR by opposite Sides.CARLOS.Good morning, Father ! you are early here.Whom come you to confess ?FRIAR.I have already been with the poor prisoner.CARLOS.And thou hast heard, no doubt, the horrid truthWhich he denies to every one besides ?FRIAR.I 've heard all he confesses.Henries I A TRAGEDY. 325CARLOS.Ay; what strange tales, what secret horridthings,In thy long course of ghostly ministry,Have in thine ear been pour'd ! By this goodhand,But that I did prefer the jointed mailAnd weapon's stroke to haircloth and the scourge,The roar of battle to the chaunting choir,I had become a friar, to learn, like thee,All those dark mysteries of human natureTo which thy mind is conscious.FRIAR.Gentle son !Pardon my words ; thou talk'st in ignorance.A tale of guilt, wrung from the sinner's soul,Strikes not the fancy like a winter's taleOf moonlight witchery, or murder doneP th' secret chamber. No ; a counter sympathyDoth quell the fancy then. Thou speak'st inignorance.CARLOS.True, Father, this may be. With your permissionI will attend you to the gate.FRIAR.Not now.I'm summon'd: Don Henriquez waits for me.Y 3326 Henries I A TRAGEDY.CARLOS.At the confessional ?FRIAR.So I believe ; I meet him in the chapel.CARLOS. fI am right glad of this. We marvelled muchHe did not sooner think of ghostly comfort.FRIAR.I have been summon'd by him once before ;But when I came, capricious in his sorrow,He would not see me.CARLOS.Speak comfort to him, and enjoin some penanceFor the indulgence of such frantic grief,So wayward, so excessive. May God bless thee![Exit FRIAR.Here comes our keen and fiery secretary.Enter BALTHAZER.Return'd so soon ! And hath the royal earInclin'd to thy petition?BALTHAZER.Ay ; every cot and castle in th' realmAt my command must open gate and hold,Chamber and bower; even the sepulchral vault,Whose sable scutcheon door hath not for yearsUpon its hinges jarred, must be unlock'd,Henries : A TRAGEDY.And show its secrets to the searching light.But as I learn you have secured the murderer,I am content ; here ends my brief commission.I pray you lead me to the prison-house :I burn to see the wretch.CARLOS.Come, follow me.[ExeuntSCENE III.A Chapel. Henries discovered on his Kneesby the Confessional, the FRIAR bending overhim, and muttering Words in a low Voice.FRIAR (aloud).Rise, son, in humble but assured faithRepentance, and these penances endured,Will gain from heavenly grace full absolutionOf this most guilty deed of all thy sins.Rise, and be comforted. (Raising him, and leadinghim forwards Be comforted !The worst of sinners league not with despair,But by their own untoward disbelief,The greatest sin of all. Thou smites thy breast,And shakes thy drooping head : thou must notdoubt.328 Henries : A TRAGEDY.All sin is finite, mercy infinite ;Why shouldst thou doubt that God will pardonthee?Henries.I doubt it not. God's mercy pardons allWho truly do repent ; and O how truly,How deeply, how intensely I repent !But in my breast there is a goading sense,An inward agony, a power repellingIn dire abhorrence every better thought.The bliss of heaven for me ! incongruous hope !My soul, my fancy, yea my very willIs link'd to misery ; and happinessComes to my thoughts like gleams of painful dayTo owls and bats, and things obscene and hateful,Fitted by nature for their dismal dens.O that I were like such ! in the reft rockOf some dank mine coiled up, dull and unconsciousOf the loud hammer's sound, whose coming strokeShould crush me from existence !FRIAR.Alas, alas, my son ! have better thoughts.Henries.Let them arise in better hearts, for mineA nest of singed scorpions hath become,And only fit for such. Each recollection,Each waking fancy, like a barbed fang,Pierces its core with thrilling agony,Henries *. A TRAGEDY. 329Which yields to a succeeding, sharper sting,And that again to others keener still.So kind, so dear, such manly, true affection !Friendship so pure ! such noble confidence !Love that surmounted all things ! When, inpassion,I did an outrage on his fiery blood,What would have hurl'd on any other headThe instant stroke of death he only waitedFRIAR.Give o'er, my son ; thou art too vehement.Henries.He waited till my senseless rage was spent,Then smiled O such an upbraiding smile !Open'd his arms, and clasp'd me to his heart.That smile, those open'd arms, I see them now,I see them constantly ; where'er I turn,They front me like a vision of delightChanged to a gorgon terror.But no restraining love did plead for him :As though he had some faithless traveller been,All base suggestions were received against him,Were cherish' d, brooded on, by dint of thoughtWork'd to a semblance of consistent truth,Which, but for this Base, black ingratitude !Passing all crimes, detested, monstrous !beating his forehead violently as hestrides rapidly axioay.')This base, believing heart, this ruffian's hand !330 Henries : A TRAGEDY.FRIAR.My son, this is wild ecstasy of passion,Which leads not to that humble true repentanceOur holy church enjoins.Henries (returning). $Or had I met him as an open foe,With accusation of defiance fairlyPreceding vengeance ; but unheard, i' th' dark !Tremble, ye venerable roofs, ye towersOf my brave fathers, men without reproach !Fall on my cursed head, and grind to dustWhat bears the honour* d semblance of their son,Although unmeet to bear the human form.FRIAR.Nay, nay ! I pray forbear ; this violent griefFor thy soul's weal is most unprofitable.Betake thyself betimes to prayer and penance.The sufferings of the body will relieveThe sufferings of the mind.Henries.The sufferings of the body ! They are powerless.(Shewing his hand.)See here, short while, in agony of thought,Pacing the armory where hangs the mailWhich Juen wore, when in Tolosa's fieldWe fought the turban'd Moslems side by side ;It was his gift, which I did beg of him,Henries : A TRAGEDY. 331In the proud joy I felt at his high deeds.How swell'd my heart ! A braver knight in armsFought not that day. Bold heart and potenthand,And lofty mien and eyes that flash'd with valour.Where run my words ? I have forgot their drift.FRIAR.Something which happened in the armory.Henries.Ay, in the armory, as I have said,I struck my hand, in vehemence of action,On a spiked shield, nor knew till afterwards,When the wild fit was past, and oozing bloodLoaded my clammy touch, that in my fleshThe broken iron was sheath* d.No; what can corporeal pain or penance do?That which inflicts the mental wound, whichrendsThe hold of pride, wrenching the bent of nature ;'T is that alone hath power. Yet from the effortNature starts back ; my mind, stunn'd at thethought,Loses the use of thought.FRIAR.I do not understand you ; good, my Lord.Henries.It matters not $ you will, perhaps, hereafter.33% Henries I A TRAGEDY.FRIAR.You are at present feeble and exhausted,And lack repose ; retire a while, my son.Hark ! on the walls without, do you not hearThe warder's call to note the rising morn ?rHenries.The morn ! And what have I to do with morn ?The reddening sky, the smoking camp, the stirOf tented sleepers rousing to the call,The snorting steed, in harness newly dight,Did please my fancy once. Ay j and the sweetnessOf my still native woods, when, through the mist,They showed at early dawn their stately oaks,Whose darkening forms did gradually appearLike slow approaching friends, known doubtfully.These pleased me once in better days ; but nowMy very soul within me is abhorrentOf every pleasant thing ; and that which cheersThe stirring soldier or the waking hind,That which the traveller blesses, and the childGreets with a shout of joy, as from the doorOf his pent cot he issues to the air,Does but increase my misery.I loathe the light of heaven : let the night,The hideous unblessed night, close o'er me now,And close for ever !Henries : A TRAGEDY. 333FRIAR.Cease, cease ! and cherish not such dark despair.Retire to your apartment, and in prayerBeseech Almighty Goodness to have pityOn a perturbed soul.Henries.Pray thou for me ; I will pray when I can.FRIAR.Hark ! steps along the corridor ; they comeTo say an early mass for the reposeOf the interr'd : they must not find you here.Henries.And to the dead they give repose ! What mass,What prayers, what chaunted hymns can to thelivingGive respite from this agony of soul ?Alas, alas ! there is no cure for this. \ Exeunt.SCENE IV.A small Court before the Door of the Prison,which is open. BLAS and other Domestics discoveredwaiting near it.FIRST DOMESTIC (tOGoes Don Henriquez with the prisoner ?BLAS.He does ; his noble courser at the gate,334) Henries : A TRAGEDY.Black Sultan, saddled stands, champing the bit,And casting from his mouth the flaky foam.Stand back ; they 're coming now.Enter ANTONIO, CARLOS, FRIAR, BALTHAZER,and DIEGO, from the Prison. *FRIAR (to ANTONIO).Be not cast down, my son, but trust in Heaven.ANTONIO.And so I do ; that is my stay, good father ;And yet, methinks, these fetters might be spared.By Don Henriquez* orders am I thusLike a vile felon chain'd ?CARLOS.'T is by his orders ; 't is a stated form.I fear they gall you ; are they clench'd too tightly?BALTHAZER.Who doth a felon's deeds must e'en submitTo bear a felon's manacles.ANTONIO (to BALTHAZER).Yes; man of pens, and records, and old lore,Such is thy narrow and ungen'rous nature.(Turning to CARLOS.)This rough but noble soldier, bred in campsAnd midst the broil of battle, is more gentle.Henriquez seem'd inclined to pity me,To think me innocent ; then, wherefore theseHenries : A TRAGEDY. 335CARLOS.Come, we lose time; we must begin our journeyTo reach the town by close of day, HenriquezBeing intent to gain a royal audienceBefore the sitting of tomorrow's court.[Exeunt all but DIEGO, to whom entersLEONORA, with something in her hand.LEONORA.My good Diego, hie thee to the gate ;And ere thy master mount, give him this scarf,These gloves too, and his signet, which, in haste,He left behind. (Giving them to him.}He has forbidden me to follow him,And he must be obeyed.DIEGO.He shall receive them.LEONORA.How look'd Antonio when they led him forth ?Greatly dejected?DIEGO.No ; he bears it stoutly.LEONORA.Asserting still that he is innocent?DIEGO.Ay, ay ; but every villain does the same.Does not my Lord believe that he is guilty ?336 Henries *. A TRAGEDY.LEONORA.I cannot doubt it. When he left the chapelA long time in his chamber he remain' d jWhen he came forth again, I watch'd his eye,And it was calm, though gloomy. Then, forthwith,t fHe gave his orders that a band of spearmenShould be in readiness to guard the prisonerBound to Zamora ; and were he in doubt,He were not now so calm, being beforeSo greatly agitated. Hie thee quickly.\JKxeunt severally*ACT V.SCENE I.The Court at Zamora, a Grand Hall of Audience.NOBLES, PRELATES, OFFICERS, 8c. discoveredin waiting ; a Flourish of Trumpets ; enter theKING and his Train, who walks slowly, as hereceives their Homage, to a Chair of State nearthe front of the Stage.FIRST NOBLEMAN (presenting a petition).Mayst please your highness, look on this petition,Humbly presented to your royal noticeBy one of noble blood.Henries I A TRAGEDY. 337KING.And noble conduct, too, I hope, Don Pedro.What is its plea ?(After reading the paper slightly')That he beneath a lady's window hathA most audacious suitor slain, who thereDid charm her ear with love-sick ditties. Slewhim!A harsh device to win the lady's favour ;Had she not ears to be again enthrall' d ?Another song had been a fitter weaponOf opposition than a sword, methinks. (Givingthe paper to a secretary')Note down that I will look on this again.SECOND NOBLEMAN (giving a paper).Deign, royal Sir, to look upon this paper.KING.Freely, Don Bias ; from such a noble handIt needs must be an honourable suit, (Readingthe paper')Don Julian, of the noble house of Guzman,Hath, by the cadet of a meaner house,Been elbow'd from his place, who most nefariouslyRefused to yield to him the dexter side. (Readingon more slightly*)Honour repair'd that he be forced a blow !(Shaking his head')VOL. I. Z338 Henries : A TRAGEDY.We are too learned in this ancient kingdom.Nay, reverend Prelate, no offence to you ;The Clergy stand acquitted of this charge.PRELATE.I know not how to comprehend your Highness.KING.We should be spared full many a deadly broil,Did we not know our right hand from our leftWe are in this, good sooth ! too nicely learn' d,Which doth but scantily, in my opinion,Supply the want of every other lore.SECOND NOBLEMAN (asideNever may I again i' th* royal presenceWear hat and plume, if this is not derision.FIRST NOBLEMAN (aside).'T is Don Henriquez we may thank for this.He spoke not to us thus when the arm'd MoorWas nearer to his doors.KING (to PRELATE).And now, my Lord, let me receive your paper.PRELATE.Most humbly to your Highness I present it,From pious men, whose prayers are offer' d upFor your prosperity. (Gives the papersKING (reading it slightly.That the free hinds of Tories and their wivesRefuse their wonted offerings to the convent,Henries ! A TRAGEDY. 339And therefore humbly the adjoining landsA royal compensation." So it runs.And it must cost me many a fruitful field,Because those villagers love fatted pullets,As well as sober, self-denying monks !This also at our leisure we '11 consider.(Gives the paper to the Secretary, and sittingdown, receives other petitions, when aconfused noise is heard')What noise is that without ?Enter an Officer.OFFICER.May 't please you, Don Henriquez waits without.KING.Henriquez, my brave general ? How is this ?OFFICER.He comes attended by a goodly train,Guarding a prisoner, and humbly begsTo be admitted to the royal presence,Before your court shall sit.KING.Most willingly : say, I am ready nowTo give him audience. \ Exit Officer.I marvel muchHow it should be. In this unwonted formTo bring his prisoner ! But here he comes.340 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Enter Henries, followed by CARLOS and Antonio,going up to the KING, who rises to meethim.KING. ( tThou too, my valiant friend, a suitor here ?Henries.A humble supplicant.KING.Who needs not sue.Say freely what thou would'st, and it is granted.Henries.But what I beg, an earnest boon, must beConfirm'd to me with all solemnity,Before I utter it.KING.A strange request !But that thy services have been to meBeyond all recompense, and that I knowThy country's welfare and thy sovereign's honourAre dear to thee, as thou full well hast proved,I should with some precaution give my word.But be it so ; I say thy suit is granted.Henries.Nay, swear it on this sword.KING.Where doth this tend ? Doubts thou my royalword ?Henries : A TRAGEDY. S41Henries.When honour'd lately by your princely presence,You gave to me this ring with words of favour ;And said if I should e'er, by fortune press'd,Return the same to you, whatever graceI then might ask, should be conceded to me.(Giving the ringsReceive your royal token : my requestIs that you swear upon my sword to grantThis boon which I shall beg. (Holds out hissword to the KING, who lays his hand on it.}KING.This sword, this honour'd blade, I know it well,Which thou in battle from the princely MoorSo valiantly did'st win : why should I shrinkFrom any oath that shall be sworn on this ?I swear, by the firm honour of a soldier,To grant thy boon, whatever it may be.Declare it then, Henriquez. (A pauseThou art paleAnd silent too : I wait upon thy words.Henries.My breath forsook me. J Tis a passing weakness:I have power now. There is a criminal,Whose guilt before your Highness in due formShall shortly be attested ; and my boonIs, that your Highness will not pardon him,However strongly you may be inclinedz 3Henries: A TRAGEDY.To royal clemency, however stronglyEntreated so to do.KING.This much amazes me. Ever till now,Thou *st been inclined to mercy, not to blood. ,Henries.Yea ; but this criminal, with selfish cruelty,With black ingratitude, with base disloyaltyTo all that sacred is in virtuous ties,Knitting man's heart to man What shall Isay?I have no room to breathe. (Tearing open hisdoublet with violence')He had a friend,Ingenuous, faithful, generous, and noble :Ev'n but to look on him had been full warrantAgainst th' accusing tongue of man or angelTo all the world beside, and yet he slew him.A friend whose fost'ring love had been the stay,The guide, the solace of his wayward youth,Love steady, tried, unwearied, yet he slew him.A friend, who in his best devoted thoughts,His happiness on earth, his bliss in heaven,Entwined his image, and could nought deviseOf sep'rate good, and yet he basely slew him ;Rush'd on him like a ruffian in the dark,And thrust him forth from life, from light, fromnature,Unwitting, unprepared for th' awful changeHenries : A TRAGEDY. 343Death brings to all. This act so foul, so damned,This he hath done : therefore upon his headLet fall the law's unmitigated justice.KING.And wherefore doubts thou that from such amanI will withhold all grace ? Were he my brotherI would not pardon him. Produce your criminal.(Those who have ANTONIO in custody leadhim forward.)Henries (motioning with his hand to forbidthem).Undo his shackles ; he is innocent.KING.What meaneth this ? Produce your criminal.Henries kneeling.My royal Master, he is at your feet.(A cry of astonishment is heard through thehall ; the KING, staggering back from thespot, is supported by an Attendant, whileCARLOS and ANTONIO, now free from hisfetters, run to Henries, who continueskneeling, and bend over him in deep concerns')KING (recovering.A fearful shock ! Mine ears are ringing still.Rise, Don Henriquez d'Altavero, rise. (Turningaway his head*)z 4344 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Raise him : O do not let me see him thus !(Motions the crowd to withdraw, who go off,leaving the KING, Henries, CARLOS,and ANTONIO only on the stageKING (Fiercely. f fCarlos, on thee my anger rests, who thusStoutest by and suffer' d me to be deceived.CARLOS.Condemn me not, my Liege ; I was myselfConvinced this youth had done the deed, deceived.This on a soldier's honour I aver.KING.Alas, Henriquez ! thou hast practised on meWith cruel guile. I would right gladly forfeitThe fairest town thy sword e'er won for me,And be again at liberty to pardonWhatever thou hast done. A deed, most surely,By thy high nature all too rudely charged.Thou in the frenzy of some headlong passionHast acted as a madman, who still wreaksHis direst wrath on those he loves the most.Henries.No, no ! it was an act of brooding thought,Of slow intent, of dark consideration.Our early love, with all his fair endowmentsAnd noble qualities, before my mindHenries 1 A TRAGEDY. 345Did clearly pass ; pass and return again,And strongly plead for him, and were rejected.KING.Go to ! thou hast a wild imagination,Which has overreached thy judgment. Set mefree.The public weal requires thy service : oathsAdverse to this do not, and should not, bind.Henries.There are within your kingdom many chiefsWho may do better service to the state,Though not with better will than I have done ;(Laying his sword at the KING'S feet.}Here do I part with ensigns, arms, and war ;Nor soldier's brand, nor baton of command,This hand accursed shall ever grasp again.Your Highness by the honour of a princeStands bound to me in this, and you are bound*KING.Ay, if it needs must be, determined spirit.Yet, think again ; be it a while deferred,This dismal trial, for a month a year.Henries.Not for a day.KING.Thou art too boldly stubborn.By what authority dost thou oppose it,If 't is my pleasure it should be deferred ?346 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Henries.The law's authority emboldens me.I am Don Pueri's heir, and do by rightDemand the speedy trial of his murderer.Nor think the law's delay would aught avail.How many secret ways there may be found *'To rid a wretch of life, who loathes to live.My soul demands this sacrifice pants for it,As that which can alone restore to itThe grace of Heaven, and the respect of men,CARLOS.Noble Henriquez, thy too stubborn virtueHenries.Nay, Carlos, hold thy peace. Be not my foe :He were my greatest enemy who shouldImpede this consummation. When 't is past,Then let the favour of my princely master,Of loving camp-mates, and all virtuous men,Return to me again. A noble treasureThat will redeem my memory from shame.KING (embracing him).Living or dead, brave man, thou must be honour' d,I will no more contend with thy desires.Some preparation for this solemn ceremonyThou wilt require ; Don Carlos will conducttheeWhere thou may'st rest and find all needful aid.\ Exit.Henries I A TRAGEDY. 347Henries.Come, friends, till I am summon' d to my trial :The time is short, and we must husband it. (Goingand stopping again.)I shun not now thy friendly aid, good Carlos ;My heart is lighten' d of its heavy load,And I can take a good man by the hand,And feel we are akin.CARLOS.To all that is most great and admirableThou art akin. I have no words to speakThe thoughts I have of thee, thou noble man !HENRIQ.UEZ (tO ANTONIO).And thou, too, gentle youth ; give me thy hand.Thy noble confidence did point to meThe true and honoured, path. For, hadst thoufled,I might have shrunk aside, and been on earthA sullen secret thing of wretchedness,Cursing the light of heaven. Gentle youth,I 've felt the kindly pressure of thy hand,And all thy gen'rous sympathy : forgive me,That I did hold thy mind so long in doubt.ANTONIO.O nothing did I doubt that thou did'st knowMy innocence, and would protect it ; yet,This noble, terrible act I ne'er divined.Would I had fled my prison at thy bidding,348 Henries I A TRAGEDY.And lived a vagabond upon the earth,Ere this had been ! What was my name or worth ?But thouHenries.Cease, cease ! repent it not, sweet youth ; ^For all the friends on earth would not have donemeSuch true and worthy service. [Exeunt.SCENE II.A royal Apartment. Enter LEONORA and FRIAR.FRIAR.The king will from his council come ere long ;Then wait, I pray, and take a little respiteFrom this impatient fever of your mind.LEONORA.Take respite ! this impatience ! O good father !Thou canst not know this agony, and speak'stLike one secured from human misery.Heaven grant me patience ! I have need of it jBut it must come from heaven.FRIAR.See ; now his Highness comes.HENR1QUEZ : A TRAGEDY. 34-9Enter KING attended ; and LEONORA, running tohim, casts herself at hisfeef, embracing his knees.KING.The Lady Leonora ! rise, dear Lady.LEONORA.No ; to your knees I '11 cling, nor quit my hold,Till from your royal pity I obtainThe mercy I implore. My Lord HenriquezYour valiant general my dear, dear husbandSay that he shall not die. This execution !This malefactor's end ! O save him ! save him !KING (raising her).As far as I have power, your suit is granted.LEONORA.Then he is saved he lives ? Is it not so ?KING.Alas ! 1 would it were. Your Lord refusesAll royal mercy. I have sworn to himNever to pardon Juen's murderer.If thou canst move his stubborn spirit, kneel,And at his feet implore him to release meFrom this most fatal oath.LEONORA.Move him ! Alas, alas ! this will not be ;I know him well : in what he deems the right,He is inflexible. But solemn oaths,350 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Ev'n oaths upon the holy reliques sworn,The holy church annuls : it will release you.Then say not you are bound.KING.From oaths upon the holy reliques sworn I* -The church can loose, as thou, no doubt, hastlearntFrom sacred books and this good Father's lore ;But, solemnly, upon Henriquez's swordI 've pledged a prince's word a soldier'shonour,From which nought can release me, but the willAnd free consent of him to whom 't is pledged.Hie, therefore, to thy Lord : kneel at his feet,And may Heaven give thee power to touch hisheart.LEONORA.Is all my hope in this ! Unhappy woman !By Heaven and man abandon'd! Dismal doom !The woe of desperation ! (Franticly wringingher hands, and then turning in anger tothe KING.)There 's mockery in this. Thou art a king,And canst command what I would beg in vain ;Command him, as his royal Liege and Master,That he release thee from this fatal pledge.A king, and not obey'd ! deceitful shadow !Doth not thy power o'er all things reign supreme?HENRI Ques : A TRAGEDY. 351KING.Not o'er men's wills.This is a power Heaven to itself retains,And ne'er did delegate to mortal being.LEONORA (pacing about as before).Despair, despair ! What see I but despair,Shame, infamy, a malefactor's end ?KING.Wring not thy hands so wildly, wretched lady.His life, indeed, we must despair to save ;But infamy is from his name removed,As heaven from hell. Yea, his proud house shallboastOf this its noble malefactor, moreThan all its trophied chiefs.When at the bar he stood arraign'd, and pled,Proving his secret guilt, against himself,Ne'er rose his form so nobly on the mind,Even in his days of triumph.But when the fatal sentence was pronounced,He raised his head, and sent a look to HeavenOf pleased appeal and solemn thankfulness;A look of pious hope, so dignified,He seem'd like some fall'n seraph that againHad won his way to bliss. A general murmurOf admiration from deep silence rose.Old men did clasp their hands, and young menwept jHenries : A TRAGEDY.And those who on his victories bestow' dA cold and niggard praise, now, with full hearts,Gave boundless tribute to his lofty virtue.LEONORA.And he was honour* d thus! high Heaven * bepraised! (Bursting into tears')It makes me weep that they did weep for him.Heaven's will be done !I've been too stern and violent in my grief:God grant me more submission to his will,And I will learn to bear it. My Henriquez !The brave with tears of admiration graceThy hapless end, and rescue thee from shame.KING.Rescue ! far more than rescue : his proud houseThe very implements of executionWill henceforth in their banners proudly weave.LEONORA.I needs must weep ; but let my tears have vent,And I shall be resign'd.Enter CARLOS and ANTONIO.KING (to them).How is Henriquez ? came ye from his tower ?CARLOS.Most admirably well ; his soul is up :I left him shaking hands most cordiallyHenries I A TRAGEDY. 353With his worst enemy, and he intends,Ere close the night's first watch, to spend an hourIn social converse with some early friends,Who shared his first campaigns, and have desiredTo see his face once more.His soul seems open'd now, and raised aboveThat close reserve, which was his greatest blemish.KING.Some. noble minds do from misfortune rise,Yea, ev'n from guilt, more noble than before ;As by the hardest blow the smitten ballBounds highest from the earth.Retire, fair Leonora : this good man (pointingto FRIAR)Will heavenly comfort to thy soul impart,And strengthen it to bear the coming trial.(FRIAR supports her on one side, while ANTONIOoffers his aid also, as she goes off.)LEONORA (to ANTONIO).Not thou ; the hidden cause of all this woe.FRIAR.Nay, daughter, be not angry with this youth.The will of Heaven must be ; the means appointedMust also be : he is most innocent,Since ignorant of ill.VOL. i. A A354} Henries I A TRAGEDY.LEONORA.My grief is wayward still ; but I '11 subdue it.(Takes hold of ANTONIO, and exit with himand FRIAR, while KING, CARLOS, and attendantsgo out by another door') ^SCENE III.Before the Gate of the Prison ; the Stage dark,excepting a Lamp hung over the Gate : Sentinelsdiscovered on watch.Enter BALTHAZER with a dark lantern.FIRST Sentinel.Stand ! Who art thou ?BALTHAZER.A friend, connected with the noble prisoner.Sentinel.Stand there aloof; thou may'st not enter yet.Enter FRIAR by the opposite side.FIRST Sentinel.Ho there !FRIAR.A friend.SECOND Sentinel.A friend ! What seek'st thou here ?Henries I A TRAGEDY. 355FRIAR.I am a priest, confessor to Henriquez.FIRST Sentinel.Thou shalt have entrance presently.FRIAR.I thank thee. (Going up close to BALTHAZER.)Thou art Balthazar?BALTHAZER.And thy servant, father.FRIAR.Thought up by times ; it is still pitchy night.BALTHAZER.Nay ; look thou eastward ; yon dull line of light,Bounding the sable darkness of the earthFrom the sky's fainter gloom : it is the dawn.FRIAR.Ha ! runs the time so fast ! What noise is that?BALTHAZER.The hum of distant voices, and the soundOf preparation for the awful morn.As I now pass'd along, in every streetI heard the eager citizens astir,While light from many a lattice gleam'd. Andonward,As I approach' d th' appointed place, I sawRound the fenced spot, already gather'd, groupsOf men and women, young and old, whose facesDid seem, from darkness, as from nothing sprung,A A 2356 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Touch'd with the torches' glaring light, whichdownwardStream' d from the lofty scaffold, whereon formsOf busy artists at their fatal work,And ghastly herdsmen moving to and fro, ^Appear' d like blacken' d fiends. Dost thou nothearThe stroke of hammers, and that sounding plank?There comes a strange and thrilling coldness o'erme. (A pause, and noise without')I little thought to feel such ruth for him,The man who slew my good and noble master.FRIAR.Why should'st thou not ? The feeling does theehonour ;And he doth for that rash and rueful deedMake dear and great amends. The. gate isopen'd. \JZxeunt into the Prison.SCENE IV.A Passage Way in the Prison. Enter FRIARand GAOLER, speaking as they enter.GAOLER.But it is past the hour ; he must be waked.FRIAR.Waked ! dost thou think he sleeps ?Henries : A TRAGEDY. 357GAOLER.Yes, father ; he hath slept, I guess, since midnight.FRIAR.How know'st thou this ?GAOLER.I've listen' d at his doorFrom time to time, and nought have heard withinBut a deep silence, once or twice broke faintlyBy slow-heaved breathing, as of heavy sleep.FRIAR.So sound asleep, and such a morn to wake to !GAOLER.Nay, they who sleep before their day of doomSleep often thus, a deathlike, dreamless sleep.(Speaking as he goes off.}I well remember one, who, on the morn\ Exeunt.SCENE V.Trie Prison Chamber. Henries discoveredasleep on a Couch, near the Front of the Stage.Enter FRIAR and GAOLER.FRIAR.Still fast asleep : it grieves my soul to wake him.No trace of trouble on his face ! He liesA A 3358 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Like a tired hunter after toilsome chace.Call to him, friend, I cannot.GAOLER.Ho ! Don Henriquez ! ho, my Lord ! awake !Awake, my Lord ! He is in heavy sleep,Like the dull rest of death, which hath no ear.FRIAR.Oh that it were indeed the rest of death !It is a woful service to awake him.How goes the time? Might he still sleep awhile?GAOLER.'Tis past the hour at which he charged mestrictlyTo call him up.FRIAR.Then he must be obey'd.GAOLER (touching him gently.Wake ! Don Henriquez, wake ! it is the hour.He moves him now : the sound is in his ears ;The light annoys his eyes. Awake, my Lord.(Touching him againstHenries (raising his head.What is it ?GAOLER.'T is the hour ; the morning breaks.Henries (starting from his couch.Bring me my armour : have ye roused the camp?Henries : A TRAGEDY. 359Bid every soldier dight him for the field :I 've slept too long.GAOLER.It is the very hourAt which you did give orders to be waked.Henries.Ha! Yes, I understand thee : it is morn,The fated morn that brings to me no noon.Sleep from the tablet of my brain had razedAll present things, and in my waking fancyHad led me back to what I was so lately.I thank you. Dawns the light ?FRIAR and GAOLER (both at once).The morning breaks.Henries.Your voices sound like midnight, not like morn.Welcome, good Father ; thou art come, in truth,To wake me for the fight, and brace my strength,Not with corporeal arms.FRIAR.No, good my Lord jA nobler armour, for a nobler warfare :And the Almighty King, whose valiant soldierThou wilt this day approve thyself to be,Will gird thee for the field. Receive from himHis high commission, worthy of a man.A A 4360 Henries : A TRAGEDY.Henries (looking upward, and then kneelingwith his arms on his breast, and his head bowedto the ground).I do receive it, Father, most devoutly. (Risingwith solemnityLet me be forward in my work, good Father.I would retire, and give my thoughts to heavenEre earthly things shall press to mingle with them.Come, then, and join thy fervent prayers withmine,And teach my dying voice to sue for mercy.[Exit with FRIAR.GAOLER (looking after Henries).The right true metal this j 't will bear the furnace.Ah ! who would once have thought that from mycustodyHe should pass forth to such a death ? Heavendoomed it. (Noise and bustle without.)What noise is that without? Ho ! who wouldenter ?VOICE (without).Open ; it is the King. (GAOLER opens the door,and enter the KING, CARLOS, ANTONIO,and BALTHAZER.)KING (to GAOLER).Where is thy noble charge ?GAOLER.With his confessor, in the private chapel.Henries: A TRAGEDY. 361KING.How is he, Gaoler ? Has he through the nightHad any rest ?GAOLER.Yes, may it please your Highness,He hath slept soundly.KING.Sound sleep in such a state ! Yet, whereforemarvel :He has been used to look death i' the face.CARLOS.Ay, in the field ; but many brave him thereWho on a scaffold feel their manhood quail.KING.Is it so, Gaoler ? Thou hast good experience.GAOLER.Some years ago, two brothers suffered here,For an offence of state ; the one a soldier,Stout, brave, and bold in war ; the other bredTo a quiet life at home ; but on the scaffoldThe man of peace did bear the loftier brow,And beat the hardy vet'ran shamefully.KING.Strange creatures are we all ! and who is knownUntil his trial comes ? I think, good Carlos,Thou oldest me he conversed with cheerfulnessTill a late hour last night.CARLOS.Yes, good my Liege.362 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Having first settled all his worldly cares,Like one, who, from a heavy load released,Unclasps his vest to recreate himself,He with two ancient climates and your liegemanftConversed with kindlier, more enliven'd freedomThan he was wont: spoke of their old adventures,Praised many a valiant heart, falPn in the field,And of the fate of others did inquireWith kindly interest, as though his soulUpon the very parting verge of natureFelt nature's sympathies more warmly. TrulyHis spirit seem'd already to have doffedIts earthly coat, and gain'd a purer being.KING.Ay ; he is passing to a higher state :So teach our holy men, and I believe them.Doth aught approaching to a final endOf dark extinction rise to meet it thus ?It doth not : no, it cannot.But first he settled all his worldly cares.And what are his bequests ?CARLOS.Balthazar, thou canst tell.BALTHAZER.He first of all provides a noble monumentTo Juen's mem'ry near his native town,Desiring he himself may be interr'dIn the same vault with him, and by his side.Henries: A TRAGEDY. 363For many friends, and all his ancient servants,Forgetting none, he hath made kind provision.His Lady's dowry is enlarged, and MenciaReceives a noble portion to bestowUpon her early lover, this good youth,Whom he hath named with words of special love.KING (to ANTONIO, who turns aside to weep).Weep freely, gentle youth ; whom he hath lovedShall ever in his Prince's favour holdAn honourable place. Pray thee, proceed.BALTHAZER.He hath besides, for good and pious ends,A large benevolenceCARLOS.Hush ! he approaches.Re-enter Henries and FRIAR.KING (advancing to meet him).My noble friend, I felt a strong desireOnce more a short intrusion.Henries.Say not so.Your Grace is come to wish me a good morrow,And cheer me on this outset of my way.KING.Alas ! a dismal cheer, a wofiil morrow !364 Henries: A TRAGEDY.Henries.Nay, three successive days have dawn'd uponmeThrough such a gloom of hopeless misery,That this, comparatively, seems indeed *'A morn of cheer. Then so consider it.And now, in parting, I would beg of youTo pardon whatsoe'er, in my long service,I 've done, in ignorance or stubborn will,To prejudice the service of the state,Or to offend your Grace. Once at CuencaI rashly hazarded some brave men's lives ;And, for th' unmeaning triumph of a day,Those brave men's lives were lost. My heart forthisHas suffer'd many a pang ; but pride till nowRestrain' d confession. Pardon me for this.KING.Thou need'st from me no pardon ; yet thouhast it,And with it, too, my thanks, my solemn thanks,For all the noble service thou hast done me.And is there no request thou hast to make ?Henries.Yes, if I might presume. Here is a list (givingthe KING a paper.)Of some brave officers, whose worthy servicesDeserve promotion : let them, for my sake,Find favour with your Grace. This is my suit.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 365KING.It shall be done. Oh that a suit of mineCould, in return, move thine obdurate bosom !Henries.What is 't, my gracious Master ?KING.If I have been to thee a gracious Master,Be thou a gracious Liegeman, and restoreRestore to me that honour of my reign,That pride, and fence, and bulwark of my land,Restore to me again my gallant General,Henriquez talavera.Henries.Alphonse of Castile, I 've serv'd thee longsthough I say it, I have served thee bravely.Have I from fire, or flood, or havoc shrunk ?What battle have I lost ? what town abandon'd,That now I may not, like a noble Spaniard,My earthly station quit, from insult spared ?I Ve owed you service as my rightful King ;I *ve owed you service as my gracious Master :But not for man on earth, nor saint in heaven,Would I submit a loathed life to live,After the horrid deed that I have done.FRIAR (laying his hand gently on Henries).My son, my son ! where is the Christian meekness366 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Which, at the Throne of Grace, some momentssince,Thou didst devoutly pray for ?Henries. fFather, I am reproved : my mortal frailtyWas smother' d, not extinct. (Turning to theKING.)I will not, standing on this awful verge,To mortal greatness bend, else on my kneesI 'd crave forgiveness of this new offence : (layinghis hand sorrowfully on his breastsAn unrefined mind, offending to the last. (TheKING rushes into his arms and embraceshim ; then turns away, retiring to thebottom of the stage, to conceal strongemotionsHenries.Carlos, thou wilt not leave me till the end ;But thou 'It forgive me now the many wrongsI 've done thine honest worth, fastidiouslyBestowing confidence on one alone. (Takinghis hand affectionately(Turning to ANTONIO.) And thou, brave youth,I know thy gen'rous soul.Though I have held thee long in doubt, ItrustThou partes with me in charity.Henries : A TRAGEDY. 367ANTONIO (catching his hands, and kissing themfervently.In love,In deepest admiration, in devotionThat for thy sake would make me welcome death,Yea, suffer shame, or be an outlaw'd wretch,Cast off from all my kind.Henries.Come to my heart ! think of me when I 'm gone ;And be my fate thy warning. For I seeKeen passions and affections in thy nature,Akin to those I felt in early youth.And when thou think'st of me, consider this :The law condemned not a man unheard,Be he the veriest wretch upon the earth :But I unheard condemn'd my dearest friend.Balthazar, thou dost know how very dearNo, no ! thou could'st not know how well Iloved him.Farewell, good Secretary, and be sureThou mind thy charge. See that it be erectedWith strength and skill ; a noble monument,That will resist the silent strokes of time.(Looking round") Where is my ancient servant,good Diego?How is it that I do riot see him here ?BALTHAZER.On learning that your sentence was pronounced,He took his bed ; and whether violent grief368 Henries .* A TRAGEDY.Or other means did speed his end, I know not :He died last night.Henries.Then I shall meet him shortly, where the servant,Freed from his master, fears his wrath no most.My poor Diego ! he did live with meIn too much awe : and yet he loved me well.I was to blame in this.Enter LEONORA and Mercia.CARLOS.Thy Leonora comes.Henries.Ah ! would she had been spared this dismalparting.CARLOS.She would not be restrained.Henries.My Leonora, wherefore art thou come ?Yet thou art welcome to my heart once more.Farewell in love, in true, in most dear love,My dearest wife.LEONORA.Oh no ! thy cruel wife,The cause of all thy misery, thy bane.Henries (embracing her).Hush, hush ! thou wert my torment and my bliss,Henries I A TRAGEDY. 369But O ! far more my bliss ! So be content.I have had many days of prosperous lifeBefore this storm of misery broke upon me.Thy love the flower and crown of all. Be comforted.And Mencia, too, sweet maid, I understandThy mute farewell, which I accept. God blessthee !Antonio, take thy charge. (Putting Mercia'shand in his.)Heaven bless thee, and farewell, my dearest wife!LEONORA.Not yet, not yet ! my swelling heart will burst.It tries to utter what it cannot. Oh ! (A belltolls, and she, giving a loud shriek, fallsinto the arms of Mercia and ANTONIO.)Henries.Bear her away ; I may not look again. (As sheis borne off, the KING advances to the front')KING.Farewell, thou noble man ! Part we in charity ?Henries.In charity ; and on your royal headMy dying blessing rest ! [Exit KING.Here comes the Marshal.VOL. i. B B370 Henries I A TRAGEDY.Enter MARSHAL and other OFFICERS.(To the Marshal) Are all things ready, then?(The Marshal bows.}(To CARLOS and FRIAR.) My faithful friendWho still cling to my latest throb of life,I claim of you a kind but painful service.(He begins to move, the FRIAR walking by MsSide, and CARLOS following, while the Bell tolls,and a large Door in the Centre of the backScene being thrown open, discovers a grandarched Passage, lined with Guards and otherpublic Officers, who, as he passes along, jointhe Procession. The Curtain drops')THE MARTYRA DRAMA.IN THREE ACTS.B BPREFACETO THE FOLLOWING DRAMA, WHEN FIRST PUBLISHEDIN THE YEAR 1826.OF all the principles of human action, Religio 11is the strongest. It is often, indeed, overcomeby others, and even by those which may be consideredas very weak antagonists ; yet, on greatemergencies it surmounts them all, and it is masterof them all for general and continued operation.In every country and nation, under somform or other, though often dark and distorted,it holds warfare with vice and immorality ;either by destroying corrupted selfishness, or byrendering it tributary. And dear and intolerableto the feelings of nature are the tributes it willvoluntarily offer, fasting, scourging, woundsand humiliation ; the humiliation of all worldlydistinction, when the light of reason as well asthe robe of dignity are thrown aside. A greatphilosophical writer * of our own days, afterhaving mentioned some of the sceptical works ofHume, says, " Should not rather the melancholyStewart's Elements of the Philosophy of the HumanMind, vol. i. p. 368.B B 3374 PREFACE.histories which he has exhibited of the follies andcaprices of superstition direct our attention tothose sacred and indelible characters of thehuman mind, which all these perversions ofreason are unable to obliterate ? * * * ftIn truth, the more striking the contradictionsand the more ludicrous the ceremonies, to whichthe pride of human reason has thus been reconciled,the stronger is our evidence that Religionhas a foundation in the nature of man. * * ** * * Where are those truths in the wholecircle of the sciences, which are so essential tohuman happiness, as to procure an easy access,not only for themselves, but for whatever opinionsmay happen to be blended with them ? Whereare the truths so venerable and commanding, asto impart their own sublimity to every mode ofexpression by which they are conveyed ; andwhich, in whatever scene they have habituallyoccupied the thoughts, consecrate every objectwhich it presents to our senses, and the veryground we have been accustomed to tread ? Toattempt to weaken the authority of such impressions,by a detail of the endless variety of formswhich they derive from casual association, issurely an employment unsuitable to the dignityof philosophy. To the vulgar it may be amusingin this as in other instances, to indulge theirwonder at what is new or uncommon ; but to thephilosopher it belongs to perceive, under allPREFACE. 375these various disguises, the workings of the samecommon nature ; and in the superstitions ofEgypt, no less than in the lofty visions of Plato,to recognise the existence of those moral tieswhich unite the heart of man to the Author ofhis being."Many various circumstances, which it suits notmy present purpose to mention, have producedthis combination of gloomy, cruel, and absurdsuperstitions with Religion, even in nations anderas possessing much refinement of literatureand perfection of the arts. But Religion, whenmore happily situated, grows from a principle intoan affections exalted, adoring devotion; andis then to be regarded as the greatest and noblestemotion of the heart. Considering it in thislight, I have ventured, with diffidence and awe,to make it the subject of the following Drama.The Martyr whom I have endeavoured to portray,is of a class which I believe to have beenvery rare, except in the first ages of Christianity.There have been many martyrs in the world.Some have sacrificed their lives for the cause ofreformation in the Church, with the zeal andbenevolence of patriotism : some for the maintenanceof its ancient doctrines and rites, with thecourage of soldiers in the breach of their beleagueredcity : some for intricate points of doctrine,with the fire of controversies, and thehonour of men who disdained to compromiseB B 4376 PREFACE.what they believed to be the truth, or under impressionsof conscience which they durst notdisobey; but, from the pure devoted love ofGod, as the great Creator and benevolent Pareof men, few have suffered but when Christianitywas in its simplest and most perfect state, andmore immediately contrasted with the mean,cheerless conceptions and popular fables of Paganism.We may well imagine that, compared to theheathen deities, those partial patrons of nationsand individuals, at discord amongst themselves,and invested with the passions and frailties ofmen, the great and only God, Father of allmankind, as revealed in the Christian Faith, musthave been an idea most elevating, delightful, andconsonant to every thing noble and generous inthe human understanding or heart. Even tothose who, from the opinions of their greatestphilosophers, had soared above vulgar belief toone universal God, removed in his greatnessfrom all care or concern for his creatures, thecharacter of the Almighty God and beneficentParent joined, who cares for the meanest of hisworks, must have been most animating andsublime, supposing them to be at the same timeunwearied by the toils and pride of learning.But when the life and character of JesusChrist, so different from every character that hadever appeared upon earth, was unfolded to themPREFACE. 377as the Son, and sent of God, sent from Heavento declare his will on earth, and with the love ofan elder brother, to win us on to the attainmentof an exalted state of happiness, which we hadforfeited, sent to suffer and intercede for benightedwanderers, who were outcasts from theirFather's house ; can we conceive mingled feelingsof gratitude, adoration, and love, more fervent,and more powerfully commanding the soul andimagination of man, than those which must thenhave been excited by this primitive promulgationof the Gospel? Such converts, too, werecalled from the uncertain hope (if hope it mightbe termed) of a dreary, listless, inactive existenceafter death, so little desirable, that their greatestpoet makes his chief hero declare, he wouldprefer being the meanest hind who breathes theupper air, to the highest honours of that dismalstate.Through the thick gloom his friend Achilles knew,And as he speaks the tears descend in dew :Com'st thou alive to view the Stygian bounds,Where the wan spectres walk eternal rounds ;Nor fear'st the dark and dismal waste to tread,Throng'd with pale ghosts, familiar with the dead ?To whom with sighs : I pass these dreadful gateTo seek the Theban, and consult the Fates :For still distress'd I roam from coast to coast,Lost to my friends, and to my country lost.378 PREFACE.But sure the eye of time beholds no nameSo blest as thine in all the rolls of fame ;Alive we hail'd thee with our guardian gods,And dead, thou rules a king in these abodes.Talk not of ruling in this dolorous gloom,Nor think vain words (he cried) can ease my doom ;Rather I 'd choose laboriously to bearA weight of woes, and breathe the vital air,A slave to some poor hind that toils for bread,Than reign the scepter'd monarch of the dead." *They were called, I repeat it, from hopes likethese to the assurance of a future life, so joyful,active, spiritual, and glorious, that the presentfaded in the imagination from before it as ashadow. " Eye hath not seen nor ear heard,neither hath it entered into the heart, the joythat is prepared for those who love God," isone of the many expressions of the Christianapostles on this lofty theme ; who counted thegreatest happiness of the present life as unworthyto be compared to the rewards of therighteous after death, where, according to theirdifferent degrees of worth, unsullied with anyfeeling of envy, they should shine in their blessednessas one star different from another starin glory. A transition from prospects so meanand depressing as the former to hopes so dignified,spiritual, and animating as the latter, might wellhave a power over the mind which nothingPope's Odyssey, lath book.PREFACE. 379could shake or subdue ; and this transition nonebut the first race of Christians could experience,at least in so great a degree.And those enlarged conceptions, those ennoblingand invigorating hopes came to them in thepure simplicity of the Gospel as taught by Christand his apostles. They had no subtle points offaith mixed with them as matters of necessarybelief, which the fathers of succeeding times,and too often the pious missionaries of thepresent, have pressed upon their bewilderedconverts with greater perseverance and earnestnessthan the general precepts and hopes ofChristianity. * Those ancient converts also hadDr. Samuel Clarke, in a sermon on the Powers andWisdom of the Gospel, hath this passage : " And whereasthe best and greatest philosophers were in continual disputes,and in many degrees of uncertainty, concerning thevery fundamentals and most important doctrines of truth andreason, amongst those, on the contrary, who embraced theGospel of Christ, there never was the least room for disputeabout any fundamental ; all Christians at all times and in allplaces having ever been baptized into the profession of thesame faith, and into an obligation to obey the same commandments.And it being notorious that all the contentionsthat ever arose in the Christian world have been merelyabout several additions which every sect and party, in directcontradiction to the express command of their Master, haveendeavoured presumptuously to annex by their own authorityto his doctrines and to his laws. How much,therefore, and how just ground [soever has been given bythose who call themselves Christians to the reproach of380 PREFACE*before their eyes a testimony of heroic endurancewhich till then had been unknown toleworld. Who, in preceding times, had givenmisbody to the flames for his belief in any religiousnotions, taught or entertained by the learned|<orunlearned ? It was a thing hitherto unknownto the heathens ; and it is not very marvellousthat abstract doctrines of philosophers, taughtto their disciples as such, or popular deities,many in number, and of local, limited power,with moral attributes ascribed to them inferiorto those of a virtuous mortal man, should belittlecalculated to raise those strong excitementsin the mind, from which religious persecutionsdid at first proceed amongst Christians, who,from intemperate zeal and narrow conceptions,deemed a right belief in every doctrine of theChurch necessary to salvation. Diana of theEphesians could peaceably hold her state inconjunction with any god or goddess of Greece,Scythia, Persia, or Egypt ; but this toleration,which proceeded from any cause rather than theexcellence of their religion, was changed intothe most bloody and ferocious persecution uponthem which are without, yet Christ himself, that is, theGospel in its native simplicity as delivered by him, hasabundantly to all reasonable persons among the Gentilesmanifested itself to be the wisdom of God ; as well as itappeared to be the power of God in signs and wonders to theJews." Clarke's Sermons, vol. v. Seem. ] eth.PREFACE. 381the divulging of a faith which was altogether incompatiblewith their theologies, and must, therefore,should it prevail, overturn them entirely.Under these circumstances, the most enlightenedPagans, whose toleration has so often beenpraised, became-the first persecutors, and Christiansthe first martyrs. And then it was that anew spectacle was exhibited to mankind ; thenit was that the sublimity of man's immortal soulshone forth in glory which seemed supernatural.Men and women, young and old, suffered fortheir faith all that flesh and blood can suffer ;yea, joyfully and triumphantly.In beholding such terrific and interestingspectacles, many were led to inquire into thecause of such superhuman resolution, and becameconverts and martyrs in their turn ; and itwill be found, in the accounts of those ancientpersecutions, that many Roman soldiers, andsometimes officers of high rank, were amongstthe earlier Christians who laid down their livesfor their religion. It was, indeed, natural thatthe invincible fortitude of those holy sufferers,fronting death with such noble intrepidity, shouldattract the admiration and sympathy of thegenerous and brave, whose pride it was to meetdeath undauntedly in a less terrific form ; andwe may easily imagine also, that a generous andelevated mind, under the immediate pressure ofsuch odious tyranny as some of the Roman382 PREFACE.emperors exercised on their senators and courtiers,would turn from this humiliating bondageto that promise of a Father's house in whichthere are many mansions, and turn to it withmost longing and earnest aspirations. The breveman, bred in the camp and the field, encompassedwith hardships and dangers, would belittleencumbered with learning or philosophy,therefore more open to conviction ; and whenreturned from the scenes of his distant warfare,would more indignantly submit to the capriciouswill of a voluptuous master. These considerationshave led me to the choice of my hero,and have warranted me in representing him as anoble Roman soldier; one whose mind is filledwith adoring awe and admiration of the sublime,but parental character of the Deity, whichis for the first time unfolded to him by the earlyteachers of Christianity; one whose heart isattracted by the beautiful purity, refinement, andbenignant tenderness, and by the ineffable generosityof him who visited earth as his commissionedSon, attracted powerfully, with thatardour of affectionate admiration which binds adevoted follower to his glorious chief.But though we may well suppose unlearnedsoldiers to be the most unprejudiced and ardentof the early Christian proselytes, we have goodreason to believe that the most enlightenedminds of those days might be strongly movedPREFACE. 383and attracted by the first view of Christianity inits pure, uncorrupted state. All their previousnotions of religion, as has been already said,whether drawn from a popular or philosophicalsource, were poor and heartless compared to this.Their ideas on the subject, which I have alreadyquoted, having passed through the thoughts andimagination of their greatest poet, could surelycontract no meanness nor frigidity there, butmust be considered as represented in the mostfavourable light which their received beliefcould possibly admit. We must place ourselvesin the real situation of those men, previous totheir knowledge of the sacred Scripture, and nottake it for granted that those elevated conceptionsof the Supreme Being and his paternalProvidence which modern deists have in fact,though unwilling to own it, received from theChristian revelation, belonged to them. It hasbeen observed by an author, whose name I oughtnot to have forgotten, that the ideas of the Deityexpressed in the writings of philosophers, subsequentlyto the Christian era, are more clearand sublime than those which are to be found inheathen writers of an earlier period. I thereforerepresent him also as a Roman, cultivated,contemplative, and refined.Martyrs of this rank and character were not,I own, mentioned amongst those belonging tothe first persecutions under Nero, but in those384 PREFACE.which followed, during the first and secondcentury of the Christian era, when the storieswhich had been propagated of the shockingsuperstitions and wickedness of the sect beganto lose their credit. But I conceive myselfwarranted to take this liberty, as the supposedrecentness of the promulgation of the Gospelgives (if I may so express it) a greater degreeof zest to the story, and by no means alters theprinciples and feelings which must have actuatedthe martyrs. The whole of this period wasstill one of pure Christianity unencumbered withmany perplexing and contradictory doctrineswhich followed, when churchmen had leisure tooverlay the sacred scriptures with a multitudeof explanatory dissertations, and with perverse,presumptuous ingenuity to explain the plainpassages by the obscure, instead of the obscureby the plain.In this representation of religious devotion inits early primitive state, it has been my desire tokeep clear from all fanatical excess which inafter-times too often expressed itself in thewildest incoherent rhapsodies ; the language ofa natural delirium, proceeding from a vain endeavourto protract, by forced excitement, theecstacy of a few short moments, and to makethat a continued state of the mind which wasintended, by its beneficent Creator, only for itsoccasional and transient joy. Of this we mayPREFACE. 385be well assured ; for if otherwise indulged, itwould have rendered men incapable of theduties of social life; those duties which theblessed founder of our religion did so constantlyand so earnestly inculcate. That I am too presumptuousin attempting to represent it at all, isa charge which, if it be brought against me, Iought to bear with meekness ; for when it firstoffered itself to my mind as the subject of adrama, I shrunk from it as a thing too sacred tobe displayed in such a form. But, in often consideringthe matter, this impression at last gaveway to a strong desire of showing the noblest ofall human emotions in a light in which it hasbut seldom been contemplated ; and I trust thatthrough the following pages, whatever defectsmay be found, and no doubt there are many,want of reverence will not be amongst thenumber.I would gladly pass over the lyrical part ofthe piece without remark, were it not that Ifear I may have offended the classical reader, byhaving put into the mouths of Roman soldiers ahymn in honour of their deities so homely andunpoetical. This too will more likely offend,after the beautiful and splendid effusions on thissubject which have been so much and justlyadmired in a recent drama. But I wished tomake them express what I conceived to be theactual feelings and notions of such men regard-vol.i. c c386 PREFACE.ing the objects of their worship, not the richdescriptive imaginations of a learned and poeticalhigh priest. Besides, had I possessed talentsrequisite for the successful imitation of suchclassical affluence, it would scarcely have accordedwith the general tenor of the piece andthe simplicity of the hymns of the Christians : Ishould therefore have injured the general effect,as well as the supposed faithfulness of the particularpassage, regarding its description of realcharacters. At least it appears so to me.I need scarcely observe to the reader, that thesubject of this piece is too sacred, and thereforeunfit, for the stage. I have endeavoured, however,to give it so much of dramatic effect as torouse his imagination in perusing it to a livelyrepresentation of the characters, action, andscenes, belonging to the story ; and this, if Ihave succeeded, will remove from it the dry nessof a mere dramatic poem. Had I considered itas fit for theatrical exhibition, the reasons thatwithhold me from publishing my other manuscriptplays, would have held good regardingthis.Before I take leave of my reader, I must bepermitted to say, that the following Drama hasbeen written for a long time, and read by a fewof my friends several years ago. When Mr.Milan's beautiful drama on a similar subjectwas published, I began to be afraid that, were IPREFACE. 387to keep it much longer in manuscript, someother poet, in an age so fertile in poetic genius,might offer to the public that which might approachstill nearer to the story of my piece, andgive it, when published, not only all its ownnative defects to contend with, but those alsoarising from the unavoidable flatness of an exhaustedsubject. I therefore determined topublish it as soon as other duties permitted me,and many have intervened to prevent the accomplishmentof my wish. In preparing it forthe press, I have felt some degree of scruple inretaining its original title of The Martyr but Icould not well give it any other. The public, Jhope, and Mr. Milan, I am certain, are sufficientlymy friends not to find fault with thiscircumstance, which has not arisen from presumption.c cPERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.NERO, Emperor of Rome.CORDENIUS MARO, Officer of the Imperial Guard.Orders, a Parthian Prince, visiting Rome.Suspicious, a Senator.SYLVIUS, a brave Centurion.Roman Pontiff.Christian Father or Bishop, Christian Brother, 8$c.A Page, in the family of Suspicious.Senators, Christians, Soldiers, fyc.WOMEN.PORTIA, Daughter of Suspicious.Christian Women.Scene, ROME.THE MARTYR.ACT I.SCENE I. A private Apartment in the houseO/^SULPICIUS.Enter Suspicious and Orders by opposite sides.Suspicious.So soon return' d ! I read not in thy faceAught to encourage or depress my wishes.How is it, noble friend ?Orders.Ev'n as it was ere 1 received my mission.Cordenius Maro is on public duty ;I have not seen him. When he knows your offer,His heart will bound with joy, like eaglet plumed,Whose outstretched pinions, wheeling round andround,Shape their first circles in the sunny air.Suspicious.And with good cause.Orders.Methinks I see him now !A face with blushes mantling to the brow,c c 3390 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Eyes with bright tears surcharged, and parted lipsQuiv'ring to utter joy which hath no words,Suspicious.His face, indeed, as I have heard thee say,Is like a wave which sun and shadow cross ; |Each thought makes there its momentary mark.Orders.And then his towering form, and vaulting step,As tenderness gives way to exultation !O! it had been a feast to look upon him ;And still shall be.Suspicious.Art thou so well convincedHe loves my little damsel ? She is fair,But seems to me too simple, gay, and thoughtless,For noble Maro. Heiress as she isTo all my wealth, had I suspected sooner,That he had smother* d wishes in his breastAs too presumptuous, or that she in secretPrefer* J d his silent homage to the praiseOf any other man, I had most franklyRemoved all hindrance to so fair a suit.For, in these changeling and degenerate days,I scarcely know a man of nobler worth.Orders.Thou scarcely know'st ! Say certainly thou dostnot.He is, to honest right, as simply trueAs shepherd child on desert pasture bred,Where falsehood and deceit have never been ;THE MARTYR : A DRAMA. 391And to maintain them, ardent, skilful, potent,As the shrewd leader of unruly tribes.A simple heart and subtle spirit join'dMake such an union as in Nero's courtMay pass for curious and unnatural.Suspicious.But is the public duty very urgentThat so untowardly delays our happiness ?Orders.The punishment of those poor Nazarenes,Who, in defiance of imperial power,To their forbidden faith and rites adhereWith obstinacy most astonishing.Suspicious.A stubborn contumacy unaccountable !Orders.There's sorcery in it, or some stronger power.But be it what it may, or good or ill,They look on death in its most dreadful form,As martial heroes on a wreath of triumph.The fires are kindled in the place of death,And bells toll dismally. The life of RomeIn one vast clust'ring mass hangs round the spot,And no one to his neighbour utters word,But in an alter'd voice, with breath restrain'd,Like those who speak at midnight near the dead.Cordenius heads the band that guards the pile ;So station'd, who could speak to him of pleasure?My words had come like sounds of evil omen,c c 4392 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.Suspicious.Cease ; here comes Portia, with a careless face :She knows not yet the happiness that waits her.Orders.Who brings she with her thus, as if compel!' c?By playful force ?Suspicious.'Tis her Numidia Page ; a cunning imp,Who must be woo'd to do the thing he's proud of.Enter PORTIA, dragging Syphon offer her,speaking as she enters.PORTIA.Come in, deceitful thing ! I know thee well ;With all thy sly affected bashfulness,Thou 'it bold enough to sing in Caesar's court,With the whole senate present. (To Orders.)Prince of Parthia,I knew not you were here ; but yet I guessThe song which this sly creature sings so well,Will please you also.Orders.How can it fail, fair Portia, so commended ?Suspicious.What is this boasted lay ?PORTIA.That tune, my father,Which you so oft have tried to recollect;THE MARTYR '. A DRAMA. 3Q3But link'd with other words, of new device,That please my fancy well. Come, sing it, boy !Suspicious.Nay, sing it, Syphax, be not so abash'd,If thou art really so. Begin, begin !But speak thy words distinctly as thou king's,That I may have their meaning perfectly.SONG.The storm is gath'ring far and wide,Yon mortal hero must abide.Power on earth, and power in air,Falchion's gleam and lightning's glare ;Arrows hurtling thro' the blast ;Stones from flaming meteor cast ;Floods from burthen'd skies are pouring,Mingled strife of battle roaring ;Nature's rage and Demon's ire,Belt him round with turmoil dire :Noble hero ! earthly wight !Brace thee bravely for the fight.And so, indeed, thou tak'st thy stand,Shield on arm and glaive in hand ;Breast encased in burnish'd steel,Helm on head, and pike on heel ;And, more than meets the outward eye,The soul's high temper'd panoply,Which every limb for action lightens,The form dilates, the visage brightens :Thus art thou, lofty, mortal wight !Full nobly harness'd for the fight.Orders.The picture of some very noble heroThese lines portray.394 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Suspicious.So it should seem ; one of the days of old.PORTIA.And why of olden days ? There liveth nowThe very man a man I mean to say, $There may be found amongst our Roman youth,One, who in form and feelings may compareWith him whose lofty virtues these few linesSo well describe.Orders.Thou mean'st the lofty Morbus.PORTIA.Out on the noisy braggart! Arms withoutHe hath, indeed, well burnish'd and well plumed,But the poor soul, within, is pluck'd and bare,Like any homely thing.Orders.Sertorius Galba then ?PORTIA.O, stranger still !For if he hath no lack of courage, certes,He hath much lack of grace. Sertorius Galba !Orders.Perhaps thou mean'st Cordenius Maro, lady.Thy cheeks grow scarlet at the very name,Indignant that I still should err so strangely.PORTIA.No, not indignant, for thou arrest not ;Nor do I blush, albeit thou think'st I do,To say, there is not of our Romans one,THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 395Whose martial form a truer image givesOf firm heroic courage.Suspicious.Cease, sweet Portia !He only laughs at thy simplicity.Orders.Simplicity seen through a harmless wile,Like to the infant urchin, half concealedBehind his smiling dam's transparent veil.The song is not a stranger to mine ear,Methinks I've heard it passing thro* those wilds,Whosegroves and caves, if rumour speak the truth,Are by the Nazarenes or Christians haunted.Suspicious.Let it no more be sung within my walls :A chaunt of their's to bring on pestilence !Sing it no more. What sounds are those I hear ?Orders.The dismal death-drum and the crowd without.They are this instant leading past your doorThose wretched Christians to their dreadful doom.Suspicious.We'll go and see them pass.[Exeunt hastily, Suspicious, Orders.PORTIA. (Stopping her ears.)I cannot look on them, nor hear the sound.I'll to my chamber.PAGE.May not I, I pray,Look on them as they pass ?396 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.PORTIA.No ; go not, child :'Twill frighten thee ; it is a horrid sight.PAGE.Yet, an it please you, lady, let me go. ^PORTIA.I say it is a horrid, piteous sight,Thou wilt be frighten' d at it.PAGE.Nay, be it e'er so piteous or so horrid,I have a longing, strong desire to see it.PORTIA.Go then ; there is in this no affectation :There's all the hardened cruelty of manLodged in that tiny form, child as thou art.[Exeunt, severally.SCENE II.An Open Square, with Buildings.Enter CORDENIUS MARO, at the head of his Soldiers,who draw up on either Side ; then entersa long Procession of public Functionaries, <c.conducting Martyrs to the Place of Execution,who, as they pass on, sing together in unison :one more noble than the others walking First.SONG.A long farewell to sin and sorrow,To beam of day and evening shade ;High in glory breaks our morrow,With light that cannot fade.THE MARTYR : A DRAMA. 397We leave the hated and the hating,Existence sad in toil and strife ;The great, the good, the brave are waitingTo hail our opening life.Earth's faded sounds our ears forsaking,A moment's silence death shall be ;Then to heaven's jubilee awaking,Faith ends in victory.[Exeunt Martyrs, c. $c. CORDENIUS withJus Officers and Soldiers still remaining ;the Officers on the front, and CORDENIUSapart from them in a thoughtful posture.FIRST OFFICER.Brave Varus marches boldly at the headOf that deluded band.SECOND OFFICER.Are these the men who hateful orgies holdIn dens and deserts, courting, with enchantments,The intercourse of demons ?THIRD OFFICER.Ay, with ritesCruel and wild. To crucify a babe,And, while it yet hangs shrieking on the rood,Fall down and worship it ! device abominable !FIRST OFFICER.Dost thou believe it ?THIRD OFFICER.I can believe or this or any thingOf the possessed and mad.398 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.FIRST OFFICER.What memory, thickest thou, possesses Varus ?SECOND OFFICER.That is well urged. (To the others Is he amaniac ? t*Alas, that I should see so brave a soldierThus, as a malefactor, led to death !FIRST OFFICER.Viewing his keen enliven' d countenanceAnd stately step, one should have rather guess'dHe led victorious soldiers to the charge :And they, indeed, appeared to follow himWith noble confidence.THIRD OFFICER.'Tis all vain seeming.He is a man, who makes a show of valourTo which his deeds have born slight testimony.CORDENIUS, (advancing indignantlyThou lies ; a better and a braver soldierNe'er fronted foe, or closed in bloody strife.[Turning away angrily to the back-ground.FIRST OFFICER.Our chief, methinks, is in a fretful mood,Which is not usual with him.SECOND OFFICER.He did not seem to listen to our words,Yet they have moved him keenly.But see, he gives the signal to proceed ;THE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 399We must advance, and with our closing ranksThe fatal pile encircle.\ Exeunt in order, whilst a chorus of Martyrsis heard at a distance.SCENE III.An Apartment in a Private House.Enter two CHRISTIAN WOMEN, by opposite sides.FIRST WOMAN.Hast thou heard any thing ?SECOND WOMAN.Nought, save the murmur of the multitude,Sinking at times to deep and awful silence,From which again a sudden burst will riseLike mingled exclamations, as of horrorOr admiration. In these neighbouring streetsI have not met a single citizen,The town appearing uninhabited.But wherefore art thou here ? Thou should'sthave stayedWith the unhappy mother of poor Callus.FIRST WOMAN.She sent me hither in her agonyOf fear and fearful hope.400 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.SECOND WOMAN.Ha ! does she hope deliverance from death ?FIRST WOMAN.O no ! thou wrongs her, friend ; it is not that :Deliverance is her fear, and death her hope, t*A second time she bears a mother's throesFor her young stripling, whose exalted birthTo endless life is at this fearful crisis,Or earned or lost. May heaven forfend the last !He is a timid youth, and soft of nature :God grant him strength to bear that fearfulproof !SECOND WOMAN.Here comes our reverend father.Enter a CHRISTIAN FATHER.What tidings dost thou bring ? are they inbliss ?FATHER.Yes, daughter, as I trust, they are ere thisIn high immortal bliss. Callus aloneFIRST WOMAN.He hath apostatised ! O woe is me !O woe is me for his most wretched mother !FATHER.Apostatised ! No ; stripling as he is,His fortitude, where all were braced and brave,Shone paramount.THE MARTYR '. A DRAMA. 401For his soft downy cheek and slender formMade them conceive they might subdue hisfirmness :Therefore he was reserved till noble VarusAnd his compeers had in the flames expired.Then did they court and tempt him with fail-promiseOf all that earthly pleasure or ambitionCan offer, to deny his holy faith.But he, who seem'd before so meek and timid,Now suddenly embued with holy grace,Like the transition of some watery cloudIn passing o'er the moon's refulgent disc,Glowed with new life ; and from his fervidtongueWords of most firm indignant constancyPour'd eloquently forth ; then to the pileSprung he as lightly as a dauntless warriorScaling the breach of honour ; or, alas !As I have seen him midst his boyish mates,Vaulting aloft for very love of motion.FIRST WOMAN.High heaven be prais'd for this ! Thine eyesbeheld it ?FATHER.I saw it not : the friend who witness'd it,Left him yet living midst devouring flame ;Therefore I spoke of Callus doubtfully,If he as yet belong'd to earth or heaven.They cover their faces and remain silent.VOL, I. D D402 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.Enter a CHRISTIAN BROTHER.BROTHER.Lift up your heads, my sisters I let your voicesIn grateful thanks be raise ! Those ye lament,Have earthly pangs for heavenly joy exchanged.The manly Varus and the youthful Cselus,The lion and the dove, yoke-fellows linked,Have equal bliss and equal honour gained.FIRST WOMAN.And prais'd be God, who makes the weakeststrong !1*11 to his mother with the blessed tidings.exit.FATHER.Let us retire and pray. How soon our livesMay have like ending, God alone doth know !O 1 may like grace support us in our need ![Exeunt.SCENE IV.An open Space in front of a Temple.Enter CORDENIUS, as returned froth Executionwith his Soldiers, who, upon a signal from him,disperse and leave him alone. He walks a Jewpaces slowly, then stops and continues for ashort time in a thoughtful posture.CORDENIUS.There is some power in this, or good or ill,THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 403Surpassing nature. When the soul is rousedTo desp'rate sacrifice, 'tis ardent passion,Or high exalted virtue that excites it.Can loathsome memory in dauntless bearingOutdo the motives of the lofty brave ?It cannot be ! There is some power in thisMocking all thought incomprehensible.[Remains for a moment silent and thoughtful,while SYLVIUS enters behind him unperceived.Delusion ! ay, 'tis said the cheated sightWill see unreal things ; the cheated earList to sweet sounds that are not ; even thereasonMaintain conclusions wild and inconsistent.We hear of this : the weak maybe deluded;But is the learn'd, th' enlighten'd noble VarusThe victim of delusion ? Can it be ?I'll not believe it.SYLVIUS advancing to him).No, believe it not.CORDENIUS (starting.Ha! one so near me !I have seen thy face before ; but where? whoart thou ?SYLVIUS.Ev'n that Centurion of the Seventh Legion,Who, with Cordenius Maro, at the siegeOf Fort Volundum *, mounted first the breach ;A strong fort in Armenia, taken by Corbulo in Nero'sreign.D D 2404 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.And kept the clust'ring enemy in check,Till our encouraged Romans followed us.CORDENIUS.My old companion then, the valiant Sylvius.Thought done hard service since I saw thee last :Thy countenance is mark'd with graver linesThan in those greener days : I knew thee not.Where goes thou now? I'll bear thee company.SYLVIUS.I thank thee : yet thou may'st not go with me.The way that I am wending suits not thee,Though suiting well the noble and the brave.It were not well in fiery times like these,.To tempt thy generous mind.CORDENIUS.What dost thou mean ?SYLVIUS (after looking cautiously round to seethat nobody is near].Did I not hear thee commune with thyselfOf that most blessed Martyr gone to rest,Varus Novella ?CORDENIUS.How blessed ? My unsettled thoughts were busyWith things mysterious; with those magic powersThat work the mind to darkness and destruction ;With the sad end of the deluded Varus.SYLVIUS.Not so, not so 1 The wisest prince on earth,With treasured wealth and armies at command,THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 405Ne'er earn'd withal such lofty exaltationAs Varus now enjoys.CORDENIUS.Thy words amaze me, friend ; what is theirmeaning ?SYLVIUS.They cannot be explain'd with hasty speechIn such a place. If thou would'st really know-andmay such lightCORDENIUS.Why dost thou check thy words,And look so much disturb'd, like one in doubt?SYLVIUS.What am I doing ! Zeal, perhaps, betrays me.Yet, wherefore hide salvation from a manWho is so worthy of it?CORDENIUS.Why art thou agitated thus? What moves thee ?SYLVIUS.And would'st thou really know it ?CORDENIUS.Dost thou doubt me?I have an earnest, most intense desire.SYLVIUS.Sent to thy heart, brave Roman, by a PowerWhich I may not resist. [Bowing his head.But go not with me now in open day.At fall of eve I'll meet thee in the suburb,Close to the pleasure-garden of Sulpicius jWhere in a bushy crevice of the rockD D 3406 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.There is an entry to the catacombs,Known but to few.CORDENIUS.Ha ! to the catacombs !SYLVIUS.A dismal place, I own, but heed not that ;For there thou'lt learn what, to thy ardent mind,Will make this world but as a thorny passTo regions of delight ; man's natural life,With all its varied turmoil of ambition,But as the training of a wayward childTo manly excellence ; yea, death itselfBut as a painful birth to life unending.The word eternal has not to thine ears,As yet, its awful, ample sense conveyed.CORDENIUS.Something possesses thee.SYLVIUS.Yes, noble Maro ;But it is something which can ne'er possessA mind that is not virtuous. Let us part;It is expedient now. All good be with thee!CORDENIUS.And good be with thee, also, valiant soldier !SYLVIUS (returning as he is about to go out.At close of day, and near the pleasure-garden,The garden of Sulpitius.CORDENIUS.I know the spot, and will not fail to meet thee.[Exeunt.THE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 4-07ACT II.SCENE I. The Catacombs, showing long low-roofedaisles, in different directions, supportedby thick pillars of the rough unhewn rock, withrude tombs and heaps of human bones, and thewalls in many places lined with human skulls.Enter CORDENIUS MARO, speaking to a ChristianFATHER, on whose arm he leans, and followedby SYLVIUS.CORDENIUS.One day and two bless'd nights, spent in acquiringYour heavenly lore, so powerful and sublime,Oh! what an altered creature they have made me!FATHER.Yes, gentle son, I trust that thou art altered.CORDENIUS.I am, methinks, like one who, with bent backAnd downward gaze if such a one might be-hathonly known the boundless azure skyBy the strait circle of reflected beauty,Seen in the watery gleam of some deep pit ;Till of a sudden roused, he stands erect,And wondering looks aloft and all aroundOn the bright sunny firmament : like one(Granting again that such a one mightD D 4408 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.Who hath but seen the element of fireOn household hearth or woodman's smoky pile,Arid looks at once, midst sounding thunder-peals,On Jove's magnificence of lightning. Pardon,I pray you pardon me ! I mean his lightning,Who is the Jove of Jove, the great Jehovah.FATHER (smiling).Be not disturb'd, my son ; the lips will utter,From lengthened habit, what the mind rejects.CORDENIUS.These blessed hours which I have pass'd with youHave to my intellectual being givenNew feelings and expansion, like to thatWhich once I felt, on viewing by degreesThe wide development of nature's amplitude.FATHER.And how was that, my son ?CORDENIUS.I well remember it ; even at this momentImagination sees it all again.'Twas on a lofty mountain of Armenia,O'er which I led by night my martial cohort,To shun the fierce heat of a summer's day.Close round us hung, the vapours of the nightHad form'd a woody curtain, dim and pale,Through which the waning moon did faintly markIts slender crescent.THE MARTYR : A DRAMA. 409FATHER.Ay, the waned moon through midnight vapoursseen,Fit emblem is of that retrenching light,Dubious and dim, which to the earliest PatriarchsWas at the first vouchsafed ; a moral guide,Soon clouded and obscured to their descendants,Who peopled far and wide, in scatter'd tribes,The fertile earth. But this is interruption.Proceed, my son.CORDENIUS.Well, on the lofty summitWe halted, and the day's returning lightOn this exalted station found us. ThenOur brighten' d curtain, wearing into shredsAnd rifted masses, through its opening gaveGlimpse after glimpse of slow revealed beauty,Which held th* arrested senses magic bound,In the intensity of charm'd attention.FATHER.From such an eminence, the op'ning mistWould to the eye reveal most beauteous visions.CORDENIUS.First, far beneath us, woody peaks appear'dAnd knolls with cedars crested ; then, beyond,And lower still, the herdsmen's cluster'd dwellings,410 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.With pasture slopes, and flocks just visible ;Then, further still, soft wavy wastes of forest,In all the varied tints of sylvan verdure,Descending to the plain; then, wide and boundless,The plain itself with towns and cultured tracts,And its fair river gleaming in the light,With all its sweepy windings, seen and lost,And seen again, till through the pale grey tintOf distant space, it seem'd a loosen' d cestusFrom virgin's tunic blown ; and still beyond,The earth's extended vastness from the sightWore like the boundless ocean.My heart beat rapidly at the fair sightThis ample earth, man's natural habitation.But now, when to my mental eye reveal' d,His moral destiny, so grand and noble,Lies stretching on even to immensity,It overwhelms me with a flood of thoughts,Of happy thoughts.FATHER.Thanks be to God that thou dost feel it so !CORDENIUS.I am most thankful for the words of powerWhich from thy gifted lips and sacred scriptureI have received. What feelings they have raised !O what a range of thought given to the mind !And to the soul what loftiness of hope !That future dreamy state of faint existenceWhich poets have described and sages taught,THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 411In which the brave and virtuous pined and droop'dIn useless indolence, changed for a stateOf social love, and joy, and active bliss,A state of brotherhood, a state of virtue,So grand, so purified ; O it is excellent !My soul is roused within me at the sound,Like some poor slave, who from a dungeon issuesTo range with free-born men his native land.FATHER.Thou may'st, indeed, my son, redeem'd fromthraldom,Become the high compeer of blessed spirits.CORDENIUS.The high compeer of such! These gushingtears,Nature's mysterious tears, will have their way.FATHER.To give thy heart relief.CORDENIUS.And yet mysterious. Why do we weepAt contemplation of exalted virtue ?Perhaps in token of the fallen stateIn which we are, as thrilling sympathyStrangely acknowledges some sight and sound,Connected with a dear and distant home,Albeit the mem'ry hath that link forgotten :A kind of latent sense of what we were,Or might have been ; a deep mysterious token.THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.FATHER.Perhaps thought right, my son ; for even thewickedWill sometimes weep at lofty, generous deeds.Some broken traces of our noble natureWere yet preserved ; therefore our great CreatorStill loved his work, and thought it worth redemption.And therefore his bless'd Son, our generousMaster,Did, as the elder brother of that race,Whose form he took, lay down his life to save us.But I have read thee, in our sacred book,His gentle words of love.CORDENIUS.Thou hast! thou hast! they're stirring my heart:Each fibre of my body thrills in answerTo the high call.FATHER.The Spirit of Power, my son, is dealing with thee.CORDENIUS (after a pause*One thing amazes me, yet it is excellent.FATHER.And what amazes thee ? Unbosom freelyWhat passes in thy mind.CORDENIUS.That this religion which dilates our thoughtsOf God Supreme to an infinityTHE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Of awful greatness, yet connects us with him,As children, loved and cherish'd ;Adoring awe with tenderness united.SYLVIUS (eagerly.Ay, brave Cordenius, that same thought moremovedMy rude unletter'd mind than all the rest.I struck my hand against my soldier's mail,And cried, " This faith is worthy of a man 1"CORDENIUS. ' I*Our best philosophers have raised their thoughtsTo one great universal Lord of all,Lord even of Jove himself and all the gods \But who durst feel for that high, distant Essence,A warmer sentiment than deep submission ?But now, adoring love and grateful confidenceCling to th* infinity of power and goodness,As the repentant child turns to his sireWith yearning looks, that say, " Am I notthine?"I am too bold : I should be humbled firstIn penitence and sorrow, for the stainsOf many a hateful vice and secret passion.FATHER.Check not the generous tenour of thy thoughts :O check it not ! Love leads to penitence,And is the noblest, surest path ; whilst fearIs dark and devious. To thy home return,And let thy mind well weigh what thou hast heard.414 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.If then thou feel'st within thee faith assured ;That faith, which may, ev'n through devouringflames,Its passage hold to heaven, baptismal ritesShall give thee entrance to a purer life,Receive thee, as thy Saviour's valiant soldier,For his high warfare arm'd.CORDENIUS.I am resolved, and feel that in my heartThere lives that faith ; baptize me ere we part.FATHER.So be it then. But yet that holy riteMust be deferr'd j for, lo ! our brethren come,Bearing the ashes of our honour'd saints,Which must, with hymns of honour, be received.Enter CHRISTIANS, seen advancing slowly alongone of the aisles, and bearing a large veiledurn, which they set down near the front.They then lift off the veil and range themselvesround it, while one sings and the rest join inthe Chorus at the end of each short verse.SONG.Departed brothers, generous brave,Who for the faith have died,Nor its pure source denied,Your bodies from devouring flames to save,THE MARTYR : A DRAMA. 415CHORUS.Honour on earth, and bliss in heaven,Be to your saintly valour given IAnd we, who, left behind, pursueA pilgrim's weary wayTo realms of glorious day,Shall rouse our fainting souls with thoughts of you.Honour on earth, &c.Your ashes, mingled with the dust,Shall yet be forms more fairThan e'er breathed vital air,When earth again gives up her precious trust.Honour on earth, &c.The trump of angels shall proclaim,With tones far sent and sweet,Which countless hosts repeat,The generous martyr's never-fading name.Honour on earth, and bliss in heaven,Be to your saintly valour given !CORDENIUS (to Father).And ye believe those, who a few hours sinceWere clothed in flesh and blood, and here, beforeus,Lie thus, ev'n to a few dry ashes changed,Are now exalted spirits, holding lifeWith blessed powers, and agencies, and all416 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.Who have on earth a virtuous part fulfilled ?The dear redeem' d of Godlike love, againTo their primeval destiny restored ?It is a generous, powerful, noble faith.SYLVIUS.Did I not tell thee, as we pass'd along,It well became a Roman and a soldier ?FATHER.Nay, worthy Sylvius, somewhat more of meeknessAnd less of martial ardour were becomingIn those whose humble Lord stretch' d forth hishand,His saving hand, to ev'n the meanest slaveWho bends beneath an earthly master's rod.This faith is meet for all of human kind.CORDENIUS.Forgive him, father : see, he stands reproved ;His heart is meek, though ardent ;It is, indeed, a faith for all mankind.FATHER.We feel it such, my son, press'd as we are ;On every side beset with threatening terrors.Look on these ghastly walls, these shapelesspillars,These heaps of human bones, this court ofdeath ;Ev'n here, as in a temple, we adoreTHE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 417The Lord of life, and sing our song of hope,That death has lost his sting, the grave histriumph.CORDENIUS.O make me then the partner of your hopes !(Taking the hand of SYLVIUS, and then ofseveral other CHRISTIANS.)Brave men ! high destined souls ! immortalbeings !The blessed faith and sense of what we areComes on my heart, like streams of beamy lightPour'd from some opening cloud. O to conceiveWhat lies beyond the dim, dividing veilOf regions bright, of blest and glorious being !FATHER.Ay, when it is withdrawn, we shall beholdWhat heart hath ne'er conceived, nor tonguecould utter.CORDENIUS.When but a boy, I've gazed upon the sky,With all its sparks of light, as a grand copeFor the benighted world. But now my fancyWill greet each twinkling star, as the bright lampOf some fair angel on his guardian watch.And think ye not, that from their lofty stationsOur future glorious home, our Father's house,May lie within the vast and boundless kenOf such seraphic powers ?VOL. I. E E418 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.FATHER.Thy fancy soars on wide and buoyant wings ;Speak on, my son, I would not check thy ardour.CORDENIUS.This solid earth is press'd beneath our feet,But as a step from which to take our flight ;What boots it then, if rough or smooth it be,Serving its end ? Come, noble Sylvius !We've been companions in the broil of battle,Now be we fellow-soldiers in that warfareWhich best becomes the brave.SYLVIUS.Cordenius Maro, we shall be companionsWhen this wide earth with all its fields of bloodWhere war hath raged, and all its towers ofstrengthWhich have regarded been with iron hosts,Are shrunk to nothing, and the flaming sunIs in his course extinguished.CORDENIUS.Come, lead me, father, to the holy fount,If I in humble penitence may beFrom worldly vileness clear'd.FATHER.I gladly will, my son. The Spirit of GraceIs dealing with thy spirit : be received,A ransom* d penitent, to the high fellowshipOf all the good and bless'd in earth and heaven !THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 419Enter a CONVERT.Whence comest thou, Fearon ? Why wert thoupreventedFrom joining in our last respectful homageTo those, who have so nobly for the truthLaid down their lives ?CONVERT.I have been watching near the grated dungeonWhere Ethocles, the Grecian, is immured.FATHER,Thou say'st not so ! A heavier loss than this,If they have seiz'd on him, the righteous causeCould not have suffered. Art thou sure of it?We had not heard of his return from Syria.CONVERT.It is too true : he landed ten days sinceOn the Brundusian coast, and, as he enter* dThe gates of Rome, was seized and dragg'd toprison.FATHER.And we in utter ignorance of this !CONVERT.He traveled late and unaccompanied,So this was done at night-fall and conceal'd.But see his writing given me by a guard,Who has for pity's sake betray'd his trust :It is address'd to thee. (Giving him a papersE E 2420 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.FATHER (after reading it).Alas, alas ! it is a brief accountOf his successful labours in the East :For with his excellent gifts of eloquence,Learning and prudence, he has made moreconvertsThan all our zealous brotherhood besides.What can we do ? He will be sacrificed :The church in him must bleed, if God so wills.It is a dreadful blow.CORDENIUS (to the CONVERT).I pray thee, in what prison is he kept ?CONVERT.In Scylla's tower, that dwelling of despair.CORDENIUS.Guarded by Romans ?CONVERT.Yes ; and strongly guarded.CORDENIUS.Yet, he shall be released.FATHER (to CORDENIUS).Beware, my son, of rash, imprudent zeal :The truth hath suffer'd much from this ; beware :Risk not thyself: thy life is also precious.THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.My whole of life is precious; but this shred,This earthly portion of it, what is that,But as it is employ* d in holy acts ?Am I Christ's soldier at a poorer rateThan I have served an earthly master ? No ;I feel within my glowing breast a powerWhich says I am commission'd for this service.Give me thy blessing thy baptismal blessing,And then God's spirit guide me ! Serving God,I will not count the cost but to discharge it.FATHER.His will direct thee then, my gen'rous son !His blessing be upon thee ! Lead him, Sylvius,To the blest fount, where from his former sinsHe shall by heavenly grace be purified.exeunt.SCENE II.The Garden ofSulpidus.Enter Suspicious and PORTIA, with Flowers inher hand.PORTIA.Was it not well to rise with early mornAnd pay my homage to sweet Flora? NeverWere flowers by mid-day cull'd so fair, sofragrant,With blending streaky tints, so fresh and bright.E E 3THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.See ; twinkling dew-drops lurk in every bell,And on the fibred leaves stray far apart,Like little rounded gems of silver sheen,Whilst curling tendrils grasp with vigorous holdThe stem that bears them ! All looks young andfresh.The very spider through his circled cageOf wiry woof, amongst the buds suspended,Scarce seems a hotly thing, but like the smallImprison* d bird of some capricious nymph.Is it not so, my father ?Suspicious.Yes, morn and youth and freshness sweetly join,And are the emblems of dear changeful days.By night those beauteous thingsPORTIA.And what of night ?Why do you check your words? You are not sad ?Suspicious.No, Portia ; only angry with myselfFor crossing thy gay stream of youthful thoughtsWith those of sullen age. Away with them !What if those bright-leaved flowers, so soft andsilken,Are gathered into dank and wrinkled foldsWhen evening chills them, or upon the earthWith broken stems and buds torn and dispers'd,Lie prostrate, of fair form and fragrance reftWhen midnight winds pass o'er them ; be it so !THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.All things but have their term.In truth, my child, I am glad that I indulgedtheeBy coming forth at such an early hourTo pay thy worship to so sweet a goddess,Upon her yearly feast.PORTIA.I thank you, father ! On her feast, 'tis said,That she, from mortal eye concealed, vouchsafesHer presence in such sweet and flowery spots :And where due offerings on her shrine are laid,Blesses all seeds and shoots, and things of promise.Suspicious.How many places in one little dayShe needs must visit then !PORTIA.But she moves swift as thought. The hastyzephyr,That stirr'd each slender leaf, now as we enter'd,And made a sudden sound, by stillness follow'd,Might be the rustling of her passing robe.Suspicious.A pleasing fancy, Portia, for the moment,Yet wild as pleasing.PORTIA.Wherefore call it wild ?Full many a time I've listen'd when aloneE E 4THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.In such fair spots as this, and thought I heardSweet mingled voices uttering varied tonesOf question and reply, pass on the wind,And heard soft steps upon the ground ; and thenThe notion of bright Venus or Diana,Or goddess-nymphs, would come so vividlyInto my mind, that I am almost certainTheir radiant forms were near me, tho' conceal' dBy subtle drapery of the ambient air.And oh, how I have long'd to look upon them !An ardent strange desire, tho' mix'd with fear.Nay, do not smile, my father: such fair sightsWere seen were often seen in ancient days ;The poets tell us so.But look, the Indian roses I have foster' dAre in full bloom ; and I must gather them.[Exit, eagerly.Suspicious (alone.Go, gentle creature, thou art careless yet :Ah ! couldst thou so remain, and still with meBe as in years gone by ! It may not be ;Nor should I wish it: all things have theirseason :She may not now remain an old man's treasure,With all her woman's beauty grown to blossom.Enter Orders.The Parthian prince at such an early hour ?THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 425Orders.And who considers hours, whose heart is bentOn what concerns a lover and a friend ?Where is thy daughter ?Suspicious.Within yon flowery thicket, blythe and careless ;For tho' she loves, 'tis with sweet, maiden fancy,Which, not impatient, looks in cheering hopeTo future years.Orders.Ay, 'tis a sheltered passion,A cradled love, by admiration foster' d :A showy, toward nurse for babe so bashful.Thus in the shell athwart whose snowy liningEach changeful tint of the bright rainbow plays,A little pearl is found in secret valueSurpassing all the rest.Suspicious.But mayest thou nothingOf what I wish to hear ? What of Cordenius ?Orders.By my good war-bow and its barbed shafts !By the best war-horse archer e'er bestrode !I'm still in ignorance ; I have not seen him*Suspicious.Thou hast not seen him I this is very strange.426 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.Orders.So it indeed appears. My wayward friendHas from his home been absent. Yesterday,There and elsewhere I sought, but found him not.This morning by the dawn again I sought him,Thinking to find him surely and alone ;But his domestics, much amazed, have told me,He is not yet returned.Suspicious.Hush ! through yon thicket I perceive a man.Orders.Some thief or spy.Suspicious.Let us withdraw awhile,And mark his motions ; he observes us not.Enter CORDENIUS from a Thicket in the background.CORDENIUS (after looking round him with delight).Sweet light of day, fair sky, and verdant earth,Enrich* d with every beauteous herb and flower,And stately trees, that spread their boughs liketentsFor shade and shelter, how I hail ye now !Ye are His works, who made such fair abodesFor happy innocence, yet, in the wreckOf foul perversion, has not cast us off.(Stooping to look at the flowers.)THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Ye little painted things, whose varied huesCharm, ev'n to wonderment ; that mighty handWhich dyes the mountain's peak with rosy tintsSent from the rising sun, and to the barbedDestructive lightning gives its ruddy gleam,Grand and terrific, thus adorns even you !There is a father's full unstinted loveDisplay'd o'er all, and thus on all I gazeWith the keen thrill of new waked ecstasy.What voice is that so near me and so sweet ?PORTIA without, singing some notes of prelude,and then a Song.SONG.The lady in her early bowerIs blest as bee in morning flower;The lady's eye is flashing bright,Like water in the morning light ;The lady's song is sweet and loud,Like skylark o'er the morning cloud ;The lady's smiles are smiles that passLike morning's breath o'er wavy grass.She thinks of one, whose harness'd carIn triumph comes from distant war ;She thinks of one, whose martial stateWill darken Rome's imperial gate ;She thinks of one, with laurel crown'd,Who shall with sweeter wreaths be bound.Voice, eye, and smiles, in mingled play,The lady's happy thoughts betray.428 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.Her voice indeed, and this my fav'rite song !It is that gentle creature, my sweet Portia.I call her mine, because she is the imageWhich hath possessed my fancy. Such vainthoughtsMust now give place. I will not linger here.This is the garden of Sulpicius ;How have I miss'd my path ? She sings again.[Sings without, as before.She wanders fitfully from lay to lay,But all of them some air that I have prais'dIn happy hours gone by.SONG.The kind heart speaks with words so kindly sweet,That kindred hearts the catching tones repeat ;And love, therewith, his soft sigh gently blending,Makes pleasing harmony. Thus softly sendingIts passing cheer across the stilly main,Whilst in the sounding water dips the oarAnd glad response bursts from the nearing shore,Comes to our ears the home-bound seamen's strain,Who from the lofty deck hail their own land again.CORDENIUS.O gentle, sweet, and cheerful ! form'd to beWhatever my heart could prize of treasured love !Dear as thou art, I will not linger here.THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 429Re-enter Suspicious and Orders, breaking outupon him, and Orders catching hold of hisrobe as he is going off.Orders.Ha ! noble Maro, to a coward turn'd,Shunning a spot of danger !Suspicious.Stay, Cordenius.The fullest foe thou shalt contend with here,Is her thou call'st so gentle. As for me,I do not offer thee this hand more freelyThan I will grant all that may make thee happy,If Portia has that power.CORDENIUS.And dost thou mean, in very earnest mean,That thou wilt give me Portia thy dear Portia?My fancy catches wildly at thy words.Suspicious.And truly too, Cordenius. She is thine,If thou wilt promise me to love her truly.CORDENIUS (eagerly clasping the knees, and thenkissing the hands, of Suspicious).Thanks, thanks! thanks from my swoln, o'erflowingheart,430 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.Which has no words. Friend, father, Portia'sfather!The thought creates in me such sudden joy,I am bewilder'd with it.Suspicious.Calm thy spirits.Thou should'st in meeter form have known itsooner,Had not the execution of those Christians(Pests of the earth, whom on one burning pile,With all their kind, I would most gladly punish,)Till now prevented me. Thy friend, OrdersThou west him thanks pled for thee powerfully,And had my leave. But dost thou listen tome?Thy face wears many colours, and big dropsBurst from thy brow, whilst thy contracted lipsQuiver, like one in pain.Orders.What sudden illness racks thee ?CORDENIUS.I may not tell you now : let me depart.Suspicious (holding him).Thou art my promised son ; I have a rightTo know whate'er concerns thee, pain or pleasure.THE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 431CORDENIUS.And so thou hast, and I may not deceive thee.Take, take, Sulpicius. O such with'ring words !The sinking, sick'ning heart and parched mouth !I cannot utter them.Suspicious.Why in this agony of perturbation ?Nay, strive not now to speak.CORDENIUS.I must, I must!Take back thy proffer 5 d gift ; all earth couldgive ;That which it cannot give I must retain.Suspicious.What words were these ? If it were possible,I could believe thee touch* d with sorcery,The cursed art of those vile Nazarenes.Where hast thou past the night ? their haunts arenear.Orders.Nay, nay ; repress thine anger ; noble MaroMay not be questioned thus.Suspicious.He may, and shall. And yet I will not urgehim,If he, with hand press' d on his breast, will say,That he detests those hateful Nazarenes.432 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.No ; though my life, and what is dearer far,My Portia's love, depended on the words,I would not, and I durst not utter them.Suspicious.I see it well : thou art ensnared and blindedBy their enchantments. Demoniac powerWill drag thee to thy ruin. Cast it off;Defy it. Say thou wilt forbear all intercourseWith this detested sect. Art thou a madman ?CORDENIUS.If I am mad, that which possesses meOutvalues all philosophers e'er taught,Or poets e'er imagined. Listen to me.Call ye these Christians vile, because theysufferAll nature shrinks from, rather than denyWhat seems to them the truth ? Call ye themsorcerers,Because their words impart such high conceptionsOf power creative and parental love,In one great Being join'd, as makes the heartBound with ennobling thoughts ? Call ye themcurstWho daily live in steady strong assuranceOf endless blessedness ? O, listen to me !THE MARTYR I A drama.Re-enter PORTIA, bursting from a Thicketclose to them.PORTIA.O, listen to him, father !Suspicious.Let go my robe, fond creature ! Listen to him !The song of syrens were less fatal. CharmsOf dire delusion, luring on to ruin,Are mingled with the words that speak their faith ;They, who once hear them, flutter rounddestructionWith giddy fascination, like the moth,Which, shorn of half its form, all scorch'd andshrivelled,Still to the torch returns. I will not listen ;No, Portia, nor shalt thou.PORTIA.O, say not soFor if you listen to him, you may save him,And win him from his errors.Suspicious.Vain hope ! vain hope ! What is man's naturalreasonOpposed to demon subtlety ? Cordenius !Cordenius Maro! I adjure thee, go!Leave me ; why would'st thou pull destructionon me?On one who loved thee so, that tho* possess* dVOL. i. F F434 THE MARTYR *. A DRAMA.Of but one precious pearl, most dearly prized,Prized more than life, yet would have given it tothee.I needs must weep : ev'n for thyself I weep.CORDENIUS.Weep not, my kind Sulpicius ! I will leave thee,Albeit the pearl thou would'st bestow upon meIs, in my estimation, dearer farThan life, or power, or fame, or earthly thing.When these fierce times are past, thou wilt,perhaps,Think of me with regard, but not with pity,How fell soe'er my earthly end hath been,For I shall then be blest. And thou, dear Portia,Wilt thou remember me ? That thought, alas !Dissolves my soul in weakness.O, to be spared, if it were possible,This stroke of agony ! Is it not possible,That I might yet Almighty God forgive me !Weak thoughts will lurk in the devoted heart,But not be cherish* d there. I may not offerAught short of all to thee.Farewell, farewell ! sweet Portia, fare thee well ![Orders catches hold of him to preventhis going.Retain me not : I am a Parthian now.My strength is in retreat.exit.THE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 435PORTIA.That noble mind ! and must it then be ruiri'd?O save him, save him, father ! Brave Orders,Wilt thou not save thy friend, the noble Maro ?Orders.We will, sweet maid, if it be possible.We'll keep his faith a secret in our breasts;And he may yet, if not by circumstancesProvok'd to speak, conceal it from the world.PORTIA.And you, my father ?Suspicious.I will not betray him.PORTIA.Then all may yet be well ; for our great gods,Whom Caesar and his subject-nations worship,Will not abandon Rome's best, bravest soldierTo power demoniac. That can never be,If they indeed regard us.Orders.Were he in Parthia, our great god, the sun,Or rather he who in that star resides,Would not permit his power to be so thwarted,For all the memory that e'er exertedIts baleful influence on wretched men.Beshrew me! for a thought gleams thro' my brainIt is this God, perhaps, with some new name.Which these bewilder'd Nazarenes adore,F F 2436 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.Suspicious.With impious rites, most strange arid horrible.Orders.If he, my friend, in impious rites hath join'd,Demons, indeed, have o'er the soul of manA power to change its nature. Ay, Sulpicius ;And thou and I may, ere a day shall pass,Be very Nazarenes. We are in ignorance ;We shoot our arrow in the dark, and cry,It is to wound a foe." Come, gentle Portia ;Be not so sad ; the man thou lowest is virtuous,And brave, and loves thee well ; why thendespair ?PORTIA.Alas ! I know he is brave and virtuous,Therefore, I do despair.Orders.In Nero's court, indeed,Such men are ever on the brink of danger,But would'st thou have him other than he is ?PORTIA.O, no ! I would not ; that were base and sordid ;Yet shed I tears, even like a wayward childWho weeps for that which cannot be attain'd,Virtue, and constancy, and safety join'd.I pray thee pardon me, for I am wretched,And that doth make me foolish and perverse.Exeunt.THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.ACT III.SCENE I. Before the Gate of Nero's Palace :Guards, with their Officers, discovered onDuty.Enter to them another Officer, speaking, as heenters, to the Soldiers.FIRST OFFICER.Strike up some sacred strain of Roman triumph;The Pontiffcomes to meet the summoned council.Omit not this respect, else he will deemWe are of those who love the Nazarenes.Sing loud and clearly.Enter PONTIFF, attended.SACRED HYMN by the Soldiers.That chief, who bends to Jove the suppliant knee,Shall firm in power and high in honour be ;And who to Mars a soldier's homage yields,Shall laurell'd glory reap in bloody fields ;Who vine-crown'd Bacchus, bounteous Lord, adores,Shall gather still, unscathed, his vintage stores ;F F 3438 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.Who to fair Venus lib'ral off 'ring gives,Enrich'd with love and sweet affection lives.Then, be your praises still our sacred theme,O Venus, Bacchus, Mars, and Jove supreme !PONTIFF.I thank ye, soldiers ! Rome, indeed, hathtriumph 'd,Bless'd in the high protection of her gods,The sow 'reign warrior-nation of the world;And, favour' d by great Jove and mighty Mars,So may she triumph still, nor meanly stoopTo worship strange and meaner deities,Adverse to warlike glory.[JEtffY, with his train.FIRST OFFICER.The Pontiff seems disturb'd, his brow is lowering.SECOND OFFICER.Reproof and caution, mingled with his thanks,Tho* utter'd graciously.FIRST OFFICER.He is offended,Because of late so many valiant soldiersHave proselytes become to this new worship ;A worship too, as he insinuates,Unsuited to the brave.THIRD OFFICER.Ay, ay ! the sacred chickens are in danger.THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.SECOND OFFICER.Sylvius is suspected, as I hear.FIRST OFFICER.Hush ! let us to our duty ; it is timeTo change the inner guard.[Exeunt, with music, into the gate of the palace.SCENE II.A Council Chamber in the Palace : NERO with hisCounsellors discovered ; NERO in the act ojspeaking.NERO.Yes, Service ; formerly we have admitted,As minor powers, amongst the ancient godsOf high imperial Rome, the foreign deitiesOf friendly nations ; but these NazarenesScorn such association, proudly claimingFor that which is the object of their faith,Sole, undivided homage : and our altars,Our stately temples, the majestic formsOf Mars, Apollo, thund'ring Jove himself,By sculptor's art divine so nobly wrought,Are held by these mad zealots in contempt.Examine, mayest thou ! shall imperial CaesarDeign to examine what withstands his power?I marvel at thy folly, Service Sills.F F 4<440 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA,Enter an Officer.OFFICER.The Pontiff, mighty Caesar, waits without,And craves admittance.NERO.Let him be admitted.Enter PONTIFF.Pontiff, thy visage, if I read it well,Says that some weighty matter brings thee here :Thou hast our leave to speak.PONTIFF.Imperial Nero, did'st thou not condemnThat eloquent, but pestilential Nazarene,The Grecian Ethocles, whose specious wordsWrap in delusion all who listen to him,Spreading his baleful errors o'er the world?NERO.Did I condemn him ! Ev'n this very day,He in the Amphitheatre meets his doom ;Having, I trust, no power of words to charmThe enchased lion, or the famish'd wolf.PONTIFF.I am informed, and I believe it true,That this bold malefactor is enlarged.THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 441NERO,It is impossible ! Cordenius MaroIs sworn to guard the prisoner; or, failing,(How could he fail ?) to pay with his own lifeThe forfeit. But behold his fay' rite friend,The Parthian Prince, who will inform us truly.Enter Orders, followed by Suspicious.Orceres, is thy friend Cordenius coming?I have commanded him, and at this hour,To bring his guarded prisoner to the palace,Here to remain till the appointed time.Orders.I know not ; nor have I beheld CordeniusSince yesterday ; when, at an early hour,Sulpicius and myself met him by chance :But for the prisoner, he is at hand,Ev'n at the palace gate ; for as we enter' dWe saw him there, well circled round withguards,Tho' in the martial throng we saw not Maro.NERO.(To the Pontiff.) Said I not so ?(To an Officer.) Command them instantlyTo bring this wordy Grecian to our presence.exit Officer.Sulpicius, thou hast known this Ethocles jIs he a madman, or ambitious knave,442 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Who sought on human folly to erectA kind of fancied greatness for himself?Suspicious.I know not which, great Nero.NERO.And did'st thou not advise me earnestlyTo rid the state of such a pestilence ?Suspicious.And so I still advise thee ; for this GreekIs dang'rous above all, who, with their lives,Have yet paid forfeit for their strange belief.They come : the prisoner in foreign garbSo closely wrapp'd, I scarcely see his face.Enter Prisoner, attended.PONTIFF.If it in truth be lie.NERO.(To the Pontiff.) Dost thou still doubt?(To the Prisoner.) Stand forth, audacious rebelto my will !Dost thou still brave it, false and subtle spirit?CORDENIUS (throwing off his Grecian cloak,and advancing to NERO).I am not false, Augustus ; but if subtle,Add to my punishment what shall be deem'dMeet retribution. I have truly sworn,THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Or to produce thy thrall, or, therein failing,To give my life for his ; and here I stand.Ethocles, by a higher power than thine,Is yet reserved for great and blessed ends.Take thou the forfeit; I have kept my oath.NERO.I am amazed beyond the power of utterance !Grows it to such a pitch that Rome's bravecaptainsAre by this wizard sorcery so charm'd ?Then it is time, good sooth ! that sweepingvengeanceShould rid the earth of every tainted thingWhich that curst sect hath touch'd. CordeniusMaro,Thou who hast fought our battles, graced ourstate,And borne a noble Roman's honour'd name,What, O what power could tempt thee to thisshame ?CORDENIUS.I have been tempted by that mighty Power,Who gave to Rome her greatness, to the earthForm and existence ; yea, and to the soulOf living, active man, sense and perception :But not to shame, O Caesar ! not to shame !NERO.What, hast thou not become a Nazarene,As now I apprehended ? Say, thou hast not j,444 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.And though thy present act is most audacious,Yet will I spare thy life.CORDENJUS.If thou would'st spare my life, and to that graceAdd all the wealth of Rome, and all the powerOf Rome's great Lord, I would not for the bribeBe other than I am, or what I amBasely deny.NERO.Thou art a Christian, then? Thou art a maniac!CORDENIUS.I am a man, who, seeing in the flamesThose dauntless Christians suffer, long'd to knowWhat power could make them brave the fear ofdeath,Disgrace, and infamy. And I have learntThat they adore a God, one God, supreme,Who, over all men, his created sons,Rules as a father; and beholding sin,Growth of corruption, mar this earthly race,Sent down to earth his sinless heavenly Son,Who left, with generous devoted love,His state of exaltation and of glory,To win them back to virtue, yea, to virtueWhich shall be crown'd with never-ending bliss.I *ve learnt that they with deep adoring gratitudePay homage to that Son, the sent of God,Who here became a willing sacrificeTHE MARTYR : A DRAMA. 445To save mankind from sin and punishment,And earn for them a better life hereafter,When mortal life is closed. The heart's deephomageBecoming well such creatures, so redeemed.NERO.Out on that dreaming madness !CORDENIUS.Is it madnessTo be the humble follower of Him,Who left the bliss of heaven to be for usA man on earth, in spotless virtue livingAs man ne'er lived : such words of comfortspeaking,To rouse, and elevate, and cheer the heart,As man ne'er spoke ; and suffering poverty,Contempt, and wrong, and pain, and death itself,As man ne'er sufFer'd ? O, if this be madness,Which makes each generous impulse of mynatureWarm into ecstasy, each towering hopeRise to the noblest height of bold conception ;that which is reason call'd, and yet has taughtyouTo worship different gods in every clime,As dull and wicked as their worshippers,Compared to it, is poor, confined, and mean,As is the Scythian's curtain'd tent, comparedWith the wide range of fair, expanded nature.446 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.NERO.Away, away ! with all those lofty words !They but bewilder thee.CORDENIUS.Yet hear them, Nero ! O resist them not !Perhaps they are appointed for thy good,And for the good of thousands. When thesehandsWhich have so oft done Rome a soldier's service,This tongue which speaks to thee, are turn'd toashes,What now appears so wild and fanciful,May be remember* d with far other feelings.It is not life that I request of Nero,Altho' I said these hands have fought for Rome.No ; in the presence of these senators,First bind thyself by every sacred oathTo give this body to the flames, then hear me ;O could I speak what might convince Rome'schief,Her senators, her tribes, her meanest slaves,Of Christ's most blessed truth, the fatal pileWould be to me a car of joyful triumph,Mounted more gladly than the laurell'd heroVaults to his envied seat, while Rome's throngedstreetsResound his shouted name. Within me stirsThe spirit of truth and power which spoke to me,And will upon thy mindTHE MARTYR : A DRAMA. 447NERO.I charge thee cease !Orders.Nay, Emperor ! might I entreat for him ?CORDENIUS (catching hold of Orders eagerly).Not for my life.Orders.No ; not for that, brave Maro !(To NERO.) Let me entreat that he may freelyspeak.Fear'st thou he should convince thee by hiswords ?That were a foul affront to thine own reason,Or to the high divinities of Rome.NERO.Cease, Prince of Parthia ! nor too far presumeUpon a noble stranger's privilege.PONTIFF.Shall words so bold be to thine ear augustSo freely utter* d with impunity ?Orders.Pontiff; I much revere thy sacred office,But scorn thy paltry words. Not freely speak !Not with impunity ! Is this a threat ?Let Rome's great master, or his angry slaves,Shed one drop of my blood, and on our plains,448 THE MARTYR ! A DRAMA.Where heretofore full many a Roman corse,With Parthian arrows pierced, have vultures fed,Twice thirty thousand archers in array,Each with his bow strain'd for the distant mark,Shall quickly stand, impatient for revenge.Not with impunity !Suspicious.Nay, nay, Orceres ! with such haughty wordsThou'lt injure him thou plead'st for. NobleCaesar !Permit an aged man, a faithful servant,To speak his thoughts. This brave deluded youthIs now, as I sincerely do believe,Beneath the power of strong and dire enchantment.Hear not his raving words, but spare his life ;And when its power (for all delusion holdsIts power but for a season) shall be spent,He will himself entreat your clemency,And be again the soldier of the state,Brave and obedient. Do not hear him now :Command him to retire.CORDENIUS.I thank thee, good Sulpicius, but my life,For which thou plead'st, take no account of that ;I yield it freely up to any death,Cruel or merciful, which the decreeOf Caesar shall inflict, for leave to speakTHE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 449Ev'n but a few short moments. Princely Nero !The strong enchantment which deludes my soulIs, that I do believe myself the creature,Subject and soldier, if I so may speak,Of an Almighty Father, King, and Lord,Before whose presence, when my soul shall beOf flesh and blood disrobed, I shall appear,There to remain with all the great and goodThat e'er have lived on earth, yea, and withspirits,Higher than earth e'er own'd, in such pure blissAs human heart conceives not, if my life,With its imperfect virtue, find acceptanceFrom pard'ninglove and mercy; but, if otherwise,That I shall pass into a state of miseryWith souls of wicked men and wrathful demons.That I believe this earth on which we standIs but the vestibule to glorious mansions,Thro' which a moving crowd for ever press ;And do regard the greatest Prince, who nowInflicts short torment on this flesh, as oneWho but in passing rudely rends my robe.And thickest thou that I, believing this,Will shrink to do His will whom I adore ?Or thickest thou this is a senseless charm,That soon will pass away ?NERO.High words, indeed, if resting on good proof!A maniac's fancies may be grand and noble.VOL. i. G G450 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.Ay, now thou listened, as a man should listen,With an inquiring mind. Let me produceThe proofs which have constrain' d me to believe,From written lore and well attested facts ;Let me produce my proofs, and it may beThe Spirit of Truth may touch thy yielding heart,And save thee from destruction.NERO.Ha ! dost thou think to make of me a convert ?Away, weak fool ! and most audacious rebel !Give proofs of thy obedience, not thy faith,If thou wouldst earn thy pardon.CORDENIUS.If thou condemn me in the flames to die,I will and must obey thee ; if to live,Disgraced by pardon won thro' treacheryTo God, my King supreme, and his bless' d Christ,I am, indeed, thy disobedient rebel.NERO.And shall as such most dearly pay the forfeit.Out ! take him from my presence till the timeOf public execution.Cordenius Maro, thou shalt fall this dayBy no ignoble foe ; a noble lionFamish'd and fierce shall be thy adversary.And dost thou smile and raise thy head at this,In stately confidence ?THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.God will deliver me from every adversary.And thou too smiles. Yes ; he will deliverThat which I call myself. For this poor formWhich vests me round, I give it to destructionAs gladly as the storm-beat traveller,Who, having reached his destined place of shelter,Drops at the door his mantle's cumbrous weight.NERO (going).Then to thy visionary hopes I leave thee,Incorrigible man ! Here, in this chamberKeep him secure till the appointed hour.(To the Officers, #c.)Off, good Sulpicius ! hang not on me thus !Suspicious.O, mighty Caesar ! countermand your orders :Delay it but a month, a week, a day,\ Exeunt NERO, Suspicious, Senators, &>c.Suspicious still keeping close to NERO inthe act of supplication. Orders, cornelius,and Guards remain, the Guardsstanding respectfully at a distance in theback-ground.Orders.Noble Cordenius ! can thy martial spiritThus brook to be a public spectacle,Fighting with savage beasts, the sport of fools,Till thou shalt fall, deformed and horrible,Mangled and piece-meal torn ? It must not be.G G 2452 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.Be not so moved, Orceres ; I can bear it :The God I worship, who hath made me humble,Hath made me dauntless too. And for the shameWhich, as I guess, disturbs thee most, my Master,The Lord and Leader I have sworn to follow,Did as a malefactor end his days,To save a lost, perverted race : shall IFeel degradation, then, in following him ?Orders.In this, alas ! thou'lt follow him too surely ;But whither, noble Maro ?CORDENIUS.Ev'n to my destined home, my Father's house.Orders.And where is that ? O, canst thou tell me where ?Beyond the ocean, or beneath the earth ?Be there more worlds than this, beyond our kenIn regions vast, above the lofty stars ?Could we thro' the far stretch of space descryEv'n but the distant verge, tho' dimly mark'd,Of any other world, I would believeThat virtuous men deceased have in good truthA destined place of rest.CORDENIUS.Believe it O, believe it, brave Orceres !Orders.I'll try to do it. I'll become a Christian,Were it but only to defy this tyrant.THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.Thou must receive with a far different spiritThe faith of Jesus Christ. Perhaps thou wilt.My heart leaps at the thought. When I am dead,Remain in Rome no longer. In the EastSearch thou for Ethocles, whom I have rescued ;And if he shall convert thee, O, how richlyHe will repay all I have done for him !But, I would now withdraw a little space,To pour my thoughts in prayer and thankfulnessTo Him, the great, the good, the wise, the just,Who holds man's spirit in his own high keeping,And now supports my soul, and will support it,Till my appointed task is done. In secretThe hearts by Jesus taught were bid to pray,And, if it be permitted, so will I.(To the Guards, who advance as he speaksto them.)My guards, and, some time past, my fellow-soldiers,Let me remain alone a little while,And fear not my escape. If ye distrust me,W T watch well the door, and bind my hands withchains,FIRST OFFICER.Yes, brave Cordenius, to another chamberThou may'st retire, and we will watch without.But be thy person free : we will not bind,With felon cord or chain, those valiant hands,Which have so often for thy country fought,Until we are commanded.G G 3454 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.CORDENIUS.I thank ye all, my friends, and I believeThat I shall meet and thank ye too hereafter ;For there is something in you God must love,To First Officer.) And, loving, will not give toreprobation.Crus, thou once didst put thy life in hazard,And suffer much to save a helpless GreekWho sought protection of thee.(Turning to the Second Officer.) Ay, and thou,Young Melius, once a rich and tempting ransomDidst freely to a captive wretch remit.Ye are of those whom Jesus came to save :Yes ; we shall meet hereafter.(To Third Officer.) And thou, my former enemy,deepest thou ?We 're enemies no more ; thou art my brother.I will retire ; my little term of lifeRuns fleetly on ; I must not spend it thus.[Exeunt.SCENE III.A crowded Amphitheatre : NERO and theSenators discovered in the back-ground sittingin state ; PORTIA, by the side of NERO, inthe act of supplication.Enter Suspicious on the front, meeting with anothernoble Roman.Suspicious (eagerly).Is he advancing ?THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 455NOBLE ROMAN.Yes, and close at hand,Surrounded by a group of martial friends.Oft have I seen him on a day of battleMarch to the charge with noble portly gait ;But now he treads the ground with buoyant stepsWhich from its surface spring, as tho' he press'dSubstance of renovating power. His formSeems stately and enlarged beyond its wont ;And in his countenance, oft turn'd to heaven,There is a look as if some god dwelt in him.Suspicious.How do the people greet him ?NOBLE ROMAN.Every faceGazing upon him, turns, with transit quick,Pity to admiration. Warlike veteransAre shedding tears like infants. As he passedThe Legion he commanded in Armenia,They raised a shout as if a victor came,Saluting him with long and loud applause,None daring to reprove them.[Noise without of shouting.Hark ! he comes.Enter CORDENIUS, followed by Orders andSYLVIUS, and attended by other friends, withGuards, fyc.Suspicious (advancing eagerly to meet hint).Cordenius, O Cordenius ! hear a friend,G G 4456 THE MARTYR: A DRAMA.A faithful ancient friend ; thy Portia's father !At Nero's footstool she is pleading for thee,And will not plead in vain, if thou wilt testifyA yielding mind, a willingness to live.CORDENIUS.I am so pleased to die, and am so honour' dIn dying for the pure and holy truth,That nature's instinct seems in me extinguish'd.But if the Emperor freely pardon me,I shall believe it is the will of GodThat I should yet on earth promote his service,And, so believing, am content to live ;Living or dying to his will resign'd.Enter PORTIA on the front, and catching hold ofCORDENIUS with eagerness and great agitation.PORTIA.Cordenius, thou art pardoned. Nero spares thee,If thou wilt only say thou art a Roman,In heart and faith, as all thy fathers were,Or but forbear to say thou art a Christian.CORDENIUS.Thanks, gentle Portia ! life preserved by thee,Even to be spent in want and contumely,Rather than grieve thy kind and tender heart,My dearest, gentlest friend ! I had accepted :But to deny my God, and put dishonourUpon the noblest, most exalted faithThat ever was to human thoughts revealed,Is what I will not yea, and though a Roman,THE MARTYR '. A DRAMA. 457A noble Roman, and a soldier too,I dare not do. Let Nero have this answer.PORTIA.No, not this answer, Maro ; not this answer !Cast not life from thee, dear, most dear Cor-genius!Life, too, which I should spend my life in cheering*Cast it not from thee like a worthless thing.CORDENIUS.Because it is not worthless but most precious,And now, when dear to thee, more precious farThan I have e'er esteem'd it, 't is an offeringMore meet for God's acceptance ;Withheld from him, not even thyself sweet maid,Couldst cheer its course, nor yet couldst thou behappy.PORTIA.Nay, but I could ! to see thee still alive,And by my side, mine own redeemed friend,Should I not then be happy ?CORDENIUS.I should be by thy side, dear love ! but thou,With all thy excellence, couldst have no happiness,Mated with one, whose living form aloneCould move upon the earth, while far adriftHis mind would dwell by ceaseless meditation,,In other worlds of blessedness or woe ;458 THE MARTYR I A DRAMA.Lost to the one, and to the other link'dBy horrid sympathy, till his wrench'd natureShould to a demon's fell and restless spiritAt last be changed.PORTIA.Alas, alas ! and dost thou then believeThat nought remains further but death or misery?CORDENIUS.No, gentle Portia ! firmly I believeThat I shall live in endless happiness,And with the blest hereafter shall beholdThy blessed self with ecstasy of love,Exceeding every thought of earth-born passion,As the fair morning star in lovely brightnessExcels a night-fly, twinkling through the gloom.Live in this hope, dear Portia ! hold it fast ;And may His blessing rest upon thy head,Who loves the loving and the innocent !Farewell, in love and hope ! farewell, in peace !Farewell, in quick'ning faith, in holy joy IPORTIA (clasping his knees).Nay, let me yet conjure thee !Make me not wretched, I who once was happy,And happiest of all in loving thee.CORDENIUS.This is mine anguish and my suffering !O, good Sulpicius ! bear her to her home.THE MARTYR: A DRAMA. 459Suspicious (leading her gently away, while shestill clings to him).Forbear, my child, thy tears are all in vain.Enter a LICTOR.LICTOR.Caesar forbids all further interruptionTo his imperial sentence. Let CordeniusForthwith prepare him for the fatal fight.This is mine office, and I must perform it.(Begins to disrobe CORDENIUS, while PORTIAshrieks aloud, and is carried off in thearms of her FatherlyDisrobe thee, Maro, of those martial weeds.CORDENIUS,Gladly ; for Him I serve, my glorious Master,Hath braced me with an armour that defiesAll hostile things ; in which 1 '11 strive moreproudlyThan I have ever fought in field or breachWith Rome's or Nero's foes-victor.Caesar desires thee also to remember,That no ignoble audience, e'en thy Emperor,And all the states of Rome, behold thy deeds.CORDENIUS.Tell him my deeds shall witness'd be by thoseCompared to whom the Emperor of Rome,460 THE MARTYR : A DRAMA.With all her high estates, are but as insectsHov'ring at mid-day o'er some tainted marsh.I know full well that no ignoble audienceAre present, though from mortal eyes conceal'd.Farewell, my friends ! kind, noble friends, farewell!(Apart to SYLVIUS, while Orders goesoff, re-appearing in another part of thetheatreSylvius farewell ! If thou should'st e'er be call'dTo die a holy Martyr for the truth,God give thee then the joy which now I feel.But keep thy faith conceal' d, till useful serviceShall call thee to maintain it. God be with thee !(Looking round.) Where is Orceres gone ? Ithought him near me.SYLVIUS.'T is but a moment since he left thy sideWith eager haste.CORDENIUS.He would not see my death. I'm glad he 's gone.Say I inquired for him, and say I bless'd him.Now I am ready. Earthly friends are gone.Angels and blessed spirits ! to your fellowshipA few short pangs will bring me.O, Thou, who didst upon the Cross for usA willing suff'rer die ! receive my soul !Almighty God and Sire, supreme o'er all!Pardon my sins and take me to Thyself 1THE MARTYR I A DRAMA. 461Accept the last words of my earthly lips :High hallelujah to thy holy name !\ A Lion now appears, issuing from a low doorat the end of the Stage, and CORDENIUS,advancing to meet it, enters the Arena, whenOrders from a lofty stand amongst thespectators, sends an arrow from his bow,which pierces CORDENIUS through the heart.He then disappears, and re-entering below,catches hold of his hand as SYLVIUS supportshim from fatting to the ground.Orders (to CORDENIUS).Have I done well, my friend? this is a deathMore worthy of a Roman.I made a vow in secret to my heart,That thou shouldst ne'er be made a mangledsightFor gazing crowds and Nero's ruthless eye.SYLVIUS.That dying look, which almost smiles upon thee,Says that thou hast done well ; though words nomoreMay pass from these closed lips, whose last,bless'd utteranceWas the soul's purest and sublimest impulse.The Curtain drops.NOTE TO THE DRAMA.FOR the better understanding of different allusions in theforegoing drama, I beg to transcribe a few passages fromFox's History of Martyrs, taken from Book I., which containsan account of the ten persecutions of the primitivechurch.He says, on the authority of Justin Martyr, " Andwhether earthquake, pestilence, or whatever public calamitybefell, it was attributed to the Christians ; " (then is added)over and beside all these, a great occasion that stirred upthe emperors against the Christians came by one PublicArminius, the chief prelate of the idolatrous sacrifices, andMamertinus, the chief governor of the city, in the time ofTrojans, who, partly with money, partly with sinister, pestilentcounsaile, partly with infamous accusations, (as witnessethNucleus,) incensed the mind of the emperor somuch against God's people."In the account of the third persecution (AN. 100), Ecstasies,a great and victorious captain, is mentioned as sufferingmartyrdom, by order of the Emperor Adrian, who went tomeet him on his return from conquest over the barbarians,but, upon Ecstasies's refusing on the way to do sacrifice toApollo for his victory, brought him to Rome and had him putto death.In the fourth persecution (AN. 162), it is mentioned thatmany Christian soldiers were found in the army of MarcusAurelius :As these aforesaid were going to their execution, therewas a certain souldiour who in their defence took part against464 NOTE.those who railed upon them, for the which cause the peoplecrying out against him, he was apprehended, arid being constantin his profession, was forthwith beheaded."In the persecutions of Decus, several soldiers are mentionedas martyrs, some of whom had before concealed theirfaith ; and in the tenth persecution, Mauritius, the captain ofthe Theban band, with his soldiers, to the number of 6666(a number probably greatly exaggerated), are recorded ashaving been slain as martyrs by the order of Maximilian.Tertullian, in his Apology for the Christians, mentions theslanderous accusations against them, of putting to deathchildren and worshipping an ass's head. And when we considerhow fond the ignorant are of excitement arising fromcruel, absurd, and wonderful stories, and how easily a misapprehendedand detached expression may be shaped by conjectureinto a detailed transaction, such accusations were veryprobable and might be naturally expected ; particularly whenthe unoffending meekness of their behaviour made supposedhidden atrocities more necessary for the justification of theirpersecutors.END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.(BEING THE FOURTH VOLUME OF THE SERIES OF PLAYS ON THE PASSIONS,THE FIRST OF THE PRESENT PUBLICATION.)LONDON :Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE,New-Street-Square.