DRAMAS,BYJOANNA Bailie,IN THREE VOLUMES.VOL. III.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & Hangman,Paternoster-row.1836.ft iWITCHCRAFT :A TRAGEDY IN PROSE.IN FIVE ACTS.VOL. ni.PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.ROBERT KENNEDY OF DUNGARREN (commonlycalled DUNGARREN).MURREY.RUTHERFORD, Minister of the Parish.FATHERINGHAM, Friend of Murrey.THE SHERIFF OF RENFREWSHIRE.THE BAILLIE OR MAGISTRATE OF PAISLEY.BLACK Bawdy, the Hereby of Dungarren.ANDERSON, the principal Domestic of Dungarren.Welkin, an Idiot.Crowd, Jailor, Landlord, fyc.WOMEN.LADY DUNGARREN (commonly so called). Motherof Robert Kennedy.VIOLET, Daughter of Murrey.ANNABELLA, the rich Relation of Lady Dun-garden.Prized BANE, 1MARY MACMURREN, > reputed Witches.ELSPY Low, jPHEMY, Maid to Arabella.Nurse, Maidservants, Crowd, c.Scene in Renfrewshire, in Scotland.WITCHCRAFT.ACT I.SCENE I. A Parlour in the House or Towerof Dungarren.Enter LADY DUNGARREN and ANNABELLA, bydifferent sides.ANNABELLA.You must be surprised, my dear cousin, at myunexpected return.LADY DUNGARREN.I will frankly confess that I am. How didyou find your friends in Glenrowan?ANNABELLA.With their house full of disagreeable visitorsand discomfort : another day of it would havecast me into a fever ; so I will trespass on yourhospitality a week longer, knowing how kindlydisposed you have always been to the child ofyour early friend.4 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.LADY DUNGARREN.It would be strange, indeed, if the daughterof Duncan Gordon were not welcome here.ANNABELLA.How has poor Jessie been since I left you ?LADY DUNGARREN (shaking her head).I have but a sorrowful account to give of her.ANNABELLA.Had she any rest last night ? Does she lookas wildly as she did ? Were any strange noisesheard in the chamber during the night ?LADY DUNGARREN.Ay ; noises that made me start and tremble,and feel a horrid consciousness that some beingor other was in the room near me, though to thenatural eye invisible.ANNABELLA.What kind of sounds were they? Why didyou think they were so near you ?LADY DUNGARREN.I was sitting by the table, with my head restingon my hand, when the door leading fromthe back staircase, which I am certain I hadbolted in the evening, burst open.ANNABELLA.And what followed ?WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 5LADY DUNGARREN.I verily thought to see some elrich form orother make its appearance, and I sat for somemoments rivetted to my chair, without power tomove hand or foot, or almost to breathe.ANNABELLA.Yet you saw nothing ?LADY DUNGARREN.Nothing.ANNABELLA.And heard only the bursting of the door ?LADY DUNGARREN.Only that for a time : but afterwards, when Ilistened intently, I heard strange whisperingsnear me, and soft steps, as of unshod feet, passingbetween me and the bed.ANNABELLA.Footsteps ?LADY DUNGARREN.Ay; and the curtains of the bed began toshake as if touched by a hand, or the motion ofsome passing body. Then I knew that theywere dealing with my poor child, and I had nopower to break the spell of their witchcraft, forI had no voice to speak.ANNABELLA.You had no power to speak ?B 36 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.LADY DUNGARREN.No ; though the Lord's prayer was on mylips, I was unable to utter it.ANNABELLA.Heaven preserve us ! what a dreadful situationyou were in ! Did the poor child seem to noticeany thing ?LADY DUNGARREN.I cannot say how she looked when the doorburst open ; but as soon as I could observe her,her eyes were wide open, gazing fixedly, as ifsome ugly visage were hanging over her, fromwhich she could not turn away, and presentlyshe fell into a convulsion, and I at that instantrecovered my voice and my strength, and callednurse from her closet to assist her.ANNABELLA.What did nurse think ?LADY DUNGARREN.Nurse said she was sure that both PrizedBane and Mary Macmurren had been in theroom. And this I will take my oath to, thatafterwards, when she fell quiet, she muttered inher sleep, in a thick untameable voice, andamongst the words which she uttered, I distinctlyheard the name of Mary Macmurren.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. yANNABELLA.What an awful thing it is if people can havepower from the evil spirit to inflict suchcalamity !LADY DUNGARREN.Awful indeed !ANNABELLA.How can they purchase such power ?LADY DUNGARREN.The ruin of a Christian soul is price enoughfor any thing. Satan, in return for this, willbestow power enough to do whatever his bonds-womanor bondsman listeth.ANNABELLA.Yet they are always miserable and poor.LADY DUNGARREN.Not always ; but malignant gratifications arewhat they delight in, and nothing else is ofmuch value to them.ANNABELLA.It may be so :-it is strange and fearful!LADY DUNGARREN.I must go to my closet now, and mix themedicine for poor Jessie, to be ready at theproper time ; for I expect the minister to prayby her to-night, and would have every thingprepared before he comes. \JE*xit.B 48 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ANNABELLA (alone, after a thoughtful pause).Ay, if there be in reality such supernaturalagency, by which a breast fraught with passionand misery may find relief. (Starting backsDreadful resource! I may not be so assisted.after walking to and fro in great perturbationsOh, Dungarren, Dungarreri ! that a paltry girl,who is not worthy to be my tirewoman, theorphan of a murderer a man disgraced, whodied in a pit and was buried in a moor; onewhose very forehead is covered with blushingshame when the eye of an irreproachable gentlewomanlooks upon her ; whose very voice dothalter and hesitate when a simple question ofher state or her family is put to her, that acreature thus naturally formed to excite aversionand contempt should so engross thy affections! It makes me mad ! " May not be soassisted!" Evil is but evil, and torment is buttorment ! I have felt both I have felt themto extremity ? what have I then to fear ? (Startson hearing the door open behind her, as PHEMYenters Who is there ?PHEMY.Only me, madam.ANNABELLA.What brings thee here ?WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 9PHEMY.I came to know if you will trust the Glasgowcarrier, who is just come for the orders of thefamily, with your commission to the silk shop.ANNABELLA.What art thou telling me ?PHEMY.Of your commission to the silk shop.ANNABELLA.I don't understand thee.PHEMY.The additional yards of silk that are wanted.ANNABELLA.I want none, fool ! Thy wits are bewildered.PHEMY.Not my wits, Madam. What will you pleaseto have, then, for the trimming of your newmantua ?ANNABELLA.Newt skins and adder skins, an thou wilt.PHEMY.That might do for a witch's gown, indeed :Grizeld Bane might have a garniture of that sort.ANNABELLA.What dost thou know of Grizeld Bane ?10 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.PHEMY.Stories enow, if they be true. It is she, orMary Macmurren, who has, as they say, bewitchedthe poor young lady here ; and it was aspell cast by her, that made the farmer's prettydaughter fall over the crag and break her leg,the week before her wedding.ANNABELLA.Before her wedding ?PHEMY.Yes, truly, Madam ; and no wedding at allwill ever follow such an untoward mischance.ANNABELLA.Who told thee this ?PHEMY.Everybody tells it, and knows it to be true.after a paused But the carrier is waiting.She does not heed me. aside') What is thematter, Madam ? Are you not well ?ANNABELLA (r 014 sing her self suddenly.Dost thou know Grizeld Bane ?PHEMY.Heaven for fend !ANNABELLA.Dost thou know where she lives ?WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 11PHEMY.Somewhere not far distant, I believe : BlackBawldy the herd knows her den well enough.ANNABELLA.Is he in the house at present ?PHEMY.Very likely ; for this is the time when hiscows are brought in for the milking.ANNABELLA.Go find him, if thou canst, and send him tomeimmediately. \ Exit PHEMY.] If there beaspell to break wedlock, and to break affectionalso, it were well worth its purchase at any price ;yea, though the soul's jeopardy were added tothe gold.Re-enter PHEMY, followed by Bawdy.PHEMY.I had not far to seek for him : he stood waitingin the passage, for the cooling of his brose.ANNABELLA.Come nearer, Bawldy. Dost thou know whereGrizeld Bane lives ?Bawdy.Ay, that I do, to my cost. She and her blackcat, too, live owre near my milk kye. BrindleWITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.and Hawks gi' but half the milk they should gi',and we wat weel whare the other half gangs to.ANNABELLA.Never mind that, my good lad ! Hie to herimmediately, and tell her to come to me.Bawdy.To you, Leddy ?ANNABELLA.Yes : to come to me without loss of time.There is money for thee. (Giving money Dothy errand speedily and secretly : let nobodyknow that I have sent thee.Bawdy.An' she 's to come to you here, shillings, as itwar?ANNABELLA.Yes, Bawldy ; and when she comes, let herwait for me in the cattle shed, by the wood, andI '11 meet her there. Dost thou understand me,man ? Go quickly.Bawdy.The night, Leddy ?ANNABELLA.Yes, to-night. Why dost thou look so scared?Bawdy.I darn gang to her at night. - Gude be wi*us ! an I war to find her at her cantrips, I hadWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 13better be repaired in a bog, or play comparingowre the craig o j Dalwhirry.ANNABELLA,She must be very terrible to make thee soafraid.Bawdy.When she begins to mutter wi' her whitewithered lips, and her twa leg even are gloweringlike glints o' wildfire frae the hollow o' herdark bent brows, she 's enough to mak a trooperquake ; ay, wi' baith sword and pistol by hisside. No, no, Leddy ! the sun maun be up inthe lift whan I venture to her den.ANNABELLA.Thou wilt get there before it be dark, if thoumake good speed.Bawdy.No, though I had the speed o' a mawkin. Itis gloaming already ; black clouds are spreadingfast owre the sky, and far-off thunder is growling.There is a storm coming on, and the fiendso' the air are at war ; I darn gang till themorning.ANNABELLA.Timid loon ! retire then, and go in the morning.But see that thou keep the secret. I '11give thee more money, if thou prove trusty anddiligent. [Exit Bawdy.14 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.PHEMY.The carrier will set off in a trice, Madam.ANNABELLA.Let him go.PHEMY.And no orders given ?ANNABELLA.Give him what orders thou wilt, and plagueme no more. [ Exeunt severally.SCENE II.Before the Gate O/^DUNGARREN Tower : Andersonand othe Gate.SON and other Servants are seen loitering withinEnter DUNGARREN, with a fowling-piece in hishand 9 and a pouch or bag swung from hisshoulder, as returned from sport.ANDERSON (advancing to meet him).I 'm right glad to see your honour returned ;for the night draws on, and it wad hae been naejoke, I trow, to hae been belated on a hauntedwarlock moor, and thunder growling i' thewelkin.DUNGARREN.The sky indeed looks threatening.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 15ANDERSON.And what sport has your honour had the day ?The birds grow wilder every year, now.DUNGARREN.Think you so, Anderson ?ANDERSON.Growth do I ! There 's something uncannyabout them too. It 's a fearful' time we live in.DUNGARREN.I have done pretty well, however. Give thisto the housekeeper to increase the stores of herlarder. ( Unfastening the bag, and giving it toANDERSON.)ANDERSON.By my faith ! she '11 be glad enough o* sick asupply ; for Madam Annabelll is come backagain, wi' that Episcopal lassie frae the Isle o*Barra, that reads out o* a prayer book, and ca'sherself her Leddy's gentlewoman. Lord bemerciful' to us ! the leddy 's bad enough, butJob himself could hardly thole the gentlewoman.DUNGARREN.What has brought her back so soon ? Shewas to have staid a week in Dumbartonshire.ANDERSON.That 's more than I can say : but here comesBlack Bawldy, wha was sent for to speak to her ;16 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ay, and gaed into the very parlour till her. He,maybe, kens what has brought her back.DUNGARREN.That 's strange enough.ANDERSON.Nae mair strange than true. Into the veryparlour : I saw him set his dirty feet on theclean floor wi' my ain even.Enter Bawdy.DUNGARREN.So, Bawldy, thou 'rt become company forladies in a parlour.Bawdy.Toot, your honour ! ony body 's gude enoughto haver wi' them, when they 're wearying.DUNGARREN.What makes Mrs. Annabelll return to us sosoon, if she be wearying ?Bawdy.She'll no weary now, when your honour'scome hame.DUNGARREN.Has any thing happen'd ? She was to havestaid a week in Dumbartonshire.Bawdy.Maybe she has been a week there, o' her ainWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 1?reckoning, tho' we ca' it only twa days. Folkssaid when she gaed awa', that she wou'd na belang awa'. It wou'd be as easy to keep a mothfrae the candle, or a cat frae the milk-house, askeep her awa' frae the tower o' Dungarren(lowering his voice) when the laird is at hame.DUNGARREN.What say'st thou, varlet?Bawdy.Only what I hear folks say, your honour.DUNGARREN.Go thy ways to thy loft and thy byre. Folksare saucy, and teach lads to forget themselves.exit Bawdy.] (Pointing to the bag*) Takeit in, Anderson. exit ANDERSON.DUNGARREN (alone, turning impatiently from thegate.I thought to have crossed the threshold of myown house in peace. To be pestered with thepassion of an indelicate vixen ! She fastens heraffection upon me like a doctor's blister-sheet,strewed with all the stinging powders of thetorrid zone, for daring and desperate medication.(After pacing to and fro in a disturbed mannerlyAnd my gentle Violet, too : must she be stillsubjected to her scornful looks and insultinginsinuations? A noble spirit like hers, underVOL. in. c18 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.such painful circumstances to be exposed tosuch insolence ! It shall not be : I will notsuffer it. {A thoughtful pause') To affront alady in my own house? Not to be thought of!To leave the country at once, and let the sea andits waves roll between us ? Ay, this were well,were not all that is clear to me left behind ; mymother, my poor afflicted sister, my dear, dearViolet, the noble distressed Violet Murrey.No ; I will stay and contend with the termagant,as I would with an evil spirit. Had she the soulof a woman within her, though the plainest andmeanest of her sex, I would pity and respecther ; but as she is O ! shame upon it ! shemakes me as bad as herself. I know not whatto do : I dare not enter yet.[Exit the way by which he came.WITCHCRAFT t A TRAGEDY. 19SCENE III.A wild Moor, skirted on one side by a thick tangledWood, through which several open paths areseen. The Stage darkened to represent faintmoonlight through heavy gathering clouds.Thunder and lightning.Enter by the front ELSPY Low, MARY MACMUR-REN, and her son, Welkin, who stop and listento the thunder.MARY MACMURREN (spreading her arms exultinglyAy, ay! this sounds like the true sound o'Princeton and Powerfu'ness.ELSPY LOW (clapping her hands as another louderpeal rolls on).Ay ; it sounds royally ! we shall na mare bedeceived ; it wull prove a' true at last.MARY MACMURREN.This very night we shall ken what we shallken. We shall be wi j the Beings of power bewi' them and be of them.(Thunder again')20 WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.ELSPY LOW.It is an awful' din, and tells wi' a lordly voicewha is coming and at hand : we shall na marebe deceived.MARY MACMURREN (to WlLKIN, OS he pressescloser to her side],Dinna tug at me sa wickedly, Wilkin ; thoushalt ha' a bellyful' soon o' the fat o' the lawn,my poor glutton.Welkin.Fou ! fou ! meat ! great meat ! hurt, hurt !(making a noise in his throat to express pleasure)it's a-coming !MARY MACMURREN.We shall ha' what we list at last, milk andmeat ! meat and malt !ELSPY LOW.Mingling and merry-making ; and revengefor the best sport of a' !MARY MACMURREN.Ay ; the hated ones will pay the cost, I trow.We '11 sit at our good coats f cream, and thinko* the growling carle's kye wi' their udders lankand sapless, and the good wife greeting ow'r herkern.ELSPY LOW.Ha, ha, ha ! there's good spice in that, woman,to relish far poorer fare.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 21MARY MACMURREN.They refused us a han'fu' in our greatest need,but now it wuli be our turn to ha* fbu sacks andbaith cakes and kebbucks at command, whiletheir aumery is bare.ELSPY LOW.Ha, ha, ha ! there's good spice in that, simmer.(A very loud peal, etc.)MARY MACMURREN.Hear ye that ! the thunder grows louder andlouder ; and here she comes wi' her arms in theair and her spirit as hie as the clouds. Hermurky chief and his murky mates wuli soonfra a' quarters o' the world, I warrant ye, cometrooping to their triste.Enter Prized BANE from the wood by thebottom of the Stage, advancing with wild franticgestures.Prized BANE (stopping on the middle of thestage, and spreading wide her raised arms withlofty courtesy).Come, come, my mighty master!Come on the clouds ; come on the wind !Come for to loosen, and come for to bind IRise from the raging sea ; rise from the mine IThere's power in the night storm for thee and for thine.c 3WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.MARY MACMURREN (very eagerly to Prized).Dost thou really see him ?ELSPY LOW (in the same manner).Dost thou see him ? or hear him ?MARY MACMURREN.Is he near us ?ELSPY LOW.Is he on the moor?Prized BANE.Hold your peace, wretches ! he may start upby your side in an instant, and scare the verylife from your body, if ye forget what I toldyou.ELSPY LOW.I have na' forgotten it.MARY MACMURREN.Nor I neither. We're to tak* han's first ofa'. (Takes ELSPY by the hand, and then turns toWilkin.) And thine, too, Wilkin.Welkin.Meat, meat !MARY MACMURREN.No, glutton ; thou mini gi* me thy han andgo round, as I told thee.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 23Welkin.Round ! round ! pots be round, dishes beround ; a' fou for Wilkin ! hurt, hurt ![GmzELD BANE joins them, and they all takehands, moving in a circular direction, andspeaking all together in a dull chantingmeasure. ~]To the right, to the right, to the right we wheel ;Thou heaving earth, free passage give, and our dark Princereveal.To the right, &c. (three times, then turning the contrary way.)To the left, to the left, to the left we go ;Ye folding clouds, your curtain rend, and our great Mastershow.(Loud thunder.)ELSPY LOW (after a pause).Is he coming yet ?MARY MACMURREN.Is he coming, Grizeld Bane ? I see nothing.Prized BANE (seizing her by the throat).Hold thy peace, or I'll strangle thee ! Is itfor a wretch like thee to utter earthly words onthe very verge of such an awful presence ?MARY MACMURREN.For God's sake ! for Satan's sake ! for onysake, let gang thy terrible grip.(A tremendous loud peal.)c 4WITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY.Grazed BANEThere's an astounding din to make your earstingle! as if the welkin were breaking downupon us with its lading of terror and destruction! The lightning has done as I bade it. Isee him, I see him now.MARY MACMURREN.Where, where ? I see nothing.ELSPY LOW.Nor I either, Grizeld.Prized BANE.Look yonder to the skirt of that cloud : hishead is bending over it like a knight from thekeep of a castle. Hold ye quiet for a space ;quiet as the corse in its coffin : he will be on themoor in a trice.ELSPY LOW.Growth, I think he will ; for I'm trembling sa.MARY MACMURREN.I'm trembling too, woman ; and sa is poorWilkin.Prized BANE (exultingly, after another very loudpeal, #c.).Ay, roar away ! glare away ! roar to the veryoutrage of roaring! Brave heralding, I trow,for the prince of the power of the air! He willbe here, anon.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 25MARY MACMURREN.I'm sure he will, for my legs bend under mesa,I canna' stand upright.Prized BANE.Hold thy tongue ! he is on the moor. Lookyonder, where he is moving with strides like thesteps of a man, and light by his side. Dost thousee it? (To MARY MACMURREN.)MARY MACMURREN.Preserve us from skate ! I see like a manwi' a lantern. Dost thou see it, Espy ?ELSPY LOWE.Distinctly : and wi' what fearful' strides hecomes on !Prized BANE.It is him 5 he approaches. Bow your headsinstantly to the earth, and repeat the Lord'sPrayer backwards, if you can.[They all bow their bodies and begin an inarticulatemuttering ; and presently entersMURREY, bearing a lantern which hehastily darkens upon discovering them,and tries to avoid them']Prized BANE.Do not pass from us ! stay with us ; speak tous,Satan ! Our spells are shrewd and sure, and2 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.thou knowest we have served and will servethee. Turn not away ! Give us power andwe '11 worship thee. Art thou not come to ourtryste ?MURREY.Miserable women ! what brings you here atthis hour in this place ? With whom have youmade a triste ?Prized BANE.With thyself mighty Satan ! for we know theewell enough for all the skreen of darkness thatencircles thee.MURREY (in a deep, strong, feigned voice).What is your will with me ?Prized BANE.Give us power, and we'll worship thee.MURREYWhat power do you covet ? Power over goodsand chattels, or power over bodies and spirits ?Say which, by your compact, you would purchase?Prized BANE (eagerly.Both, both !MURREY.Ye ask too much ; take your choice of theone or the other.WITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY. 27MARY MACMURREN.What say'st thou, Espy ?ELSPY LOW.I'll consider first.MARY MACMURREN.Goods and chattels for my compact.Prized BANE (to her disdainfully).Sordid caitiff! Bodies and spirits for mine !MURREY.I will see to that at convenient season.Prized BANE, MARY MACMURREN, and ELSPYLOW (speaking at once).Now, now !Prized BANE.Let us have it now, mighty master, and we'llswear to the compact on this spot.MURREY.Have ye considered it ? Ye shall have yourwill on earth for a term, and then ye must servemy will in the pit of fire and brimstone for ever.GRizELD BANE.Be it so ! and make this very night the beginningof our power.MURREY.Ye are rare mates, indeed, to be so eagerly setupon evil.28 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.Prized BANE.Are we not, master? Swear us forthwith,and remove that dull darkness from thy presence.Call round thy liege imps and begin.Ay, ay ; they are all coming.MARY MACMURREN.Where, where, Grizeld?Prized BANE.A score of grinning faces to the right and theleft. Dost tliQU not see them, blind mole thatthou art? But where is he who was wont toattend thee, great chieftain ? Thou hast never aliege man like him.MURREY.Whom dost thou mean, haggard dame ?Prized BANE.He with the wreath round his throat; thefullest and bravest of them all.MURREY.He shall be with me when I meet you again.Prized BANE.Do not leave us now, princely-master! do notdeceive us again : bind us and give us powerere we part.MURREY.Go to the further side of the wood, and I '11follow you : I may not bind you here, for I hearWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 29the sound of horses approaching. Begone ;mortal man must not disturb our rites.[As the women are about to go off, Rutherford,as if just dismounted, holding hishorse by the bridle, appears from behinda rocky hillock which forms one of theside scenes, near the front, whilst the lightning,coming in a broad Flash across theStage, shows every thing upon it distinctlyfor a moment. A loud peal follows : Rutherfordand his horse draw back anddisappear ; and exeunt by the opposite sidePrized BANE, fyc., leaving MURREYalone. ,]And so there be verily such wretched creaturesin the world, who are, or desire to be, in leaguewith the wicked one ! It is a fearful and mortifyingglimpse of human nature. I hope theyhave not scared my poor child upon her way ;or rather, that this awful storm has prevented herfrom coming abroad. O, would I had not requestedher to meet me ! for I know her bravespirit and the strength of her affection ; neitherstorm nor danger will deter her. Why did Itempt her ? Alas, my gentle child ! is this thelove of a parent ? Here she is !30 WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.Enter VIOLET from the same side by which Rutherforddisappeared, and he runs to her andlocks her in his arms, both remaining silent foratime.VIOLET.My father ! my dear, dear father !MURREY.My own sweet Violet ! all that I can call myown, and worth all that I have lost. But forthee, my dear child, I should in truth be, what Iam now, by all but thyself, believed to be, nolonger a being of this world.VIOLET.Say not so, my dear father ! are there notkindness and humanity every where, whetheryou receive it under one name or another?And if this be not the case, take me with you,and you shall be no longer friendless and bereft.MURREY.No, Violet -, that I will never do. To see theeby stealth, were it but a few times in the courseof years, with sad dreary intervals between, isstill worth living for ; and more than a man,stained with the blood of a fellow creature, deserves.VIOLET.Ah, why will you tax yourself so harshly !The quarrel was fastened on you.WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY. 31MURREY.Fool that I was, to let the angry reproachesof a fool get such mastery over me ! were reasonand prowess bestowed upon me for such a despicableuse ? Oh ! had Fatheringham, whostood by, and was the only witness of the combat,endeavoured, as he might have done, to reconcileus, that blood had never been shed.VIOLET.But what is past is past ; let us think of thelot which is our portion now of that which liesbefore us. I will love you always, and think ofyou always, and be with you always, if you willpermit me. The rank and the fare and the homethat are good enough for you are good enoughfor me. And if Fatheringham be still in life,he may again appear to clear you from thiscrime. In the mean time, your supposed deathand your supposed body being found and buriedby your friends, give you in any distant retreata complete security. Let me then, my dearfather, go with you now, or follow you soon.MURREY.Is there not one to be left behind who is dearto you ?VIOLET.No one who is or ought to be so dear as you.And I shrink from the thought of being receivedinto a family who will despise me.32 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.MURREY.Violet, thou art too proud : thou hast got myinfirmity by inheritance. Yes, I was proud once :but, dead in men's belief, and separated fromthe social world, I am now, as it were, a deadmanin my own feelings. I look on the thingsof this earth as though I belonged not to it. I ammeek and chastened now, and will not encouragethee in the cherishing of imprudent unreasonablepride. But we will talk of this elsewhere :I hear voices from the wood.Wild cries from the women heard at a distance,and then nearer. ,]I fear they will return when they find I donot join them.Violet.Whom do you mean ?MURREY.Didst thou meet nobody on the way ?VIOLET.Nobody but our good minister and his man,going, as I suppose, to the Tower of Dungarren,to pray by the sick child.MURREY.I hope he did not see you.VIOLET.I hope he did not : for I tried to conceal my-witchcraft: A TRAGEDY. 33self behind a bush; and he and the servantpassed me in silence.[Wild cries without, nearer than beforeMURREY.Let us leave this spot : those creatures arereturning to it. I will tell thee about themwhen we are in safety. \ Exeunt in haste.SCENE IV.A narrow Passage Hall or Lobby.Enter PHEMY, meeting ANDERSON, who carries alight in his hand.ANDERSON.We may a* gang to our beds now, that are naeappointed to sit up.PHEMY.What a terrible storm we have had ! Thebrazen sconces in the hall, with the guns, pistols,pikes, and claymores, made such a clattering, asif they were coming down upon our heads altogether,with the slates and rafters of the old roofon the top of all. I 'm certain a thunderboltstruck somewhere or other on this unluckyhouse : I wish I were out of it.VOL. III. D34* WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ANDERSON.It's a pity ye dinna get your wish, then. I J msure there 's nobody rightfully belonging to thisfamily that has ony mind to baulk it.PHEMY.Don't be so hasty, Mr. Anderson : I had nointention to disparage the house of Dungarren,though there be neither silk nor tapestry on itswalls, like the houses that I have lived in.ANDERSON.Weel, weel ! be it sae ! Silk and tapestry maybeplanter than manners in the rich island ofBarra.PHEMY.I have lived in other places than Barra, I assureyou.ANDERSON.I dinna doubt ye hae ; but let us us mak naemair quarrelling about it now, whan we shou'da' be thankful' that we war sheltered frae sic astorm in ony house. Grizeld Bane and her mateswar on the moor the night, I '11 tak my with on't.God help ony poor wanderer wha may hae beenbelated near their haunts ! I wadna hae been inhis skin for the best harvest fee that ever was paidinto a Lowlander's purse or a Highlander'sspleuchan.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 35PHEMY.Was not the minister expected ?ANDERSON.O ! he, belike, might cross the moor unscathed.It wad be a bauld witch or warlock either, thatwad meddle wi' the minister. And that is thereason, I reckon, why he winna believe there isony sic thing in a 5 the country about.Enter Bawdy.PHEMY.Here comes Bawldy. What keeps thee up,man ?Bawdy.I 'm waiting for the minister.ANDERSON.Wha bade thee wait ? What is Duncan about ?Bawdy.He's about a Highlands's business, justdoing naething at a' ; and wad be snoring on thesettle in the turning o' a bannock, if fear wadlet him sleep.Themishe more afraid than the rest of you ?Bawdy.He has mair cause, mistress : he has seenD 236 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.bogle enow in his time, and kens a' the gaitsand fashions o' them.PHEMY.Has he indeed.Bawdy.Ay, certes ; by his ain tale, at least. We haeheard o' hawkins starting up in the shapes ofauld women, whan chased to a cross runningburn, but Duncan has seen it. Nae wonder ifhe be feared !ANDERSON.Weel, than, an thou will sit up, he '11 tell theestories to keep thee frae wearying ; and I dinnacare if I join ye my sell for an hour or sae, forI 'm nowise disposed for my ain bed in thatdark turret-chaucer.Bawdy.But gin ye keep company wi' stable loons andherds, Mr. Anderson, ye '11 gi' them, nae doubt,a wee smack o' your ain higher calling. Is thekey o' the cellar in your pouch ? My tongue'sunco dry after a' this fright.ANDERSON.Awa 5 , ye pawky thief! Dost tu think thatI '11 herrie the laird's cellar for thee or onybody ? But there 's the whisky bottle in myain cupboard, wi' some driblets in it yet, that yemay tak ; and deil a drap mair shall ye get, anWITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 37thy tongue were as guizened as a spending. Iwonder wha learnt sic a youngster as thee to besae pawky.PHEMY.Bawldy has by nature cunning enough to losenothing for want of asking ; and Mr. Anderson,too, has his own natural faculty for keeping whathe has got. Good night to you both.ANDERSON.Good night to ye. (Half aside.) I 'in sure Iwad rather bid you good night than good morrow,at ony time. exeunt severally*SCENE V.A large Chamber ', with a Bed at the bottom ofthe Stage, on which is discovered a sick Child,and LADY DUNGARREN seated by it.Enter DUNGARREN by the front, stepping verysoftly.DUNGARREN.Is she asleep ?LADY DUNGARREN.Yes ; she has been asleep for some minutes.D 338 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.Let me watch by her then, and go you to rest.LADY DUNGARREN.I dare not : her fits may return.DUNGARREN.The medicine you have given her will, I trust,prevent it : so do go to rest, my dear mother !LADY DUNGARREN.No, dear Robert; her disease is one overwhich no natural medicine has any power. Assureas there are witches and warlocks on earthand we know there are they have beendealing with her this night.DUNGARREN.Be not too sure of this. The noise of thestorm, and the flashes of lightning, might alarmher, and bring on convulsions.LADY DUNGARREN.Ah, foolish youth ! thou art proud of theheathenish learning thou hast gleaned up atcollege, and wilt not believe what is written inScripture.DUNGARREN.Nay, mother, say only that I do not believeWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 39\ Enter ANNABELLA behind them, and stops tolisten]such explanations of Scripture as have givencountenance to superstitious alarm. Our goodpastor himself attaches a different meaning tothose passages you allude to, and has but littlefaith in either witches or apparitions.LADY DUNGARREN.Yes, he has been at college, good man as heis. Who else would doubt of it ?DUNGARREN.But Violet Murrey has not been at college,and she has as little faith in them as Mr. Rutherford.ANNABELLA (advancing passionately.If Violet Murrey's faith, or pretended faith,be the rule we are to go by, the devil and hisbonds folk will have a fine time of it in this unhappycounty of Renfrew. She will take especialcare to speak no words for the detection ofmischief which she profits by.DUNGARREN.Profits by ! What means that foul insinuation?LADY DUNGARREN.Be not so violent, either of you. Soften thatD 440 WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.angry eye, Robert; and remember you are speakingto a lady.DUNGARREN.And let her remember that she is speaking ofa lady.ANNABELLA.What rank the daughter of a condemned malefactorholds in the country, better heralds thanI must determine.DUNGARREN.Malignant and heartless reproach ! Provokeme not beyond measure, Arabella. For thisgood woman's sake, for thy own sake, for thesake of female dignity and decorum, provoke menomore with words so harsh, so unjust, so unseemly.ANNABELLA.Not so unseemly, Dungarren, as degradingthe heir of an honourable house, with an attachmentso But I will say no more.DUNGARREN.You have said too much already.LADY DUNGARREN.Hush, hush ! for Heaven's sake be peaceable !You have wakened the child from her sleep.Look how she gazes about. Nurse ! nurse ! ho !(Calling loud off the Stage.)WITCHCRAFT *. A TRAGEDY. 41Enter Nurse.NURSE.Are they tormenting her again ? They haetime now, when their storm and their revelry ispast, to cast their cantrips here, I trow. (Shakingher List angrily.) O you ugly witch ! showyour el rich face from behind the hangings there,an* I '11 score you boon the breath wi' a jockLADY DUNGARREN (to Nurse).Dost thou see any thing ?NURSE.I thought I just saw a waft o' her haggardvisage in the dark shadow o' the bed hangingsyonder. But see or no see, she is in this room,as sure as I am a Christian saul. What elseshou'd mak the bairn stare sae, and wriggle wi'her body sae miserably ?DUNGARREN.But are not you a bold woman, Nurse, tothreaten a witch so bloodily ?NURSE.I 'm bauld enough to tak vengeance at my ainhan upon ony body that torments my bairn,though it war Satan himsel. Howsomever, Icarry about a leaf o' the Bible sewed to mypouch, now ; for things hae come to sic a fearful*4 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.pitch, that crooked pins and rowan-tree do nextto nae good at a'. Bless us a' ! I wish theminister war come.DUNGARREN.And you have your wish, Nurse ; for here heis.Enter RUTHERFORD, in a hurried, bewilderedmanner.LADY DUNGARREN.My good Sir, you are welcome : but my heartreproaches me for having brought you from homein such a dreadful night. What is the matterwith you ?DUNGARREN.He cannot speak.LADY DUNGARREN.Sit down in this chair, my good Sir. He isgoing to faint.[DUNGARREN supports him, and places himin an easy chair ; then fetches him a glassof water, which he swallows hastily. ~\DUNGARREN.Has the lightning touched you, dear Sir ?RUTHERFORD.Not the lightning.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 43LADY DUNGARREN.Has aught happened to you on the moor ?ANNABELLA.Have you seen any thing ? He has seensomething.DUNGARREN.Have you seen any thing, my good Sir ?RUTHERFORD.Nought, by God's grace, that had any powerto hurt me.DUNGARREN.But you have seen something which has overcomeyour mind to an extraordinary degree.Were another man in your case, I should saythat superstitious fears had o'ermaster'd him, andplayed tricks with his imagination.RUTHERFORD.What is natural or unnatural, real or imaginary,who shall determine ? But I have seen that,which, if I saw it not, the unassisted eyesight cangive testimony to nothing.LADY DUNGARREN and ANNABELLA [both speakingtogether].What was it ? What was it ?[RUTHERFORD gives no answer].44 WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.You saw, then, what has moved you so much,distinctly and vividly ?RUTHERFORD.Yea, his figure and the features of his face, asdistinctly, in the bright glare of the lightning, asyour own now appear at this moment.DUNGARREN.A man whom you knew, and expected not tofind at such an hour and in such a place. Butwhat of this ? Might not such a thing naturallyhappen ?RUTHERFORD (lowering his voice, and drawingDUNGARREN aside, while ANNABELLA drawscloser to him to listen).No, Robert Kennedy : he whose form andface I distinctly saw, has been an indweller ofthe grave these two years.DUNGARREN (in a low Voice flo).Indeed ! Are you sure of it ?RUTHERFORD.I put his body into the coffin with mine ownhands, and helped to carry it to the grave ; yetthere it stood before me, in the bright blazing ofthe storm, and seemed to look upon me, too, witha look of recognition most strange and horrible.WITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY. 45ANNABELLA (eagerly.Whose ghost was it ? Who was the dead manyou saw ?RUTHERFORD (rising from his chair 9 and steppingback from her with displeasure).I reckoned, Madam, but upon one listener.LADY DUNGARREN.Nay, be not angry with her. Who can wellrefrain from listening to such a tale ? And benot angry with me neither, when I ask you onequestion, which it so much concerns me to know.Saw you aught besides this apparition ? anywitches or creatures of evil ?RUTHERFORD.I will answer that question, Lady, at anothertime, and in greater privacy.ANNABELLA (fa LADY DUNGARREN).He has seen them ; it is evident he has. Butsome of his friends might be amongst them :there may be good cause for secrecy and caution.DUNGARREN (to ANNABELLA).Why do you press so unsparingly upon a manwhose spirits have, from some cause or other,received such a shock ?RUTHERFORD.I forgive her, Dungarren : say no more aboutit. It is God's goodness to me that I am here46 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.unhurt, again to do the duty of a Christian pastorto my dear and friendly flock now convened.Let me pray by the bed of that poor sufferingchild, for her, for myself, and for all here present.LADY DUNGARREN (tO ANNABELLA).Let us put her in a different position beforehe begin : she must be tired of that ; for see,she moves again uneasily.[LADY DUNGARREN takes ANNABELLA to thebottom of the Stage, and they both seememployed about the child, while DUNGARRENand RUTHERFORD remain on the front .]DUNGARREN.It is a most extraordinary and appalling apparitionyou have seen. What do you think ofit?RUTHERFORD."What can I think of it, but that the dead aresometimes permitted to revisit the earth, and thatI verily have seen it.DUNGARREN.I would more readily believe this than givecredit to the senseless power and malevolence ofwitchcraft, which you have always held in derision.RUTHERFORD.It is presumption to hold any thing in derision.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 47DUNGARREN.Ha ! say you so, in this altered tone of voice!Have you met with any thing to-night to changeyour opinions on this subject? Have you seenany of the old women, so strangely spoken of,on the moor ?'. ' ''IRUTHERFORD.Would that I had only seen such !DUNGARREN.The voice in which you speak, the expressionwith which you look upon me, makes me tremble.Am I concerned with aught that you have seen ?RUTHERFORD.You are, my dear Robert, and must think nomore of Violet Murrey. (A deep silence Yes ;it has stricken you to the heart. Think upon itas you ought. I expect no answer.DUNGARREN (endeavouring to recover speech.But I must 1 will try 1 must answeryou, for I (tearing open his waistcoat, andpanting for breaths I can believe nothingthat accuses her.RUTHERFORD.Were a daughter of my own concerned, Icould not be more distressed.DUNGARREN.It makes me distracted to hear thee say so !48 , WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.RUTHERFORD.Go to thine own room, and endeavour to composethy mind, and I will pray for thee here.Pray for thyself, too, in private : pray earnestly,for there is, I fear, a dreadful warfare of passionabiding thee.DUNGARREN by the front, whileRUTHERFORD joins the ladies by the sickbed,where they prepare to kneel as theScene closes.ACT II.SCENE I. The inside of a miserable Cottage,with a Board or coarse Table by the wall, onwhich stand some empty wooden Bickers orBowls.Enter Welkin, who runs eagerly to the board,then turns away disappointed.Welkin.Na, na ! tui yet ! a' tui yet ! Milk nane !WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 49parritch nane ! pointing to the bowls, and thenpressing his stomach.) Tui there ! tui here !Woe worth it ! to say they wad be fou, an'they 're no fou ! Woe worth it ! woe worththem a' !Enter Bawdy, and Welkin runs to take hold ofhim.Bawdy (frightened.Han's aff, I tell thee !Welkin.Hast brought ony thing ? Gie me 't, giemet.Bawdy (pulling out a horse-shoefrom his pocket.Stan' aff, I say ! Nane o' your witch nips forme! I hae, maybe, brought what thou winnalike, an tu hae wit enough to ken what it is.Welkin.Will 't kill me ?Bawdy.Ay; full as he is, he 's frightened foret;the true mark of warlockry. They hae linnethim in wi' the rest : naething's owre waft forSatan, an it hae a saul o' ony kind to be tint.Welkin.Will 't kill me ?VOL. III. E50 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.Bawdy.No : but I Ml score thy imp's brow wi 't,that 's what I '11 do, an tu lay a finger on me.But dinna lower sae : stan' afF a bit, an answermy questions, and there's silver for thee. (Throwinghim some pence.) Was tu on the moor i' thenight-time, wi' thy mither ?Welkin.Mither?Bawdy.Ay ; was tu on the moor wi' her, whan thethunder roared ?Welkin.Thunder roared, fire roared, thunder roared !hurl ! hurl ! hurl ! (Imitating the noise ofthundersBawdy.Ay ; an' ye ware there ?Welkin.Ay, there. (Nodding his headyBawdy.An' wha was there beside ?Welkin.Beside ?Bawdy.Beside thee an' thy mither. What saw yethere ?WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 51Welkin.Black man an* fire : hurl ! hurl ! (Making anoise as beforeBawdy.Gude saP us ! has tu seen the deil then, bodily?Welkin.Deil, deil !Bawdy (shrinking back from him).Keep me frae scathe ! That I should stan*sae near ane that has been wi' Satan himsel !What did tu see forbye ?Welkin.Saw ? Saw folk.Bawdy.What folk ? Auld women ?Welkin.Auld women; young women. Saw them a*on fire. Hurl ! hurl ! hurl !Bawdy.Saw a young woman ? Was it Mangy Kirk'scrooked daughter ?Welkin.Na, joe ! young woman.Bawdy.What's her name ? What did they ca' her?E 252 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.Welkin.Leddy young teddy, on fire.Bawdy.Gude saf' us a' ! can this be true ![Voices without']FIRST VOICE.I '11 tak amends o' her for cheating us again.SECOND VOICE.An' sae will I, spiteful' carlin ! Maun riae-body hae power but herself ?Enter MARY MACMURREN and ELSPY Low, andBawdy hides himself behind the door.MARY MACMURREN.There 's power to be had, that 's certain :power that can raise the storm and the fiend ;ay, that can do ony thing. But we 're aye to bepuir yet : neither meat nor money, after a' sdune !ELSPY LOW.Neither vengeance nor glawmery, for a' thewicket thoughts we hae thought, for a' the fearful'words we hae spoken, for a' the backward prayerswe hae prayed ! I'll rive her even out o' herhead, though they shou'd glare upon us fraetheir hollow sconces, like corpse-candles frae agrave-stane.Witchcraft I A TRAGEDY. 53MARY MACMURREN (pointing to the board).Even thay puir cogs are as toom as before, andmy puir idiot as hungry. Hast tu had ony thing,Wilkin? (Turns round to him and discoversBawdy.) Ha! wha has tu wi' thee? (ToBawdy.) What brought thee here, in a mischiefto thee! Thou's Dungarren's herd, I reckon.Bawdy.I came frae the tower of Dungarren wr* anerrand, I wou'd hae ye to wit.MARY MACMURREN.Tell thy errand, then, and no lurk that gate,in a nook, like a thoumart in a dowcot : for if tubecome here without an errand, thou shalt rueit dearly to the last hour o* thy life.Bawdy.Ista this Grizeld Bane's house ?MARY MACMURREN.No, silly loon ! it 's my house. She 's but arin agate tawny, frae far awa' parts, that came tobe my lodger. Ay ; and she may gang as shecame, for me : I '11 no harbour her ony mair.Nae mair Grizeld Banes in my house, to reevean' to herrie me sae ! She maun pack aff wi' herselfthis very day.E 354 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.Enter Prized BANE.Prized BANE (looking on her with sterncontempt).Who speaks of Grizeld Bane with such unwarywords ? Repeat them, I pray thee. (MARYstands abashed Thou wilt not. (To ELSPY,in like mannerly And what hast thou to say ofGrizeld Bane ? (A pause And thou, too, artsilent before my face.ELSPY LOW.There *s a callant frae Dungarren, i' the nook,that comes on an errand to thee.Prized BANE (/O Bawdy),Do not tremble so, silly child ! What is thineerrand ?Bawdy.She bade me she bade me say ye mauncome to her.Prized BANE.To whom, and where ? Thou speaks as ifmy hand were already on thy throat, where itshall very soon be, if thou tell not thy errandmore distinctly.Bawdy.The stranger teddy at the tower, the LeddyWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 55Annabelll, desires that ye wad meet her in thelone shed, near the outer gate, in the afternoon.Gi' me an answer, an please ye.Prized BANE (in a kind of chant).Where there be ladies and where there be lords,Mischief is making with glances and words,Work is preparing for pistols and swords.Bawdy.Is that an answer?Prized BANE.She may take it for one ; but if it please theebetter, thou may'st say to her, I will do as shedesires. And take this token with thee, youngster.(Going close to him')Bawdy.Na, na, I thank ye ; I have answer enough.\JEtxit in a fright.Prized BANE (turning to MARY MACMURRENand ELSPY Low).And ye are dissatisfied, forsooth ! you musthave power as you will and when you will.ELSPY LOW.Thou hast deceived us.Prized BANE.Was there not storm enough to please ye ?"E 45O WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.ELSPY LOW.Enough to crack the welkin ; but what gotwe by it ?Prized BANE.Did he come in the storm ? Did you not seehim and hear him ?MARY MACMURREN.Certes did he; but what gat we by it? Hekeepit na' his triste wi' us the second time ; an'we gaed wearily hame on our feet, as wat and aspuir as we came.Prized BANE.O that false tongue ! ye rode upon clouds : Isaw you pass over my head, and I called to you.MARY MACMURREN.The woman is a fiend or bereft a' together !I walked hame on my feet, en' gaed to my miserablebed, just as at ony other time, an' sa didshe.Prized BANE.But rode ye not afterwards, my chucks? Isaw you both pass over my head, and I calledto you.ELSPY LOW.If we ware upon clouds, we ware sleeping a'the while, for I ken naething anent it. Do ye,neighbour? (To MARY MACMURREN.)WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 5JMARY MACMURREN.I dare na' just say as ye say, simmer, for Idreamt I was flying in the air and somebodybehind me.Prized BANE.Ay, ay, ay ; ye will discern mist and mysteriesat last. But ye must have power, forsooth !as ye list and when ye list. If he did not keeptriste in the night, let us cast a spell for him inthe day. When doors and windows are darkened,mid-day is as potent as midnight. Shut out thelight and begin. But if he roar and rage atyou when he does come, that is no fault of mine.(Draws a circle on the.floor.}MARY MACMURREN and ELSPY LOW (atNa, na ! dinna bring him up now.\ Exeunt hastily, leaving Prized alone.Prized BANE (chanting to herself after havingcompleted the circle).Black of mien and stern of brow,Dark one, dread one, hear me now !Come with potency and speed ;Come to help me in my need.Kith and kindred have I none,Ever wand'ring, ever lone.Black of mien and stern of brow,Dark one, dread one, hear me now !He is now at hand ; the floor yawns undermy feet, and the walls are running round ; he is58 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.here ! (bending her head very low and then raisingit.} Ha ! is it thou ? art thou risen in thy master'sstead ? It becomes thee to answer my call ;it is no weak tie that has bound us together.I loved thee in sin and in blood : when thenoose of death wrung thee, I loved thee. Andnow thou art a dear one and a terrible with thePrince of the power of the air. Grant what Iask ! grant it quickly. Give me of thy power ;I have earned it. But this is a mean, narrowden ; the cave of the lin is near, where water issoughing and fern is waving ; the bat-bird clutchingo'er head, and the lithe snake stirring below ;to the cave, to the cave ! we'll hold our councilthere.[Exit with frantic gestures, as if courteouslyshowing tie way to some great personage.SCENE II.A Flower Garden by the cottage of VIOLET Murrey,with the building partly occupying thebottom of the Stage, and partly concealed.Enter DUNGARREN, who stops and looks roundhim, then mutters to himself in a low voice, thenspeaks audibly.DUNGARREN.The lily, and the rose, and the gillyflower ;WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 59things the most beautiful in nature, planted andcherished by a hand as fair and as delicate asthemselves ! Innocence and purity should livehere ; ay, and do live here : shall the ambiguouswhisper of a frightened night-scared man, behis understanding and learning what they may,shake my confidence in this ? It was foolish tocome on such an errand. (Turns back, and isabout to retire by the way he entered, then seemsirresolute, and then stops shortly Yet being here,I had better have some parley with her : I maylearn incidentally from her own lips, what willexplain the whole seeming mystery. (Lookingagain on the flowers as he proceeds towards thehouse Pretty pansy! thou hast been welltended since I brought thee from the southcountry with thy pretty friend, the carnation bythy side. Ay, and ye are companions still ; thou,too, hast been well cared for, and all thy swellingbuds will open to the sun ere long.Enter VIOLET from the house, while he is stoopingover the flowers.VIOLET.You are come to look after your old friends,Dungarren ?DUNGARREN.I have friends here worth looking after, if60 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.beauty and sweetness give value. Thou art anexcellent gardener, Violet ; things thrive withthee wonderfully, even as if they were consciouswhose flowers they are, and were proud of it.VIOLET.Ah ! that were no cause for pride. Methinks,if they were conscious whose flowers they are,they would droop their heads and wither away.DUNGARREN.Say not so : thou art melancholy ; the stormhas affected thy spirits. Those who were abroadin it say that the lightning was tremendous.VIOLET.It was tremendous.DUNGARREN.And the rolling of the thunder was awful.VIOLET.It was awful.DUNGARREN.And the moor was at times one blaze of fierylight, like returning bursts of mid-day, givingevery thing to view for an instant in the depthof midnight darkness. (A pause.) One whowas there told me so. (Another pause, and sheseems uneasy.) And more than that, a strangeunlikely story. (A still longer pause, and shemore uneasy.) But thou hast no desire to hearWITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY. 61it : even natural curiosity has forsaken thee.What is the matter ?VIOLET.Nothing is the matter : tell me whatever youplease, and I will listen to it. Were witches onthe moor?DUNGARREN.Yes, witches were there, but that is not mystory. There was a form seen on the moor mostunlike any thing that could be evil. Thou artpale and disturbed ; hast thou a guess of mymeaning?VIOLET.The moor is wide, and benighted wanderersmight be upon it of different forms and degrees.DUNGARREN.But none who could look like one, whom,nevertheless, 'tis said, it did resemble,VIOLET (endeavouring to recover herself).Nay, nay, Dungarren ! do not amuse yourselfwith me : if the devil has power to assume whatform he pleases, that will account for your storyat once. If he has not, you have only to supposethat some silly girl, with her plaid over herhead, was bewildered by the storm at her trystingplace, and that will explain it sufficiently.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.These are light words, methinks, to followupon melancholy gravity so suddenly.VIOLET.If my words displease you, Dungarren, thereis more cause for sorrow than surprise, and thesooner I cease to offend the better.DUNGARREN.Violet Murrey of Tore wood ! ! !VIOLET.Robert Kennedy of Dungarren ! ! !DUNGARREN.What am I to think ?VIOLET.Thoughts are free : take your range. Thinkingis better than speaking for both of us ; andso, if you please, we shall wish each other goodmorning. (Turning from him with a hurriedstep towards the houseDUNGARREN (Jbttowing her).We must not so part, my Violet. Had anywoman but thyself used me thus, but what ofthat! I love thee and must bear with thee.VIOLET.No, Robert Kennedy ; thou lowest me not :for there is suspicion harboured in thy mindwhich love would have spurned away.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 63DUNGARREN.Say not harboured. O no ! Spurned and rejected,yet, like a trodden adder, turning andrearing again. I ask to know nothing that thoumeekest to conceal. Say only that thou wert inthy own home during the night, as I am surethou wert, and I will be satisfied, though all thediabolical witnesses of Renfrewshire were set inarray against thee.VIOLET.Must I be forced to bear witness in my ownbehalf? There is one who should bear witnessfor me, and lacking that evidence, I scorn everyother.DUNGARREN.And where is that witness to be found ?VIOLET.In the heart of Dungarren.DUNGARREN.Thou wrings it to the quick ! I am proudand impetuous, but have I deserved this haughtyreserve ? Dost thou part with me in anger ?VIOLET.I am angry, and must leave thee ; but perhapsI am wrong in being so.DUNGARREN.Indeed thou art wrong.6l< WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.VIOLET.Be thou charitable, then, and forgive me ; butfor the present let us part.\ Exit into the house.DUNGARREN (alone.Her behaviour is strange and perplexing.Was her anger assumed or sincere ? Was she,or was she not, on that accursed moor ? " Somesilly girl bewildered by the storm at her trystingplace," were not these her words? Ay, bymy faith ! and glancing at the truth too obviously; at the hateful, the distracting, thehitherto unsuspected truth. It is neither witch,warlock, nor devil, with whom she held hertriste. Yea, but it is a devil, whom I will resistto perdition ! It is a devil who will make meone also. O, this proud rising of my heart ! itgives the cruelty of distraction ; and, but forthe fear of God within me, would nerve myhand for blood.Re-enter VIOLET, in alarm, from the house.VIOLET.Oh Robert, Robert ! what mean those tossingof the arms those gestures of distraction ?You doubt my faith, you think me unworthy,and it moves you to this fearful degree. If Ideserve your attachment I deserve to be trusted.WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY. 65Think of this, dear Robert, for it kills me to seeyou so miserable.DUNGARREN.Dear! you call me dear, only because youpity me.VIOLET.I call thee dear, because because Outon thee, Robert Kennedy ! hast thou no moregenerosity than this ? (Bursting into tears.)DUNGARREN (catching her in his arms, thenunclasping her suddenly and dropping on hisMee).forgive me, forgive me! I have treatedthee ungenerously and unjustly: forgive me,my own sweet girl !VIOLET.1 will not only forgive thee, but tell thee everythingwhen I am at liberty to do so. Let usnow separate ; I have need of rest.\ He leads her towards the house, caressingher hand tenderly as they go ; then exeuntseverally.VOL. III.6(1 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.SCENE III.A Passage or Entrance-room in the Tower.Enter ANDERSON.ANDERSON (looking off the Stage.What 5 s the cunning loon standing, wi' his lugsae near that door for ? (Calling loud.) What'stu doing there, rascal ?Enter Bawdy.Wha gives thee leave to come near the chamberso' gentle folks, and lay thy blackened lug saeclose to the key-hole ?Bawdy.As for gentle folks, they come to me oftenernor I gang to them ; and as for my lug, therewas nae need to lay it to the key-hole whan thedoor was half open.ANDERSON.Catch thee who can unprovided wi' a readyanswer ! Thou hast the curiosity o' the devilin thee and his cunning to boot : what businesshast thou to pry into people's secrets ?WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. jBawdy.A secret, forsooth, auld wi' an open door andvoices as loud as twa wives cracking in the lone !And gude be wi' us a' ! they war only talking o'what we are a 5 talking or thinking o' fra' morningtill night and fra' Sabbath day till Saturday.ANDERSON.And what is that, ne'er-do-weel ?Tawdry.What should it be but witchcraft and theyoung teddy ? But this last bout, I trow, is thestrangest bout of a*.ANDERSON.What has happened now ?Bawdy.As I was passing by the door, I heard Nursetell the Leddy Annabelll how the young teddywas frightened frae her rest, as she lay in herbed, wi' the room darkened.ANDERSON.And how was that ?Bawdy.Witches cam' into the room, I canna tell howmony o' them, and ane o' them cam' upon thebed, and a'maist moored her.ANDERSON.The Lord preserve us !F 268 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.Bawdy.Ay ; and she would hae been moored aethergin she had na caught haud of the witch'sarm, and squeezed it sae hard that the witch ranawa', and left a piece o' her gown sleeve in theyoung teddy's han'.ANDERSON.It was Grizeld Bane or Mary Macmurren, I '11be bound for 't.Bawdy.Wha it was she could na say, for she could nasee i' the dark.ANDERSON.But the piece of the gown sleeve will revealit. Show me that, and I '11 ken wha it was, to acertainty. I ken illa gown and garment belongingto them.Bawdy.So does Nurse, too : but the young teddy tooka fit, as the bodies left the chaucer, and she haslost the clout.ANDERSON.That was a pity. The chamber maun besearched for it carefully, else they'll come again,and wi' some cantrip or other, join it into thesleeve it was riven frae, as if it ne'er had beenriven at a'. But gang to thy crowd, man, anddinna tine a meal for a marvel. Thou hast nae busi-WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 69ness here : the kitchen and the byre set thee betterthan lobbies and chambers. [Exit Bawdy.]That callant lurks about the house like a brownie.He 's a clever varlet, too : he can read the kittlenames in the Testament, and ding the dominiehimsel at the questions and catches. He 's ascunning and as covetous as ony gray-haired sinnerr* the parish ; a convenient tool, I suspect, inthe hands of a very artful woman. \JLocit.SCENE IV.The Apartment of ANNABELLA, who enters, andthrows herself into a chair, remaining silent forashort time, and then speaks impatiently.ANNABELLA.What can detain her so long ? Could shemiss finding him ? He is seldom far off at thishour of the day, when broth and beef are on theboard ; and he can send a boy to the hill as hissubstitute. I wish the sly creature were come ;for time passes away, and with it, perhaps, opportunity.Enter PHEMY.PHEMY.He 's here, Madam.F 370 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ANNABELLA.That 's well. Let him enter immediately, anddo thou keep watch in the outer room.Exit PHEMY, and presently Bawdy enters.I want thee to do an errand for me again,Bawldy. Do not look so grave and so cowed,man : thou shalt be well paid for it.Bawdy.Atween, I *m ready enough to do ony errand,gin there be nae witchery concerned wi 't.ANNABELLA.And what the worse wilt thou be if thereshould ? Didst thou not go to Grizeld Bane thismorning, and return safe and sound as before,both soul and body, with a good crown in thypocket to boot ?Bawdy.Certes my body cam' back safe enough ; butfor my puir saul, Lord hae mercy on it ! forwhen 1 gaed to my kye on the hill again, I triedto croon o'er to myself the hunter and sixteenpsalm, and second commandment, and couldhardly remember a word o' them. Oh ! she 'san awful' witch, and scares the very wit frae ane'snoddle.WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 71ANNABELLA.Never fear, Bawldy : she has left thee enoughof that behind to take care of thine own interest.Thou hadst wit enough, at least, to do thy businesswith her ; for she came to me in good time,to the spot which I appointed.Bawdy.If she kens the place, she may meet you thereagain, without my ganging after her. The Lordpreserve us ! I wadna enter that house againfor twa crowns.ANNABELLA.Be not afraid, man : it is not to that house 1would send thee ; and thou shalt have two crownsfor thy errand, though it be both an easy and ashort one.Bawdy.As for that, Madam, an it war baith lang an 5hard, I wadna mind it, so as it be an errand aChristian body may do.ANNABELLA.A Christian body may go and speak a fewwords privately to Mrs. Violet Murrey's prettymaid, I should think.Bawdy (sheepishly.There *s nae great harm in that, to be sure.F 42 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ANNABELLA.And a Christian body may slip a crown quietlyinto her hand, andBawdy (interrupting her in a low murmuringvoice).Ay, ane o' the twa ye spak o'.ANNABELLA.No, indeed, Bawldy ; a third crown, which Iwill give thee to take from thine own pocket,and put into her pretty hand. ' Perhaps it mayprove the forerunner of some other token betweenyou. She is a good tight girl, but a fewyears older than thyself: she may take a fancyto thee.Bawdy.Ah ! Madam Annabelll, somebody has beentelling you that I hae a fancy for her ; for theynever devall wi' their havers. But what is sheto do for the crown ? for I reckon she maun wonit some way or another.ANNABELLA.In a very easy way. Tell her to send me hermistress's striped lutestring gown, for I want tolook at the pattern of it, and will restore it toher immediately.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. JBawdy.Is that a' ?ANNABELLA.Only thou must make her promise to conceal,from her mistress and from every body, that Iborrowed the gown. Be sure to do that, Bawldy.Bawdy.That's very curious, now. Whaup wad betheharm o' telling that ye just looked at it.ANNABELLA.Thou 'rt so curious, boy, there 's no concealingany thing from thee. Art thou silly enoughto believe that I only want to look at it ?Bawdy.Na, I guessed there was somewhat hint it.ANNABELLA.And thou shalt know the whole, if thou wiltpromise to me solemnly not to tell any body.Bawdy.I '11 tell nobody. Gif my ain mither war tospeer, she wad ne'er get a word anent it frae me.ANNABELLA.I have been consulting with Grizeld Bane,about what can be done to relieve our poor sickchild from her misery, for those who put herinto it can best tell how to draw her out of it,and she says, a garment that has been upon the74 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.body of a murderer, or the child of a murderer,it does not matter which, put under the pillowof a witched bairn, will recover it from fits,were it ever so badly tormented. But, mark mewell ! should the person who owns the garmentever come to the knowledge of it, the fits willreturn again, as bad as before. Dost thou understandme ?Bawdy.I understand you weel enough : but willwitches speak the truth, whan the deil is theirteacher ?ANNABELLA.Never trouble thy head about that : we canbut try. Fetch me the gown from thy sweetheart,and thou shalt have more money than this,by and by. (Gives him moneyBawdy.Since you will ca' her my sweetheart, 1 cannahelp it; though I ken weel enough it's butmocking.ANNABELLA.Go thy ways, and do as I bid thee, withoutloss of time, and thou wilt soon find it good, profitableearnest. She will make a very goodthrifty wife, and thou a good maitland drover,when thou 'rt old enough. [Exit Bawdy.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. *J5ANNABELLA (alone].Now shall I have what I panted for, and farbetter, too, than I hoped. To be tormented bywitchcraft is bad; but to be accused and punishedfor it is misery so exquisite, that, to purchase itfor an enemy, were worth a monarch's ransom.Ay, for an enemy like this, who has robbed meof my peace, stolen the affections of him whomI have loved so ardently and so long ; yea, whohas made me, in his sight, hateful and despicable.I will bear my agony no longer. The heart ofDungarren may be lost for ever ; but revenge ismine, and I will enjoy it. It is a fearful anddangerous pleasure, but all that is left for me.Oh, oh ! that I should live to see him thedoating lover of a poor, homely for homelyshe is, let the silly world call her what theyplease artful girl, disgraced and degraded;the daughter of a murderer, saved only from thegibbet by suicide or accident ! That I shouldlive to witness this ! But having lived towitness it, can revenge be too dearly purchased ?No ; though extremity of suffering in this world,and beyond this world, were the price Cease,cease ! ye fearful thoughts ! I shall but accuseher of that of which she is, perhaps, really guilty.Will this be so wicked, so unpardonable ? Howcould a creature like this despoil such a woman76 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.as myself of the affections of Dungarren, or anyman, but by unholy arts?Enter PHEMY in alarm.PHEMY.Madam, Madam ! there are people in thepassage.ANNABELLA.And what care I for that ?PHEMY.You were speaking so loud, I thought therewas somebody with you. (Looking fearfullyround.)ANNABELLA.Whom dost thou look for? Could any onebe here without passing through the outer room ?PHEMY.I crave your pardon, Madam, they can enterby holes, as I have heard say, that would keepout a moth or a beetle.AANNABELLA.Go, foolish creature ! Thy brain is wild withthe tales thou hast heard in this house. Did Ispeak so loud ?PHEMY.Ay, truly, Madam, and with such violentWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.changes of voice, that I could not believe youalone.ANNABELLA.I was not aware of it. It is a natural infirmity,like talking in one's sleep : my mother had thesame. I '11 go to the garden, where the flowersand fresh air will relieve me.PHEMY.Are you unwell ?ANNABELLA.Yes, girl ; but say so to no one, I pray thee.[Exeunt.ACT III.SCENE I. A half-formed Cave, partly roofedwith rock and partly open to the sky, which isseen through the overhanging bushes ; a Burnor Brook crossing the mouth of it, at the bottomof the Stage, banked by precipitous rocks mixedwith wood and fern.VOICE (heard without.Indeed, thou canst not pass this way.78 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.SECOND VOICEI don't mind it at all ; the water will do menoharm.FIRST VOICE (without).Thou shalt not wet thy feet, my dear child,when a father's arms are here, so able and sohappy to carry thee.Enter MURREY by the mouth of the cave, bearingVIOLET in his arms, whom he sets down bysome loose rocks near the front of the Stage.VIOLET.Set me down, my dear father ; I am heavy.MURREY.I could carry thee to the world's end, myown dear girl. O that thou wert again a baby,and mine arms lock'd round thee as of yore!VIOLET.I remember it, father.MURREY.Dost thou, sweet one? Ah, ah ! thee in myarms, and she whom I loved by my side, andthy pretty worthless lips cooing to us by turnsan utterance that made all words contemptible! Alas, alas ! such days, and many brightsucceeding days have been and are gone. Thefatal passion of a few short moments has madeWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 79me a homeless outlaw, while reproach, instead ofprotection, is a father's endowment for thee.(Sits down on a low detached rock, and burieshis face in the folds of his plaidsVIOLET.Dear, dear father ! do not reproach yourselfso harshly. If the world call what you havedone by a very dreadful name, it is not a trueone : equal fighting, though for a foolish quarrel,deserves not that appellation.MURREY.Whatever it may deserve, it will have it, whenthere is no witness to prove the contrary. Fa-thuringiaalone was present, and he disappearedon the instant. When my trial came, I couldnot prove that the man I had slain fell in equalcombat ; nay, was the real aggressor in first attackingme.VIOLET.It was cowardly and strange, it was not theact of a friend to disappear and leave you soexposed.MURREY.Some evil fate befell him : he was not alive, Iam certain, when I was apprehended, else hewould have come forward like an honest, manlyfriend in my justification. The sentence of death80 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.is upon me ; the mark of Cain is on my forehead; I am driven from the fellowship of men.VIOLET.Say not so ; for you have by the accidentaldeath of your servant been, as it were, providentiallysaved from a fearful end ; and beingso saved, I must needs believe that some betterfortune is in reserve for you.MURREY.Ay, poor Donald ! I believe he would willinglyhave died for my sake, and Providence did sodispose of him. I little thought, after my escapefrom prison, when I had changed apparel withhim, how completely our identity was to be confounded.He lies in the grave as James Murreyof Torwood, in an unhallowed grave, as amurderer.VIOLET.Were you near him when he fell into the pit ?MURREY.Dear Violet, thou art bewildered to ask mesuch a question ! When we had changed clothescompletely, and I had even forced upon him as agift, which he well deserved, the gold watch andseals of my family, we parted ; and when hisbody was discovered, many weeks afterwards,the face, as I understand, from the mutilationsof bruises and corruption, was no longer recog-WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 81disable. But this is a mournful subject, and itis useless to dwell upon it now.VIOLET.Very true ; let us speak of those things forwhich there is still cause of thankfulness. TheIrish home you have found on the mountains ofWicklow, is it not a pleasant one ?MURREY.Pleasant to those who look on sky and cliff,on wood and torrent, to rouse and refresh themind, in the intervals of such retirement as hath apurpose and a limit. To the lonely outcast whatscene is pleasant ? The meanest man who plieshis honest trade in the narrow lane of a city,where passers-by may wish him a good day, orbid God speed him, has a domicile and a homewhich I think of with envy.VIOLET.do not, then, live any longer in this desertedsituation !MURREY.1 know what thou wilt offer, but it must notbe.VIOLET.Why so ? Since I have lost my dear mother,and have no farther duties to detain me here,may I not cross the sea with you now, and spendVOL. III. G8*2 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.some time with you in Wicklow. It will bethoughtthat I am gone to visit our Irish relation.MURREY.No, my affectionate child, that may not be.VIOLET.I should go to our relation first, and nobodyshould know that I went anywhere else butDungarren ; nor should I even tell it to himwithout your permission.MURREY (rising quicMyfrom his seat.Which thou shalt never have.VIOLET.Why do you utter those words so vehemently ?He is honourable and true.MURREY.He is thy lover, and thou believes him to beso.VIOLET.Are you displeased that he is my lover ?MURREY.Yes, I am displeased, for he will never be thyhusband.VIOLET.O think not so hardly of him ! in his heartthere is honour even stronger than affection.And if I might but tell him of your beingaliveWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. S3MURREY.Art thou mad ? art thou altogether bereft ofunderstanding ? Swear to me, on the faith of aChristian woman, that thou wilt never reveal it.VIOLET.He is incapable of betraying any one, and farlessMURREY.Hold thy tongue ! hold thy tongue, simplecreature ! Every man seems true to the womanwhose affections he hath conquered. I know thetruth of man and the weakness of woman. Reasonnot with me on the subject, but solemnly promiseto obey me. I should feel myself as onefor whom the rope and the gibbet are preparing,should any creature but thyself know of mybeing alive.VIOLET.Woe is me ! this is misery indeed.MURREY.Do not look on me thus with such mingledpity and surprise. Call what I feel an excess ofdistrust a disease a perversion of mind, ifthou wilt, but solemnly promise to obey me.VIOLET.Let my thoughts be what they may, I darenot resist the will of a parent j I solemnly proseWITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.mise (looking up to heaven, and then bending herhead very low).MURREY.I am satisfied, and shall return to my boat,which waits for me on the Clyde, near the mouthof this burn, with a mind assured on so importanta point, and assured of thy good conduct andaffection. (Looking about, alarmed.) I hear anoise.VIOLET.'Tis the moving of some owlet or hawk inthe rests of the rock over-head. To this retiredspot of evil report no human creature ever venturesto come, even at mid-day.MURREY.Yes, I remember it used to be called the Warlock'sden, and had some old legendary pretensionsto the name. But there is a noise. (Looksup to the open part of the cave, and discoversDUNGARREN above, looking down upon them.)VIOLET.It is Dungarren ; what shall we do ? Begone,father?MURREY.I must stand to it now ; he will be down uponus in an instant : it is too late to avoid him.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 85VIOLET.No, it is not ; he shall not come down. (Callingup to him.) Robert Kennedy, is it thou ?DUNGARREN (above).Does the voice of Violet Murrey dare to askme the question ?VIOLET.Stay where thou art, and come no farther ; Idare ask of thee to be secret and to be generous.DUNGARREN (above).Distracting and mysterious creature, I obeythee. (Retires.)VIOLET.He retires, and we are safe. Let us now separate.(In a low voice Farewell, my dearfather! you will come and see me again?MURREY.I hope next summer to pay thee another anda less hurried visit. Farewell. (Holding herback.) No, no ! do not embrace me.VIOLET.He has retired, and will not look again.MURREY.Be not too confident. Farewell, and rememberthy solemn promise. My ship will sail forG 386 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.Ireland tomorrow morning early, and thou shalthear from me soon.exit by the way he entered.VIOLET (alone).If they should meet without, and they may doso ! But that must not be. (Calling in a loudvoice.) Dungarren, Dungarren ! art thou stillwithin hearing ?(DUNGARREN reappears above.)I cannot speak to thee in so loud a voice ; comedownto me here.\JELe descends by the jutting rocks into thebottom of the cave in the dress and accoutrementsof an angler , with a fishingin his hand, and stands before herwith a stern and serious look, remainingperfectly silent"]O Robert Kennedy ! look not on me thus ! Imeant to thank you for your friendly forbearance,but now I have no utterance: I cannotspeak to you when you so look upon me.DUNGARREN.Silence is best where words were vain andworthless.VIOLET.You deserve thanks, whether you accept themor not.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 87DUNGARREN.To obey the commands of a lady deservesnone.VIOLET.Nay, but it does, and I thank you most gratefully.He who was with me is gone, butbutDUNGARREN.But will return again, no doubt, when the faceof a casual intruder will not interrupt your conference.VIOLET.O no ! he will not return may never return.Who he is, and where he goes, and how I ambound to him, O how I long to tell thee-all, andmay not !DUNGARREN.What I have seen with mine eyes leaves younothing to tell which I am concerned to hear.VIOLET.Be it so, then ; since the pride of your heartso far outrages its generosity.DUNGARREN.You have put it out of my power to be generousj but you desire me to be secret, andshall be obeyed. Is it your pleasure, madam,that I should conduct you to your home, sincehe who was with you is gone ?G 488 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.VIOLET.That I accept of a service so offered, showstoo well how miserably I am circumstanced.But I do accept it : let me leave this place.(Goes toward the mouth of the cave')DUNGARREN.Not by the burn, the water is too deep.VIOLET.I came by it, and there is no other way.DUNGARREN.Came by it, and dry-shod too ! (Looking ather feet.} He who was with thee must havecarried thee in his arms.VIOLET.Yes, he did so ; but now I will walk throughthe stream : wet feet will do me no injury.DUNGARREN.There is another passage through a cleft rockon this side, concealed by the foxglove and fern.VIOLET.Lead on, then, and I'll follow.\ Exeunt.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 89SCENE II.A large Hall or Entrance-room, with deer's hornsand arms hanging on the watts.Enter Nurse with a tankard in her hand, followedpresently by ANDERSON, who calls after her asshe is about to disappear by the opposite side.ANDERSON.Nurse, Nurse, I say ! Is the woman deaf?NURSE.What are ye roaring after me for ? Can abody get nae peace or comfort ony time o' theday or night ? Neither o* them, by my truth,bring muckle rest to me.ANDERSON.That may be, but yer tankard comforts, thatbelong, as it wad seem, to baith day and night,maun be stinted at present ; for the sheriff anda' his rascally officers frae Paisley are at the yet,and writers beside, Lord preserve us ! wi' ink-hornsat their buttons and paper in their hands.Gae tell the Leddy quickly, and set yer tankard90 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.NURSE.For the sheriff officers to lay their lugs in.Na, na ! sma'er brows may serve them ; I'llmak* sure o' some o't. [Takes a drink, and exit.ANDERSON.1 wonder whaup the laird is : its an unchancytime for him to be out of the get. Donald,Donald !Enter DONALD.Whaup's the laird ? He should be here to receivethe sheriff.DONALD.He's no in the house.ANDERSON.Gang and find him in the fields, then.DONALD.He's no in the fields, neither.ANDERSON.Whaup is he, then ?DONALD.He'll be a clever fellow, I reckon, that findshim on the hither side o' Dumbarton.ANDERSON.How dost tu ken that sa weel? What suldtak him to Dumbarton ?WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 91DONALD.His ain ill humour, I believe, for he returnedfra' the fishing wi' his knit brows as grimly as athunder cloud on the peak o' Bellman, anddesired me to saddle his meir : and he took theroad to the ferry without speaking another word ;and the last sight I gat o' the meir and him wasfrae the black craig head, whan they war baithin the boat together, half way over the Clyde.ANDERSON.That's unlucky : I maun gang to the yet andreceive the sheriff myself, as creditably as I can.DONALD.Ye may save yourself that trouble, I trow, forhe has made his way into the house already.Enter the Sheriff with his Officers and Attendants,and Servants of the family following them.SHERIFF (to ANDERSON).We would see the Laird of Dungarren.ANDERSON.He 's frae hame, an please your honour.SHERIFF.From home ! are you sure of this ? we comeon no unfriendly errand.92 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.ANDERSON.I mak' nae tout o' that, your honour : but heis frae hame, and far a-field, too.SHERIFF.That is unfortunate ; for I am here officiallyto examine the members of his household. Hismother, I presume, is at home?ANDERSON.Yes, your honour ; the teddy is at hame, andwill come to you immediately.SHERIFF.It is said you have been disturbed with strangenoises and visitations in this family, and that theyoung lady is more tormented than ever. Whatkind of noises have been heard ?ANDERSON.O Lord, your honour, sic elrich din ! I cancompare it to nothing. Sometimes it's like thesoughing o' wind ; sometimes like the howling o'dogs.DONALD (taking the word from him).Sometimes like the mewling o' cats - ? sometimeslike the clattering o' broomsticks.FIRST SERVANT (pressing forward, and taking theword from DONALD).Sometimes like the hooting o' holes ; andsometimes like a black sow grunting.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. Q3SHERIFF.A black sow grunting !DONALD.Ay, please your honour. The grunt of a blacksow is as deil-like as its colour : I wad ken 't, inthe dark, frae ony white sow that ever wore asnout.SHERIFF.Well, sometimes hooting of owlets, and thegrunting of a black sow.ANDERSON, DONALD, and FIRST SERVANT (allspeaking at once).And sometimes like aSHERIFF.Spare me, spare me, good folks ! I can listenbut to one at a time.Enter LADY DUNGARREN, ANNABELLA, PHEMY,Nurse, and Maid-servants.Good day, and my good service to you, LadyDungarren. I J m sorry the laird is from home :my visit may perhaps disturb you.LADY DUNGARREN.Do not say so, Sheriff; I am at all times gladto see you ; but were it otherwise, we are toowell accustomed to be disturbed in this miserablehouse, to think much of any thing.94 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.SHERIFF.I am very sorry for it, very sorry that yourdaughter continues so afflicted. (Showing her apapered Have you any knowledge of this paper?The information contained in it is the cause ofmy present intrusion.LADY DUNGARREN (after having looked over itattentively.I know nothing of the paper itself; but theinformation it conveys is true.SHERIFF.Have you ever seen the hand writing before ?LADY DUNGARREN.No yes I think I have. Look at it,Arabella : it is somewhat like your own.ANNABELLA (in a hurried manner.Dear Madam, how can you say so ? The 1's,and the m's, and the n's are all joined stifflytogether, and you know very well that I neverjoin my letters at all.LADY DUNGARREN.Very true, cousin ; I see there is a great differencenow, and I don't know whose hand it is,though doubtless the hand of a friend ; for wecannot remain in this misery much longer. Itshould be examined into, that the guilty may beWITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. Q5punished, and prevented from destroying mypoor child entirely.SHERIFF.Has any person of evil repute been admittedto see her ? Who has been in her chamber ?LADY DUNGARREN.Who has been visibly in her chamber, we caneasily tell ; but who has been invisibly there, theLord in heaven knows.SHERIFF.Have they never been visible to the child herselfwhom they torment ?LADY DUNGARREN.She has stared, as though she saw them.ANNABELLA.She has shrieked, as though they laid hold ofher.NURSE.She has clenched her hands, as if she had beencatching at them, in this way. (Showing how.)PHEMY.Ay, and moved her lips so (showing how), asif speaking to them. I saw her do it.NURSE.And so did I ; and I saw her grin, and shakeher head so, most piteously.96 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.PHEMY, NURSE, and MAID-SERVANT (all speakingat once).And I saw herSHERIFF.Softly, softly, good women ! Three tellersare too many for one tale, and three tales are toomany for one pair of ears to take in at a time.(Turning to the Lady.} Has she ever toldyou that she saw witches by her bed-side ?LADY DUNGARREN.Yes ; several times she has told me so, in wildand broken words.SHERIFF.Only in that manner.ANNABELLA.You forget, Madam, to mention to the Sheriff,that she told us distinctly, a few hours ago, howa witch had been sitting on her breast, as she layin bed ; and that, when she struggled to get ridof her, she rent a piece from the sleeve of hergown.SHERIFF.The witch rent the sleeve from her gown ?NURSE.No, no, your honour ; our poor child rent apiece frae the sleeve o' the witch's gown.SHERIFF.Has the piece been found ?WITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY. 9?A great many, speaking at once.Ay, ay ! it has ! it has !SHERIFF.Silence, I say! (To ANNABELLA.) Have thegoodness to answer, Madam : has the rag beenpreserved ?ANNABELLA.It has, Sir ; but it is no rag, I assure you.NURSE.As good silk, your honour, as ever came fraethe Luckenbooths of Edinburgh.SHERIFF.Are not witches always old and poor ? Thedevil must have helped this one to a new gown,at least; and that is more than we have everheard of his doing to any of them before.ANNABELLA.We have read of witches who have been neitherold nor poor.SHERIFF.Ha! is there warranty, from sober sensiblebooks, for such a notion ? I am no great scholaron such points : it may be so. But here comesthe minister : his better learning will assist us.Enter MR. RUTHERFORD.I thank you, my reverend Sir, for obeying myVOL. III. H98 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.notice so quickly. Your cool head will correctour roused imaginations : you believe little, Ihave heard, of either apparitions or witches.RUTHERFORD.My faith on such subjects was once, indeed,but weak.SHERIFF.And have you changed it lately? \A pausefor RUTHERFORD to answer, but he is silent.)Since when has your faith become stronger ?After a short pause as before, several Voices callout eagerlySince the storm on Friday night ; when MaryMacmurren and a 5 the crew were on the moor.SHERIFF.Silence, I say again ! Can the minister notanswer for himself, without your assistance ?You heard my question, Mr. Rutherford : wereyou upon the moor on that night ?RUTHERFORD.I was.SHERIFF.And saw you aught upon the moor contraryto godliness and nature ?RUTHERFORD.What I saw, I will declare in fitter time andplace, if I must needs do so.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 99SHERIFF.Well, well, you are cautious, good Sir ; and,perhaps, it is wise to be so. Lady Dungarren,with your permission, I will go into the sickchamber and examine your daughter myself.LADY DUNGARREN.You have my permission most willingly. Followme immediately, if you please, and ask thepoor child what questions you think fit. Mr.Rutherford, do you choose to accompany us ?[Exeunt LADY DUNGARREN, ANNABELLA,Sheriff) and RUTHERFORD ; ANDERSON,Nurse, DONALD, 8$c. fyc. remaining.ANDERSON.And he '11 gie nae answer at a', even to theSheriff.NURSE.Certes, were he ten times a minister, he shouldhae auld what he saw to the Sheriff of thecounty.DONALD.A gentleman born and bred, and the king'sappointed officer into the bargain.NURSE.And he winna tell what he saw afore us, forsoothfor that 's what he means by fitter timeand place foul bea' his discretion ! He wad2100 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.na believe in witches, I trow ; but they haecowed him weel for 't at last.ANDERSON.To be sure, he looked baith ghastly and wan,when the Sheriff steered what he saw upon themoor.NURSE.Ay, ay, it was some fearful' sight, nae doubt.God's grace preserve us a' ! the very thought o'what it might be gars my head grow could likea turnip.DONALD.It was surely something war than witchesdancing that frightened the minister.NURSE.As ye say, Donald : either Highlander orLowlander has wit enough to guess that. I likenane o' your ministers that '11 speak nowherebut in the pulpit. Fitter time and place, quotha !ANDERSON.Hoot, toot, woman ! he has gotten his lear atthe college, and he thinks shame to be frightened.NURSE.Foul bea' him and his lear too ! It maun beo' some new-fangled kind, I think. Our auldminister had lear enough, baith Hebrew andLatin, and he believed in witches and warlocks,honest man, like ony other sober, godly person.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 101ANDERSON.So he did, Nurse j ye 're a sensible woman,but somewhat o' the loudest, whan ye 're angry.The gude folks want some refection, I trow ;and there 's gude will and ham in the buttery.Come, Sirs, follow me.[Exit, with a courteous motion of the hand,followed by the Sheriffs Officers, $c.PHEMY and Nurse remaining.NURSE.Whaup can Black Faulty be a 5 this while ?His smooth face is seldom missing whan onymischief is ganging on ?PHEMY.What do you want with him ?NURSE.To send him owre the craft for the new-laideggs, that the ploughman's wife promised us.PHEMY.He has been sent further off on another errandalready.NURSE.And wha sent him, I should like to ken, whanwe are a' sae throng?PHEMY.My lady sent him.H 3102 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.NURSE.Your teddy, say ye ! She has grown unco intimatewi' that pawky loon o* late : I wish gudemay come o' t. I maun gang for the eggs myself,I warrant. But I maun e'en gang first tothe chaucer door, and listen a wee ; thoughwe '11 only hear the hum o' their voices, an ourlugs war as leg as the coley's.PHEMY.And I '11 go with you too : the hum of theirvoices is worth listening for, if nothing more canbe heard. [Exeunt.ACT IV.SCENE I. An open Space before the Abbey Churchof Paisley.Enter the Sheriff and RUTHERFORD, in earnestdiscourse.SHERIFF.Yes, you may, indeed, be well assured that Ihave never, during all the years in which I haveWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 103served the office of sheriff of this county, performeda duty so painful ; and I am very sensiblethat what I am compelled to summon you toperform, is still more distressing.RUTHERFORD.Were it not sinful, I could wish myself incapable,from disease or disaster, or any other let, ofgiving legal testimony. Oh ! to think of it cloudsmy brain with confusion, and makes me sick atheart ! Violet Murrey, the young, the unfortunate,the gentle, and, I firmly believe, the innocent,to give evidence to her prejudice, it isa fearful duty !SHERIFF.It is so, good Sir ; yet it must be done. I havetaken into custody, on accusation of witchcraft,the fairest woman in the west of Scotland ; andyou must answer on oath to the questions thatmay be put to you, whether it be for or againsther. If she be innocent, Providence will protecther.Enter the Chief Bailie ofPaisky behind them, andlistens to the conclusion of the above speech.BAILLIE.If she be innocent ! Can any one reasonablysuppose that such a creature would be accused,H 4104 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.or even suspected, but on the strongest proofsof guilt? Some old haggard beldame, with anill name at any rate, might be wrongfully suspected; but Violet Murrey, good sooth ! musthave been where she should not have been, erea tongue or a finger in the county would havewagged to her prejudice.SHERIFF.That 's what your wife says, I suppose.BAILLIE.By my faith, Sheriff, it 's what every bodysays ; for it stands to reason.RUTHERFORD.That it stands to folly, would be an aptercause for every body's saying it, my worthyBailie.BAILLIE.Grace be with us all ! does a minister of theGospel set his face against that for which therebe plain texts of Scripture ? And when cattleare drained dry, children possessed, storms raised,houses unroofed, noises in the air, and every one'sheart beating with distrust and fear of his neighbour,is this a time for us to stand still, andleave free scope for Satan and his imps to lord itover a sober and godly land ? By my certes ! Iwould carry faggots with my own hands to burnmy nearest of kin, though her cheeks were likeWITCHCRAFT *. A TRAGEDY. 105roses, and her hair like threads of gold, if shewere found, but for one night, joining in theelrich revelry of a devil's conventicle. (A distanttrumpet heard Ha! the judges so nearthe town already !SHERIFF.Would they were further off! they come soonerthan I reckoned for.BAILLIE.Soon or late, we must go to meet them, as induty bound. You take precedence, Sheriff: Iwill follow you. exeunt Sheriff and Bailie.RUTHERFORD (alone).What is or is not in this mysterious matter,lies beyond human reason to decide. That Imust swear to the truth of what 1 have seen,when questioned thereupon by authority, is myonly clear point of discernment. Hard necessity! My heart, in despite of every proof, whispersto me she is innocent. (A loud brawlingand tumult heard without.) What noise is this ?The senseless exasperated crowd besetting oneof those miserable women who held orgies on theheath on that dreadful night.106 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.Enter MARY MACMURREN and Welkin, in thecustody of Constables, and surrounded by acrowd 9 who are casting dust at her, fyc. TheConstables endeavouring to keep them off.FIRST WOMAN,Deil's hag ! she '11 pay for her pastime now, Itrow.SECOND WOMAN.For a' the milk kye she has witched.FIRST WOMAN.For a' the bonnie bairns she has blasted.FIRST MAN.She girns like a brock at a terry-dog.SECOND MAN.Score her boon the breath, or she '11 cast acantrip, and be out o' your han's in a twinkling.MARY MACMURREN.What gars ye rage at me sae ? I ne'er didnae harm to nane o' ye.FIRST WOMAN.Hear till her ! hear till her ! how she lees !FIRST MAN.And what for no ? Seeing is the best o' theirlear, that hae the feel for their dominie.SECOND MAN.Ay, wicket witch ; seeing 's nought to her :WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 107but we'll gie her something forbye words for ananswer. Wha has gotten a jocteleg to score thewrinkled brow o' her ?THIRD MAN (offering a knife).Here! here![The crowd rush furiously upon her, and arewith difficulty kept off by the Constables.]FIRST CONSTABLE.Stand back, I say, every mither's son o' yean*every father's daughter to boot. If thewoman be a witch winna she be burnt for 't, asothers o' that calling hae been afore her ? Istathat enough to content ye ?FIRST MAN.Ay, we '11 soon see that ugly face, gloweringthrough the smoke o' her bonfire, like a howletin the stour of an auld coping barn.SECOND MAN.An that piece o' young warlockry by her side,see how he flowers at us ! Can tu squeak, imp ?(Trying to pinch Welkin, who calls out.)Welkin.O dull, o' dear ! the 're meddling wi' me.FIRST CONSTABLE.Shame upon ye, shame upon ye a' ! Ha' yenae better way o' warring wi' the feel than tormentinga poor idiot ?108 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.MARY MACMURREN.Shame upon ye ! he's a poor fatherless idiot.FIRST WOMAN.Fatherless, forsooth ! He's a fiend-begottenimp I warrant ye, and should be sent to the dadhe belongs to. (Trumpet heard nearerFIRST CONSTABLE.Red the way, I say, and gang out o' our gait,illa saul and book o* ye ! The judges are athan', and my prisoner maun be kary'd or theycome, else they'll order ye a' to the tolbooth ata swoop.exeunt Constables with MARY MACMURRENand Welkin, followed by some of thecrowd, while others remain; the trumpetheard still nearer.FIRST MAN.What a braw thing it is to hear the trumpetsound sae nobly ! There they come now ; thejudges, and the sheriff, and the bailies, and thedeacons a' the grand authorities o' the country.FIRST WOMAN.High saf ' us, what a surly carle that judgeis on the left ! nae witch that Stan's before himwull escape, I trow, war' she as young and asbonny as the rose-buds in June.YOUNG WOMAN.Haud your tongue, mither, that a body mayWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 109see them in peace. It's an awful' thing but tolook upon them here : the Lord help them thatmaun face them in condemnation !FIRST WOMAN.Daft bairn ! wull the Lord help witches,think'st tu ?Enter Judges in procession, followed by the Sheriff,Bailies, Gentlemen of the county, and Attendants,fyc. <fyc., and passing diagonally acrossthe Stage, exeunt.SCENE II.A poor, mean Room in a private house in Paisley.Enter ANNABELLA, throwing back her hood andmantle as she enters.ANNABELLA.Now let me breathe awhile, and enjoy myhard-earned triumph unconstrained. Revengeso complete, so swift-paced, so terrible !It repays me for all the misery I have endured.May I triumph ? dare I triumph ? Whyam I astounded and terrified on the very pinnacleof exultation? Were she innocent, WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.evidence had protected her. What have I donebut contrived the means for proving her guilt ?Means which come but in aid of others thatwould almost have been sufficient.Enter BLACK Bawdy.Bawdy*cool, O cool ! she's condemned ! she'll beexecuted, she'll be burnt, she'll be burnt themorn's morning at the cross, and a' through myputting that sorrowful' gown into your hands,and by foul play, too, foul bea' it! O hone,hone !ANNABELLA.What's all this weeping and wringing of handsfor ? Art thou distracted ?Bawdy.1 senna how I am, I care na how I am j but1 winna gang to hell wi' the death of an innocentteddy on my head, for a' the gowd in christened.ANNABELLA.Poor fool ! what makes thee think that thegown thou hottest for me had any thing to dowith her condemnation ?Bawdy.O you wicked woman ! I ken weel enough ;and I ken what for you confined me in that backWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. Illchamber sae lang, and keeper my brains in sica whirligig wi* whiskey and potations.ANNABELLA.Thou knowest ! how dost thou know ?Bawdy.I set my lug to a hole in the casement, andheard folks below in the close telling a' aboutthe trial. It was that gown spread out in thecourt, wi' a hole in the sleeve o't, matching preciselyto a piece o' the same silk, which na doubtyou tore out yourself whan it was in your hands,that made baith judge and jury condemn her.ANNABELLA.Poor simpleton ! did'st thou not also hear themsay, that the minister, sore against his will, sworehe saw her on the moor, where the witches weredancing, in company with a man who has beenin his grave these three years? was not thatproof enough to condemn her, if there had beennothing more ?Bawdy.It may be sae.ANNABELLA.And is so. Is not Mary Macmurren a witch ?and has not she been condemned upon muchslighter evidence? Thought an absolute fool,man, for making such disturbance about nothing.WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.Bawdy.Fool, or nae fool, I'll gang to the sheriff andtell him the truth, and then my conscience wullbe clear frae her death, whate'er she may be.ANNABELLA.Her death, frightened goose ! Dost thou thinkshe will really be executed ?Bawdy.I heard them say, that she and Mary are baith to be brunt the morn's morning.ANNABELLA.They said what they knew nothing about.Mary Macmurren will be burnt, for an exampleto all other witches and warlocks, but a respiteand pardon will be given to Violet Murrey : itis only her disgrace, not her death, that is intended; so thy conscience may be easy.Bawdy.If I could but believe you !ANNABELLA.Believe me, and be quiet ; it is the best thingthou canst do for thyself, and for those who aredearest to thee. Be a reasonable creature, then,and promise to me never to reveal what thouknowest.Bawdy.I will keep the secret, then, since she is not toWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 113suffer. But winna you let me out the morn tosee the burning o* Mary Macmurren ? It wadbe a vexatious thing to be sae near billet, andmiss sic a sight as that.ANNABELLA.Thou shalt have all reasonable indulgence.But what scares thee so ?[Voice heard withoutBawdy (trembling).I hear the voice o* Grizeld Bane. She nunha* been below the grunt wi' her master sin* welast gat sight o' her at the tower, else the sheriffofficers wad ha* gripped her wi' the rest.Lord preserve us ! is she coming in by the dooror the winch, or up through the boards o' theflooring ? I hear her elrich voice a' round aboutus, an my lugs ring like the bell o' an amoshouse.Enter Prized BANE.Prized BANE.Now, my brave lady, my bold lady, my victoriouslady ! Satan has many great queens inhis court, many princesses in his court, manyhigh-blooded beauties in his court ; I saw themall last night, sweeping with their long velvetrobes the burning pavement of it : thou wilthave no mean mates to keep thee company, andVOL. III. I114 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.thou wilt match. with the best of them too ; thereis both wit and wickedness in thee to perfection.ANNABELLA.Hush, hush, Grizeld Bane ! What bringsthee here ? Is there not good ale and spirits inthy cellar, and a good bed to rest upon ? Whatbrings thee here ?Prized BANE.Shame of my cellar ! think'st thou I have beenthere all this time? I have been deeper, anddeeper, and deeper than a hundred cellars, everyonesunken lower than another.Bawdy (aside to ANNABELLA).I auld you sae, madam.ANNABELLA (aside to Bawdy).Go to thy chamber, if thought afraid.Prized BANE.Ay, deeper and deeperANNABELLA.Thou need'st not speak so loud, Grizeld Bane :I understand thee well enough. I hope thouhast been well received where thou wert.Prized BANE.Ay; they received me triumphantly. Theyscented the blood that will pour and the brandsthat will blaze ; the groans and the shrieks thatWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 115will be uttered were sounding in their ears, likethe stormy din of a war-pipe. What will be donetomorrow morning ! Think upon that, mydainty chuck ! and say if I did not deserve anoble reception.ANNABELLA.No doubt, with such society as thy imaginationholds converse with.Prized BANE.Yes, dearest ! and thou, too, hast a noble receptionabiding thee.ANNABELLA (shrinking back).Heaven forfend !Prized BANE.Ha, ha, ha ! Art thou frighten'd, dearest ?Do not be frightened ! it is a grand place : myown mate is there, and the cord about his neckchanged into a chain of rubies. There is muchhigh promotion abiding thee.ANNABELLA.And will have long abiding, I trust, ere I aminvested with it.Prized BANE.Not so long ; not so long, lady : wheneverthou wilt it may be. Dost thou love a clasp' dgorget for thy pretty white neck ? (Going uptoher with a sly grin of affected courtesy, andattempting to grasp her throats116 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.Bald Y (springing forward and preventing her).Blasted witch ! wad ye throttle her ?Prized BANE.Ha ! imp ! hast thou followed me so fast behind? Down with thee ! down with thee ! Thereis molten lead and brimstone a-cooking for thysupper ; there's no lack of hot porridge for thee,varlet.Bawdy.Oh madam, oh madam ! what hae ye broughton yourself and on me, that was but a poorignorant callant ! O send for the minister atonce, and we'll down on our knees, and he'llpray for us. The damnation of the wicked isterrible.ANNABELLA.She is but raving : the fumes of her possethave been working in her brain ; be not foolishenough to be frightened at what she says.Bawdy.I wish, O I wish I had never done it ! I wishI had never set eyes or set thoughts on themammon of unrighteousness. Oh, oh !Prized BANE (tO Bawdy).Ha, ha, ha ! Thou 'rt frighten'd, art thou ?ANNABELLA.Thou see'st she is in jest, and has pleasure inWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 117scaring thee. Go to thy chamber, and composethyself. (Calling him back as he is about to go,and speaking in his ear.) Don't go till she hasleft me. Hie to thy cellar, Grizeld Bane.Prized BANE.And leave thy sweet company, lady ?ANNABELLA.For a good savoury meal, which is ready forthee ; I hear them carrying it thither. Go, go !I have promised to visit Lady Dungarren at acertain hour, and I must leave thee. (Callingvery loud.) Landlord ! Landlord !Enter Landlord (a strong determined-lookingman).Is Grizeld Bane's meal ready ? (Significantly*)LANDLORD.Yes, madam, and with as good brandy to relishit as either lord or lady could desire. (To PrizedBANE.) Come, my lofty dame, let me leadyou hence. (Fixing his eyes stedfastly on herface, while she sullenly submits to be led off.)Manent ANNABELLA and Bawdy.Bawdy.The Lord be praised she is gone ! for she hasbeen in the black pit o' hell since yestreen, andi 3118 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.wad pu* every body after her an she could.Dear teddy, send for the minister.ANNABELLA.Hold thy foolish tongue, and retire to thychamber. Violet Murrey's life is safe enough,so thy conscience may be easy. Follow me, forI must lock thee in.Bawdy.Mun I still be a prisoner ?ANNABELLA.Thou sha* net be so long ; have patience a littlewhile, foolish boy. exeunt.SCENE III.A Prison. VIOLET MURREY is discovered sittingon the ground, by the light of a lamp stuck inthe wall; her face hid upon her lap, while agentle rocking motion of the body shows thatshe is awake.Enter DUNGARREN by a low arched door, whichis opened cautiously by a turnkey, who immediatelyshuts it again and disappears.DUNGARREN (going close to her, and after asorrowful pause.Violet, O Violet, my once dear Violet! dostWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 119thou know my voice ? Wilt thou not raise thyhead and look upon me ?VIOLET.I know your voice : you are very kind to cometo me in my misery.DUNGARREN.Misery, indeed ! Oh that I should see theethus, the extremity of human wretchednessclosing around thee !VIOLET (rising from the ground and standingerect).Say not the extremity, Robert Kennedy, forI am innocent.DUNGARREN.I will believe it. Ay, in despite of evidenceas clear as the recognition of noon-day, in despiteof all evidence, I would believe it. Thehateful sin of witchcraft, if such a sin there be,thou hast never committed ; it is impossible.VIOLET.I know thou wilt believe it : and O ! that thoucould'st also believe that I am innocent of allfalsehood and fickleness of affection ! But thoucanst not do so ; it were unreasonable to expectit. Thou wilt think of me as an ungrateful, deceitfulcreature ; and this is the memory I mustleave behind me with Robert of Dungarren.i 4WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.I forgive thee ! I forgive thee, dear Violet .'for so in thy low estate I will call thee still,though thou lowest another as thou hast neverloved me.VIOLET.I love him, full surely, as I cannot love thee,but not to the injury of that affection which hasalways been thine.DUNGARREN.I came not here to upbraid : we will speak ofthis no more.VIOLET.Alas, alas ! I should speak and think of thingsfar different, yet this lies on my heart as theheaviest load of all. May God forgive me forit!DUNGARREN.And he will forgive thee, my dear friend ! forsuch I may and will call thee, since I may notcall thee more.VIOLET.Do, my noble Robert ! that is best of all.And, resting in thy mind as a friend, I knowI am confident, that something will happen,when I am gone, that will discover to thee myfaithfulness. Death will soon be past, and thouwilt live to be a prosperous gentleman, and wiltWITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.sometimes think of one my evil fame willnot thou wilt think, ay, wilt speak good ofViolet Murrey, when all besides speak evil.Thou wilt not (Bursts into tearsDUNGARREN (embracing her passionately.My dear, dear creature ! dear as nothing elsehas ever been to me, thou shalt not die : thevery thought of it makes me distracted !VIOLET.Be not so: it is the manner of it that distressesthee. But has it not been the death ofthe martyrs, of the holy and the just ; of those,the dust of whose feet I had been unworthy towipe ? Think of this, and be assured, that Ishall be strengthened to bear it.DUNGARREN.Oh, oh, oh ! If deliverance should be frustrated!VIOLET.What art thou talking of? thou art, indeed,distracted. Nay, nay ! let not my executionterrify thee so much. I, too, was terrified ; butI have learnt from my gaoler, who has been presentat such spectacles, that the sentence, thoughdreadful, is executed mercifully. The flameswill not reach me till I have ceased to breathe ;and many a natural disease doth end the courseof life as mine will be terminated.WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.God forbid ! God help and deliver us !(Runs impatiently to a corner of the dungeon,and puts his ear close to the groundsI do not hear them yet : if they should fail toreach it in time, God help us !VIOLET.What dost thou there ? What dost thou listenfor ? What dost thou expect ?DUNGARREN.Means for thy deliverance, thy escape.VIOLET.Say not so ; it is impossible.DUNGARREN.It is possible, and will be, if there 's a Providenceon earth if there 's mercy in heaven.(Puts his ear to the ground as before.)VIOLET (stooping and listening).I hear nothing. What is it thou expected tohear ?DUNGARREN.I do hear it now : they are near j they willopen upon us presently.VIOLET.What dost thou hear ?DUNGARREN.The sound of their spades and their mattocks.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.O my brave miners ! they will do their worknobly at last.VIOLET.A way to escape under ground ! my ears ringand my senses are confounded. Escape anddeliverance ?DUNGARREN.Yes, love, and friend, and dear human creature! escape and deliverance are at hand.VIOLET.How good and noble thou art to provide suchdeliverance for me, believing me unfaithful !DUNGARREN.Come, come ; that is nothing : be what thouwilt, if I can but save thee ! Life and deathare now on the casting of a die. The groundmoves; it is life! (Tossing up his arms exultinglyVIOLET.The ground opens : wonderful, unlooked-fordeliverance ! Thank God ! thank God ! hismercy has sent it.[The earthen floor of the dungeon at onecorner falls in, making a small opening*and the miners are heard distinctly atwork"]DUNGARREN (calling down to them).May we descend ? are you ready ?WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.VOICE (beneath),In two minutes the passage will be practicable.DUNGARREN (as before.Make no delay ; we will pass any how.VIOLET.How quickly they have worked, to mine so farunder ground since yesterday !DUNGARREN.That mine was completed many months agoto favour the escape of a prisoner, who died suddenlyin prison before his projected rescue. Thesecret was revealed to me yesterday, by one ofthe miners, who had originally conducted thework.VOICE (beneath.We are ready now.DUNGARREN.Heaven be praised ! I will first descend, andreceive thee in my arms.\ As they are about to descend, the door ofthe dungeon opens, and enter Rutherfordand LADY DUNGARREN, accompaniedby the Sheriff and Gaoler].SHERIFF.Ha ! company admitted without due permission! Dungarren here ! Your underling, Mr.Gaoler, is a rogue. How is this ?WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.GAOLER.As I am a Christian man, I know no moreabout it than the child that was born sinceyestreen.SHERIFF.It is only one born since yestreen that willbelieve thee. A hole in the floor, too, made forconcealment and escape ! Dungarren, you aremy prisoner in the king's name. To favour theescape of a criminal is no slight offence againstthe laws of the land.DUNGARREN.You distract me with your formal authorities :the laws of the land and the laws of God are atvariance, for she is innocent.SHERIFF.She has abused and bewitched thee to thinkso ; and a great proof it is of her guilt.DUNGARREN.It is you and your coadjutors who are abused,dreadfully and wickedly abused, to hurry on,with such unrighteous obduracy, the destructionof one whom a savage would have spared.Tremble to think of it. At your peril do this.SHERIFF.I am as sorry as any man to have such workWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.to do, but yet it must be done ; and at yourperil resist the law. Holloa, you without!(Calling loud.)Enter his Officers, armed.Take Robert Kennedy, of Dungarren, into custody,in the king's name.\ The Officers endeavour to lay hold of DUN-garden,who paces about in a state ofdistraction"]DUNGARREN.Witchcraft ! heaven grant me patience ! herlife to be taken for witchcraft ? senseless idioticaldelusion !SHERIFF (to Officers).Do your duty, fellows: he is beside himself;distracted outright.VIOLET.Noble Dungarren ! submit to the will of heaven.I am appointed to my hard fate ; and God willenable me to bear it. Leave me, my dear friend !be patient, and leave me.DUNGARREN.They shall hack me to pieces ere I leave thee.WITCHCRAFT *. A TRAGEDY.VIOLET.Dear Robert, these are wild distracted words,and can be of no avail. Good Mr. Rutherford,and Lady Dungarren, too ; ye came here tocomfort me : this I know was your errand, butO comfort him! speak to him, and move himto submission.RUTHERFORD.Your present vain resistance, Dungarren, doesinjury to her whom you wish to preserve.LADY DUNGARREN.My son, my Robert, thou art acting like amaniac. Retire with these men, who are onlydoing their duty, and neither wish to injure norinsult you. I will stay with Violet, and Mr. Rutherfordwill go with you.DUNGARREN.Leave her, to see her no more !LADY DUNGARREN.Not so; the sheriff will consent, that you maysee her again in the morning, ere -SHERIFF.I do consent : you shall see her in the morning,before she goes forth to to the toher128 WITCHCRAFT ! A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.To that which is so revolting and horrible,that no one dare utter it in words. Oh ! oh, oh !(Groans heavily, and leans his back to thewall, while his arms drop listlessly by hisside, and the Officers, laying hold of him,lead him out in a state faintness andapathy')RUTHERFORD.His mind is now exhausted, and unfit for presentsoothing ; attempts to appease and consolehim must come hereafter ; there is time enoughfor that. (To VIOLET, with tenderness.) Butthy time is short ; I would prepare thee for anawful change. Unless thou be altogether hostileto thoughts of religion and grace, which I cannever believe thee to be.VIOLET.O no, no ! that were a dreadful hostility ; andthou, even thou, the good and enlightened Rutherford,my long-tried monitor and friend, canexpress a doubt whether I am so fearfully perverted.Alas ! death is terrible when it comeswith disgrace, with the execration of Christianfellow-creatures ! O pray to God for me ! prayto God fervently, that I be not overwhelmedwith despair.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.RUTHERFORD.I will pray for thee most fervently; and thouwilt be supported.VIOLET.I have been at times, since my condemnation,most wonderfully composed and resigned, as if Ifloated on a boundless ocean, beneath His eyewho says, " Be calm, be still ; it is my doing."But, oh! returning surges soon swell on every side,tossing, and raging, and yawning tremendously,like gulfs of perdition, so that my senses areutterly confounded. My soul has much need ofthy ghostly comfort.LADY DUNGARREN.Comfort her, good Rutherford ! I forgive herall that she has done against my poor child, andmay God forgive her !VIOLET.And will nothing, dear Madam, remove fromyour mind that miserable notion, that I havepractised witchcraft against the health and lifeof your child ? Can you believe this and pityme ? No, no ! were I the fiend-possessedwretch you suppose me to be, a natural antipathywould rise in your breast at the sight of me,making all touch of sympathy impossible. Iam innocent of this, and of all great crime ; andyou will know it, when I am laid in a dis-vol.III. K130 WITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY.honoured grave, and have passed through thefearful pass of death, from which there is noreturn.LADY DUNGARREN.You make me tremble, Violet Murrey : if youare innocent, who can be guilty ?VIOLET.Be it so deem'd ! it is God's will : I must bemeek when such words are uttered against me.(After a pause') And you think it possible thatI have practised with evil powers for the tormentand destruction of your child ; of poor Jessie,who was my little companion and play-fellow,whom I loved, and do love so truly ; who hunground my neck so kindly, and called meay, sister was a sweet word from her guilelesslips, and seemed to be (Bursts into an agonyof tears')LADY DUNGARREN (to RUTHERFORD).She may well weep and wring her hands : itmakes me weep to think of the power of theEvil One over poor unassisted nature. Had shebeen less gentle and lovely, he had tempted herless strongly. I would give the best part of allthat I possess to make and to prove her innocent.But it cannot be ; O no ! it cannot be !RUTHERFORD (ft) LADY DUNGARREN).Forbear ! forbear ! Prayer and supplicationWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 131to the throne of mercy for that grace which canchange all hearts, convert misery into happiness,and set humble chastised penitence by the sideof undeviating virtue, prayer and supplicationfor a poor stricken sister, and for our sinfulselves, is our fittest employment now.VIOLET.Thanks, my good Sir ; you are worthy of yoursacred charge. I am, indeed, a poor strickensister ; one of the flock given you to lead, andhumbly penitent for all the sins and faults I havereally committed. Pray for me, that I may bemore perfectly penitent, and strengthened forthe fearful trial that awaits me.RUTHERFORD.Thou wilt be strengthened.VIOLET.O ! I have great need ! I am afraid of death ;I am afraid of disgrace ; I am afraid of my ownsinking pusillanimous weakness.RUTHERFORD.But thou need'st not be afraid, my dear child ;trust in his Almighty protection, who strengthensthe weak in the hour of need, and gives nothingto destruction which in penitence and love canput its trust in Him.K %WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.VIOLET (weeping on his shoulder.I will strive to do it, my kind pastor ; and theprayers of a good man will help me.RUTHERFORD.Let us kneel, then, in humble faith.SHERIFF (advancing from the bottom of the Stage.Not here, good Sir ; I cannot leave her here,even with a man of your cloth, and that openingfor escape in the floor.RUTHERFORD.As you please, Sir; remove her to anothercell : or, if it must be, let a guard remain inthis.Enter an Attendant.ATTENDANT (to Sheriff).It is ready, Sir.SHERIFF (to VIOLET).You must be removed to another prison-room.VIOLET.As you please, Sheriff.SHERIFF.Lean upon me, Madam : woe the day that Ishould lodge so fair a lady in such unseemlychambers !VIOLET.I thank you for your courtesy, good She-witchcraftI A TRAGEDY. 133riff: you do what you deem to be your duty ;and when you are at last undeceived, and convincedof my innocence, as I know you will oneday be, you will be glad to remember that youdid it with courtesy.SHERIFF.Blessing on thy lovely face, witch or no witch !dost thou speak to me so gently ![Exit VIOLET, leaning on the Sheriff.Manet Gaoler, who mutters to himself as he preparesto follow them.GAOLER.A bonny witch, and a cunning ane, as eversigned compact wi' Satan ! I wonder what can-trapshe '11 devise for the morn, whan the pinchingtime comes. I wish it were over.\JExit, locking the door.K 3131< WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ACT V.SCENE I. A mean Chamber, with a windowlooking upon the Market-place of Paisley.Enter ANNABELLA and the Landlord of theHouse.LANDLORD.Here, Madam, you can remain concealed fromevery body, and see the execution distinctly fromthe window.ANNABELLA.Yes ; this is what 1 want. And you must letno creature come here, on any account. Keepyour promise upon this point, I charge you.LANDLORD.Trust me, Madam, nobody shall enter thisroom, though they carried a bag of gold in theirhand. I have refused a large sum for the use ofthat window; and excepting some schoolboysand apprentices who have climbed up to the roofof the house, there is not a creature in the tenement,but Grizeld Bane and Black Bawldy, eachin their place of confinement.ANNABELLA.I thank thee. Landlord, and will reward theeWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 135well : thou shalt be no loser for the money thouhast refused on my account. What is the hour ?LANDLORD.The abbey church struck eight, as I reckon,half an hour ago.ANNABELLA.Longer than that much longer. The timeshould be close at hand for leading out the criminals.(Going to the window.) What a concourseof people are assembled ! and such a deepsilence through the whole !LANDLORD.Ay ; in the day of doom they will scarcelystand closer and quieter.ANNABELLA.Hold thy tongue : we know nothing of suchmatters.LANDLORD.But what the holy book reveals to us.ANNABELLA.Leave me, I pray thee. I would be alone.[Landlord retires"] Half an hour! no halfhour was ever of such a length. Landlord !ho ! Landlord !Re-enter Landlord.LANDLORD.What is your pleasure, Madam ?K 4WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ANNABELLA.Art thou sure that no reprieve has arrived ?It must be past the hour. (Bell tolls) Ha!the time is true.LANDLORD.That awful sound 1 It gives notice that theprisoners will soon be led forth. Lord havemercy on their sinful souls ! on all sinful souls !ANNABELLA.Thou may'st go : I would be alone.[Exit Landlord.Bell tolls again, and at intervals throughthe whole scene"]ANNABELLA (alone).Now comes the fearful consummation ! Herarts, her allurements, her seeming beauty, herglamour, and her power, what will they allamount to when the noon of this day shall bepast? a few black ashes, and a few scorchedbones. Fye upon these cowardly thoughts,this sinking confidence ! Revenge is sweet ;revenge is noble ; revenge is natural ; what priceis too dear for revenge ? Why this tormentingcommotion ? To procure false evidence for theconviction of one whom we know or believe tobe guilty, is this a sin past redemption ? No ;it is but the sacrifice of truth for right and usefulends. I know it is ; reason says it is ; and Iwill be firm and bold, in spite of human infirmity.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 137Enter Prized BANE.Prized BANE.Yes, dearest ; thou art very bold. There isnot a cloven foot, nor a horned head of them all,wickeder and bolder than thou art.ANNABELLA (shrinking backed.What brings thee here ?Grazed BANE.To be in such noble company.ANNABELLA.What dost thou mean by that ?Prized BANE.Every word hath its meaning, Lady, thoughevery meaning hath not its word, as thou verywell knowest. I am great ; thou art great ;but the greatest of all stands yonder. (Pointingto the farther corner of the roomyANNABELLA.What dost thou point at ? I see nothing.Grazed BANE.But thou wilt soon, dearest. The master weboth serve is standing near us. His stature islofty ; his robe is princely ; his eyes are twoflames of fire. And one stands behind him, likea chieftain of elrich degree. But why is he thus?138 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.Can no power undo that hateful noose? Itwavers before my eyes so distractingly !ANNABELLA.Thou art, indeed, distracted and visionary.There is nobody here but ourselves.Prized BANE.The master of us all is waiting yonder ; andhe will not sink to his nether court again till thefair lady is with him.ANNABELLA.O ! I understand thy moody fancy now. Themaster thou meanest is waiting for VioletMurrey.Prized BANE.Yes, dearest, if he can get her. If not, hewill have some one else, who is worthy to bearhim company. He must have his meed and hismate : he will not return empty-handed, when afair lady is to be had.ANNABELLA.Heaven forfend ! ( The bell now sounds quicker')That bell sounds differently : they are now leadingthem forth.Prized BANE (running to the window, andbeckoning her).Come, come here, darling : here is a sight toWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 139make the eyes flash, and the heart's blood stir inits core. Here is a brave sight for thee !both go to the window, and the SceneclosestSCENE II.The Market-place prepared for the Execution,with two Stakes, and faggots heaped roundthem, erected in the middle, but nearer the bottomthan the front of the Stage. A great Crowd ofpeople are discovered. The Bell tolls rapidly,and then stops.Enter the Sheriff and Magistrates, and MARYMACMURREN, supported by a Clergyman, andguarded.CLERGYMAN.Now, prisoner, may God be merciful to thee !Make use of the few moments of life that remain,by making confession before these good peopleof the wickedness thou hast committed, and thejustice of the sentence that condemns thee. Itis all the reparation now in thy power ; and mayGod accept it of thee !MARY MACMURREN.Oh, hone ! oh, hone !HO WITCHCRAFT *. A TRAGEDY.CLERGYMAN.Dost thou not understand what I say ? Makeconfession.MARY MACMURREN.Oh, hone ! oh, hone !CLERGYMAN.Dost thou hear me, woman ? Make confession.MARY MACMURREN.Confession ?CLERGYMAN.Yes, confession, woman.MARY MACMURREN.Tell me what it is, an' I '11 say't.BAILLIE.How cunning she is to the last !CLERGYMAN (to MARY MACMURREN).Didst thou not confess on thy trial that thouwert a witch, and hadst triste-meetings anddealings with the devil ?MARY MACMURREN.Lord hae mercy on me : I said what I thought,and I thought as ye bade me. The Lord haemercy on a wicked woman ! for that, I know, Iam.BAILLIE.How cunning she is again ! She calls herselfwicked, but will not call herself witch.WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 141CLERGYMAN.Mary Macmurren, make confession ere youdie, and God will be more merciful to you.MARY MACMURREN.Oh, hone ! oh, hone ! miserable wretch that Iam ! Do ye mak confession for me, Sir, and I'llsay 't after you, as weel as I dow. Oh, hone !oh, hone !SHERIFF (to Clergyman).There is no making any thing of her now,miserable wretch ! Lead her on to the stake,and make her pray with you there, if the EvilOne hath not got the entire mastery over her tothe very last. (The Clergyman leads MARY to the stakes And now there is a sadderduty to perform ; the fair, the young, and thegentle must be brought forth to shame and topunishment.she goes to the gate of the prison and returns,conducting VIOLET MURREY, whoenters, leaning on the arm of Rutherford.]SHERIFF.Now, Madam, it is time that I should receivefrom you any commands you may wish to entrustme with : they shall be faithfully obeyed.VIOLET.I thank you, Mr. Sheriff. What may be al-witchcraftI A TRAGEDY.lowed for mitigating my sufferings, I know youhave already ordered : have you also given similardirections in behalf of my miserable companion?SHERIFF.I have, Madam.VIOLET.Thanks for your mercy! My passage to abetter state will be short : and of God's mercythere I have no misgivings ; for of the crimelaid to my charge I am as innocent as the childnewly born ; as you yourself worthy Sir, or thisgood man on whose arm I now lean.SHERIFF.If this be so, Lady, woe to the witnesses, thejudges, and the jury by whom you are condemned!VIOLET.Say not so. I am condemned by what honest,though erring men, believed to be the truth.What God alone knows to be the truth, is notfor man's direction. (To RUTHERFORD.) Weepnot for me, my kind friend. You had goodcause to believe that you had seen me in companywith a creature not of this world, and youwere compelled to declare it.RUTHERFORD.I wish I had died, ere that evidence had beengiven !WITCHCRAFT t A TRAGEDY.VIOLET.Be comforted! be comforted! for you makeme good amends, in that your heart refuses, inspite of such belief, to think me guilty of thecrime for which I am to suffer. There is anotheryou know whom I mean who thinks me innocent.When I am gone, ye will be often together,and speak and think of Violet Murrey. This isthe memory I shall leave behind me : my evilfame with others is of little moment. And yet Ineeds must weep to think of it; 'tis humanweakness.RUTHERFORD.God bless and strengthen thee, my daughter,in this thy last extremity !VIOLET.Fear not for that : I am strengthened. Youhave prayed for me fervently, and I have prayedfor myself; and think ye I shall not be supported?(Looking round on the crowded Andthese good people, too, some of them, I trust,will pray for me. They will one day know thatI am innocent.SEVERAL VOICES (From the crowd, calling out insuccession.We know it already. She must be so. Sheis innocent.144 WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY.BAILLIE.I command silence ! Mr. Sheriff, your dutycalls upon you.SHERIFF (to VIOLET).Madam. (TurnsVIOLET.You speak, and turn from me : I understandyou.SHERIFF.I am compelled to say, though most unwillingly,our time is run.VIOLET.And I am ready. ( Turning to RUTHERFORD.)The last fearful step of my unhappy course onlyremains : you have gone far enough, my goodSir. Receive my dying thanks for all your kindness,and let us part. Farewell ! till we meet inabetter world !RUTHERFORD.Nay, nay ; I will be with thee till all is over,cost what it may, though it should kill me.VIOLET.Most generous man ! thou art as a parent tome,and, woe the day ! thy heart will be wrungas though thou wert so in truth.BAILLIE (to Sheriff).Why so dilatory? Proceed to the place ofexecution.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY, 145SHERIFF.Not so hasty, Sir ! The psalm must first besung.BAILLIE.It will be sung when she is at the stake.SHERIFF (aside.Would thou wert there in her stead, heartlessbigot ! (Aloud Raise the psalm here.VIOLET.You are very humane, good Sheriff, but weshall, if you please, proceed to the place appointed.[She is led towards the stake, when a loudcry is heard without']VOICE.Stop ! stop ! stop the execution.Enter MURREY, darting through the crowd, whogive way to let him pass.MURREY.She is innocent ! she is innocent ! Ye shallnot murder the innocent !SHERIFF (to MURREY).Who art thou, who wouldst stop the completionof the law ?MURREY.One whom you have known ; whom you havelooked on often.VOL. III. L146 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.SHERIFF.The holy faith preserve us ! art thou a livingman?RUTHERFORD.Murrey of Torwood ! doth the grave give upits dead, when the sun is shining in the sky ?SHERIFF.Look to the lady, she is in a swoon.MURREY (supporting VIOLET).My dear, my noble child ! thine own miserythou couldst sustain, but mine has overwhelmedthee : dear, dear child !Enter DUNGA.RREN, running distractedly.BAILLIE (fronting him).Dungarren broke from prison, in defiance ofthe law !DUNGARREN.In defiance of all earthly things. (Pushingthe Bailie aside, and rushing on to VIOLET.)Who art thou ? (Looking sternly at MURREY.)What right hast thou to support Violet Murrey ?MURREY.The right of a father ; a miserable father.DUNGARREN.Her father is dead.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.MURREY.Not so, Dungarren : I would I were dead, ifit could save her life.DUNGARREN (pointing tO RUTHERFORD).This good man, whose word is truth itself;laid Murrey of Torwood in the grave with hisown hands.MURREY.Did he examine the face of the corse whichhe so piously interred ? I had changed clotheswith my faithful servant. - But it is a storytedious to tell ; and can ye doubt his claims toidentity, who, in the very act of making them,subjects his own life to the forfeit of the law ?BAILLIE (aside to the Sheriff's officers).By my faith ! he is a condemned murderer,and will be required of our hands ; keep wellon the watch, that he may not escape.DUNGARREN.She seems to revive ; she will soon recover.(To MURREY.) And it was you who were withher on the heath, and in the cave ?MURREY.It was I, Dungarren.DUNGARREN.No apparition, no clandestine lover, but herown father !L 2148 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.VIOLET (recovering, and much alarmed).Call him not father ! I own him not ! Sendhim away, send him away, dear Robert !MURREY (embracing her).My generous child ! the strength of thy affectionis wonderful, but it is all vain : I here submitmyself willingly to the authority of the law,though innocent of the crime for which I amcondemned the wilful murder of a worthygentleman. And now, Mr. Sheriff) you cannotrefuse to reprieve her, who is mainly convictedfor that, in being seen with me, she seemed tohold intercourse with apparitions, or beings ofanother world.SHERIFF.You speak reason : God be praised for it !DUNGARREN.God be praised, she is safe !BAILLIE.There be other proofs against her besides that.DUNGARREN.Be they what they may, they are false !Enter BLACK Bawdy, letting himself down fromthe wall of a low building, and running eagerlyto the Sheriff.Bawdy.Hear, my Lord Sheriff', hear me, your honourWITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 149hear me, Dungarren ; hear me, a' present !She 's innocent ; I stole it, I stole it myself :the Lady Annabel tempted me, and I stole it.SHERIFF.Simple fool! it is not for theft she is condemned.Bawdy.I ken that weel, your honour. She's condemnedfor being a witch, and she's nae witch :I stole it myself and died it to the Lady Annabel,wha cutter the hole i' the sleeve o't, I'll besworn. Little did I think what wicked purposeshe was after.SHERIFF.Yes, yes, my callant ! I comprehend theenow : it is that gown which was produced inCourt, thou art talking of. Thou stole it for theLady Annabel, and she cut a piece out of it,which she pretended to have found in the sick-chamber?Bawdy.E'en sae, your honour. Whip me, banish me,or hang me, an' it man be sae, but let the innocentteddy able.SHERIFFWell, well ; I'll take the punishing of theeinto my own hands, knave. What shrieks arethese ? [Repeated shrieks are heard from thewindow of a house, and two figures are seen in-L 3150 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.distinctly within, struggling : a dull stifled soundsucceeds, and then a sudden silence'] There ismischief going on in that house.BAILLIE (running to the door of the house, andknocking).Let me enter : I charge you within, whoeverye be, to open the door. No answer ! (Knocksagain.) Still no answer ! Open the door, or itshall be forced open.Prized BANE (looking over the window).Ha, ha ! what want ye, good Mr. Magistrate ?Battle.Some body has suffered violence in this house ;open the door immediately.Prized BANE.And what would you have from the housethat ye are so impatient to enter ? There becorses enow in the churchyard, I trow ; ye neednot come here for them.SHERIFF.She is a mad woman, and has murdered somebody.FIRST OFFICER.Mad, your honour! she's the witch we ha'been seeking in vain to apprehend, and theblackest, chiefs hag o' them a'.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 151SECOND OFFICER.By my faith, we nun deal cannily wi' her, orshe '11 mak her escape fra' us again through theair.BAILLIE (calling up to her).Open the door, woman, and you sha' net beforced ; we want to enter peaceably. Who iswith you, there ? Who was it that shrieked sofearfully ?Prized BANE.Never trouble thy head about that, Mr. Magistrate; she'll never disturb you more.SHERIFF.Who is it you have with you ?Prized BANE (throwing down to them the scarfof ANNABELLA).Know ye that token ? It was a fair lady whoowned it, but she has no need of it now : handme up a winding sheet.SHERIFF.The cursed hag has destroyed some lady.Officers, enter by force, and do your duty.Witch or no witch, she cannot injure strong menlike you, in the open light of day.The door is burst open, and the Officers gointo the house, and presently re-enter,bearing the dead body of ANNABELLA,which they place on the front of the Stage,the crowd gathering round to stare at it.~]L 4WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.BAILLIE.Stand back, every one of you, and leave clearroom round the body. It is the Lady arabella.She has been strangled : she has struggledfearfully ; her features are swollen, and hereyes starting from her head ; she has struggledfearfully. - Stand back, I say ; retire to yourplaces, every one of you, or I'll deal with you asbreakers of the peace.SHERIFF.Be not so angry with them, good Bailie : theymust have some frightful sight to stare at, andthey will be disappointed of that which theycame for.BAILLIE.Disappointed, sheriff! You do not mean, Ihope, to reprieve that foul witch at the otherstake : is not one execution enough for them ?It makes me sick to see such blood thirsting inaChristian land.SHERIFF.Ay, you say true ; that poor wretch had goneout of my head.BAILLIE.Wretch enough, good sooth ! the blackestwitch in Renfrewshire, Grizeld Bane excepted.WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 153SHERIFF.But we need not burn her now : her evidencemay be wanted to convict the other.BAILLIE.Not a whit ! we have evidence at command toburn her twenty times over. A bird in hand isa wise proverb. If we spare her now, she maybein Norway or Lapland when we want heragain for the stake.DUNGARREN (approaching the body of arabella).And this is thy fearful end, most miserablewoman ! It wrings my heart to think of whatthou wert, and what thou nights have been.MURREY (to Sheriff).Your authority having, on these undoubtedproofs of her innocence, reprieved her, may Irequest that she be now withdrawn from thepublic gaze? It is not fit that she should befurther exposed.SHERIFF.True, Torwood ; you shall lead her back toprison, where she shall only remain till safe andcommodious apartments are prepared for her.As for yourself, I am sorry to say, we have nopower to lodge you otherwise than as a condemnedman, obnoxious to the last punishmentof the law.154 WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.VIOLET.O say not so, dear Sir ! He had made hisescape, he was safe, he was free, and he surrenderedhimself into your hands to save thelife of his child. Will ye take advantage of that ?it were cruel and ungenerous.SHERIFF.We act, lady, under authority, and must notbe guided by private opinions and affections.BAILLIE.Most assuredly ! it is our duty to obey thelaw and to make it be obeyed, without fear orfavour.VIOLET.On my knees, I beseech you ! (Kneeling andcatching hold of the Bailie and Sheriff.) I beseechyou for an innocent man ! Royal mercymay be obtained if ye will grant the time timeto save the life of the innocent innocent, Jmean, of intentional murder.SHERIFF.Has he further proof of such innocence toproduce than was shown on his trial ?BAILLIE.If he has not, all application for mercy werevain. He slew the man with whom he had aquarrel, without witnesses. If he is innocent, itWITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY. 155is to God and his own conscience, but the lawmust deem him guilty.VIOLET.He did it not without witnesses, but he whowas present is dead. Alas, alas ! if Fathering-hamhad been alive, he had been justified*BAILLIE.Forbear to urge that plea, lady : that theonly person who was present at the quarrel orcombat is dead or disappeared, throws a greatershade of darkness on the transaction.SHERIFF.These are hard words, Bailie, and unnecessary.BAILLIE.You may think so, Sheriff, but if you yield onthis point, I entirely dissent from it; ay, fromgranting any delay to the execution of his sentence.Shall a man be made gainer for havingdefied the law and broken from his prison ?SHERIFF (to MURREY sorrowfully.I am afraid we can do nothing for you. Youmust prepare for the worst.MURREY.I came here so prepared, worthy Sir : I knewyou could do nothing for me. ( To VIOLET, whoagain kneels imploringly. Forbear, dearest156 WITCHCRAFT '. A TRAGEDY.child ! thou humblest thyself in vain. I willmeet fate as a man : do not add to my sufferingby giving way to such frantic humiliation.(Raising her from the ground') Dungarren, Icommit her to your protection. You will be herhonourable friend.DUNGARREN.Ay, and her devoted husband, also, if youesteem me worthy to be so.MURREY.Worthy to be her husband, were she thedaughter of a king, my noble Robert Kennedy.But thou must not be the son-in-law of such aone as I am, one whose life has been terminatedbyDUNGARREN.I despise the prejudice !VIOLET.But I do not ! O ! I cannot despise it ! Ifmy father must suffer, I will never marry thee,and I will never marry another. My fate issealed. Thou and this good man (pointing toRUTHERFORD) will be my friends, and Heavenwill, in pity, make my earthly course a short one.A creature so stricken with sorrow and disgracehas nothing to do in this world but to wait, inhumble patience, till God in his mercy takes herout of it.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.MURREY.Come from this hateful spot, my sweet child !Cruel as our lot is, we shall be, for what remainsof this day, together.(Endeavours to lead her out, but is preventedby the crowd, who gather close onthe front of the Stage, as Prized BANEissues with frantic gestures from the houseVOICES (from the crowd in succession).Ay, there she comes, and the feel raging withinher. The blackest witch of a*. Let her bebrunt at the stake that was meant for the teddy.Hurry ! hurry ! mair faggots and a fiercer firefor Grizeld! Hurry! and defiance to Satanand his agents !\ A trumpet sounds without, and the tumult increases,till a company of Soldiers appears underarms, and enter an Officer, accompanied byFATHERINGHAM.]OFFICER (giving a paper to the Sheriff).You will please, Mr. Sheriff, to make the contentsof this paper public.SHERIFF.I charge every one here, at his peril, to besilent. (ReadingsBe it known unto all men, that the King'sMajesty, with the Lords and Commons in PartialWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.ment assembled, have decreed that the law punishingwhat has been called the crime of witchcraftas a felonious offence be repealed ; and itis therefore repealed accordingly. Henceforththere shall no person be prosecuted at law as awizard or witch, throughout these realms ; andany person or persons who shall offer injury toany one, as being guilty of the supposed crimeof witchcraft, shall be punished for such aggression.God save the King ! "\ A pause of dead silence, followed by low,then loud murmurs, and then voices callout in successionsVOICES.My certes ! the dee has been better representedin the house of Parliament than a* thebraid shires in the kingdom. Sic a decree asthat in a Christian land ! To mak Satantriumphant ! There '11 be fine gambols onmoors and in kirk yards for this, I trow. Parliament,forsooth ! we hae sent bonnie membersthere, indeed, gin the be the laws they mak.And will Mary Macmurren escape after a* ? rOut upon J t ! She may be brunt at ony rate, forshe is condemned by the gude auld law of ourforefathers. Ay, so she may; that stands toreason.[Crowd close round the stake where MARYMACMURREN is bound']WITCHCRAFT I A TRAGEDY. 1,59SHERIFF (to the Crowd).Desist, I say, or the soldiers shall disperse youforthwith.FATHERINGHAM.Would they burn the miserable creature for animaginary crime ; one may say, for a pastime !BAILLIE (to FATHERINGHAM).No, good Sir; not imaginary. She is a witchby her own confession. And charwoman (pointingto Prized BANE) is also, by her own words,convicted of consorting and collecting withSatan, an awful and mischievous witch.FATHERINGHAM.Is she so ?Prized BANE (looking at himjiercely}.Who says otherwise ? The sun shines now,and that makes thee bold; but my time of poweris coming.FATHERINGHAM (approaching her).Is this you, Grizeld Bane? What broughtyou to this part of the country ?Prized BANE.The prince of the power of the air.BAILLIE.There, Sir ! you hear her confess it. Andwho is she ? for you seem to know her.FATHERINGHAM.A miserable worn an whose husband was hanged160 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.for murder, at Inverness, some years ago, andwho thereupon became distracted. She was,when I left that country, kept in close custody.But she has, no doubt, escaped fromher keepers, who may not be very anxious to reclaimher.BAILLIE.We must secure her, then, and send her backto the north.Prized BANE.Lay hands on me who dare ! I defy you : mymaster is stronger than you all, since you senthim to his kingdom of darkness. Ye cannot stopthe breath of a spirit, though you had a score ofexecutioners at your beck. Lay hands upon mewho dare !FATHER1NGHAM.Nobody will do you any violence, Dame ; butyou will quietly retire with these two friends ofyours (motioning significantly to two Soldiers,who advance and take charge of her). Nay ;make no resistance : look steadfastly in my face,and you will plainly perceive that you must go.(Fixes his eyes upon her sternly, while shesuffers herself to be led off')OFFICER.Now, Mr. Sheriff, release your prisoners, sincethe laws against witchcraft are abrogated.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. l6lSHERIFF.I do it most gladly. Would you had authorityto command the release of all my prisoners.OFFICER.It is only those condemned for witchcraft,whose enlargement I have authority to command.MURREY (stepping sternly from the opposite sideof the Stage, and fronting FATHERINGHAMclosely).But there is a prisoner condemned for murderwhom thou, James Fatheringham, knowest to beinnocent, and therefore thou art by nature authorised,yea, compelled, to demand his release,I mean, the reversion of his sentence.FATHERINGHAM (starting backMurrey of Tor wood in the land of the living !MURREY.No thanks to thee that I am so ! To desertme, and leave the country too, circumstancedas thou knowest me to be, the only witness ofthat fatal quarrel, was it the act of a friend,of a Christian, of a man ?FATHERINGHAM.No, neither or a Christian, nor a heathen, hadit been a voluntary act. But you were not yetin custody, when I left the country, with no intentionof going further than the southern coastof Ireland, to visit a dying relation.VOL. in. MWITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY.MURREY.In Ireland all these years ?FATHERINGHAM.Be not so hasty. That coast I never reached :a violent storm drove our vessel out to sea, whereshe was boarded and captured by a pirate. Myvaried tale, dear Murrey, you shall hear on afitter occasion. Thank God that I am now here !and have this day accompanied my friend (pointingto the Officer) on his public errand, still intimeto save thee. For hearing, on my returnto England, some weeks ago, thy sad story, howthou hadst been condemned, hadst made thyescape from prison, how thy dead body was foundin a pit, and interred, I was in no hurry to proceednorthwards, as the justification of thy memorycould not be disappointed.MURREY.Thou shouldst not have suffered even mymemory to rest under such imputation, no, notan hour.VIOLET.Dear father, be not so stern when deliverance,a blessed deliverance, is sent to thee. See ;there is a tear in his eye. It was not want offriendship that detained him.FATHERINGHAM.I thank thee, sweet lady, for taking my part.WITCHCRAFT : A TRAGEDY. 168It was not want of friendship that detained me ;though Murrey has always been so hasty andardent, and I so deliberate and procrastinating,it is wonderful we should ever have been friends.DUNGARREN.No, not wonderful : though slow yourself; youloved him, perhaps, for his ardour.FATHERINGHAM.Yes, young man, you are right. But how wasit that he loved me? if, indeed, he ever lovedme. Perhaps he never did.MURREY (rushing into his arms).I did I do and will ever love thee, wertthou as slow and inert as a beetle.DUNGARREN.Now ye are friends, and this terrible tempesthas past over us ! May such scenes as we havethis day witnessed never again disgrace a freeand a Christian land !\ A murmur amongst the Crowd. ^SHERIFF.Good people, be pacified ; and instead of theburning of a witch, ye shall have six hogsheadsof ale set abroach at the cross, to drink the healthof Violet Murrey, and a grand funeral into thebargain.M 2164 WITCHCRAFT: A TRAGEDY.DUNGARREN.Forbear, Sheriff: the body of this unhappylady is no subject for pageantry. She shall beinterred with decent privacy ; and those whohave felt the tyranny of uncontrolled passionswill think, with conscious awe, of her end.[The Curtain drops"]THEHOMICIDE:A TRAGEDY IN PROSE,WITH OCCASIONAL PASSAGES OF VERSE.IN THREE ACTS.M 3PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.CLAUDIEN, a Danish Nobleman.VAN MAURICE, his Friend.BARON HARTMAN, a near Relation of VanMaurice.KRANZBERG ,# Citizen of Lubeck, related to VanMaurice and Hartman.ARDUSOFFE, 1 AJ\ Advocates.Abortion, JGORMAN, Confidential Servant to Kranzberg.Judges, Confessors, Officers of Justice, Mariners,&c. &c.WOMEN.ROSELLA, Sister to Van Maurice.MARGARET, her confidential and domestic Friend.Scene, the free Imperial City of Lubeck, and atSea.THE HOMICIDE.ACT I.SCENE I. An Ante-chamber in the House ofVAN MAURICE.Enter BARON HARTMAN and MARGARET, bydifferent sides.HARTMAN,GOOD morning, fair Margaret ! I come to havethe felicity of half an hour's conversation withRosella. I hope this will prove to her, as wellas myself, the most agreeable way of receivingan answer to the billet which I had the honourto send her this morning.MARGARET.Indeed, honoured Sir, she is in no spirits toreceive company at present, and wishes to bealone.HARTMAN.Ha ! she is considering of it then. It is indeeda serious consideration j but after the favourI may indeed call it so the condescensionM 4168 THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY.at least with which she has received my devotedattentions, I might fairly have supposed that ashort time would have sufficed for the ceremonyof consideration.MARGARET.I believe, Baron, that ceremony, as you arepleased to term it, has been gone through already.At least, 1 believe, this billet which shedesired me to put into your own hands, alongwith this case of jewels, will convince you thatfurther consideration were needless. I was justgoing to your house to deliver them to you.HARTMAN.What does she mean ? return my present !MARGARET.The letter will, no doubt, explain it.HARTMAN (snatches the letter ', opens it with agitation,reading it half aloud and half to himself).Only friendship to return for all. Pleasurein your society as a neighbour and a kinsman.Beg of you to accept my grateful acknowledgments."What is all this? Would she prolongthe fooling of attendance another half year?Let her beware how she sports with devotedaffection like mine. ( Walks to and fro somewhatdisturbed, then returns to MARGARET.) I understandall this well enough. Let me find her inher own apartment.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 169MARGARET (jpr&oentfag him as he endeavours topass on).Nay, Sir, you must not.HARTMAN.Foolish girl ! I know thy fair friend betterthan thou dost. Let me pass to her apartment,and I'll soon make her glowing lips contradictthe cold words of her letter.MARGARET.Indeed, Baron Hartman, you must not pass.HARTMAN.Why so ? Nonsensical mummery !MARGARET.She wishes to be alone.HARTMAN.Alone ! wishes to be alone ! that is not herusual inclination. What is the matter ?MARGARET.She is indisposed, and can see no one. AndI must take the liberty to say that you are deludingyourself when you mistake that cheerfulgaiety of her manner, which is natural to her,for a proof of partiality to your company.HARTMAN.If what you say be true, young mistress, ifthis answer of hers be a serious one, I have notdeluded myself, but she has deluded me.170 THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY.MARGARET.Then every pleasant man of her acquaintancemight say the same thing, for she is cheerful andaffable with them all.HARTMAN.No, madam ; affable and cheerful as youplease, but she has not demeaned herself towardsthem as she has done towards me : and Iwill know the cause why I am so treated, beforeanother hour passes over my head. (Going.)MARGARET.But you will be pleased to take this with you,Baron. (Offering him the case of jewels, whichhe casts from him indignantlyHARTMAN,Let any jilt in Lubeck wear the paltry baublesfor me. \ Exit.MARGARET (alone).The vanity of that man is unconquerable ; andyet I cannot help pitying him a little ; for .Rosella,to conceal her betrothment to Claudius,has amused herself with his folly too long.(Picking up the case.) I must keep these richjewels carefully, however, and restore them tohim at a more favourable moment. \J&xit.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.The Apartment of ROSELLA. She is discoveredsitting by a table writing, and CLAUDIENstanding behind her chair, overlooking her asshe writes.CLAUDIEN.That pretty hand, and those fair charactersSo delicate ! they should alone expressWords of a sweet and sisterly affection,Words of the dearer tenderness of love.Have done with cold notes of formality ;Let Margaret henceforth write such things asthose.(Lifting her hand from the paper and caressingit.}No, this white hand, this soft, this delicatehand,As delicate as if the early dewDropp'd from the lily's bell or hawthorn's blossom,A fresh collection of all summer sweetness,Had been its daily unguent, it is mine ;Thou' st given it to me ; ay, and it shall writeTo me, to me alone, when I am gone.172 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.ROSELLA.A wise precaution, mask'd with seeming love.When I shall think of nobody but thee,I might, perhaps, betray our secret bond,Beginning thus to some old gouty kinsmanA dull epistle " My dear Claudius."CLAUDIEN.Alas, that secret, that constraining secret !It is a galling weight about our necks,Would we were rid of it !ROSELLA.But when the king of Denmark, thy good master,Shall know how thou art circumstanced, hesurelyWill not enforce upon thee an allianceUnsought by thee, now thought of with repugnance,Because he did at first, on thy behalf)Propose it to the parent of the maid,A maid thought scarcely seen, and never woo'd ?mCLAUDIEN.I trust he will not, and should lose no timeIn reaching Copenhagen ere the courtRemove to Elsineur, that speedilyI may return to thee, my sweet Rosella,A free and happy man.ROSELLA.A free man, say'st thou, Claudius ?THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 173CLAUDIEN.Yes, gentle mistress, for the bonds of loveAre very freedom, or are something better.Still, to protect thee from all harm, to beNear to thee always ; sit by thee unbiddenRead to thee pleasant tales look in thy face,And, all thy smiles and meaning glances scanning,To do what they desire will this be thraldom ?Will this be servitude ?ROSELLAROSELLA.Ah, no ! that is not servitude from which,When tired of it, thou wilt break loose, my friend.CLAUDIEN.And so I will, my love, when thou art tiresome,But when will that be j say ?ROSELLA.E'en when thou see'st what thou may'st shortlyfind,A face to gaze on, fairer than Rosella's.CLAUDIEN.Be not offended ; such a one alreadyI've seen, and yet the latchet of thy shoeI 'd rather tie and have one smile of thanks,Than press a score of kisses on her lips.ROSELLA.She may be also wittier than me.174 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.CLAUDIEN.And pardon me again ; that may be possible ;Yet would I rather hear thy cheerful voiceBidding me a good morrow, faith and truth !Than all her wit and wisdom, were she learn' dAs Gothenburg professor.ROSELLA.Fy on thee, Claudius ! Would'st thou theninsinuateThat I am not thy reasonable choice,But one that has been fasten'd on thy fancyBy spells of witchcraft ?CLAUDIEN.Thou hast it, love ; by very spells of witchcraft ;For how could that be reasonable choiceWhich no deliberation knew. Thy countenance,Such as it is thy joyous playful countenance,I look'd upon, and look'd upon again,Till I became a fascinated thing,As helpless as an infant.ROSELLA.Alas, poor child ! this was a sudden change.CLAUDIEN.Nay, I am wrong j it was not quite so sudden ;For after I had seen thy face, I waitedWaited with eager ears to hear thy voice,And then I watch' d thee to observe thy movements,THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 175Light step and graceful gesture then I waitedTo hear thy voice again, and thenROSELLA.I pray theeHave done with such a foolish list of them !Dost thou forget thou hast already won me ?I'll have thee presently, I do suppose,Repeating all thy courtship o'er again,And kneeling at my feet for perfect idleness.CLAUDIEN.And so thou shalt, weren't only for the pleasureOf being raised again by that white hand.(Kneeling to her playfully')ROSELLA (laying her hand upon his head).It will not raise thee up, thou saucy mimic IBut keep thee down, for this thy mock humility,Which is but vanity in cloak and vizard ;The bearing of success without misgivingOr fear of change ; the full securityOf an affianced lord.Enter BARON HARTMAN behind.CLAUDIEN.To keep me down,Whilst thy soft fingers, mixing with my hair,Gives thrilling so delightful ! on such terms,I 'd gladly at thy feet kneel by the hour,So to be mortified176 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.HARTMAN (rushing forward).Oh, woman, woman ![CLAUDIEN starts up from the feet of hisMistress, and both seem surprised and embarrassed']ROSELLA.Baron Hartman here !HARTMAN.Yes, madam ; and, as I perceive, not altogetherwelcome.ROSELLA.In this place and at this hour, Baron !HARTMAN.An injured man, madam, regards not time orplace. As a near kinsman, had there been noother plea, I might have been admitted for onehalf hour into your presence, to know the causewhy, after such long and well-received attentions,I am now to be discarded from yourfavour. But this, forsooth, could not be : youwere indisposed ; you were alone, and wished tobe alone. I have, no doubt, grievously offendedin breaking thus upon the privacy of one wholoves so very much to be alone.CLAUDIEN.Truly, Baron, I have, like yourself, come unbiddeninto this lady's presence, and have castmyself at her feet, as you have witnessed ; forTHE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY. 177which humiliation she has only rewarded mewith mocking : had you done the same, Baron,you would, perhaps, have fared no better.HARTMAN.Count Claudius, the freedom of a carelessstranger may be some excuse for your intrusionhere, but can be none for her excluding me onpretences so frivolous ; for the alleged indispositionis, I perceive, only the being indisposedfor my company, who am an old and faithfulfriend ; ay, and her kinsman to boot.CLAUDIEN.My noble baron, you and I are rivals, and restour pretensions here on very different foundations; you on being known to the lady, I onthe reverse. But I am the wiser of the two.HARTMAN.How so, I pray ?CLAUDIEN.Is it not a notorious fact, that strangers ofany apparent likelihood always occupy the vantageground in every woman's favour? Hadthe fair Rosella known me as long as she hasknown you, she might have discovered in me asmany faults, perhaps, as would have excludedme from the very threshold of her vestibule.ROSELLA.So you see, my dear cousin, that the wisestVOL. III. N178 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.thing you can do, is to leave the count and metime enough to discover how foolish we bothare.HARTMAN.The wisest thing I can do, madam, is to forgetand despise the heartless caprice of a fickle,fantastical beauty.ROSELLA.Be wise, then, good cousin, since you havefound out the way.HARTMAN.Heartless woman ! canst thou treat with suchlevity the misery thou hast occasioned ?ROSELLA.O pardon me, my dear Hartman ! thou takesthis matter more deeply than I dreamt of. Thinknot so severely of me ; if I have erred, lend meof thine own generosity some further credit onthy good opinion, and I will redeem it. Haveyou not always known me as your gay andthoughtless cousin? and why will you tax menow as a grave and prudent dame ? Come tometomorrow ; I shall then have seen my brother,and will talk to you seriously on a subjectwhich to-day I would avoid.HARTMAN.At what hour shall I meet you ?THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 179ROSELLA.Not at an early hour. At noon. No, not sosoon. In the afternoon in the evening: thatwill suit me best.HARTMAN.Well, since it must be deferred so long, letthe evening be the time. But remember, madam,I will submit no longer to be the sport of femalecaprice. If this gay stranger takes such treatmentmore lightly, he is of a different temperament,perhaps, and it may agree with him j butit will not pass with Baron Hartman.[Exit, proudly.CLAUDIEN.My dear Rosella ! I fear thou hast beenleading on this poor man in a fool's chase. Ipity him.ROSELLA.I fear I have, and do repent me of it.CLAUDIEN.It was but the foible of thy gay and thoughtlessnature.ROSELLA.Ah no ! I fear I have not that excuse.CLAUDIEN.Intentional deceit !N 2180 THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY.ROSELLA.Dearest Claudius ! kill me not with that wordand that look ! It was to conceal my connectionwith thee, that I have of late received thegallantries of Hartman with more than usualgraciousness ; but it was to deceive the worldrather than himself. Fool that I was !CLAUDIEN.Yes, it was foolish.ROSELLA.But though I might have guessed that hisinordinate vanity would construe my behaviourinto downright love of his fine form and mentalendowments, I never imagined he would feelmore pain in the disappointment than a littlewounded vanity might inflict, nor am I surethat he really feels more deeply.CLAUDIEN.I fear thou dost him wrong. I pity him frommy heart ; and were it possible for me to chidewhat is so dear, I should inflict upon thee, atthis moment, words of grave rebuke.ROSELLA.Nay, not now, dear Claudius ! reserve themtill thy return, for then I shall be so happy thatthey will sound in my ear like harmony. I cannotbear them now. (Weeping')THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY. 181CLAUDIEN.Nay, nay, mistress of my soul ! I meant not todistress thee so much. Those tears are a greaterpunishment to me than I can bear. And let mewipe them off, kiss them off. Thou shalt nevershed tears again for Claudius's sternness.Enter MARGARET.ROSELLA.What is the matter ?MARGARET.Nothing ; 1 am only come to inform the Countthat the master of the vessel is below, and wishesto know his will concerning the removal of hisluggage.CLAUDIEN.Ha ! very true ; I should have waited for himat home, and it slipt from my memory entirely.Keep thee from being in love, fair Margaret, itmakes one's head not worth a maravedi.MARGARET.But the heart finds what the head loses, andwhere is the waste ?CLAUDIEN.True, girl ; and be pleasant and amusing tothy friend here, while I am absent. \ Exit.N 3182 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.ROSELLA.My dear Margaret, didst thou see Hartmanwhen he left the house ?MARGARET.Only a glimpse of him.ROSELLA.Did he look very miserable ?MARGARET.I do think he did, poor man; but he is sovain, he will be the better for his mortification.ROSELLA.I thank thee, Margaret ; it does me good tohear thee say so ; for 1 know that thy thoughtsand thy words are the same.MARGARET.Come along, my dear child, and I will tellthee a new story of his consummate conceit aswe go : shan't we take our usual turn on theterrace ? [Exeunt.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 183SCENE III.A Public Garden.Enter HARTMAN, walking backward and forwardin a perturbed manner, and presentlyenter KRANZBERG, who stands observing himcuriously before he speaks.KRANZBERG.Good morning, kinsman ; nothing, I hope,has happened to disturb you : I have markedyou at a distance, striding along with a quickunusual pace : pardon the solicitude of friendship,if I am anxious to know what discomposesyou so much.HARTMAN.Let it pass, let it pass ! I know my place andmy pretensions as well as any man ; she shallneither break my heart nor discompose me long.KRANZBERG.It is a woman, then, who is the cause of youragitation. What kind of woman can she be whois unfavourable to the suit of Baron Hartman ?N 4184 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.HARTMAN.Thou may'st well ask that question, my friend ;it would, I believe, cause some surprise in manya noble citizen of Lubeck.KRANZBERG.Ill many a noble lady of Lubeck we may, atleast, aver, though strange unnatural things willsometimes happen, as if by witchery. But lether have her way ; she will be glad enough atlast to bring you back to her toils again by humblesubmission, if you will have spirit enough toforswear her company for a time.HARTMAN.A time !KRANZBERG.Ay, some weeks or so.HARTMAN.Perhaps thou art right. I had good reasonto believe my company was agreeable to her.But butKRANZBERG.Out with it, Baron ! you cannot question myfriendship or secrecy, arid perhaps I may be ofuse to you.HARTMAN.This cousin of mineTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 185KRANZBERG.What, the fair Rosella ; she is the culprit!I had almost guessed as much.HARTMAN.But thou canst not guess the excess of herfickleness.KRANZBERG.I will not attempt it, for you shall tell me.HARTMAN.She denied me access to her presence thisvery morning, on the pretence of being unwell,and wishing to be alone ; and when I made myentry by stealth through the private door of herapartment, I found her engaged in playful coquetrywith Claudius.KRANZBERG.I fear there is something more than play concernedin this coquetry.HARTMAN.But she has not regarded him of late ; hersmiles were bestowed upon me.KRANZBERG.Deceitful smiles, to cover secret passion. Believeme, kinsman, she has only made you thecover for her wiles ; and I am well assured, thatwhen he is returned from Copenhagen, where hegoes to remove some obstacle to their wishes, they186 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.will, with the approbation of her brother VanMaurice, throw aside all disguise, and be married.He sails in the Mermaid tomorrow.HARTMAN.May the waves of the sea be his winding-sheet !May the fishes of the ocean devour his hotly carcass!KRANZBERG.It may, indeed, be hotly enough when it fallsto their share, but for his living carcass, at least,you must own that is noble and goodly.HARTMAN.I own it not : to me there is something in hisair, his form, his mien, in the glance of his eye,yea, in the garb which he wears, that is intolerable.KRANZBERG.The ladies of Lubeck think differently.HARTMAN.Let them think as they will ! it makes me madto hear of such stupid, such perverse, such blindpartiality. Senseless, fickle fools !KRANZBERG.True, they are fickle enough ; but never mindit, that will cure the evil. They will praise himfor an Apollo till he marry Rosella, and abusehim for a scarecrow afterwards.THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY. 187HARTMAN.Marry Rosella ! I will have the heart's bloodfrom his body ere I endure this misery for oneday longer.KRANZBERG.Fy, fy, good Baron ! I am very sorry I havesaid so much to you on this subject; but thefriendly, I may truly say, affectionate regardI feel for you, besides the admiration I havelong entertained for your merits, made me unableto conceal from you longer the unworthydeceit which has been practised upon you.When I saw her smile upon you, and glancesecret looks of fondness to Claudius,HARTMAN.Say no more of it ; my very ears are ringingwith the sound. I will have vengeance ereanother day pass over my head.[Exit furiously.KRANZBERG (alone.Let the fool work upon this ! it will embroilhim at least with Van Maurice and his sister, andI shall have the management of himself and hisfortune in my own hands. (In a calculatingposture, after having taken a turn across the Stage,muttering to himself.) Well, two thousand goodacres, corn-land and forest, though encumberedwith the due maintenance of the proprietor, maybeas profitable to me as a third part of the THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.simple. What idiots they are who put theirthroats in jeopardy of the hangman, to have theactual property of money, when without risk ortrouble they may have the actual spendingthereof! O there is nothing one may not procure,when one is happy enough to have a richfool for one's friend one's very dear, noble,feeling, high-minded friend ! To soil one's handswith crime but for a little more than one cansafely wheedle from him ; it is the act of a hotheadedidiot ! \ Exit.SCENE IV.A Library, with globes, cabinets, and other furniture,denoting the apartment of a student ;a Table in front, on which burns a Lamp, theback of the Stage being entirely in shade.Enter CLAUDIEN by a concealed door at the bottomof the Stage, who walks once or twice acrossit in a distracted manner, and then leaning hisback against the wall, continues motionless.Enter VAN MAURICE by the front, with a book inhis hand, which he lays upon the table.VAN MAURICE (after having turned over the leavesfor some time).It is very strange ; the passage opened to myTHE HOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY. 189hand in this very book but the other day, andnow it is nowhere to be found. {A heavy sigh isuttered by CLAUDIEN.) I thought I heard something.(Looking roundly It is fancy. (Turningover the leaves again") I will not give up thesearch ; it was certainly here, and it will bearme out in every thing I have advanced on thesubject. (A deep sigh, uttered as before Thereis somebody near me. (Looking round the roommore perfectly, and discovering CLAUDIEN.) Whoart thou, lurking yonder in the shade ? Comeforward to the light, be thy designs hostile orfriendly. Speak ; say who thou art?CLAUDIEN (advancing).Thy friend.VAN MAURICE.My friend, here at this hour in such a plight !What is the matter, Claudius? what has happened?CLAUDIEN.Something has happen'd! I will tell thee allWhen I am able.VAN MAURICE.Thou 'rt deadly pale ; thy face is strangely haggard.Sit down, sit down ; thou art too weak to stand.190 THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY.CLAUDIEN (sinking, half supported by VAN Maurice,into a chair).The light bewilders me.VAN MAURICE.There 's fever on thee ; let me feel thy hand.Ha ! there is blood upon it ; thou art wounded ;Thou 'rt faint and need'st assistance. (Going')CLAUDIEN (preventing him).Call no one here, but stay with me thyself.'Tis not my own blood, Maurice j would itwere!VAN MAURICE.Hast thou slain any one ?CLAUDIEN.He did attack me ; from his hand I wrestedThe clenched dagger plunged it in his breast.VAN MAURICE.Then God be praised thou hast escaped, dearClaudius !CLAUDIEN.Oh say not so ! I' ve taken human life,I Ve sent a sinful soul to its dread reckoning.VAN MAURICE.Be not so overcome ; there is no cause.His death is thy deliverance ; and the lawsOf God and man will fully justifyAn act of self-defence.THE HOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY. 191CLAUDIEN.But me they will not justify ! Beneath meMy knee upon his breast. (Starting from hisseat with a gesture of despaired Oh!what availedThe poor offence of a few spiteful words,That I should do a fell a ruffian's deed !VAN MAURICE.Be patient, Claudius, nor against thyselfSpeak with such vehemence of condemnation.Hadst thou resisted provocation, surelyIt had been well. Thou 'st done a fearful deed,But 't was a reckless, instantaneous impulse.CLAUDIEN.No, no ! Oh, no ! there was a fearful moment,And thoughts cross' d o'er my mind before Istruck him.Would it had been an instantaneous impulse !VAN MAURICE.Distress of mind obscures thine understanding.CLAUDIEN.I 've loved and been beloved by worthy men ;A noble, gen'rous heart dwelt in my breast,As they believed, and so, alas, did I.But Providence has brought it to the proof;It was a fiend's heart ; not a noble one.Maurice, Van Maurice, when upon thy shoulderTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.I leant this morning, list'ning to the praiseWhich thy too partial friendship lavish' d on me,That I deserved it not, full well I knew,But little did I think a deed like this(Bursting into tears')VAN MAURICE.My dear, dear Claudius ! I will love thee still,Will praise thee still ; thou art a noble creature.CLAUDIEN.Call me not so ! it is excruciating.I was a happy man, he was unhappy jI at the moment arm'd, he weaponless ;I was the victor, he upon the ground.I might have saved his life, and meant to save it jBut keen suggestions rush'd, I know not how,Like blasts from hell, all nature's virtue searing ;Like poison* d arrows from an ambush' d foe ;Like gleams, revealing for one fearful instantThe weltering billows of a midnight deep,Athwart my mind they rush'd ; and what cameafter !God ! thy boundless mercy may forgive,But I for ever am a wretched man !VAN MAURICE.But tell thy story more connectedly ;Whom hast thou slain? Hush, hush! there'speople coming.1 hear strange voices and the sound of feet.(Runs to the door, and locks it.)THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY* 193Haste to the garden-gate, go to thy lodgings,Thou wert at any rate to sail tomorrowFor Copenhagen by the early tide ;Thy quitting Lubeck will not raise suspicion.Take leave, then, of Rosella, at the hourWhen she expects thee, as if nought gave painBut leaving her. Go home, all will go well.(Knocking at the door')Dost thou not hear? art spell-bound to the spot?Go home immediately. (Leads him hastily tothe private door 9 and pushes him gentlyaway.} \JExit CLAUDIEN.the knocking repeated still louder without:VAN MAURICE returns to the opposite sideand unlocks the doors]Enter KRANZBERG and two Officers of Justice.KRANZBERG.How intent you have been on your studies,good Baron ! to let us knock so long at yourdoor !VAN MAURICE.I expected no visitors at this hour.KRANZBERG.Visitors will come at all hours when mattersof moment compel them, I have that to tellyou of which it concerns you much to know.VOL. in. o194 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.But you look as if you knew it already, for yourface is as white as your neckcloth.VAN MAURICE.I know not what you mean ; but I expect tohear something very dreadful from the alarm ofyour manner. What concern have I in yourtale ? which you had better tell me quickly in asfew words as may be. What has happened ?KRANZBERG.Your cousin, Baron Hartman, is murdered ;the body has been found in a field, under thenorthern rampart.VAN MAURICE.Are you sure he is dead ? The dagger, perhaps,has not gone so deep as you imagine ; andhe may but have fainted from loss of blood.FIRST OFFICER (stepping eagerly up to VANMAURICE).And how do you know, Sir, that it is a daggerwhich has given the wound ?VAN MAURICE (in confusion).I guess I suppose it is the commonweapon of an assassin.SECOND OFFICER (aside tO KRANZBERG).Did you mark that ? I have my suspicions.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.KRANZBERG (after a pause, during which they alllook on VAN MAURICE and on one another significantly.But you give us no orders, Van Maurice?You are his nearest kinsman : it belongs to you toact on this unhappy occasion.[Whilst they are speaking, First Officer goesround the room, looking into every corner,and at last stoops and lifts something fromthe floor, at the bottom of the Stage']VAN MAURICE.Yes, true ; something should be done. Letthe body be removed to his house, and try if itcan possibly be recovered.KRANZBERG.That has been done already, and it is as deadas the corpse of your grandfather. Are theseall the orders you have to give ? Shan't we sendan armed party through the country to track outthe murderer ?FIRST OFFICER (advancing.We need not track him far. (Holding up thedagger.) Here is his mark : and, Baron VanMaurice, I arrest thee in the name of the state.(Laying hold of him.)VAN MAURICE (repelling him).Lay no hands on me, or ye may dearly answerfor such an outrage. I am most innocent of theo 2196 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.crime with which you would charge me ; thoughI may well look disturbed on hearing such terribleintelligence.KRANZBERG.Ay, so thou may'st ; but there is more thanlooks to condemn thee. showing him the dagger,upon which he recoils some paces back, andseems confounded") Does this appal thee ? Wearrest thee in the name of the state, and thisshall be our witness that we have not actedrashly.\ They all endeavour to seize him, while hestruggles with them ; and then enter severalServants.]FIRST SERVANT.Lay hands on our master ! Ye shall take ourlives, hell-hounds, ere ye wrong one hair of hishead.FIRST OFFICER.We arrest him in the name of the state, andhe is our lawful prisoner.FIRST SERVANT (showing a pistol).And I will blow your brains out in my ownname, if ye do not let him go i* the instant.\ More armed Servants rushing in, surroundKRANZBERG and the Officers, and rescueVAN Maurice]]THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.VAN MAURICE (recovering his composure.Ye see I am freed from your grasp, and ye arenow prisoners in this house during my pleasure.All the Servants, speaking at once.Yes, noble Baron ; give them to our charge,and we will keep them securely, I warrant you.VAN MAURICE (to the Servants).I thank you, my friends ; but I have somewhatmore to say to these gentlemen. Ye see that Imight detain you here, as long as my own convenienceor safety, granting I were guilty, mightrequire it ; but I release you freely, upon thiscondition, that I shall remain at liberty, unmolested,till to-sorrow mid-day ; after that hour,I bind myself as a man of honour, to be foundhere in my own house, ready without resistanceto obey the laws of my country.FIRST OFFICER.Spoken like a man of honour, and we will trustyou.VAN MAURICE (to KjRANZBERG).And you promise this ? (To Second Officer.)And you.KRANZBERG and SECOND OFFICER (both at OttCtf).We do.VAN MAURICE (to Servants).Let these gentlemen retire freely when it iso3198 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.their pleasure. (To KRANZBERG.) Kinsman,good night. [Exit.[KRANZBERG and Officers remain on the front,whilst the Servants retire to the bottom of theStage']FIRST OFFICER (to KllANZBERG).Had we not better go hence and return byand by with a guard to hover, concealed roundthe house, and watch his motions ? He may makehis escape else, for all his fair promises.KRANZBERG.Let him do so ; if he fly the country he isoutlawed, and that will serve the purpose aseffectually.FIRST OFFICER,Purpose ! is there any other purpose but thevindication of the law, which says, " He whosheds the blood of man, by man shall his bloodbe shed."[KRANZBERG turns away in confusion andpretends to speak to the Servants at thebottom of the Stage]SECOND OFFICER.What ! man, dost thou not understand him ?FIRST Officer.No, faith ! and thy wit is sharper than I reckonfor if thou dost.THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY. 199SECOND OFFICER.Yet the mystery is not very deep neither. TheBaron here is heir to Baron Hartman, andKranzberg again is next heir after him, the landsbeing strictly so destined ; and an outlaw, thouknowest, is a dead man as to all inheritance.FIRST OFFICER.Why, there's some sense in that. And by myfaith ! if Van Maurice has murdered Hartmanto transfer his large estate to Kranzberg, he hassold himself to the devil for a ducat.SECOND OFFICER.Yes ; hell will have a good bargain of it everyway, for the revenues of the land will be as muchspent for its interest in the possession of Kranz-berg, as if given in fee simple to Beelzebub.FIRST OFFICER.Nay, nay ; he lives in good repute, thou artuncharitable.KRANZBERG (advancing to the front).Come, friends ; let us return to our homes ;tomorrow, at mid-day, we meet here again.\JLxeunt.o 4200 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.SCENE V.The Apartment of ROSELLA ; she enters, followedby an old Seaman, speaking as she enters.ROSELLA.And the wind is fair, thou sayest, but the skyforetelling change. Thou art an old mariner,good Jackie, and hast skill in sky and weather ;tell me, then, faithfully, does it forbode a storm ?JACOME.No, madam ; not to say a storm ; nothing tomake you or any of the friends of Count Claudiusuneasy : a stiff gale or so ; and that, with atight new vessel to trust to, is but a passing rousefor sailors or passengers either. It only makesa stir on board and the blood circulate morequickly. No, no, no ! nothing to make one uneasy.ROSELLA.God grant it may be so !JACOME.Fear not, madam, fear not ! You know I neverspeak but as I think ; and I would not disgracemy former calling now by lying like a landsman.THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY. 201ROSELLA.I hear them coming ; do what I desired thee,quickly. \JRxit JACOME.Thank heaven ! the voyage is but short ; thetimeOf his return fix'd as the calendar,If that the fickle winds will give permission.Enter CLAUDIEN and VAN MAURICE.True to the hour of taking leave, my Claudius :Ah ! be as punctual to the promised timeOf thy return. And wilt thou not ?CLAUDIEN.At least,The fault shall not be mine, if I am not.ROSELLA.How gravely and how solemnly thou mayest so !Has aught befallen to make thee on this pointLess sure than thou wert yesterday ? Dearbrother,You spoke so lightly of our parting then,But now your cheer is wonderfully changed.VAN MAURICE.Something indeed has happen' d, dear Rosella,That may defer thy Claudius's returnFor a short month or so.THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.ROSELLA (after looking at them inquiringly).No, no, Van Maurice,Upon your faces I do plainly readA more distressing tale. Deceive me not :Tell me the worst at once ; I'm his betroth'd,And have a right to know it. Have I not ?Have I not, gentle Claudius ?CLAUDIEN.Thou hast a right to every thing, my love,That a devoted heart can give. My life,All that deserves the name of life, I haveBut in thy presence ; to be absent from theeLonger than strict necessity compelsWould be a wanton act of self destruction.Trust, then, that he who is so strongly boundWill soon return. The carrier-bird, released,Points to one cherish' d spot her arrowy flight ;Not air's bright insects, nor earth's alpine peaks,With purple berries clothed, her wonted lures,From its true line can warp it e'en so muchAs the vibration of a stricken cord.ROSELLA.This is no answer : art thou not my own,Almost my husband, and here stands a brother,And yet you deal with me in mysteries.Fie ! is this well ? Have I deserved this wrong ?VAN MAURICE.Be satisfied, Rosella ; urge us not.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 203It is not want of confidence in theeWhich makes us so reserved ; urge no further.ROSELLA.Nay, but I will ; for ye conceal from meSome recent and disastrous eventTo spare me pain. But ye mistake your aim.In certainty is aggravated pain.Is he a ruin'd man ? then I am readyWith heart and hand to sooth his poverty.Is he proscribed by law ? then I am readyMy country to abandon for his sake.Say any thing, and I will bear it firmlyAnd meekly as I may.CLAUDIEN.My dearest love, I thought to have parted fromtheeWith brighter omens of a glad return :But now thou weep'st because the very dayOf my return is doubtful. If I stayTwo weeks or three weeks longer than we reckoned,Shall I not still be welcome ?ROSELLA.O, mock me not with weeks ! thou knowest wellNo time can make thee otherwise than welcome ;To me most dearly welcome.Keep thy mysterious secret, if thou must;But make amends by swearing on this hand204 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.Not to extend thine absence for a dayBeyond the added time which thou hast mentioned.CLAUDIEN.Upon this hand, so lovely and so dear,Not to be absent for a day an hourLonger than sad necessity compels me.But thou meanwhile wilt keep me in thythoughts.Write to me often ; wilt thou not, Rosella ?And be to me, in whate'er clime or countryA wayward fate may doom me to reside,The very gleam and warmth of my existence.ROSELLA.A wayward fate may doom thee to reside !What words are these ? Thou never wilt return!(Wringing her hands in anguish.)VAN MAURICE (aside to CLAUDIEN).Begone, begone ! thy weakness will betray us.Sister ; thou gives way to apprehension,Like a poor perverse wife who has been spoil'dWith long indulgence. 'T is a paltry proofOf thy affection in an hour like this,To add to his distress. Fie ! be more generous !ROSELLA.And art thou angry with me, gentle Maurice ?Thou art not wont to chide. O, woe is me !THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 205There must be something wrong far wrong,indeed,When he is sorrowful and thou unkind.VAN MAURICE.Pardon me, sister, something has distressed me ;I meant not to have told thee till tomorrow.Our cousin Hartman died last night.ROSELLA.So suddenly !Awfully sudden ! I am sorry for it ;Yes ; very, very sorry. Ah, poor Hartman !I have, with too much levity, I fear,Made his last days pass most uneasily.He was vindictive, vain, and irritable :But when the storm of passion passed away,Who was more ready to repair a wrongWith generous amends ? Alas ! poor Hartman !And thou too, gentle Claudius, weep'st for him,Although he loved thee not. Well may'st thouweep ;For thou wert also one of his tormentors :Ay, we did both of us too hardly pressUpon his natural infirmity.CLAUDIEN.Detested wretch ! I Ve been a fiend, aVAN MAURICE (laying hold of him, and pressinghis mouth).Claudius,206 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.Art thou a madman ? Come, the wind is fair,The vessel is already weighing anchor.Bid to your mistress, then, a short adieu,As cheerly as you may. (They embrace andseparatelyYes ; bravely done, Rosella ! bravely done !Thou art the firmest now.ROSELLA (stepping after CLAUDIEN).Take this, and this, and wear them for my sake.Enter MARGARET.MARGARET.There is a ship-boy below with notice that theMermaid is just leaving port.VAN MAURICE (to CLAUDIEN).Come then, my friend ; we may no longer tarry.ROSELLA.Go, Claudius : I will hie me to the roofOf my pavilion ; there I'll watch thy ship,Till, like a sea-bird, on the distant wavesIt fades away to nothing. Two hours stillIt will be visible. Cast up thy mantle ;Make me, I pray, some signal from the deck.Farewell, heaven prosper thee ! farewell, farewell!\ Exeunt CLAUDIEN and VAN MAURICE, butthe latter returns hastily, and whispers toMARGARET.]THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY. 20?ROSELLA.What did he whisper to thee, Margaret ? Iam frightened at every thing.MARGARET.Nothing of importance : it was only to tellme that some necessary business might detainhim from home the whole day ; and, if so, youmust not be uneasy.ROSELLA.Uneasy ! I may be as I will now : it mattersnot how I am till Claudius return again.[Exeunt.208 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.ACT II.SCENE I. The Deck of a Ship, with a stormySea seen dimly beyond it. Sailors and Passengersare discovered, some on their knees,some clinging to the shrouds, some staggeringabout with wild gestures of despair, whilst someare endeavouring to work the ship, and disputingabout what should be done ; and a greatconfusion of voices is heard through the noise ofthe storm. The whole light should proceedfrom one part of the deck ; viz. the binnacle, bywhich means want of expression of countenancein the under-actors will not be discovered, asnone need come within the gleam of its light butthose who can give expression. CLAUDIEN isdiscovered busy in assisting those who are endeavouringto save the vessel, near the bottomof the Stage.CAPTAIN (on the frons).I say it must be done; she cannot else besaved. Boatswain, thy refractory spirit is moredangerous than the tempest. (A great confusionof sounds and voices All hands to work i' theinstant ! Cut down the mast ; lighten her ofevery thing, bales, casks, and chests, cast allto the deep !THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 209BOATSWAIN.By our Lady, it were downright cowardice tospoil ourselves of every thing for such a risk asthis!CAPTAIN.Thou know'st nothing of the matter.BOATSWAIN.I have been in worse peril before, when bothmast and freightage have been saved.CAPTAIN.Be silent, madman ! I am to judge of theperil, not thou. We are driving on the rocksof that very coast from which we departed :yonder gleams the lighthouse on the cliff.MANY VOICES (at once).Lord have mercy on us ! heaven have mercyon us !CAPTAIN.Silence, and hear my commands. All handsto work ! life and death hang on your presentexertions.[Great noise and confusion, and they beginto cut down the mast and cast things over-boardedFIRST SAILOR (with a loud voice).It is all in vain ! lighten her as you will, itcan avail nothing as long as there is a murdereron board.VOL. in. p210 THE HOMICIDE *. A TRAGEDY.CAPTAIN (catching hold of him).What mean'st thou ? On which of my passengersor crew dost thou fix such a horriblecharge ?FIRST SAILOR (pointing to CLAUDIEN).To that man yonder, your noble Danish passenger.If the devil have him not presentlyunder the waves, neither ship nor one soul of allher living freight will be afloat one hour longer.CAPTAIN.Thou speak'st in distraction.FIRST SAILOR.I know that sound in the blast : no naturaltempest ever bellows so.MANY VOICES (as before.Heaven have mercy upon us ! it is a fearfulsound !FIRST SAILOR.There be fiends on the clouds and on thewaves ; they are roaring for their prey, and inGod's name cast it to them instantly.CAPTAIN.Thou art beside thyself! how knowest thouhe is a murderer ?FIRST SAILOR.I heard him utter exclamations when hethought there was no one near him. QuestionTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.him thyself; if he will swear himself innocentof blood, send me to the bottom in his stead.CAPTAIN (beckoning CLAUDIEN to the front.Sir passenger, come hither. This man (pointingto FIRST SAILOR) has heard thee utter suchwords as compels him to accuse thee of murder.We may all be summoned few moments henceinto the presence of our Great Judge, who cannotbe deceived : if thou art guilty, cry to Godfor mercy and confess it; a ship in peril maynot be laden with such an unblessed freight.Art thou innocent of blood ?CLAUDIEN.I am innocent of deliberate murder, but notof blood.FIRST SAILOR.He confesses.MANY VOICES.He confesses ! he confesses ! away with him !OTHER VOICES.Cast him overboard, or we shall be all deadmen presently.CLAUDIEN.Hear me first, before ye be so rash,VOICES (again).No, no, no ! we cannot sacrifice our own livesfor thine : cast him overboard.p 2THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.FIRST SAILOR.Bind him hand and foot, and cast him to thefiends that are roaring for him.[They surround CLAUDIEN to bind him, whenhe draws his sword"]CLAUDIEN.I will cut down the first man who dares to layhands on me. Bind a fellow creature and casthim to the waves ! ye are worse than the fiendsye are afraid of: and if they be roaring for measye apprehend, doubt not but they will haveme, whether I am bound or free.CAPTAIN.He says well : cast him overboard unbound,that he may save himself if possible.[They again close round him to seize him 9and he still keeps them off with his swords]CLAUDIEN.Lay hands upon me at your peril ! You neednot be so fierce ; for I will myself commit thisbody to the sea, that will, perhaps, be moremerciful than you.[He retires to the farther side of the deck,with his face to the crew and his back tothe sea; then holding up his hand, as ifuttering a short prayer, turns quicklyround, and jumps overboard, the whole crewraising a wild cry, and remaining for afew moments after it in deep silence ; thesound of the storm only heard"]THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.CAPTAIN.He is a brave man, let him be what he may.God have mercy on us, and send us safe on ourvoyage! We have paid for it a fearful price!(Calling to some who are looking over the side ofthe vessel') Can you see aught ? Does he sinkor swim ?BOATSWAIN.I saw his dark head once above the waves.SECOND SAILOR.I saw it too.THIRD SAILOR.So did I. God help him, and us too !SECOND SAILOR.Look, look, yonder, I see it again ! but a hugebillow breaks over it : we shall see it no more.THIRD SAILOR.He is too deep now under water, to rise aliving man.the sound of the storm as before, very loud']CAPTAIN.The tempest is as violent as ever! we mustlighten the ship after all.great clamour and commotion among thecrew, and the scene closes']p 3THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.A Lawyer's Study, lumbered with fables, books,and papers, 8$c.Enter BORION, with a scroll in his hand, whichhe examines attentively. He then pauses, andconsiders before he speaks to himself.BORION.Proofs like these should condemn any man ;why should I recoil from the task ? (Paces upand down, and then stopping shortly Would thisbusiness were put into other hands ! My clientis candid and specious, as far as speech is concerned,but that sinister eye, the play of thosemuscles by the mouth, the widening of the nostrilsat every virtuous sentiment he utters :physiognomy is the whimsy of simpletons, ifthere be any truth or sincerity in that man. Buthere he comes.Enter KRANZBERG.KRANZBERG.Well, learned Sir, having had full time forconsideration, what think you of it now? (Apause, ,) You see, I found my prosecution on noslight or fanciful proofs. Thus it stands : nextTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.heir to the deceased ; his confusion when wetold him of the murder ; that unwary expressionwhich fell from him, showing that he knew withwhat weapon the wound was inflicted ; and,above all, the dagger found in his apartment,every thing combines to fix the foul deed uponhim. There is no judge in the land who willhesitate to give sentence in my favour.BORION.In your favour, Sir! is it favour to you thatyour near relation should be publicly executedas a murderer ? I thought you had prosecutedunwillingly, as next nearest of kin to the deceased,and therefore compelled to it.KRANZBERG.True very true, learned Orion ; in myfavour as a prosecutor, who, from duty, wouldmake good his accusation. But as a man and akinsman, with the affections of both, which heavenknows how deeply I feel ! most keenly andseverely against me. You perceive the distinctionhere ?BORION.It had escaped me.KRANZBERG.I am drawn two different ways by two powerfulties ; but my duty to the public must be prep4THE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY.ferret. O, dear Sir ! you little know the painfulconflict in this bosom,BORION.I can guess at it, Sir. But does Van Maurice,since his imprisonment, still continue to asserthis innocence ?KRANZBERG.Of course he does. Is any man's assertion oroath regarded in a matter of this nature ?BORION.Yes, Sir ; there are some men, whose simpleword will go far in a matter of any nature, andVan Maurice is one of those.KRANZBERG.Ah, my good Sir ; there is a prepossession inyour mind, but let my wretched kinsman havethe benefit of it ; I wish not to remove it. IndeedI knew of this prepossession beforehand ;and that I applied to you for the conduct of thisprosecution, notwithstanding, shows how little Iam disposed to deal hardly with the prisoner.But here come the men whom you may question.Enter a Servant, showing in the two Officers ofJustice.BORION (waving his hand.Let them pass into the further apartment.exeunt Officers.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 217KRANZBERG.You are cautious, I see, and would questionthem apart from me. But you are right ; I amnowise offended ; on the contrary, even yourdistrust of myself gives me confidence in yourintegrity. [Exit BORION, following the Officers,while KRANZBERG looks angrily after him'] Thedevil take his incredulous nature ! who woulddemur on such flagrant proof as this ? If it werenot that the trial comes on tomorrow, and I darenot delay it, lest he should, after all, be innocent,I would put it into other hands that would undertakeit more heartily. (After consideration.)No, no ! I must press him to retain it. Were itknown that he had given it up, that would createa strong prejudice against me. I must press himto retain it. \TLxit.SCENE III.A Prison : VAN MAURICE is discovered at thebottom of the Stage in a thoughtful disconsolateposture ; he then comes forward and remains ashort time, muttering to himself, before he speaksaloud.VAN MAURICE.And infamy and death must be my portionFor my adherence to the manly tiesTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.Of honour and of friendship ! No alternative !Betray his confidence to save my life !Do what is base to save me from disgrace !Surely, some fiend of darkness must be dealingWith my necessity, when thoughts like theseContaminate my mind.He came to me in misery ; in secretHis soul pour'd out its bitterness before me.Away, away ! ye base and mean suggestions !God will deliver me. Or should his willAppoint my life to be the sacrifice,The mem'ry of the just shall be at lengthRedeemed from all dishonour. [Noise at thedoor. Enter Gaoler.]Who's there ? let no one enter but my sisterOr the good priest ; have I not told thee so ?Enter ARDUSOFFE.ARDUSOFFE.And may not your faithful counsellor also beadmitted ?VAN MAURICE.Ay, true ; I forgot thee, good Ardusoffe.Well, what hast thou done for me ? Hast thoudiscovered any thing that may tend to my exculpation? Alas ! thou shakes thy head : thouhast not been successful.ARDUSOFFE.Not, I fear, in any material degree. YourTHE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY. 219servants unanimously declare their belief that youdid not quit your apartments for the whole ofthat evening on which the fatal deed was committed: but as you were entirely shut up fromthe hour of twilight to almost midnight, thegrounds of their belief are not satisfactory ; yourapartments, unhappily, having a private doorleading to the garden, and from thence into thestreet.VAN MAURICE.True ; their belief only, under such circumstances,is but weak evidence.ARDUSOFFE.It was your custom, they say, to ring yourbell for some slight refreshment between nineand ten o'clock, but on that night, most unfortunately,you omitted it.VAN MAURICE.My studies occupied me so entirely, that Iforgot it.ARDUSOFFE.I do most perfectly believe you : but who,sitting in judgment on attested facts, and compelledto pronounce sentence accordingly, willregard such asseveration ? In short, my dearclient, I am obliged to forewarn you, that if youstill persist in refusing to account for the daggerbeing found in your chamber, and your previousTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.knowledge that the deceased was slain by a woundfrom such a weapon, I see not how your judgescan acquit you.VAN MAURICE.Be it so ! I am innocent : Heaven will protectme.ARDUSOFFE.God grant you deliverance ! But the waysof Divine Providence are mysterious as to thisworld. In the next, most assuredly, the innocentare always delivered.VAN MAURICE.Have you, then, in the course of your legalexperience, known instances of the innocent sufferingdeath for imputed crimes ?ARDUSOFFE.I have ; even when tried by an impartialjudge, and the fair laws of their country.VAN MAURICE.But their memory was vindicated afterwards,else you had never been acquainted with suchdismal perversion of circumstances.ARDUSOFFE.After many years, nearly the lapse of halfa century, it was discovered.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.VAN MAURICE (shuddering).Awful dispensation ? Almost all his contemporariesthose whom he had loved and regarded,would go down to their graves, believinghim guilty and depraved.(Turns away from him much distressedARDUSOFFE.Let me conjure you, then, to do justice toyourself! It is a fearful thing to be cut off inthe prime of your days, to die by the handsof an executioner, to finish your course indisgrace.VAN MAURICE.It is a fearful thing ! You tempt my mortalweakness almost beyond resistance.ARDUSOFFE.Let nature have its way ! O, consider of it !Run not on self-destruction.VAN MAURICE (supporting himself on the shoulderof ARDUSOFFE).Forbear a few moments, good Ardusoffe ; I amconsidering of it.ARDUSOFFE (after a pause.The dew-drops stand upon thy forehead, and222 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.thy whole frame is moved : decide as naturebids thee, and let this conflict cease.[A pause, in which VAN MAURICE, sinkingfrom the shoulder of ARDUSOFFE, covershis face with both his hands]O, have mercy on thyself, and let this conflictcease !VAN MAURICE (raising himself suddenly, withvehemence of gesture and voice).It hath ceased, Ardusoffe, I 'm now a man :I will die honour' d in my inward mind,And in the sight of heaven. Betide what will,I '11 not betray my trust !ARDUSOFFE.Alas, alas ! may Heaven have pity on thee,Since thou repellent all pity for thyself!Enter ROSELLA.ROSELLA.I left thee, dearest Maurice, cheer'd and tranquil,Like one possessing hope ; what is the matter ?ARDUSOFFE.Dear lady, circumstances bear hard againstyour brother ; and, from some point of honourwhich I am not permitted to know, he refrainsfrom exculpating himself. Join your entreatiesTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.with mine ; you who are so deeply concerned inhis safety and justification. Death and disgracemust not be incurred from romantic adherenceto honour.VAN MAURICE.If I could gain a respite for some weeks !ARDUSOFFE.You may apply for it, and I will urge yoursuit ; but it will be refused. Kranzberg, for hisown sordid interest, pushes on the trial ; and heis in high credit and favour with the judges.ROSELLA.for my sake, if not thine own, my brother,For my sake be entreated ! In thy ruin1 shall be ruin'd, agonised, and crush'd ;Think not I could survive it !VAN MAURICE.Leave me, Oh leave me ; I am only fitWith mine own thoughts to commune. YourentreatiesDo but the more distract me.(Aside to ARDUSOFFE.)Return to me again, but leave me now.\JEixit ARDUSOFFE.ROSELLA.Alas ! and wilt thou not relent, dear Maurice ?[A pause"]THE HOMICIDE *. A TRAGEDY.Why dost thou shake thy head, and look on meSo ruefully ? there is a meaning in it.VAN MAURICE.God save thee, my poor sister !ROSELLA.Yes, God will save me, saving thee my brother,Not else ; for if thou die a felon's death,I never can survive it. For my sakeAnd for the sake of him, thine absent friend,Our gentle Claudius : would that he were hereTo join with mine his earnest, strong entreaties !VAN MAURICE (putting his hand upon her lips inan alarmed manner, and speaking low).Hush ! utter not his name ; 'tis good for theeThat he is absent.ROSELLA.Why that emotion at his name ? Speak, speak !Is he concern'd in this ?VAN MAURICE.Inquire no further, seek no further misery :Thou hast enough already.ROSELLA.A dreadful light breaks in upon me now ;Is Claudius concern'd? (looks earnestly in hisfaces He is, he is !(Faints in the arms of her brotherlyTHE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.VAN MAURICE.It is a death-blow to her stricken heart.How fix'd and pale that lovely countenance,More like my mother's than I ever saw it.Like her who loved us both and reared ustenderly,Who daily shed her widow's blessing o'er us,And little thought for what calamitiesWe both might be reserved.But she revives. How art thou, sweet Rosella ?ROSELLA.I 've been asleep, and thought some fearfulthingWas girding me. - O no ! it was not sleep :I know it now distinctly.VAN MAURICE.Thou trembles violently.ROSELLA.I tremble, but thou need'st not be afraid ;I shall not faint again.VAN MAURICE.Fear not for Claudius.ROSELLA.My own dear brother ; gen'rous and devoted ;Is any thing more precious than thyself?No, right is right ; thou shalt not die for Claudius.Thank God he's absent! let him so remain :VOL. in. QTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.I '11 to the judges ; I '11 declare the truth ;I '11 vindicate thy innocence, my Maurice.VAN MAURICE (embracing her).I thank thee, kind Rosella ; but thy pleaWere altogether fruitless.Who would give credit to thy testimony ?For they will deem, to save a brother's life,Thou dost accuse an absent man. Beside,Who will corroborate what thou averse ?And what could'st thou aver? I've told theenothing,And, so God strengthen me ! I never will.ROSELLA.I '11 to the judges ; cast me at their feet,And beg respite till I can write to Claudius.VAN MAURICE.And would'st thou have him to return to LubeckThat he may put himself into my place ?ROSELLA (distractedly).I know not what I would or what I wish ;But thou, my noble Maurice, shalt not die.VAN MAURICE.Here comes the good confessor : leave me, sister.Enter the Confessor, shown in by the Turnkey.You're welcome, reverend Father. (To theTurnkey.) Does any attendant on this ladywait without ?THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY;TURNKEY.Yes, Baron ; a lady waits for her, who accompaniedher to the gate.VAN MAURICE.Desire her to enter ; I would speak with her.[Exit Turnkey.] Good Father, comfort thisafflicted daughter.(Speaking aside to ROSELLA, as he leads herto the Friar.)Let nothing pass your lips that hath a referenceTo what we spoke of: take good heed; besecret.Sooth her, good Father; thou hast words ofconsolation for every earthly affliction.Enter MARGARET.I thank thee, friendly Margaret, for thy kindattendance on my poor distressed sister. Comenear to me. (Draws her to the front of theStage, whilst the Confessor speaks in dumb showto ROSELLA behind.) Rosella is not well; thereis fever upon her spirits, and her mind wanderswildly. Be not alarmed at this, but give her anopiate, a very powerful opiate : she has needof rest, and nature has no sleep for one so distractedwith anxiety.MARGARET.I will do so : she has been scratched andQ 2THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.greatly distressed. And I pray heaven, dearBaron, that you may also have rest !VAN MAURICE.I thank thee, Margaret. But do not tarryhere ! lead her away immediately. I do notwish to see her till the trial is over. (Returningto ROSELLA.) Farewell, dear sister ! I mustnow give my thoughts to things which regardnot this world. [Exeunt ROSELLA and Margaret.]We will, if you please, good Father,retire to the inner cell. [Exeunt.SCENE IV.The House of KRANZBERG.Enter KRANZBERG, followed by GORMAN, bearinga salver with wine 9 fyc. which he sets upon atable.KRANZBERG (speaking as they enter).Thou art right, Norman ; a cup of this oldRhenish will do me good. I have been the wholeday in a state of presentation ; the eyes of manyhave been upon me ; my cumbersome suit ofdecorum sits heavily upon me now ; I must dropit for awhile and unbrace myself.THE HOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY.CORMAN (pouring out wine and presenting it).Here, Sir; this will refresh you in the meantime,and your repast will be ready presently.KRANZBERG (after drinking).Ha, ha, ha ! what a mountebank world we livein, full of inconsistencies : every body eagerlyrunning after some wild delusion or other ! Tothink, now, that a sober philosopher like VanMaurice should start up from his books, hisglobes, and compass, to put a foolish kinsmanout of the world, and all for the enriching ofSimon Kranzberg, whom he likes as much asthou dost a bit of musty stock-fish. By my faith,it is some waggish devil that hath tempted himto this imbecility of wickedness.CORMAN.Yes, master ; and the devil will take care ofyour interest for his own advantage.KRANZBERG.But I'll cheat him, too, in the long run.CORMAN.It must be some clever device, indeed, thatcheats him.KRANZBERG.I'll give donations to the church; or I'll endowa chapel, and appoint a priest to pray mysoul out of purgatory.Q 3230 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.CORMAN.Ah, Sir ! that will be a hard work for a simplepriest of your appointment; it would be workenough for an archbishop. But it will help atleast to put you into credit with the world.KRANZBERG.Put me into cried it with the world ! Am I notin very good credit with the world ? Why dostthou shake thy head so ? Am I not ? I havebroken no laws : I have disregarded no rules ofdecency. I have preserved a show of kindness toall men ; ay, and have felt real kindness forsome. What does the world know against me,that thou shouldst look so significantly ?CORMAN.I don't say that they know any thing againstyou ; but there is something in human naturecalled suspicion, that will sometimes contravenemost provokingly all the good seeming that apainstaking man can put on.KRANZBERG.And what do they suspect ? What cause haveI given for suspicion ?CORMAN.Why, my dear Sir, that story of the heiressstands somewhat between you and their goodopinion.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 231KRANZBERG.They stumble at a small impediment, methinks.Was it my fault that her needy uncle ran off withher fortune? Would they have had me marrya beggar, because I had inadvertently made suitto her ?CORMAN.Nay, heaven forbid ! that were too romanticfor a sane burgher of Lubeck ; but they are notyet become liberal enough to tolerate inadvertentoaths.KRANZBERG.Out on thee ! Hadst thou managed that businessfor me with three grains of common sense,the transaction would never have been known.CORMAN.Ah, my dear master ! but you forget that mythree grains of common sense were coupled withyour three grains of cunning, and they did notprove prosperous yoke-fellows.KRANZBERG.Go to ! it is a fair character that has but oneblot upon it.CORMAN.True, if there were but one.KRANZBERG.Lay they any thing else to my charge ?THE HOMICIDE t A TRAGEDY.CORMAN.That matter of the poor widow's leasehold,which you deprived her of so cleverly, was notexactly to their mind.KRANZBERG.Devil take them ! and they boggle at that too !Had I not law on my side ?CORMAN.I fear you had only decision.KRANZBERG.No, no ! I had law. But those noodles arealways canting about equity and natural justice ;and one is obliged to do so too, till it is enoughto make one sick.CORMAN.To be sure this last effect is rather sickening.KRANZBERG.And thy untimely bantering is little better.Say what thou wilt, I know that I stand in asgood credit with the world as any man in ourimperial city. But who comes here ? Pshaw !It is ArdusofFe ; I must on with my buckramagain.Enter ARDUSOFFE.ARDUSOFFE.Sir, I am come from the prison of your un-theHOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY. %33happy kinsman, on a most earnest suit, whichyour known goodness and humanity will not, Iam confident, suffer you to refuse.KRANZBERG.Speak it plainly and freely, Sir. He is, indeed,unhappy, and I am little less so, in beingforced to prosecute a near relation for such anatrocious deed. You don't know how much Ifeel on this unfortunate occasion.ARDUSOFFE.Better, perhaps, than you are aware of. Yourinward dispositions are too well depicted on yourcountenance to leave any one in doubt of yourreal worth. My present suit will give you anopportunity of proving your professions. I comemost earnestly to request that you will use yourinterest with the judges to have this trial put offfor a few weeks.KRANZBERG.Ah, good Ardusoffe ! would that my boundenduty to society did not pull me the contraryway ; and I would, on my bended knees, praythat it might be put off, not only for a few weeks,but a few months, a few years ; ay, for ever.ARDUSOFFE.Nay, nay ! you exceed in tender sympathy : afew weeks is all that we desire, arid I will thisTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.moment go with you to the judges to beseechthem to grant us this indulgence.KRANZBERG.No, that won't do ; I must go to the judgesalone. On such occasions a third party createsembarrassment. You understand me ?ARDUSOFFE.I think I do, Sir ; and will trust to your exertionsaccordingly.KRANZBERG.My dear Sir, you do not understand me. Iwill leave no entreaty untried to gain what youdesire for your client. But what is your objectin this delay ? is there any witness that couldexculpate your client, who might be summonedin that time ?ARDUSOFFE.Yes ; this is our reason for soliciting delay.KRANZBERG.And who is this witness ? and from what placedo you call him ?ARDUSOFFE (drawing back from him).That is a matter, good Sir, less material foryou to know than for us to conceal.KRANZBERG.Very true ; I should have remembered this :I respect you for your caution, though it is notTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 235my way of proceeding. I am so free and openmyself, that I forget the prudent habits of concealment,which may be commendable in others.And now I will honestly tell you that I am certainmy suit to the judges for delay will be of noavail.ARDUSOFFE.That you are certain, may be true ; for youcan make it so.KRANZBERG.You mistake me again. But I am not angryat this. I can forgive the jealousy which arisesfrom the excess of laudable zeal ; and to provethis I will frankly serve your client in the onlyway in my power. I will gain over the guard,who are appointed for this evening's watch, andfavour his escape from prison. Do you pause atthis when there is such damning evidence againsthim?ARDUSOFFE (rfr%).I shall report to him what you say.KRANZBERG.At the hour of twilight he will find his prisondoors unbarred, and let him come forth fearlessly.ARDUSOFFE.I will go forthwith and report to him what yousay. [Exit.236 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.KRANZBERG,Have I cozened that suspicious fellow at last ?[Re-enter GORMAN, who had retired upon coming in"] I have cozened that suspiciousfellow at last. If Van Maurice be caughtmaking his escape, the trial will proceed immediately.The bright thought came into myhead of a sudden ; I wonder I did not think ofit before.CORMAN.But if he were really to escape and be outlawed,would not that serve your turn sufficiently.KRANZBERG.Ay, if the present senior judge were to retainhis office ; but he will resign it in a month to onewho is most partially attached to the family ofVan Maurice. No, no ! we should have him returningfrom his outlawry again, and submittingto a mock trial, which would declare him innocent,and restore him to his rights. No, no ! thetrial must proceed immediately ; and it will doso if he be caught in an attempt to escape.CORMAN.Think you he will fall into the snare ?KRANZBERG.I think he will ; I am sure he will : and evenif he should refuse, we can raise a great clamourTHE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY. 237and confusion about the prison walls as if he hadattempted it, which may turn to our account nearlyas well as the reality. I say our, for thou knowestwell that when I take possession of the inheritance,a good portion of it will fall to thy share.Let me have my meal first, and I'll give thee thydirections about this matter afterwards.CORMAN.It is ready, Sir. exeunt.SCENE V.Before the walls of a Prison : a Sentinel is discoveredwalking to and fro by an archedGateway, and several Men muffled in cloaks,'peeping occasionally from behind an outer buttressnear the front. A small Door at thefurther end of the arch opens slowly, and enters by it, through the gateway, hisface hid by his cloak.SENTINEL.Ho ! you pass not so slily as you think : whoare you ? let me see your face ?ARDUSOFFE (in a feigned voice).A friend to the noble prisoner, and the samewho passed into that door half an hour ago.238 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.SENTINEL.Thou dost not speak with the same voice, I 'mcertain.ARDUSOFFE.Nay, my good friend ; thine ears are deceivedby thine own suspicion. (In a whisper*) Beholdmy face ; dost thou not remember it ?[Going close to the Sentinel and turning hisback to the front of the Stage, he uncovershis face for a moment, on which the other,with a nod, suffers him to pass. He thenproceeds on his way, and is about to go off,when GORMAN and his companions burstupon him from behind the buttress"]CORMAN.We seize thee in the name of the law.ARDUSOFFE (still concealing his face).Go to ! you mistake me for another ; sufferme to pass. Ye have no right to detainme.CORMAN.Come under the lamp here, and let us see yourface.they drag him towards the light, he makinggreat resistance, when KRANZBERG enterssuddenly and lays hold of him.~]THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 239KRANZBERG.Resistance is in vain, Van Maurice : we seizethee in the act of making escape from prison ;and in the name of the state we secure thee.ARDUSOFFE (uncovering his face, and speaking inhis natural voice).I make no resistance to the will of the state,signified to me by such a worthy member thereof.KRANZBERG.Ardusoffe !ARDUSOFFE.Yea, the same, and thy accomplice in endeavouringto persuade a prisoner to escape from thehands of justice. (Seeing him look round significantlyto GORMAN, who, thereupon, draws theother men to a distance What, art thou afraidthose men should hear us ; thou who art so freeand open, even to imprudence ? Thou wilt becomea character of perfection by and by, sincethou corrected thy errors so completely.KRANZBERG.Is Van Maurice then so assured of his innocencethat he refuses to fly ?ARDUSOFFE.Yes ; right well assured of that or of thy perfidy; either assurance was sufficient ; and if theone be as well grounded as the other, there is aTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. .higher agent at work for his deliverance thanthou hast any knowledge of.KRANZBERG.What agent ?ARDUSOFFE.Providence, which protects the innocent, andreturns the cruelty of the wicked into his ownportion.KRANZBERG.Art thou become his confessor, too? Whydost thou detain me here with thy homilies ?ARDUSOFFE (smiling archly).Being so artless thyself, thou canst not possiblyguess my reason.KRANZBERG (furiously.He has escaped ! Ho, there ! to the search !to the pursuit ! the prisoner has escaped. (Germanand the others run to him, and he gives themorders confusedly') Go by the street, no bythe south walk no, no, give the alarm therelose not a moment.[Great bustle ; running different ways, 'whilethe alarm bell rings from the tower"]ARDUSOFFE (aside, as he goes off.Let him take this alarm for his pains : wouldwhat he apprehends were true ! [Exit.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.CORMAN (to KRANZBERG).Perhaps it would be better to enter the prisonfirst, and ascertain if the prisoner be really absentfrom his cell.KRANZBERG.Thought right ; let us go immediately.[Exeunt.SCENE VI.The House of the Senior Judge. Enter theJudge with a paper in his hand, followed byhis Secretary.JUDGE (as they enter).And tell my worthy colleague that I wish tohave a conference with him, as soon as possible,on the subject of this petition to put off the trialfor a month. It comes from those who must atleast be treated with respect. What noise is thatwithout? Go, see what it is. [Exit Secretary.While the Judge employs himself reading otherpapers, re-enter Secretary.SECRETARY.There has been an attempt to favour the prigIII. RTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.sooner's escape, and the whole neighbourhood hasbeen in commotion.JUDGE.But he has not escaped ?SECRETARY.They believe not. Shall I go with the message?JUDGE.By no means, till we see how the matterstands.Enter KRANZBERG.You come in good time, Kranzberg : know youany thing of this escape, or attempted escape,of Van Maurice ?KRANZBERG.An escape has no doubt been attempted, andhas been as certainly foiled. But there is sucha confusion of accounts, that it would be difficultto come at the real truth, as is generally the caseinsuch matters.JUDGE.It is very bad to petition for delay, and in themean time attempt to elude justice.KRANZBERG.The cause, I fear, is desperate, and that mustTHE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.be their excuse who counsel the unhappy man ;and it is for you now to consider whether, afterthis account, any request for deferring the trialshould be granted.JUDGE.Granted! most assuredly not. Ought it tobe?KRANZBERG.It becomes not me to give any opinion as tothat, though I must confess it might be dangerous: my errand here has a different object.JUDGE.Speak out, worthy Kranzberg ; what is it ?KRANZBERG.It is my earnest request that, in judging ofmy unhappy kinsman, you would cast this attemptfrom your consideration altogether, and let nomention of it be made in court.JUDGE.Is it not an additional proof of guilt ?KRANZBERG.Nay, my very learned and excellent Sir, donot so consider it. Who would not, in similarcircumstances, with such strong presumptiveevidence against him, do the same thing, even ifhe were conscious df being innocent ? Life isR 2244 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.sweet to every one, and the jeopardy of it appalling.JUDGE.Thy humanity equals thy candour. But thouart too tender on this point.KRANZBERG.Do not say so, my excellent Sir. Let not thisuntoward attempt act on your mind to the prejudiceof my miserable kinsman, if other evidencebe not sufficient to condemn him.JUDGE.Let it be as thou wilt, then ; but we musthave no delays. The trial shall commence tomorrowat the hour which was originally fixed.Excuse me, I am busy now ; good night,exit.KRANZBERG.Well, thanks to my good stars ! I am notbaffled, though I have been deceived. Mattersstill go as I wish. [Exit.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.ACT III.SCENE I. VAN MAURICE'S House ; an Anteroomin the Apartment o/" ROSELLA.Enter MARGARET and a Maid Servant, by-oppositesides.MARGARET.I hope thy lady is still asleep ?MAID.O, no ! I wish she were. She called me a fewminutes since, and I am going to her again.MARGARET.Is she aware how long she has slept ?MAID.No ; she thinks it still early, and I have notundeceived her.MARGARET.Thou hast done right, Jeanette. Ha ! she isup already !Enter ROSELLA.ROSELLA.I have had a deep and death-like sleep. ItR 3246 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.was strange that I should sleep so at such a timeas this.MARGARET.And you feel yourself refreshed, I hope ?ROSELLA.I know not : I waked in confused bewilderment,which gave me a few moments of idiot-likeinsensibility; but the dismal truth broke uponme at once : it was the blow of a leaden maceupon my breast ; I had better not have slept atall. But I am early enough to get to him erehe leave the prison. (Looking at a timepiece onthe wall of the room.) Good heaven ! it is longpast the hour! he is already at the court, and Ihave not seen him. Why was I not called?Bring me my mantle. No, I'll stay for nothing.[As she is about to go off, she is stopped bythe entering of a Servant.]SERVANT.There is a person below, who would speakwith you, lady, on particular and important business.ROSELLA.His business should be such, indeed, whocomes at an hour like the present.MARGARET (to Servant).Didst thou ever see him before ?THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 247SERVANT.I can scarcely say, Madam ; his face is so concealedby his bonnet and the buttoned-up collarof his cloak : but he is tall, and somewhat stately.ROSELLA.Let him come to me immediately.[Exit Servant.(To MARGARET and the Maid.) Leave me ; Iwould see him alone.MARGARET.I dare not leave you, you tremble so.ROSELLA.Don't mind that, but leave me.[Exit MARGARET, fyc.If it should be ! I fear why do I fear ?Should I not wish it earnestly ? Wild thought !For such a quick return no natural meansCould have effected : him it cannot be.Enter CLAUDIEN in disguise.[She remains motionless, eyeing him fromhead to foot, while he looks round to ascertainthat there be nobody in the room,and then discovers himself, on which sheutters a suppressed cry.'}Thou here! O, Claudius, wherefore art thoucome?R 4248 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.But oh ! I know it well ; thou should'st behere.My brother must not die.CLAUDIEN.Must not, and shall not, be thou well assured.Thou know'st it then ; he has to thee reveal'd ?ROSELLA.To me nor no one else has he reveal'd it.CLAUDIEN.Yet is it known to thee.ROSELLA.I have by instinct learnt it. This poor heart !Fear and affection have divined the truth.The horror he express' d when I proposedTo write to thee and hasten thy return,Came like a flash of lightning on my mind,And then the truth was instantly reveal'd.CLAUDIEN.Noble Van Maurice ! generous, matchless friend !Be comforted, my dearest ; he is safe.ROSELLA.But thou art not O, thou art not, my Claudius !(Wringing her hands distractedlyAlas, alas ! we're dreadfully beset.The innocent must not die ; and with the guiltyTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 249Is twined the dearest chord of my existence.Oh, words of misery ! to call thee guilty !(Talking his hands and pressing them tenderlyThere has been blood upon these hands Iknow it ;But 'twas the blood of a fell enemyWho would have shed thy blood ; and may I notPress them and bless thee still ?CLAUDIEN.Thou precious creature ! thy affection gleamsLike sunshine through one solitary loophole,In a dark firmament of gathered clouds,That gilds one spot of ocean, hill or plain,With brightness beautiful though circumscribed.Thou cheers my soul, and be thou also cheer' d !1 must and I will save thy brother's life.And for that thou hast made my own so precious,I will be wary to preserve it also.ROSELLA.Yes, thou shalt live ; for heaven has been thyhelp,Else thou couldst never, in so short a time,Have reach'd this shore again.CLAUDIEN.The gale was rough ; the ship was driven backUpon the breakers of a rocky shore ;But I swam stoutly, and, when quite exhausted,I caught a floating raft and gain'd the shore.THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.ROSELLA.'Twas Providence preserved thee : thanks toHeaven !And will preserve thee still.CLAUDIEN.That is my trust.ROSELLA.But, O, be cautious ! I will go forthwithAnd to the Court declare the simple truth,As to the deed, yet speaking of thee stillAs one far distant in another land.I am bold now ; I am braced for the task ;Trust it to me.CLAUDIEN.Forbear, thou heart of tenderness and courage !I've better means than this to save thy brother.ROSELLA (eagerly.And save thyself besides ?CLAUDIEN.Yes, even so ; my life is precious now :Thought made it so. There is no time, my love,For further explanation. Fare thee well !I 'm glad that I have seen thee first ; have heardThy words of strong affection, and have feltThis dear and gentle hand press'd to my heart.Farewell, farewell !THE HOMICIDE '. A TRAGEDY.ROSELLA.Thy voice sounds sadly, as though many a leagueWere going to divide us. How is this ?Farewell pronounced with such solemnity !CLAUDIEN.But there be other obstacles than distanceMay separate the dearest.ROSELLA.I apprehend thee well ; the prison's walls,The dungeon and the chain. O, God ofheaven !(Seizing him wildly.) Thou shaltnotgoj thoushalt not leave this house :I '11 lock thee up within my chamber ; goTo this dread Court myself; I have no fear,For Heaven will teach me what I ought to sayWhen I am there ; will give me words of powerTo save a brother's life ay, and a lifeDear as a brother's. Now I feel assuredlyI shall prevail. There is no time to lose :Go to my chamber ; haste thee to the cover.(Dragging him to the door of an inner room.)CLAUDIEN.Art thou not mad, Rosella ?ROSELLA (dragging him still).Not mad j but thou wilt make me so : haste,hasteTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.Alas ! I have no strength ; but let my weaknessCompel thee, generous Claudius !kneeling to him')CLAUDIEN.Dear love ! alarm bereaves thee of thy reason,If thou believes thy chamber would protectme.Shouldst thou before the judges speak of me,As of an absent man ! would they believe thee ?Thy servants too ; they have admitted hereA stranger muffled up in mystery,And must confess they saw him not depart.Thou 'It run me into danger from the dreadAnd apprehension of it.Withhold me not ; I will be very prudent \I will not rashly risk my life. No longerMust I remain ; moments are precious now ;Let me depart.ROSELLA.Go instantly ; I am a hateful wretchTo keep thee here so long.(Catching hold of him as fie hurries off.)Button thee closer, take this handkerchiefAnd press it to thy mouth like one in pain.(Giving a handkerchief.)CLAUDIEN.I thank thee, kind Rosella. (Going.)THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 2.53ROSELLA (running after him again).Halt in thy gait, and stoop thy shoulders too ;Thy step and graceful bearing will betray thee.CLAUDIEN.Trust me, my love ; I'll not betray myself. [Exit.[ROSELLA alone, who continues to pace toand fro in a hurried way, and presentlyMARGARET enters"]MARGARET.My dear friendROSELLA.Who art thou ?MARGARET.Dost thou not know me ?I met the stranger going hence, and thoughtI might return to thee : have I done wrong ?[ROSELLA gives no answer, but walks aboutas before"]Move not so rapidly, my dear Rosella,But let thy body have a little rest.ROSELLA.Cease ! thou art foolish ; should my body rest,My mind would go distracted.MARGARET.Walk as much as thou wilt within thy chamber,Where no one will observe thee. Take my armHeaven aid and pity thee, poor sufferer,There is a cruel conflict in thy breast.\ Exeunt*THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.SCENE II.A narrm Lobby or Passage, leading to theHall of Justice. Several People discovered,passing or loitering about.Enter FATHER FRANCIS.FATHER FRANCIS (7o an Under Officer).Stop, friend : thou art from the court ?OFFICER.Ay, with half the learning even of a monk,you may guess that.FATHER FRANCIS.Thou shalt enjoy thy joke unanswered, Officer.Thou art by office indifferent to the fateof an unhappy panel ; but thou wert an obligingfellow once, before thou wert spoilt by preferment,and now thou canst do me a favour.OFFICER.Mention it, good Father. I ought to havereverenced your cloth for your sake, if I do notreverence you for the sake of your cloth.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.FATHER FRANCIS.Has the advocate for the prisoner finished hisdefence ?OFFICER.Ay, Heaven be thanked ! I thought it wouldnever have an end. He has just concluded it.FATHER FRANCIS.Return to the court, then, and desire him tocome to me here, without loss of time. I havesomething of importance to communicate tohim.OFFICER.I will, Father. [Eat.FATHER FRANCIS.Woe is me that human nature should come tothis ! The pride and spirits of that creature,now, rise on an occasion like this. The condemnationor execution of a fellow creaturecreates no other feeling in him but the enjoymentof increased importance and comparativesecurity ! Yet there was some good in himonce. (Pauses thoughtfully.'} There was goodin him once : his first confession consisted of onepetty crime, for which he seemed to be mostpenitent. But the steps of the confessional is aspot which he has long forsaken.256 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.Enter ARDUSOFFE.ARDUSOFFE.You have something to communicate, goodFather ?FATHER FRANCIS.Move a little this way : I have words for thyear in secret.ARDUSOFFE.Has any thing occurred to throw light on thismystery ? any thing in favour of my unhappyclient? who comports himself with the soberdejection of a man resigned to his fate, thoughhe firmly asserts his innocence ; and I, so helpme God ! as firmly believe him.FATHER FRANCIS.I am glad thou dost.ARDUSOFFE.I could sit down and weep for his sake, hehas so wound himself round my heart in thecourse of this dismal transaction.FATHER FRANCIS.Be comforted, my son ; thou canst do betterthings for him than that.ARDUSOFFE.Instruct me, reverend Father.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 257FATHER FRANCIS.Produce in court the voluntary evidence of hisconfessor.ARDUSOFFE.How is this ? You said to me last night thathe had confessed nothing.FATHER FRANCIS.There is no time to question me on this pointnow. I shall presently present myself before thejudges, as evidence to exculpate the prisoner;and when the oath has been administeredI pray thee move further this way : we may beoverheard. [Exeunt,SCENE III.The Hall of Justice. Two Judges sitting instate; the Prisoner at the Bar; KRANZBERGand BORION, and all the Attendants, $c. of afull Court.SENIOR JUDGE.Maurice Van Maurice, baron and citizen ofthis imperial city, we have heard your defencefrom the mouth of your advocate, pled with eloquenceand ability, though opposed to muchstrong uncontradicted evidence against you : isVOL. III. S258 THE HOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY.there any thing further which you wish to urgein your own behalf?[VAN MAURICE remains silent']JUNIOR JUDGE.Baron ; if you can offer any good plea whythe sentence of the law should not be pronouncedagainst you, as the murderer of your kinsman,Baron Hartman, let not this opportunity pass.We must otherwise proceed without delay.VAN MAURICE.Most honourable judges : The evidences againstme are so strong, that I am compelled to confess,were such insufficient to convict a prisoner,there is scarcely a panel who at this or anyother bar could be convicted. I have nothingto urge against your sentence, but that which Iknow you cannot and ought not to receive, asimple and unqualified assertion of mine owninnocence.SENIOR JUDGE.There is no occasion to say further.VAN MAURICE.Pardon me, my Lord, there is occasion ; and Iam permitted so to do.SENIOR JUDGE.Proceed, then.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.VAN MAURICE.I am well aware that an assertion of mine owninnocence cannot be received for my exculpation,even when I recall to your consideration,that I am the son of an honourable father, whohas served the state in the senate and the field,and shed his blood for that service in the onlyway in which it becomes blood to be shed, thatis derived from a source so honourable : that Ihave been reared under his eye, in rectitude andtruth, which has never yet on any occasion beenimpugned : that love of worldly wealth, the onlymotive for committing the crime with which I amcharged, is a propensity from which I am knownto be altogether free. It cannot, I repeat, bereceived for my exculpation, but may surely,when joined to such considerations, well justifyyour acceding to my earnest request, that youwould grant me three weeks' delay, ere yourverdict be pronounced, that I may if possibleprove mine innocence.Yes, I request it earnestly ; for who,Of woman born, shrinks not from death inflictedBefore the gazing eyes of multitudes,Inflicted with disgrace. I do entreat you,For that I leave behind me those most dear,Who will, if such my punishment, receiveA stroke more terrible than headsman's axe,The wretch's momentary bane, can gives2THE HOMICIDE *. A TRAGEDY.I do beseech ye, for that ye yourselvesHereafter may be wrung with deep compunction,When the good citizens of Lubeck, movedWith gratitude for the brave father, coupledWith pity for the son of such a parent,Shall scowl upon ye as you pass alongHer public streets, as those who, in his misery,Denied some weeks of respite to the offspringOf their once loved commander.I do appeal to all within these walls,The citizens of this my native city ;I do appeal to every honest manOf whate'er town or kingdom ; yea, to thoseWho, banish'd forth from the communityOf social man, have but the forest wasteFor their wild home, and for their polityThe light of untaught reason, whether this,Your pitiless refusal of my suit,Be not at enmity with every sympathyOf common nature. I appeal to all.MANY VOICES (at OHC6 ).He's right, he's right ; he speaks good reason,sooth !SENIOR JUDGE.Silence in the court.VAN MAURICE (looJcmg round on the spectators).Ye pity me, and I do thank you for it.THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.I know I shall hereafter be restoredTo lost esteem and good men's love. Alas !The fisherman in his small boat, when driftedTo the wild cataract's brink, is seen no moreTill, from the boiling nether gulph cast up,Amid the fierce turmoil of warring eddies,Jagged rocks and churning foam, a sorry sightOf mangled, stripp'd, and sever' d limbs appears.I may be so restored, with praise shed o'er meAs unavailing as the rainbow tints,That through the cataract's cloudy spray maygleamUpon the perish'd wretch.Enter ARDUSOFFE and FATHER FRANCIS.SENIOR JUDGE.Again I say, keep silence in the court!(Turning to the prisoners You aver that youare innocent ; and if this be so, it is at leastknown to you, who is the guilty person. Namehim, then, that justice may take its course, andyou shall have full time allowed you to proveyour assertion. Refusing to do this, you becomeyour own destroyer, and have no right to castthe blame upon us.VAN MAURICE.I have said, my Lords, that I cannot do thiswithout betraying confidence ; and were I todoso, should I deserve to be believed in anys 3THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.thing I might reveal? He who betrays confidenceto save himself, may utter falsehoodsalso from the same urgent temptation.SENIOR JUDGE.And this is your determination ?[VAN MAURICE bows"]JUNIOR JUDGE.You screw your sense of honour, noble Baron,to the romantic pitch. Consider better of it.Is this your final determination ? [VAN Mauricebows again"] Then, though most painfully,we must proceed to give sentence as the lawdirects.ARDUSOFFE (advancing).Stop, my Lords. In this extremity, I am warrantedto bring forward evidence to exculpatemy client, which might not otherwise have beenjustifiable. This holy Father hath that to revealwhich concerns the life and honour of the prisoner,and I claim that he may be heard.SENIOR JUDGE.Reveal penitential confessions !ARDUSOFFE.Yes, my Lord, to save the life of an innocentperson ; and show me that law of God or manwhich forbids it.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 263JUNIOR JUDGE.He must speak upon oath.ARDUSOFFE.Let it be administered to him as you please.SENIOR JUDGE.Let him be sworn.[FATHER FRANCIS is led to the further endof the hall, where the oath is administeredto him in dumb show. He then advancesslowly to the front , as ifunwell.~]ARDUSOFFE.What is the matter, good father ?FATHER FRANCIS.I am somewhat faint ; may I be permitted towithdraw for a few moments ?ARDUSOFFE (after looking to the Judges, who nodassent).You are permitted. exit FATHER FRANCIS.KRANZBERG.This monk, methinks, is strangely seized onthe sudden. Will a lie or two choke a friar ?ARDUSOFFE (to KRANZBERG).If thou canst find one man in Lubeck whodoubts the veracity of Father Francis, makethat a plea for setting aside his evidence : thouhast my leave to do so.264- THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.VAN MAURICE (aside tO ARDUSOFFE).Has Father Francis confessed any one concernedin this matter ?ARDUSOFFE (aside to VAN Maurice.Why else should he volunteer this evidence ?After a pause, enter CLAUDIEN, disguised asFATHER FRANCIS.SENIOR JUDGE.Declare to us what thou knowest of this atrociousdeed.CONFESSOR.That which is only known to Heaven, the prisoner,and myself, I will declare ; and nothingbut the truth shall pass these lips,SENIOR JUDGE.Proceed without further prelude.CONFESSOR.The panel at your bar was, on the fatalevening when Baron Hartman was slainKRANZBERG.Gentle expression ! I should say murdered.JUNIOR JUDGE.Interrupt not the witness.CONFESSOR.Well, be it termed as you please. I say,he, your panel, was the whole of that eveningTHE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 265shut up within the walls of his own library,when Count Claudius, his friend, entered theroom by a private door from the garden, withblood on his hands and agony in his heart.VAN MAURICE.Thou lies, false priest! I made to thee nosuch confession. Mine own sins, and mine ownalone, were revealed to thee. (To the Judges.)Regard not what he says, for he is perjured.JUNIOR JUDGE.Silence ! do not interrupt him : it is for usto judge of this matter. (To the Confessor.)Proceed.CONFESSOR.He entered, as I have said, with blood uponhis hands, and told, in much agony of mind, tothis, your noble prisoner, that he had been, ashort half-hour before, attacked near the rampartsby Baron Hartman, who rushed furiouslyupon him with his drawn sword : that they fought,and Hartman was disarmed ; upon which hetreacherously drew his dagger, attempting tostab him ; but he, this Claudius, being the strongerman, threw the other upon the ground, and bentover him with one knee upon his breast. (^pause')266 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.SENIOR JUDGE.Proceed ; art thou ill again ?ARDUSOFFE.He will recover breath presently j give himtime.CONFESSOR.In this position were those unfortunate adversaries,when Hartman, in passion, uttered wordsmost false and injurious of a lady beloved byClaudius ; upon which, this unhappy Claudiusdrew his own dagger from his belt, and stabbedhim to the heart. That was the blood-staineddagger found in the apartment of Van Maurice.VAN MAURICE.I can forbear no longer ; if this monkTell such a tale as drawn from my confession,By all most sacred held in earth or heaven,He lies a thousand times !CONFESSOR.But wilt thou also swear that Claudius camenot into thy library on that fatal night, and toldthee a story similar to that which I now repeat ?VAN MAURICE.Do not beset me thus! the Count is absent,And cannot now defend himself. WhateverMay be your good intentions in my favour,As friendly aid I utterly reject them.THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 2&JKRANZBERG.Will any one be fooled by such bungling jugglersplaying into one another's hands so palpably?BORION.Most honourable Judges, I think you cannotadmit of such evidence as this. There is collusionhere.SENIOR JUDGE.Is there any farther evidence to produce ? (Apause*) I presume there is none.the Judges confer closely together in dumbshow, while the Prisoner and others speakin an under-voice']VAN MAURICE (beckoning to the Confessor).Come this way, friar.KRANZBERG.No speaking privately to a witness in court.ARDUSOFFE.The evidence being closed, it may now be admitted.VAN MAURICE.Come hither, stealthy monk, for holy fatherI never more may call thee. (Beckoning as beforeconfessor goes nearer. ~] So unwilling !What fiend of darkness hast thou tampered with ?268 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.No earthly man but one could to thy earWhat thou reveals convey, and he's far distant.CONFESSOR (in a low voice to VAN MAURICE).Not far distant, Maurice.J^VAN MAURICE pushes him away, and withan eager expression of countenancepoints to the door ; then sitting hastilydown, remains in a stooping posture, coveringhis face with his hands. ,]KRANZBERG (tO ARDUSOFFE).We shall know presently what all those jugglingdeceptions of yours will produce. Thouhast trained thy actors to admiration. Buthonesty is the best policy after all ; this goodsaying I have always maintained.ARDUSOFFE.As far as words will go, sapient Sir ; and thefate of thy last night's treachery has confirmedit. A laudable consistency of character, whenboth words and actions teach the same lesson.VAN MAURICE (starting up).They are long of coming to a decision.ARDUSOFFE.Nay, they have consulted but a little while.VAN MAURICE.I have sat on that bench a long time.THE HOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY. 269ARDUSOFFE.But a few minutes, dear Baron.VAN MAURICE (looking to Confessor, who stands ata distance.Not yet gone !ARDUSOFFE.Did you expect him to go ?VAN MAURICE.My understanding had left me : I knew notwhat to expect.ARDUSOFFE.Hush ! the Judges are preparing to pronouncesentence.VAN MAURICE (looking up fearfully.Is it for life or death? (Averting his eyeshastily It is not life.SENIOR JUDGE.Baron Van Maurice, having duly consideredthe evidence against you, and that also whichhas been produced in your favour, we feel ourselvesconstrained to pronounce upon you thesentence of the law. And forasmuch as murdershave, of late years, become more frequentamongst people of noble condition, we see goodto revive, upon this occasion, a law which hasbeen too long laid aside. Maurice Van Maurice,for this atrocious murder which you have com-270 THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.mitted, we condemn you to be broken alive uponthe wheel ; and tomorrow, before mid-day, thissentence shall be executed on your mortal body.May God be merciful to your immortal soul,which you have put into such fearful jeopardy ![VAN MAURICE stands motionless on the spot ;a murmur of horror sounds through thehall, KRANZBERG alone looking triumphant; while the Confessor sinks into thearms of ARDUSOFFE, who prevents himfrom falling on the ground']OFFICER OF THE COURT.Undo his cowl, and give him a cup of water.ARDUSOFFE (drawing his cowl still closer).Let him alone. It is only a momentary weakness: he revives.CONFESSOR (aside to ARDUSOFFE).Let go thy hold : I am well now, and think Ishall be strong. (Advancing with a stately stepin front of the Judges.) My Lords, I needs muststrongly raise my voice against this sentencewhich ye have pronounced upon a man mostinnocent.O, more than innocent ! a man most virtuous.Ay, more than virtuous ; e'en to honour's summitMost nobly raised, whereon he stands aloft,THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY. 271'Twixt heaven and earth, so godlike, that themindScarcely believes this nether world of sinHath been his previous home. He is mostguiltless.SENIOR JUDGE.What proof gives thou of this, and who artthou who hast twice this day addressed us withmien and air so varied, and two such differentvoices ?CONFESSOR (dropping his disguise).The man who did the deed : the unhappyClaudius.SENIOR JUDGE.And thou confesses thyself to be the murdererof Hartman ?CLAUDIEN.You call it murder so it may be called.He at the moment lay unarm'd ; I, therefore,Can make no plea of self-defence. But murder,Deliberately devised, ne'er stain'd these hands :And if there be a man in this assemblyWho loves a virtuous woman such, I trow,In every court and crowd are to be foundLet him declare how he should feel on hearingHer fair name outraged by a sland'rous tongue,The caitiff struggling to elude his grasp :And if a fatal stroke by rage inflictedTHE HOMICIDE: A TRAGEDY.He can in conscience deem deliberate bloodshed,Being so circumstanced, I am a murderer.JUNIOR JUDGE.How earnest thou hither ? Didst thou notsail in the Mermaid, bound for Copenhagen ?CLAUDIEN.I did : but agony of mind wrung from me,unawares, some words of exclamation and disclosure,which one of the crew overheard ; andwhen that tempest, which lately rocked yourwalls, began to vex our course, and put the shipin peril, this man accused me as a murderer.The frightened mariners would no longer sharethe risk with such an unblessed passenger, and Iwas cast into the deep.JUNIOR JUDGE.Fearful extremity ! How wert thou preserved ?CLAUDIEN.I swam while strength remain'd, and then embracedA floating plank, which bore me to the land.The tempest and the sea had pity on me ;And will ye then destroy what they have spared ?I beg for mercy : I am not ashamedTo ask, ay, to implore your clemency ;THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY.For, guilty as I am, I am so circumstancedThat life is dear to me. (Pointing to VANMAURICE, who is now on his knees,stretching out his hands to the Judges,but unable to speak.)And see, who kneels before you! one who kneltnot for his own life ; who never, till this moment,bent his honoured knee but to that AlmightyJudge, who hath commanded weak and erringmen to be merciful, that they may obtain mercy.The Judges whisper to one another. ~]I \j . i ,j V 8V'JUNIOR JUDGE.Thy case, Count Claudius, is piteous, thoughthou art very guilty. We must withdraw awhilebefore we make any reply to thy appeal formercy. [The Judges withdraw"][CLAUDIEN, turning to VAN MAURICE, spreadsout his arms, and the latter, rushing intothem, strains him to his bosoms]VAN MAURICE.Who would not live or die for such a man ?My noble friend ! but thou shalt live. The verystones of these walls will cry out against them,if they have not mercy on thee.KRANZBERG.If the Judges suffer themselves to be deludedVOL. Il, TTHE HOMICIDE ! A TRAGEDY.with all this mummery, they are no true successorsof King Solomon.VAN MAURICE.Deceit dwells within thine own miserablebreast, and thou perceives deceit in every thing.KRANZBERG.There is little penetration required in thiscase. It is a mighty convenient thing to havethe dagger of a friend and brother-in-law to cleat-one'sway to a rich inheritance.VAN MAURICE.Thou lies most foully and most wickedly.KRANZBERG (drawing from his cloak a concealedweapon, and rushing furiously on him).The lie to me ! thou half-condemned felon !CLAUDIEN (doing the same, and putting himselfbe (ween them).Attack an unarmed man, thou hellish caitiff![They fight, and ARDUSOFFE and others endeavourto part them, but cannot effect it,ft'// CLAUDIEN has run KRANSBERG throughthe body, and received a wound fromhim']This hand of mine is fated to shed blood. Caitiffas he is, I wish I had not slain him.THE HOMICIDE *. A TRAGEDY.ARDUSOFFE.See how he gathers in his wrung and witheringfeatures, as if he cursed us all in the veryagonies of death.CLAUDIEN.Say not so ! say not so ! Who can divine thethoughts of a dying man, be he ever so wicked?He is dead now, and I may soon be as him.VAN MAURICE (alarmed).What mayest thou ? There is blood from thyside : thou art wounded.CLAUDIEN.I am faint and sick : let me have air, I prayyou.Re-enter the Judges, and resume their seats.SENIOR JUDGE.This is our decision. Forasmuch as the murderof Hartman was not a premeditated act, butperpetrated, though unjustifiably, in a momentof provocation and passion; and further, thatthe criminal hath delivered himself up to justice,making full confession of the crime, we remitthe punishment of death, and condemn the CountClaudius of Denmark to perpetual banishmentfrom the city and territories of Lubeck. Infour and twenty hours from this time, thou mustT 2276 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.depart. Being ever again seen within the realm,after that period, death, according to the utmostrigour of the law, is thy portion.CLAUDIEN.I thank your clemency. If my soul and bodykeep together so long, I will obey you ; but ifotherwise, ye will not refuse to my mortal remainsa spot of earth for their resting-place, andthe dust of your land to cover them This ismy request : that I lie may lie where myfriend (Struggling in vain to keep down hisemotion.) I thank your clemency.(Is supported by VAN MAURICE.)JUNIOR JUDGE (descending hastily from his seat).What means this? has he slain himself?And who lies here? Kranzberg dead, andbathed in blood ! Such outrage in a court ofjustice! Who permitted it? Everyone presentis answerable to the law for this.ARDUSOFFE.Kranzberg, in the rage of disappointment,was, as Orion and all here present can witness,the aggressor. We endeavoured to separatethem, but ere we could effect it, these bleedingwounds were given and received.THE HOMICIDE I A TRAGEDY. 277Enter ROSELLA, joyfully.\ f>f(Y :i >>?><>{ Jo*.ROSELLA.I have heard it I have heard the joyfultidings !(To VAN MAURICE.) Thou art acquitted andClaudius not condemned.Ay, well may'st thou so hold him to thy heart !I will embrace ye both.VAN MAURICE. 'Forbear, dear sister ; do not press upon him.ROSELLA.What is the matter ? There is no joy here.Claudius, thought very pale; there's blood uponthee.O, misery, misery ! (Wringing her hands.)VAN MAURICE.Do not give way to such frantic lamentations ;he is severely wounded, but may yet recover.Have patience and do not distract him with outrageoussorrow.ROSELLA.I will be patient ! yes, I will be patient !'T is Heaven chastises ; I will bear it meekly.But is there yet for me no sound of kindness,No dear word of affection, gentle Claudius,From thy pale lips, so pale and so compress* d ?T 3278 THE HOMICIDE : A TRAGEDY.Alas, alas ! thou look'st upon the ground,And dost not look at me !VAN MAURICE.He is very faint, and hears not what thoumayest.[She embraces the knees of CLAUDIEN, whosinks slowly to the ground supported byVAN MAURICE and ARDUSOFFE, and thecurtain drops']THE BRIDEA DRAMA.IN THREE ACTS,T 4<PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.Rising.SAMARKOON, his Brother-in-law.JUAN DE CREDA, a Spanish Physician.SAMAR, a Child, and Son of Rising.EHLEYPOOLIE,tf RashMlHDOONY, JOfficers, Domestics, Robbers, Spearmen,WOMEN.ARTINA, Wife of Rasinga, and Sister of Samar-soon.MONTEBESA, Mother of Rasinga.THE BRIDE.SABAWATTE.Nurse, Attendants, fyc.Scene, in Ceylon.THE BRIDE.ACT I.SCENE L Scene, before the Castle of Rasinga.Enter EHLEYPOOLIE, meeting MIHDOONY andtwo Officers of the Chieftain's household.EHLEYPOOLIE.WELL met, my comrades ! I have words for you.MIHDOONY.We doubt it not ; thought bountiful in words.FIRST OFFICER.Thou never wert a niggard of such treasure.EHLEYPOOLIE.Ay, but the words which ye shall now receive,Are not the passing ware of daily traffic,But such as in each listener's fancy wakesResponding sounds, such as from twisted shellOn sea-beach found, comes to the bended earTHE BRIDE: A DRAMA.Of wand'ring child; sounds strange and full ofomen.MIHDOONY.What! evil omen? storms and hurricanes?EHLEYPOOLIE.Fy on 't ! A stirring, tinkling, hopeful sound :The ring of scattered largess, sweeter farThan pipe or chord or chant of forest birds :The sound of mummery and merriment :The soundBut wherefore stare ye on me thus ?List : I will tell ye what concerns us all.MIHDOONY.Out with it then ! for it concerns us allTo be no more tormented with thy folly.EHLEYPOOLIE.Our Lord Rasinga wills, that we, brave mates,With fifty armed followers and their followers,Shall be in readiness by early dawn,To march in goodly order to the mountains.FIRST OFFICER.I like not mountain warfare.SECOND OFFICER.No, nor I.MIHDOONY.To force our toilsome way through thick rankwoods,THE BRIDE I A DRAMA. 283With bleeding limbs drained by a hundredleeches !EHLEYPOOLJE.Fy, lazy cowards ! shrink ye from adventuresWhich gentle lady, in her palanquin,Will share with you ?MIHDOONY.A gentle lady, say'st thou ?EHLEYPOOLIE.Yes, ye dull dolts, I say so. Brave Rasing,Has with one wife, for a good term of years,(Lulled by some charm of sorcery) been satisfied.It is good time that he, like other chiefs,Should have a first sultana and a second,Or any such arrangement as becomesHis age and dignity. So, in gay trimWith our arm'd band, we by tomorrow's dawnMust be in readiness. These are your orders,Sent by our lord through me.MIHDOONY.Who is this honoured lady of the mountains?EHLEYPOOLIE.Canst thou not guess? The aged chieftain'sdaughter,Whose petty hold was sack'd by daring robbersNot many weeks gone by. He and his daughter284* THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Were dragg'd as prisoners from their ruin'dhome.In this sad plight, our chief, with Samarkoon,The valiant brother of his present wife,And a good strength of spearmen, met them ;chargedThe booted spoilers, conquer'd and releasedTheir wretched prey. And ye may well supposeThe lady's veil, amidst the strange confusion,Could not be clutched so close, but that RasingaMight see the lovely face it should have cover'd.MIHDOONY.O now I understand it ; for, methinks,Rasinga had not else brought to his houseAnother bride to share it with Artina.[SAMARKOON, who has entered behind themunperceived, and overheard part of thepreceding dialogue, now rushes forwardindignantly.SAMARKOON.Ye foul-tongued knaves, who so belie yourmaster !What words are these which ye have dared toutter ?EHLEYPOOLIE.My lord, I crave your pardon ; I have utteredThe orders which Rasinga charged me with,THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 28,5That these (pointing to MIHDOONY and Officers)should straight prepare an armed bandTo take their way tomorrow for the mountains.SAMARKOON.To bring a bride from thence? Speak out, Icharge thee,Thou lying knave ! Went not thy words thus far ?EHLEYPOOLIE.If they be true or lying words, I wot not.What may within a guarded palanquinBe from the mountains brought, I may but guess.Perhaps some speaking bird or jabbering ape.SAMARKOON (striking him).Take that and that thou false audacious slave:Dar'st thou to answer me with mockery ?[Exit EHLEYPOOLIE sulkily, followed by Mihiand Officers.Manet SAMARKOON.Base sordid reptiles ! for some paltry largessAnd passing revelry, they would right gladlySee peace and order and domestic blissTo misery and wild confusion changed.Hateful suggestions ! base and vague conjectures,Which vulgar minds on slight foundation rear !All false!And yet they are upon my heart286 THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.Like the compressure of a coiled boa,Loathly, but irresistible.A bride !It cannot be ! altho' her unveil' d faceWas of surprising beauty O how lovely !Yet he bestow'd on her but frigid praise,And still continued to repress my ardour,Whene'er I spoke of the fair mountain maid,With silent stern reserve. Is this like love ?It is not natural.Ah ! but it is ;It is too natural, deep subtle nature.How was my idiot soul so far beguiledThat I ne'er thought of this?Yes, yes, he loves her !Loves her whom I so well so dearly love,That every female image but her ownIs from my heart effaced, like curling mistsThat, rising from the vale, cling for a whileTo the tall cliff's brown breast, till the warmsunDissolves them utterly. 'Tis so ; ev'n sheWhom I have thought of, dreamt of, talk'd of,ay,And talk'd to, though in absence, as a thingPresent and conscious of my words, and living,Like the pure air around me, every where.(After a pauseAnd he must have this creature of perfection !THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 287It shall not be, whatever else may be !As there is blood and manhood in this body,It shall not be !And thou, my gentle sister,Must thy long course of wedded love and honourCome to such end ! Thy noble heart will break,When love and friendly confidence are fled.Thou art not form'd to sit within thy bowerLike a dress'd idol in its carved alcove,A thing of silk and gems and cold repose :Thy keen but generous nature Shall it be ?I '11 sooner to the trampling elephantLay down this mortal frame, than see theewronged. (After a considerable pause.)Nay, nay ! I am a madman in my rage.The words of that base varlet may be false.Good Montebesa shall resolve my doubts.Her son confides to her his secret thoughts :To her I'll go, and be relieved from torment,Or know the worst at once. [Exit.288 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.SCENE II.The Apartment of MONTEBESA.SABAWATTE is discovered at work and singing.SONG.The gliding fish that takes his playIn shady nook of streamlet cool,Thinks not how waters pass away,And summer dries the pool.The bird beneath his leafy dome,Who trills his carol, loud and clear,Thinks not how soon his verdant homeThe lightning's breath may sear.Shall I within my bridegroom's bower,With braids of budding roses twined,Look forward to a coming hourWhen he may prove unkind ?The bee reigns in his waxen cell,The chieftain in his stately hold,To-morrow's earthquake, who can tell ?May both in ruin fold.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 289Enter MONTEBESA, as the song is concluded.MONTEBESA.Did I not hear thee singing, as I came,The song my dear Artina loves to hear ?SABAWATTE.Ev'n so, good lady ; many a time I sang itWhen first I was attendant in her bower ;Ere, at your own desire, and for my honour,She did resign me to your higher service.MONTEBESA.Sing it no more : alas ! she thought not thenOf its contain'd allusions to a fateWhich now abides herself.SABAWATTE.No, not her fate ; you surely mean not so :She is a happy wife, the only wifeOf brave Rasinga, honoured and beloved.MONTEBESA.She was and is as yet his only wife.SABAWATTE.As yet his only wife ! and think you thenShe will not so continue ?MONTEBESA.Sabawatte,It grieves me much to tell thee what perforceVOL. in. u290 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Must soon be known to all ; my son RasingaHath set his heart upon a younger bride,Perhaps a fairer too.SAB A Waste (eagerly).No ; not a fairer.I 'd peril life and limb upon the bet,She is not half so fair, nor half so good.MONTEBESA.Be not so hasty. Why dost thou regard itAs such a grievous thing ? She has alreadyEnjoyed his undivided love much longerThan other dames have done with other lords,And reason teaches she should now give place.SABAWATTE.Reason and cruelty sort ill together ;A loorie haunting with a spotted pard.Ah ! woe the day ! Why have you told me this ?MONTEBESA.Because I would upon your sadden'd browPrint traces which may lead our poor ArtinaTo question thee ; and thou, who art her friend,Canst by degrees, with gentle, wise precaution,Reveal to her what she must needs be told.SABAWATTE.I cannot : put not such a task on me,I do implore your goodness ! No, I cannot.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 291MONTEBESA.Hush, hush! I hear the footsteps of a man,But not Rasinga. It is Samarkoon ;I know his rapid tread. Be wise ; be silent ;For he awhile must live in ignorance.Enter SAMARKOON, and SABAWATTE retires tosome distance.A happy morning to you, youthful kinsman !SAMARKOON.As it may prove, good lady : happy morningOft leads to woeful eve, ay, woeful noon,MONTEBESA.These are strange sombre words ; what is thematter ?Why dost thou look both sorrowful and stern ?SAMARKOON.I have good cause, if that which I have heardBe aught but a malignant, hateful tale,On mere conjecture founded. Answer me,If thou know'st nothing of a num'rous trainJn preparation, by Rasinga's orders,To fetch home to his house a fair young bride ?There 's no such thing. Speak speak ! I willbelieve thee ;For if to thee unknown, there's no such thing.[A pause, he looking inquisitively in kerjace.']Thou dost not speak ; thou dost not answer me ;u 2THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.There's trouble in thine eye. A withering curseLight on his heartless heart, if this be true !MONTEBESA.Brave Samarkoon ! thou art not wise, so fiercelyTo question me of that which well may beWithout my knowledge ; that which, if it be,Nor thou nor I have any power to alter.SAMARKOON.Which if it be ! that if betrays an answer ;A shameful answer, shunning open words.Dear, dear Artina ! thou hast climb' d alreadyThe sunny side of Coimbra's mountain ridge,And now with one short step must pass theboundsDividing ardent heat from chilling cloudsWith drenching mist surcharged.So suddenlyTo bring this change upon her ! Cruel craft !He knows that it will break her tender heart,And serve his fatal purpose.MONTEBESA.Frantic man!Thou art unjust, ungenerous, unwise ;For should Rasinga no uncommon act,Take to his princely bower a second bride,Would not Artina still be held in honour,Her children cherish' d and their rank secured ?SAMARKOON.Such honour as unfeeling worldlings giveTHE BRIDE I A DRAMA. 293To fall'n deserted merit, she will have ;And such security as should-be heirs,Who stand i' the way of younger, petted minions,Find in the house of an estranged sire,Her children will receive. Alas, alas !The very bonds of soul-devoted love,That did so long entwine a husband's heart,For her own life the cord of executionWill surely prove. Detested cruelty !But is it so ? My head is all confusion,My heart all fire ; I know not what thou said'st.MONTEBESA.Indeed, young kinsman, thou art now unfitTo hold discourse on such a wayward subject.She whom thou lov'st so dearly as a brother,I as a mother do most truly love.Let this suffice thee, and retire awhile,For I expect Artina, and 't is meetShe be not now overwhelm' d with thy distress.Ha ! she is here already ; tripping lightlyWith sparkling eyes, like any happy child,Who bears away the new-robb'd rock-bird's spoil.Enter ARTINA, gayly, with an embroidered scarfof many colours in her hand, and running up toMONTEBESA.Dear mother, look at this! such tints, suchflowers !u 3THE BRIDE I A DRAMAThe spirits of the Peak have done this work;Not hands of flesh and blood. Nay, look moreclosely.And thou too, Samarkoon. How cam'st thouhere ?I pray you both admire the beauteous giftRasinga's gift which I have just received.SAMARKOON (eagerly.Received from his own hand, so lately too ?ARTINA,Ev'n now. But did I say, from his own hand ?He sent it to me, the capricious man !Ay, and another present, some days since,Was also sent. Ay, so it was, indeed.SAMARKOON.Was he not wont to bring such gifts himself?ARTINA.With what a face of gravity thou ask'stThis most important question ! Never mind :I can devise a means to be revengedFor all this seeming lack of courtesy.MONTEBESA.Devise a means to be revenged ! and how ?ARTINA.I'll dress old nurse, as my ambassadress,With robe and veil and pall majestical,And she shall thank him in a tiresome speech,THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.(He hates her formal prosing) that I trow,Will cure him of such princely modes of sendingHis gifts to me. Bat ye are wondrous grave.What ails thee, brother? Speak, good Mon-teresa;I fear he is not well.MONTEBESA.He is not very well.ARTINA (taking his hand affectionately).Indeed he is not.SAMARKOON (turning away his face).A passing fit of fever has disturb'd me,But mind it not, Artina.ARTINA.Nay, nay, but I will mind it, gentle brother.And I have learnt this morning cheering news,Good news for thee and all sick folk beside.MONTEBESA.We want good news; what is it thouhast heard?ARTINA.De Creda, who, by physic magical,Did cure Rasinga of his fearful malady,When at the point of death, is just arrived.Where he hath been these two long year andmoreu 4296 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.There's not a creature knows. Perhaps i' themoon,If magic knows the way to climb so high.MONTEBESA.Perhaps in his own land.ARTINA.Ay, certes, Europe is a wond'rous kingdom,And well worth visiting, which sends forth menSo gifted and so good.SAMARKOON.I pray thee say not men, but only man.Hath it e'er sent another like to him ?Yet wherefore came he to these happier regionsWith such a wicked crew ?ARTINA.Nay, blame him not :His fate hath been disastrous and sad,As I have heard him say ; and, woe is me !Misfortune is not dainty in associates.SAMARKOON.Associates ! Solitude in trackless deserts,Where locusts, ants, and lizards poorly thrive,On the bare summit of a rugged peak,Where birds of prey in dusky circles wingThe troubled air with loud and clam'rous din,Were to an honest heart endurable,Rather than such associates.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 297ARTINA.Ha ! does this rouse thee so ? Yet, nevertheless,I '11 send for him, and he will make thee well.SAMARKOON.I 'm well if thou art so, my gentle sister.ARTINA.And I am so ; how canst thou doubt it, brother,Being so loving and so well beloved.SAMARKOON.yes ! thou art indeed beloved most dearly,Both thee and thine, and so shall ever be,Whilst life gives motion to thy brother's heart.Artisanbrother's heart ! How so ? there is a meaning,A meaning and a mystery in this.Tears, too, are on my hand, dropt from thineeyes ;O, speak, and tell the worst !SAMARKOON.I may not now.1 pray thee, let me go ; I cannot speak.\ Breaks from her and exit. Then SABA-wastecomes forward and takes hold ofher robe with an action of soothing THE BRIDE: A DRAMA.ARTINA (to SABAWATTE).Dost thou too look on me with pity ? Speak ;I charge thee speak, and tell the fearful cause,Since no one else will do it.MONTEBESA.My dear Artina, thou shalt know the truth,Which can no longer be concealed ; but listen,Listen with patience to the previous story,And thou wilt see how fated, strange eventsHave caused within Rasinga's noble heart,Ev'n he who has so long and dearly loved thee,A growing possibility of change.ARTINA.If he is changed, why should I know the rest ?All is comprised in this. (With actions ofdespairedMONTEBESA.Nay, do not wring thy hands, but listen to me.Sit on this seat and call up strength to hear me.Thou giv'st no heed to me ; thou dost not hear.ARTINA (in a low voice, after a pause.I'm faint and very cold ; mine ears ringstrangely ;But I will try to do whatever thou wilt. (Afteranother pause.)There is a story then : I '11 hear it now.THE Bride: A DRAMA. 299MONTEBESA.leasing, as thou know'st, did, short while since,A mountain chief and his fair daughter rescueFrom ruffian robbers. In its youthful charmsHe saw the virgin's unveil' d face. Alas !A sight so rare he could not see unmoved.Restless and troubled, like a stricken wretchWhom sorcery possesses, for a whileHe strove against his passion, but at lengthNature gave way ; and thou may'st guess whatfollows.ARTINA.What follows ! What has followed ?MONTEBESA.Our gates must soon receive this youthful bride ;And thou, dear daughter, must prepare thyselfTo bear some natural change.[Anti A faints away in the arms O/^SABAWATTE.]SABAWATTE.I knew it would be so ! Oh, my dear mistress !These cruel words have dealt the fatal blow.MONTEBESA.Be not afraid of this infirmity,Which, though it seems appalling, brings relief,Ev'n like Niwan6, when the virtuous soulHath run, through many a change, its troubledcourse.Let us remove her gently to my couch.300 THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.SCENE III.The Apartments of Rising.He enters, followed by EHLEYPOOLIE and Mihiand is speaking as he enters.RASINGA (to EHLEYPOOLIE).Thou hast done well.EHLEYPOOLIE.I am not given to boasting,Yet I must say all things are so arranged,That never bride's array, on such short notice,Was better order' d, or for gallant show,Or for security.RASINGA.'Tis rich and splendid ?EHLEYPOOLIE.Our palanquin, with all its colour'd streamers,Will shine above the guard's encircling heads,Like any crested mancka, proudly percVdUpon the summit of her bushy knoll.RASINGA.And have ye pioneers to clear its way ?THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 301EHLEYPOOLIE.Ay, pioneers who through a tangled thicketMake room as quickly as the supple trunkOf a wild elephant ; whilst forest birds,From their rent haunts dislodged, fly up andwheelIn mazy circles, raising clamorous cries,And casting noon-day shadows, like a cloud,On the green woods beneath.MIHDOONY.In truth, my lord, he makes it well appearHe is not given to boasting.RASINGA (smiling).Not a whit !As meek and modest as a Padua's child.And having done so much for show and speed,Good Ehleypoolie, I will take for grantedThe chiefs point of all, security,Has not been overlook' d ; for mountain robbersMay yet be lurking near some narrow pass.EHLEYPOOLIE.Well, let them lurk, and burst upon us too ;'T will be as though a troop of mowing monkeys,With antic mimic motions of defiance,Should front the brinded tiger and his brood.Full soon, I trow, their hinder parts they turn,Lank and unseemly, to the enemy,302 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.In scampering haste, to gain the nearest shelter.It were good sport if they should dare to stand.MIHDOONY.You see, my lord, he is in all things perfect.RASINGA.I see it plainly. Thanks for all thy pains,Brave Ehleypoolie.EHLEYPOOLIE.Shall we take with usThe pipes and douglas* which have hung so longIn the recess of Dame Artina's garden ?Of all your instruments there are not anyThat sound so loud and clear.RASINGA (sternly.No, no ! I charge thee,Let nothing there be changed. Thy witless wordsHave struck upon my heart a dismal note,Depressing all its life and buoyancy.Alas ! my joy is like the shimmering brightnessOf moving waves, touch' d by the half-risen moon,Tracing her narrow pathway on the deep :Between each brighten'd ridge black darknesslies,Whilst far on either side, the wat'ry wasteSpreads dim, and vague, and cheerless.Douglas, a kind of drums, beat on one end by the handand on the other with a stick.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 303MIHDOONY.If such thy thoughts, dost thou repent thy purpose?RASINGA.Not so ; there's ecstacy in those bright gleams ;Ay, and though cross'd with darkness black asmidnight,I will enjoy this momentary radiance.Enter a Slave, in haste.What brings thee here with such a staring face ?SLAVE.The lady's coming ; she is close at hand.RASINGA.Ha ! from her father's house, unsent for, come ?SLAVE.No, not that lady, Sir ; it is Artina.RASINGA (much disturbed).I thought my mother would have spared me this.Is Montebesa with her?SLAVE.No, my lord jShe has her children with her.RASINGA.Wretched moment!THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.The sight of them will change my strength tocowardice :What shall I do ?EHLEYPOOLIE.I '11 quickly run and say that you are busy,And cannot see her.RASINGA (pulling EHLEYPOOLIE back as he isabout to go out')Restrain thy heartless zeal ; it is most odious.Shall she be so debarr'd from entrance here,Whose presence was a blessing and a grace !Enter ARTINA, leading her youngest Child, andfollowed by SAMAR, leading his little sister.RASINGA hastens to meet her, and leads her insilence to the principal seat, at the same timemotioning to EHLEYPOOLIE and MIHDOONY towithdraw, who immediately leave the apartment.Here, take this seat, Artina.Artisansmy lord ;I come not here to sit ; I come to kneel,As now beseems a scorn'd forsaken wife,Who pleads with strong affection for her children:Who pleads in painful memory of loveTHE BRIDE I A DRAMA. 305Which thou for many years hast lavish'd on her,Till, in the gladness of a foolish heart,She did believe that she was worthy of it.RASINGA.Yes, dear Artis, thou wert worthy of it !Thou wert, and art, and shalt be loved andhonour'dWhile there is life within Rasinga's bosom.Why didst thou think it could be otherwise,Although another mate within my houseMay take her place, to be with thee associated,As younger sister with an elder born ?Such union is in many houses found.Artisanhave no skill in words no power to reason :How others live I little care to know :But this I feel, there is no life for me,No love, no honour, if thy alter'd heartHath put me from it for another mate.Oh, woe is me ! these children on thy knees,That were so oft caress'd, so dearly cherish'd,Must then divide thy love with younger fav'rites,Of younger mother born ? Alas ! alas !Small will the portion be that falls to them.RASINGA.Nay, say not so, Artina ; say not so.VOL. in. x306 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Artisanknow it well. Thou thickest now, belike,That thou wilt love them still ; but ah ! too soonThey'll be as things who do but haunt thy house,Lacking another home, cheered, uncared for.And who will heed their wants, will sooth theirsorrow,When their poor mother moulder in the grave,And her vex'd spirit, in some other form,Is on its way to gain the dreamless sleep ?Kneel, Samar, kneel! thy father loved thee first,In our first happy days. Wilt thou not, boy ?Why dost thou stand so sullen and so still ?SAMAR.He loves us not.ARTINA.he will love us.INay, nay, but he will love us.Down on thy knees ! up with thy clasped handsRasinga, O Rasinga ! did I thinkSo to implore thy pity me and mineSo to implore thy pity, and in vain !(Sinks on the ground exhausted with agitation.)RASINGA (raising her gently in his arms).Dearest Artina ! still most dear to me :Thy passionate affections waste thy strength ;Let me support thee to another chamber,More fitting for retirement and for rest.Come also, children Come, my little playmates!THE BRIDE I A DRAMA. 307SAMAR.We 're not thy playmates now.RASING A.What dost thou say ?SAMAR.Thou dost not speak and smile and sport with usAs thou were wont : we 're not thy playmatesnow.RASINGA.Thou art a fearless knave to tell me so.[Exeunt ARTINA, leaning on her husband,and the children following. ~]SCENE IV.A retired Grove near the Castle of Rasinga.Enter SAMARKOON and a Forest Freebooter.SAMARKOON.Now, stop we here ; in this sequester' d spot,We may with freedom commune on the purposeFor which I would engage thy speedy aid.Thou knowest who I am ; and dost rememberWhere, how, and when I last encountered thee ?FREEBOOTER.I do, my lord ; but though thou finest me thus,308 THE BRIDE: A DRAMA.Alone and slightly arm'd, be well assuredI will defend my life and liberty,Against thyself (looking suspiciously around) orany ambush' d bandTo the last bloody push of desperation.SAMARKOON.I know thou wilt ; it is thy desp'rate prowessWhich makes me now, all robber as thou art,And lurking here disguised, as well I guess,For no good end, to seek thy amity.FREEBOOTER.My amity ! the noble SamarkoonA chief of rank, and brother of Rasinga !SAMARKOON.Strong passion by strong provocation roused,Is not a scrupulous chooser of its means.How many of these armed desperadoes,From whose fell hands we did so lately rescueThat petty chieftain and his child, could'st thouWithin short time assemble ?FREEBOOTER.Few remainOf those who once, at call of my shrill horn,With spear and bow in hand, and quiver' d backThe deadly arrows bearing, issued forthFrom cave or woody jungle, fierce but stealthy,Like glaring, tawny pards, few, few remain.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 309SAMARKOON.But some remain ?FREEBOOTER.Ay, some.SAMARKOON.And they are brave ?FREEBOOTER.No braver bandits e'er in deadly strifeWith man or tiger grappled.SAMARKOON.Enough ! hie quickly to thy forest haunts,And near the narrow pass where ye sustainedThe onset of Rasinga, wait my comingWith all the armed mates thou canst assemble ;And there I '11 join thee with a trusty band.Do this, and thou shalt be rewarded richly.FREEBOOTER.I will ; nor do I doubt the recompenseFrom such a noble chief will be most bountiful.SAMARKOON.Tis well ; be speedy, secret, faithful, brave,I need not say. So let us separate,Nor stay for further parley ; time is precious.FREEBOOTER.I will but go to leave an offeringAt the Wihar6 yonder ; then with speedx 3310 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Wend to our woods. But wherefore smilesthou?SAMARKOON.Dost thou regard such duties ?FREEBOOTER.Ay, good sooth !Who has more need of favour from the godsThan he who leads a life of lawless peril ?exit.SAMARKOON (exultingly.Ay, now, Rasinga, set thy costly chamber,While poor Artina sighs and weeps unheeded,In gallant order for thy fair new bride !Another bridegroom and another chamberAbide her which thou little thickest of.THE BRIDE: A DRAMA. 311ACT II.SCENE!. The Castle of Samarkoon. Loudshouting heard without.Enter several Domestics in confusion.FIRST DOMESTIC.What shouts are those ? do enemies approach ?What can we do in our brave master's absence ?SECOND DOMESTIC.Ha ! hear it now ! it is no enemy ;It is our lord himself; I know the sound.And lo! his messenger arrived with tidings.Enter a Messenger.What are thy news ?MESSENGER.Right joyful news, I warrant.Our master brings a bride, by conquest won,To be the bliss and sunshine of his house ;A bride fair as the goddess, bright Paine".FIRST DOMESTIC.Most unexpected tidings ! Won by conquest ?x 4THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.SECOND DOMESTIC.With whom has he been fighting for suchprize ?MESSENGER.Fy, fy ! despatch and make such preparationAs may be fitting for a bride's reception :There is no time for telling stories now.Despatch, I say ; do ye not hear them nearer ?They are not many furlongs from the gate.\ Exeunt in haste, different ways.SCENE II.The Hall or principal Room of the Castle.Enter SAMARKOON leading in a Lady coveredwith a veil, and followed by two Female Attendants; then a band of Musicians and atrain of armed Men, with EHLEYPOOLIE andseveral of his Soldiers as prisoners. A NuptialChaunt or Song is struck up,SONG.Open wide the frontal gate,The lady comes in bridal state ;Than wafted spices sweeter far,Brighter than the morning star ;THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 313Modest as the lily wild,Gentle as a nurse's child.A lovelier prize, of prouder boast,Never chieftain's threshold crost.Like the beams of early day,Her eyes' quick flashes brightly play ;Brightly play and gladden allOn whom their kindly glances fall.Her lips in smiling weave a charmTo keep the peopled house from harm.In happy moment is she comeTo bless a noble chieftain's home.Happy be her dwelling here,Many a day and month and year !Happy as the nested doveIn her fruitful ark of love IHappy in her tented screen !Happy in her garden green !Thus we welcome, one and all,Our lady to her chieftain's hall.SAMARKOON.I give ye all large thanks, my valiant warriors,For the good service ye have done to meUpon this day of happy fate. Ere long,This gentle lady too, I trust, will thank you,Albeit her present tears and alter'd stateHave made her shrink and droop in cheerlesssilence.An ample recompense ye well have won,Which shall not with a sparing hand be dealt.Meantime, partake our cheer and revelry ;314 THE BRIDE ! A DRAMA.And let the wounded have attendance due ;Let sorcery and med'cine combineTo mitigate their pain. (Turning to the Prisoners.)Nay, Ehleypoolie,Why from beneath those low 'ring brows dostthouCast on the ground such wan and wither' d looks ?Thy martial enterprise fell somewhat shortOf thy predictions and thy master's pleasure ;But thou and all thy band have bravely fought,And no disgrace is coupled with your failure.EHLEYPOOLIE.Had not my amulets from this right armBeen at the onset torn, ev'n ambush'd foesHad not so master'd us.SAMARKOON.Well, be it so ; good amulets hereafterThou may'st secure, and fight with better luck.EHLEYPOOLIE.Ay, luck was on your side, good sooth ! suchluckAs fiends and magic give. Another timeSAMARKOON.What thou wilt do another time, at presentWe have no time to learn.(To his followers generally.)Go where cool sparkling cups and sav'ry viandsTHE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 315Will wasted strength recruit, and cheer yourhearts.Ere long I'll join you at the board, and fillA hearty cup of health and thanks to all.exeunt all but SAMARKOON, the BRIDE,and her Female Attendants.And now, dear maid, thou pearl and gem ofbeauty,The prize for which this bloody fray was fought,Wilt thou forgive a youthful lover's boldness,And the rude outrage by his love committed ?Wilt thou not speak to me ?BRIDE.What can I say ?I was the destined bride of great Rasinga ;My father told me so.SAMARKOON.But did thy heartDid thine own heart, sweet maid, repeat thetale?And did it say to thee, " The elder chieftainIs he whom I approve ; his younger rivalUnworthy of my choice?"BRIDE.My choice ! a modest virgin hath no choice.That I have seen you both ; that both have seenMy unveil'd face, alas ! is my dishonour,Albeit most innocent of such exposure.316 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.SAMARKOON.Say not dishonour ; innocence is honour.And thou art innocent and therefore honourable,Though every slave and spearman of our trainHad gazed upon thy face. The morning starReceives no taint for that a thousand eyes,All heavenward turn'd, admire its lovely brightness.Let me again look in thy dark soft eyes,And read my pardon in one beamy smile.(Attempting to draw aside her veil, while shegathers it the closer')BRIDE.Forbear, forbear ! this is indignity.SAMARKOON.And this, dear maid, is childish bashfulness.\ The upper fastening of the veil gives Waitand Jails over her hand']And look, the silly fence drops of itself;An omen of good fortune to my love.Oh ! while those eyes are fixed upon the ground,Defended from too ardent admiration,With patience hear my suit. Two rival chiefsHave look'd upon thy face, and thou perforceMust choose or one or other for thy husband.Rasinga, in his rich and noble mansion,Hath years already pass'd in wedded love ;And is the husband of a virtuous dame,Whose faithful heart, in giving place to thee,THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 317Will be asunder torn. My house is humble ;No gay and costly treasures deck its walls ;But I am young, unmarried, and my heartShall be thine own, whilst thou reigns mistresshere,As shares the lion's mate his forest cave,In proud equality. Thou smiles at this ;And it doth please thy fancy ; yea, a tearFalls on that smiling cheek : yes, thou art mine.BRIDE.Too quickly dost thou scan a passing thought.SAMARKOON.Thanks, thanks ! O, take my thanks for such dearwords !And speak them yet again with that sweet voiceWhich makes my heart dance in its glowing cell.FIRST ATTENDANT (advancing to SAMARKOON).My lady is forspent with all this coil ;She has much need of quiet repose. I pray,On her behalf let this be granted to her.BRIDE (to First Attendant).I thank thee, nurse! (To SAMARKOON.) Mylord, I would retire.SAMARKOON.I will retire, or do whate'er thou wilt.Thy word or wish commands myself and mine.[Exit.318 THE BRIDE: A DRAMA.FIRST ATTENDANT.Thyself and thine ! a mighty rich dominion !A-lack, alack-a-day, the woeful change !This rude unfurnish'd tower for the fair mansionOf great Rasinga ! Evil was the hourWhen those fell demons stopped us on our way.BRIDE.O, say not so ! in great Rasinga's houseA noble wife already holds her state,And here I shall have no divided pleasure.FIRST ATTENDANT.Divided ! Doth an elder faded wifeIn love, in honour, or in riches shareLike portion with a youthful beauty ? No !She doth herself become the flatt'ring subjectOf her through whom the husband's favoursflow ;And thereby doth increase her rival's power,Her state and dignity.Thou art a simple child, and hast no senseOf happiness or honour. Woe the dayWhen those fell demons stopp'd our high career !BRIDE.But for my father's anger, and the bloodWhich has been shed in this untoward fray,The day were one of joy and not of woe,In my poor estimation.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 319FIRST ATTENDANT.Poor, indeed !SECOND ATTENDANT (advancing).Fy, nurse ! how canst thou so forget thyself?Thy words are rude ; my lady is offended.FIRST ATTENDANT.Who would not, so provoked, forget herself?Ah ! the rich treasures of Rasinga's palace !His gaudy slaves, his splendid palanquins !They have pass'd from us like a mummer's show,Seen for an hour and gone.Enter a Female Domestic.DOMESTIC.My master bids me say, the lady's chamberIs now in readiness. [Exeunt.SCENE III.The Court of the Castle.Enter Two Domestics, meeting.FIRST DOMESTIC.The merry revelry continues stillAs if but just begun, though Samarkoon320 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Reminds them anxiously, that preparationFor the defence of this neglected hold,Is pressing matter of necessity.SECOND DOMESTIC.Those glutton bandits will not leave a board,On which good viands smoke or wine cupssparkle,For all the words of threat'ning or entreaty,That mortal tongue can utter.Enter a Third Domestic in great alarm.THIRD DOMESTIC.Where is our master ?FIRST DOMESTIC.What alarms thee so ?THIRD DOMESTIC.There is a power of armed men advancing.I saw their dark heads winding through the passAbove the bushes shown ; a lengthened line,Two hundred strong, I guess.FIRST DOMESTIC.It is Rasinga.SECOND DOMESTIC.Ring the larum bell,And rouse those drunken thieves from their debauch.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.THIRD DOMESTIC.But I must find our master ; where is he ?FIRST DOMESTIC.He was i' th' inner court some minutes since.[The larum bell is rung, and many people inconfusion cross the Stage as the scenecloses.]SCENE IV.An Open Space before the Gate of the Castle ;Armed Men are discovered on the Walls.Enter RASING A and his Force.RASINGA (/o those on the 'walls).Where is that villain whom ye call your lord ?Let him appear, and say, why, like a robber,A reckless, lawless traitor, he hath daredMy servants to attack, my bride to capture,And do most foul dishonour to my state.Am I a drivelling fool, a nerveless stripling, *A widow'd fanny, propping infants' rights,That thus he reckons with impunityTo pour on me such outrage ?VOL. III. Y32% THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Enter SAMARKOON above, and stands on the wallover the Gate.SAMARKOON.Rasinga, thou art robb'd and thou art wrong* d,And hast good cause to utter stormy words.RASINGA.Ay, and good cause to back those stormy wordsWith stormy blows, which soon shall force thatgate,Make desp'rate entrance through the rifted walls,And leave within your paltry tower, of allWho dare oppose my arms, no living thing,Unless thou do restore the mountain beauty,And all the spoil thou hast so basely won.SAMARKOON.Though I have dared to wrong thee, braveRasinga,I Ve done it in the heat and agonyOf passions that, within a generous breast,Are irresistible, and, be assured,With no weak calculations of impunity.The living treasure I have robbed thee ofI will defend to the extremityOf desp'rate effort, ev'n in this poor hold,Mann'd as it is. I well might speak to theeOf equal claims to that fair beauty's favour ;Of secret love ; of strong fraternal sympathyTHE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 323With her whose honour' d name I will riot utter ;But that were vain.RASINGA.Vain as a sea-bird's screams,To check the wind-scourged ocean's rising billows:So far thou speaks wisely. Stern defianceI cast to thee ; receive it as thou may'st,Audacious traitor !SAMARKOON.And I to thee do cast it back againWith words and heart as dauntless as thine own.RASINGA (to his followers).Here ends our waste of breath and waste of time.On, pioneers, and let your pond'rous malletsBreak down the gate. To it, my valiant bowmen!Discharge a shower of arrows on that wall,And clear it of yon load of miscreant life.Sing A 5 "s followers raise a shout, which isanswered by one equally loud from the adverseparty, and the attack commences.After great efforts of attack and defence,the gate is at last forced, and RASINGA,with his force, enters the castle, TheScene then closesTHE BRIDE I A DRAMA.SCENE V.A wild Mountain Pass, with a bridge swung fromone high perpendicular rock to another. Thecourse of a small stream, with its herby margin,seen beneath. Martial music is heard, and amilitary procession seen at some distance, windingamong the rocks, and at length crossing thebridge. Then come the followers of RASINGAin triumph, leading SAMARKOON in chains, followedby men bearing a palanquin, and in therear RASINGA himself, with his principal officers.As he is on the middle of the bridge JUAN DECREDA enters below, and calls to him with aloud voice.JUAN.Rasinga, ho ! thou noble chief, Rasinga !RASINGA (above.Who calls on me ?JUAN.Dost thou not know my voice ?RASINGA.Juan de Creda, is it thou indeed ?Why do I find thee here ?THE BRIDE ; A DRAMA. 325JUAN.Because the Power that rules o'er heaven andearthHath laid its high commission on my soulHere to arrest thee on thy fatal way.RASINGA.What means such solemn words?JUAN.Descend to me, and thou shalt know their meaning.[RASINGA crosses the bridge and re-appearsbelow]RASINGA.I have obey'd thee, and do bid thee welcomeTo this fair land again. But thou shrinks back,Casting on me looks of upbraiding sorrow :With thee I may not lordly rights assert ;What is thy pleasure ?JUAN.Is he, the prisoner now led before thee,Loaded with chains, like a vile criminal,Is he the noble Samarkoon, thy brother?RASINGA.Miscall not by such names that fetter' d villain :He, who once wore them with fair speciousseeming,Is now extinct to honour, base and treacherous.Y 3326 THE BRIDE '. A DRAMA.The vilest carcase, trampled under footOf ponderous elephant, for lawless deeds,Was ne'er inhabited by soul more worthless.JUAN.Thy bitter wrath ascribes to his offenceA ten-fold turpitude. Suspect thy judgment.When two days' thought has communed withthy conscience,Of all the strong temptations which besetUnwary youth by potent passions urged,Thou wilt not pass on him so harsh a censure.RASINGA.When two days' thought ! If that he be alive,And wear a human semblance two days hence,In the fell serpent's folds, the tiger's paws,Or earthquake's pitchy crevice, with like speed,Be my abhorred end !JUAN.Hold, hold, Rasinga!The God, in whose high keeping is the fateOf every mortal man, or prince or slave,Hath this behest declared, that sinful manShould pardon grant to a repentant brother;Yea, more than this, to his repentant enemies.So God commands ; and wilt thou prove rebellious?RASINGA.Ha ! hast thou been in heaven since last we met,THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.To bring from hence this precious message ?TrulyThou speak'st as if thou hadst.JUAN.No, I have found it in my native land,Within the pages of a sacred bookWhich I and my compatriots do believeContains the high revealed will of God.RASINGA.Ha ! then those Europeans, whom the seaHath cast like fiends upon our eastern shores,To wrong and spoil and steep the soil withblood,Are not compatriots of thy book-taught land.What! dost thou cast thine eyes upon theground ?The stain of rushing blood is on thy cheek.If they be so, methinks they have obey'dThat heavenly message sparingly. Go to !Tell me no more of this fantastic virtue,This mercy and forgiveness. Ev'n a woman,A child, a simpleton would laugh to scornSuch strange unnatural duty.JUAN.Call it not so till I have told thee further -(Taking his hand.)RASINGA.Detain me not. But that to thee I owe328 THE BRIDE 1 A DRAMA.My life from fatal sickness rescued, dearly,Full dearly should'st thou pay for such presumption.Let go thy hold.JUAN.I will not till thou promise,Before thy vengeful purpose is effected,To see me once again.RASINGA.I promise then, thou proud and dauntlessstranger ;For benefits are traced in my remembranceWith lines as ineffaceable as wrongs. [Exeunt.SCENE VI.The House of MONTEBESA ; who enters, meetinga Servant from the opposite side.MONTEBESA.What com'st thou to impart ? thy busy faceIs full of mingled meaning, grief and gladness.SERVANT.My Lord Rasinga, madam, is returned,Return'd victorious ; and the fair young brideAgain is rescued by his matchless valour.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.MONTEBESA. '*All this is good ; hast thou no more to tell ?SERVANT.Alas ! I have ; for, by his spearmen guarded,Loaded with chains, most rueful to behold,Comes Samarkoon. For now it doth appear,That he, leagued with robbers, was the spoiler,Who beat the gallant train of Ehleypoolie,And bore away their prize.MONTEBESA.Oh, this is dreadful ! Clouds overlapping cloudsAre weaving o'er our house an evil woof,A fearful canopy. It was to usThat ominous sign was sent, but few days past,When Boodhoo's rays, beneath the noon's bluedomeWith shiv'ring motion gleam'd in streaky brightness,Surpassing mid-day splendour. Woe is me !I saw it not unmoved ; but little thought,Ah ! little thought of misery like this.Enter JUAN DE CREDA.Welcome, De Creda ; thou in hour of needArt ever wise and helpful. Dost thou knowOf this most strange event ? Of SamarkoonAs lawless spoiler by Rasinga conquered,And led330 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.JUAN.I do ; and come to entreat thee, lady,That thou with thy enchased and vengeful sonMay'st use a mother's influence to save him.MONTEBESA.Entreaties are not wanted, good De Creda,For herein I am zealous as thyself.JUAN.He must not die.MONTEBESA.Nor shall, if I can save him.JUAN.Then let us meet Rasinga, as he passes,Ere he can reach the shelter of his chamber,Where men are wont to cherish moody wrath ;And we will so beset him with our prayers,That we shall move his soul, if it be possible.The fair Artina too must come with usTo beg her brother's life.MONTEBESA.Yes, be it so ; but first let us apprise her,And do it warily, lest sudden griefO'er whelm her totally.JUAN.That will be necessary.And, lady, let us find her instantly ;We have no time to spare. [Exeunt.THE BRIDE '. A DRAMA. 331SCENE VII.A Gallery or Passage leading to RASINGA'sChamber.Enter RASINGA, speaking to an Officer whofollows him.RASINGA.And let his dungeon be secured to the utmostWith bolt and bars ; and set a double guardTo watch the entry. Make it sure, I say :For if thy prisoner escape, thy lifeShall pay the forfeit. This thou knowest well,Therefore be vigilant. [Exit Officer.The very blood is boiling in my veins,Whilst the audacious braver of my rights,My arms, my honour, ev'n within a dungeonAnd manacled with iron, breathes vital air.Enter MONTEBESA by the farther end of the Gallery,followed by ARTINA and JUAN DE CREDA,who remain without advancing further, whilstshe approaches her Son with an air of dignity.MONTEBESA.Rasinga, let a mother, who rejoices33 V 2 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.In every victory thy arms achieve,Be it o'er foreign, yea, or kindred foe,Greet thee right heartily.RASINGA.I thank you, lady.MONTEBESA.But that my pride in thee may be unmix'dWith any sense of aught to taint thy glory,Grant me a boon that will enhance thy triumph,And make me say, with full, elated heart,Rasinga is my son.RASINGA.Name it ; whatever a man may grant is thine.MONTEBESA.The life of Samarkoon ; that is my boon.RASINGA.The life of Samarkoon ! then thou dost askThe foul disgrace and ruin of thy son.MONTEBESA.Not so ; for thine own peace and future weal,I do adjure thee to be merciful.4 RASINGA.And would'st thou see the son whom thou didstbearAn unrevenged, despised, derided man ?And have I got from thee and my brave sireTHE BRIDE: A DRAMA. 333This manly stature and these hands of strengthTo play an idiot's or a woman's part ?If such indeed be Montebesa's wish,Poor slight-boned, puny, shambling drivellers,Or sickly maidens, should have been the offspringProduced by her to mock a noble house.MONTEBESA.say not so ! there will be no dishonour.RASINGA.What ! no dishonour in the mocking lips,And pointing fingers of the meanest peasant,Who would his whetted blade sheath in the heartOf his own mother's son for half the wrong,Ay, half the wrong which that audacious traitorHas done to me ! Cease, lady ; say no more :1 cannot henceforth live in ignominy ;Therefore, good sooth ! I cannot grant yourboon.ARTINA (rushing forward and catching hold ofhis hand and his garments).Dear, dear Rasinga ! wilt thou make my lifeOne load of wretchedness ? Thou 'st cast meoff,I who so loved thee, and love thee still,Thou 'st cast me off, and I will meekly bear it.Then, wilt thou not make some amends to me,334* THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.In a saved brother's life, for all the tears,The bitter tears and anguish this has caused me ?RASING A (shaking her off.Thy plea is also vain ; away, away!Thy tears and anguish had been better comforted,Had he a more successful spoiler proved.[Turning fiercely on JUAN DE CREDA, whonow advances"]Ha ! thou too art upon me ! Thou whose kindredAnd colleagues are of those who read good lore,And speak like holy saints, and act like fiends.By my brave father's soul, where'er it be,Thou art a seemly suitor for such favour ![Bursts away from them and exit.~\ARTINA.De Creda, good De Creda, dear De Creda !Wilt thou not follow him ?JUAN.Not now ; it were in vain ; I might as well,While wreck of unroof 'd cots and forest boughs,And sand and rooted herbage whirl aloft,Dark'ning the sky, bid the outrageous hurricaneSpare a rock-cresting palm. But yet despairnot;I'll find a season. Let me lead thee hence.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 335MONTEBESA.I fear the fierceness of his untamed spiritWill nev 7 er yield until it be too late ;And then he will, in brooding, vain repentance,The more relentless be to future criminals ;As though the death of one he should havesparedMade it injustice e'er to spare another.I know his dangerous nature all too well.[Exeunt.SCENE VIII.A Prison.SAMARKOON is discovered in chains ; a lamp burningon the ground near him, and a pitcher ofwater by it.SAMARKOON.And now the close of this my present being,With all its hopes, its happiness, and pain,Is near at hand, a violent bloody close,Perhaps with added torture and disgrace.Oh, Kattragam, terrific deity !Thy stern decrees have compass'd all this misery.Short, turbulent, and changeful and disastrous,Hath been this stage of my existence. What,When this is past, abides me in my progress336 THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.To the still blessing of unvisited rest,Who may imagine or conjecture? Blessing!Alas ! it is a dull joyous blessingTo lose, with consciousness of pain, all consciousness:The pleasure of sweet sounds and beauteoussights.Bride, sister, friends, all vanish'd and extinct,That stilly, endless rest may be unbroken.Oh, oh ! he is a miserable man,Who covets such a blessing ! Hush, badthoughts !Rebellious, faithless thoughts ! My miseryIs deep enough to make ev'n this a blessing.Enter ARTINA.It cannot be ! is it some fantasy ?Who and what art thou ?ARTINA (approaching him softly).The thing I seem ; thy miserable sister.SAMARKOON.My gen'rous, loving sister, in her loveRunning such fearful risk to comfort me.ARTINA.Nay, more than this, dear brother j more thancomfort ;I come to set thee free.THE Brede I A DRAMA. 337SAMARKOON.Has he relented ?Artisansno ! Rasinga is most ruthless. I,By means of this (showing a signet which, inour better days,It was my privilege to use at will,Have pass'd the guards, and may a short whilehenceBy the same means return, return in safety.Meantime let me undo those galling fetters ;I 've brought fit tools, and thou shalt teach mehow.SAMARKOON.But canst thou think the guards will let theepass,Ev'n with thy signet, leading a companion ?It cannot be; thou dost deceive thyself;Thy mis'ry and affection make thee foolish.ARTINA.Not so ; there is a secret passage yonder.That stone pointing to if like many others in thewall,But rougher still (goes close to the stone andtouches zY), look at it ! take good heed,Has in its core a groove on which it turns :A man's full strength will move it, and despairWill make thee strong.VOL. III. Z338 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.SAMARKOON.Were two men's strength required, I feel withinmeThe means for such deliverance ; if, indeed,Thou hast not been deceived by some false tale.ARTINA.I'm not deceived. But wait, when I am gone,With limbs yet seemingly enthrall'd, untilThe wary guard hath come to ascertainThy presence here j and then, when he retires,Thou know'st the rest. Haste, let me loose thyshackles.Is this the way ?(Kneeling down and using her implementsfor breaking the chains, which she drawsfrom the folds of her robesSAMARKOON.Well done, my most incomparable sister !Affection seems to teach thee craftsman's skill.ARTINA.This link is broken.SAMARKOON.So it is indeed.If I am fated yet to live on earth,A prosp'rous man, I '11 have thy figure graven,As now thou art, with implements in hand,And make of it a tutelary idol.THE BRIDE *. A DRAMA. 339ARTINA (still working at the chains).Ha ! thou speak' st cheerly now ; and thy changedvoiceIs a good omen. Dost thou not rememberHow once in play I bound thy stripling limbsWith braided reeds, as a mock criminal ?We little thought Another link is conquered ;And one alone remains. (Tries to unloose if.)But it is stubborn.Oh, if that I should now lack needed strength !Vile, hateful link, give way !Enter RASINGA, and she starts up, letting fall hertools on the ground.RASINGA.And thou art here, thou most rebellious woman !A faithful spy had given me notice of it,And yet, methought, it was impossibleThou could' st be so rebellious, so bereftOf female honour, matronly allegiance.ARTINA.Upbraid me not, my lord ; I 've at your feetImplored you to relent and spare his life,The last shoot of my father's honour'd house.But thou, with unrelenting tyranny,Hast chid me from thee. Matronly allegiance,Ev'n in a favour' d and beloved wife,340 THE BRIDE t A DRAMA.Overruled not every duty ; and to her,Who is despised, abandon'd, and disgraced,Can it be more imperious ? No, Rasinga ;I were unmeet to wear a woman's form,If, with the means to save my brother's life,Not implicating thine, I had, from fearOf thy displeasure, grievous as it is,Forborne to use them.RASINGA.Ha ! such bold words to justify the act,Making rebellion virtue ! Such audacityCalls for the punishment which law providesFor faithless and for disobedient wives.SAMARKOON.Rasinga, if that shameful threat be serious,Thou art the fullest, fiercest, meanest tyrant,That e'er joined human form to demon's spirit.RASINGA.And dost thou also front me with a stormOf loud injurious clamour ? Ho, without !(Calling aloud')I came not here to hold a wordy warWith criminals and women. Ho ! I say.Enter Guards.Secure the prisoner, and fasten tightlyTHE BRIDE I A DRAMA. 341His unlocked chains. And, lady, come thou instantly,To such enthralment as becomes thy crime.[Exeunt RASING A and ARTINA, who is ledoff by Guards, while motioning her lastfarewell to SAMARKOON. The scene closes.SCENE IX.An Apartment in the House o/* MONTEBESA.SAMAR is discovered playing on thejloor with toys,and SABAWATTE sitting by him.SAMAR (holding up a toy.This is the prettiest plaything of them all :I will not use it till my mother come,That she may see it fresh and beautiful.SABAWATTE.Alas, sweet Samar ! would that she were here !SAMAR.Will she not soon ? how long she stays away !And she has been so kind to me of late.SABAWATTE.Was she not always kind ?SAMAR.Yes, always very kind ; but since my fatherz 3842 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Has thought of that new bride I hate thatbrideAnd spoken to me seldom and with looksNot like his wonted looks, she has been kinder ;Has kiss'd me oftener, and has held me closerTo her soft bosom. O she loves me dearly !And dearly I love her ! Where is she now,That thou should'st say, " I would that she werehere ! "SABAWATTE.Dear boy ! I may not tell thee.SAMAR.May not tell me !Then she is in some sad and hateful place,And I will go to her.SABAWATTE.Ah no ! thou canst not.SAMAR.I will -, what shall withhold me, Sabawatte ?SABAWATTE.Strong bolts and bars, dear child !SAMAR.Is she in prison ?SABAWATTE.She is.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 34)3SAMAR.And who hath dared to put her there ?SABAWATTE.Thy father.SAMAR.Then he is a wicked man,Most cruel and most wicked.I '11 stay no longer here ; I '11 go to her ;And if through bolts and bars I may not pass,I at her door will live, as my poor dogClose by my threshold lies and pines and moans,When he's shut out from me. I needs must go ;Rooms are too good for me when she's in prison.Come, lead me to the place ; I charge thee, do ;I '11 stay no longer here.Enter MONTEBESA, and he runs to her, claspingher knees, and bursting into tears.MONTEBESA.What is the matter with thee, my dear child ?(To SABAWATTE.) Does he know aught?SABAWATTE.I could not keep it from him.SAMAR.I know it all ; I know it all, good grand-dame.O take me to her ! take me to her prison.z 4344 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA,I '11 be with her ; I '11 be and bide with her ;No other place shall hold me.MONTEBESA.Be pacified, dear child ! be pacified,And I myself will take thee to thy mother:The guards will not refuse to let me pass.Weep not so bitterly, my own dear Samar !Fy ! wipe away those tears and come with me.SABAWATTE.A blessing on you, madam, for this goodness !It had been cruelty to keep him here.\JLxeunt.ACT III.SCENE I. The Private Chamber of RASINGA,who is discovered walking backwards and forwardsin great agitation.RASINGA,That I that I alone must be restrain'd !The very meanest chief who holds a mansionMay therein take his pleasure with a second,When that his earlier wife begins to fade,Or that his wearied heart longs for another.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 345Ay, this may be ; but I am deem'd a slave,A tamed a woman-bound a simple fool.after a pauseNor did I seek for it ; fate was my tempter.That face of beauty was by fate unveil'd ;And I must needs forbear to look upon it,Or looking, must forbear to love. Bold traitor !That he should also, in that very moment,Catch the bright glimpse and dare to be myrival !Fy, fy ! His jealous sister set him on.Why is my mind so rack'd and rent with this ?Jealous, rebellious, spiteful, as she is,I need not, will not look upon her punishment.Beneath the wat'ry gleam one moment's struggle,No more but this. (Tossing his arms in agonyOh, oh ! there was a time,A time but shortly past, when such a thoughtHad been the cords of life had snaptasunderAt such a thought. And it must come to this !(After another perturbed pauseIt needs must be : I *m driven to the brink.What is a woman's life, or any lifeThat poisons his repose for whom it flourish'd ?I would have cherish'd, honour'd her, yet she,Rejecting all, has ev'n to this extremityNo, no ! it is that hateful fiend, her brother,Who for his damn'd desires and my dishonour346 THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.Hath urged her on. The blood from his shorntrunkShall to mine eyes be as the gushing fountTo the parch'd pilgrim Blood! but that hisrankForbids such execution, his marr'd carcase,A trampled mass a spectacle of horror,Should - the detested traitor ![Noise at the doors]Who is there ?JUAN DE CREDAJuan de Creda : pray undo thy door.RASINGA.No, not to thee ; not ev'n to thee, De Creda.JUAN (without).Nay, but thou must, or fail in honest truth.I have thy promise once again to see meEre thy revengeful purpose take effect ;Yea, and I hold thee to it.RASINGA.Turn from my door, for thou since then hastseen me,And hast no further claim.JUAN (without).Tamper not so unfairly with thy words :I saw thee as the forest peasant seesA hunted tiger passing to his lair.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 347Is this sufficient to acquit thee ? No ;I claim thy promise still, as redeemed.Unbar thy chamber door and let me in.RASING A (opening the door, and as JUAN enters.Come in, come in then, if it must be so.Is misery a pleasant sight to thee,That thou dost pray and beg to look upon it ?JUAN.Forgive me, brave Rasinga, if I say,The mis'ry of thine alter' d face, to meIs sight more welcome than a brow composed.But 't is again to change that haggard faceTo the composure of a peaceful mind,That I am come. O deign to listen to me !Let me beseech thee not to wreck thy happinessFor fell revenge !RASINGA.Well, well 5 and were it so,I wreck my happiness to save my honour.JUAN.To save thine honour?RASINGA.Yes ; the meanest slaveThat turns the stubborn soil with dropping brow,Would hold an outraged, unrevenged chiefAs more contemptible than torpid reptileThat cannot sting the foot which treads upon it.348 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.JUAN.When fear or sordid motives are imputedAs causes why revenge hath been forborne,Contempt will follow, from the natural feelingsOf every breast, or savage or instructed.But when the valiant and the gen'rous pardon,Ev'n instantly as lightning rends the trunkOf the strong Nahagaha *, pride of the wood,A kindred glow of admiration passesThrough every manly bosom, proving surely,That men are brethren, children of one sire,The Lord of heaven and earth.RASINGA.Perplex me not with vain and lofty words,Which to the stunn'd ear of an injured manAre like the fitful sounds of a swoln torrent,Noble, but void of all distinctive meaning.JUAN.Their meaning is distinct as well as noble,Teaching to froward man the will of God.RASINGA.And who taught thee to know this will of GodJUAN.Our sacred Scripture.The iron tree.THE BRIDE I A DRAMA. 349RASINGA.What? your Christian Scripture,Which, as I have been told, hath bred more discordThan all the other firebrands of the earth,With church opposed to church, and sect to sect,In fierce contention ; ay, fell bloody strife.Certes, if all from the same book be taught,Its words may give, as I before have said,A noble sound, but no distinctive meaning.JUAN.That which thou hast been told of shameful discord,Perversely drawn from the pure source of peace,Is true ; and yet it is a book of wisdom,Whose clear, important, general truths may guideThe simplest and the wisest : truths which stillHave been by every church and sect acknowledged.RASINGA.And what, I pray, are these acknowledged precepts,Which they but learn, it seems, to disobey ?JUAN.The love of God, and of that blessed Being,Sent in his love to teach his will to men,Imploring them their hearts to purifyFrom hatred, wrong, and every sensual excess,350 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.That in a happier world, when this is past,They may enjoy true blessedness for ever.RASINGA.Then why hold all this coil concerning thatWhich is so plain, and excellent, and acknowledged?JUAN.Because they have in busy restless zealRaised to importance slight and trivial parts ;Contending for them, till they have at lastBelieved them of more moment, ev'n than allThe plain and lib'ral tenor of the whole.As if we should maintain a wart or moleTo be the main distinctions of a man,Rather than the fair brow and upright form,The graceful, general lineaments of nature.RASINGA.This is indeed most strange : how hath it been ?JUAN.The Scripture lay before them like the sky,With all its glorious stars, in some smooth poolClearly reflected, till in busy idleness,Like children gath'ring pebbles on its brink,Each needs must cast his mite of learning inTo try its depth, till sky, and stars, and glory,Become one wrinkled maze of wild confusion.But that good Scripture and its blessed AuthorTHE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 351Stand far apart from such perplex'd contention,As the bright sky from the distorted surfaceOf broken waters wherein it was imaged.RASINGA.And this good Scripture does, as thou believes,Contain the will of God.JUAN.I do believe it.And therein is a noble duty taught,To pardon injuries, to pardon enemies.RASINGA.I do not doubt it. 'T is an easy matterFor holy sage or prophet in his cell,Who lives aloof from wrongs and injuriesWhich other men endure, to teach such precepts.JUAN.Most justly urged : but he who utter 5 d thisDid not enforce it at a rate so easy.Though proved by many good and marvellousactsTo be the missioned son of the Most High,He meekly bore the wrongs of wicked men ;And in the agonies of crucifixion,The cruel death he died, did from his crossLook up to Heaven in earnest supplicationEv'n for the men who were inflicting on himThose shameful sufferings, pardon ev'n forthem.THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.RASINGA (bowing his head and covering his facewith his hands).Indeed, indeed, this was a noble Being.JUAN.Ay, brave Rasinga ; ireful as thou art,Thou hast a heart to own such excellence.(Laying his hand soothingly on RASING A'S.)And do consider too how he who wrong'd thee,The youthful SamarkoonRASINGA (shaking off his hand impatiently).Name not the villain.JUAN.That epithet belongs not to a youth,Who in the fever* d madness of strong passion,By beauty kindled, goaded by despair,Perhaps with sympathy, for that he deem'dA sister's sorrowsRASINGA.Hold thy peace, De Creda ;Thy words exasperate and stir within meThe half-spent flames of wrath.He is a villain, an audacious villain ;A most ungrateful, cunning, artful villain.Leave me, I charge thee, lest thou utter thatWhich might provoke me to unseemly outrage.I owe my life to thee, and but for thatLeave me, I charge thee.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 353JUAN.I do not fear what thou may'st do to me.RASINGA.No ; but / fear it, therefore quit me instantly.Out, out ! (Opening the door and pushing himHo ! Ehleypoolie ! ye who wait without,I want your presence here. [Exit JUAN.Enter EHLEYPOOLIE and MIHDOONY.EHLEYPOOLIE (after having waited some time toreceive the commands of his master, who withoutnoticing him walks about the chamber in violentagitation.My lord, we humbly wait for your commands.(Aside to MIHDOONY.)He heeds us not : as though we were not here.(Aloud.)We humbly wait, my lord, to know your pleasure.RASINGA.My pleasure is -(Stopping, and looking bewildered.)I know not what it is.MIHDOONY.Perhaps, my lord, you wish to countermandVOL. III. A A354 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Some orders that regard the executionsFix'd for tomorrow, at an hour so early.RASINGA.When did Rasinga countermand his orders,So call'd for, and so given ? Why wait ye here ?EHLEYPOOLTE.You summon'd us, my lord ; and well you knowThat Ehleypoolie hath a ready aptnessFor 'RASINGA.Boasting, fooling, flattery, and lies.Begone, I say; I did not summon you.At least I meant it not.Turns away hastily, and exit by another door.EHLEYPOOLIE.For boasting, fooling, flattery, and lies !How angry men pervert all sober judgment !If I commend myself, who, like myself,Can know so well my actual claims to praise ?MIHDOONY.Most true ; for surely no one else doth know it.EHLEYPOOLIE.And fooling is an angry name for wit.MIHDOONY.Thy wit is fooling ; therefore should it seem,Thy fooling may be wit. Then for thy flattery,What dost thou say to that ?THE BRIDE *. A DRAMA. 355EHLEYPOOLIE.Had he disliked it,It had been dealt to him in scantier measure.And lies to hear a prince whose fitful humoursCan mar or make the vassals who surround him,Name this as special charge on any one !His violent passions have reduced his judgmentTo very childishness.MIHDOONY.But dost thou think the fierceness of his wrathWill make him really bring to executionA wife who has so long and dearly loved him ?EHLEYPOOLIE.How should I know what he will really do ?The words he spoke to me ev'n now may showtheeHis judgment is obscured. But if he do ;Where is the harm when faded wives are crossAnd will not live in quietness with a younger,To help them on a step to their Newane" ?She never favour' d me, that dame ArtisansI foresaw she would not come to good.[Exeunt.A A356 THE BRIDE: A DRAMA.SCENE II.A large Court, or open Space, with every thingprepared for the Execution O/~SAMARKOON : aSeat of State near the front of the Stage.Spectators and Guards discovered.FIRST SPECTATOR.There is a mass of life assembled here :All eyes, no voice ; there is not ev'n the murmurOf stifled whispers. Deep and solemn silence !SECOND SPECTATOR.Hush, hush ! Artina comes, and by her side,Her son in the habiliments of onePrepared for death. This surely cannot be :It is impossible.FIRST SPECTATOR.I hope it is.Enter ARTINA and SAMAR, with SABAWATTE onthe one side of them, and JUAN DE CREDA onthe other ; Attendants following.ARTINA.Alas, for thee, my noble, generous child !THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 35JSAMAR.Fear not for me, dear mother ! Lean upon me.Nay, let me feel your hand upon my shoulder,And press' d more heavily. It pleases me,Weak as I am, to think I am thy prop.ARTINA.what a prop thou would'st have been to me !And what a creature for a loathly grave,For death to prey upon! Turn, turn! Oh,turn !Advance no farther on this dreadful path.SAMAR.1 came not here to turn y and for the path,And what it leads to, if you can endure it,Then so can I : fear not for me, dear mother !Nay, do not fear at all ; 9 t will soon be over.ARTINA.Oh ! my brave heart ! my anguish and my pride,Ev'n on the very margin of the grave.Good Sabawatt6 ! hold him ; take him from me.SABAWATTE.I cannot, madam ; and De Creda says,'Tis best that you should yield to his desire,ARTINA.It is a fearful an appalling risk.A A 3358 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.SABAWATTE.Is there aught else that you would charge mewith ?ARTINA.Yes, dearest friend, there is it is my last.Let not my little daughters know of this ;They are too young to miss me. Little MooreWill soon forget that she has seen my face ;Therefore whoe'er is kind to them they '11 love.Say this to her, who will so shortly fillTheir mother's place, and she will pity them.Add, if thou wilt, that I such gentle dealingsExpected from her hands, and bade thee teachthemTo love and honour her.SABAWATTE.My heart will burst in uttering such words.ARTINA.Yet for my sake thou'lt do it ; wilt thou not?[SABAWATTE motions assent, but cannot speakerEnter SAMARKOON chained and guarded.ARTINA (rushing on to meet him).My brother, my young Samarkoon ; my brother,Whom I so loved in early, happy days ;Thou top and blossom of my father's house !THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 359SAMARKOON.Weep not, my sister, death brings sure relief;And many a brave man's son has died the deathThat now abideth me.ARTINA.Alas! ere that bright sun which shines sobrightlyShall reach his noon, of my brave father's raceNo male descendant shall remain alive,Not one to wear the honours of his name,And I the cursed cause of all this wreck !Oh, what was I, that I presumptuouslyShould think to keep his undivided heart !'Twere better I had lived a drudge, a slave,To do the meanest service of his house,Than see thee thus, my hapless, noble brother.SAMARKOON.Lament not, gentle sister ; to have seen theeDebased and scorn'd, and that most wond'rouscreature,Whose name I will not utter, made the meansOf vexing thee it would have driven me frantic.Then do not thus lament; nor think that IOf aught accuse thee. No ; still let us beIn love most dearly link'd, which only deathHas power to sever.[To SAMAR, assist observing him']Boy, why art thou here ?A A 4360 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.SAMAR.To be my mother's partner and companion.'T is meet ; for who but me should cling to her ?Enter RASINGA, and places himself in the seat : adeep silence follows for a considerable time.MIHDOONY (who has kept guard with his spearmenover SAMARKOON, now approaching RASINGA).The hour is past, my lord, which was appointed ;And you commanded me to give you notice.Is it your pleasure that the executionersProceed to do their office on the prisoners,Who are all three prepared ?RASINGA.What dost thou say ?MIHDOONY.The three prepared for death abide your signal.RASINGA.There are but two.MIHDOONY.Forgive opposing words ; there is a third.RASINGA.A third, say'st thou ? and who ?THE BRIDE ! A DRAMA. 361MIHDOONY.Your son, my lord ;A volunteer for death, whom no persuasionCan move to be divided from his mother.RASINGA.I cannot credit this ; it is some craft,Some poor device. Go, bring the boy to me.[MIHDOONY leads SAMAR to his father. ~]Why art thou here, my child ? and is it so,That thou dost wish to die ?SAMAR.I wish to be where'er my mother is,Alive or dead.RASINGA.Think well of what thou say'st !It shall be so if thou indeed desire it.But be advised ; death is a dreadful thing.SAMAR.They say it is : but I will be with her ;I '11 die her death, and feel but what she suffers.RASINGA.And art thou not afraid ? Thou 'rt ignorant ;Thou dost not know the misery of drowning ;The booming waters closing over thee,And thou still sinking, struggling in the tank,On whose deep bottom weeds and water snakes,362 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA,And filthy lizards will around thee twine,Whilst thou art choking. It is horrible.SAMAR.The death that is appointed for my motherIs good enough Tor me. We '11 be together :Clinging to her, I shall not be afraid,No, nor will she.RASINGA.But wherefore wilt thou leave thy father, Samar ?Thou 'st not offended me 5 I love thee dearly ;I have no son but thee.SAMAR.But thou wilt soon.Thy new young wife will give thee soon another,And he will be thy son ; but I will beSon of Artina. We '11 be still together :When, in the form of antelope or loorie,She wends her way to Boodhoo, I shall stillBe as her young one, sporting by her side.RASINGA (catching him in his arms, and burstinginto tears).My generous boy ! my noble valiant boy !O such a son bestow'd on such a father !Live, noble creature ! and thy mother also !Her crime is pardon'd, if it was a crime ;Ye shall not be divided.THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 363SAMAR (running back to ARTINA).mother ! raise your eyes ! you are to live ;We 're both to live ; my father says we are.And he has wept and he has kiss'd me too,As he was wont to do, ay, fonder far.Come, come ! (Pulling her towards RASINGA.)He's good, you need not fear him now.RASINGA.Artina, that brave child has won thy life ;And he hath won for me I have no wordsThat can express what he hath won for me.But thou art sad and silent ; how is this,With life, and such a son to make life sweet ?Artisanhave a son, but my brave father, soon,Who died an honour'd death, and in his graveLies like an honour'd chief, will have no son,No male descendant, living on the earth,To keep his name and lineage from extinction.[RASINGA throws himself into his seat andburies his face in his mantle"]FIRST SPECTATOR (in a low voice).Well timed and wisely spoken : 't is a womanWorthy to be the mother of that boy.SECOND SPECTATOR (in a low voice to the first).Look, look, I pray thee, how Rasinga's breastRises and falls beneath its silken vesture.304 THE BRIDE I A DRAMA.FIRST SPECTATOR (as before).There is within a dreadful conflict passing,Known by these tokens, as swoln waves aloftBetray the secret earthquake's deep-pent struggles.SECOND SPECTATOR (as before).But he is calmer now, and puts awayThe cover from his face : he seems relieved.RASINGA (looking round him).Approach, De Creda; thou hast stood aloof:Thou feePst my late rude passion and unkindness.Misery makes better men than me unkind ;But pardon me, and I will make amends.I would not listen to thy friendly counsel,But now I will most freely grant to theeWhatever grace or favour thou desires :Even now, before thou names it.JUAN.Thanks, thanks, Rasinga ! this is brave amends.(Runs to SAMARKOON and commands hischains to be knocked off*, speaking impatientlyas it is doing')Out on such tardy bungling ! Ye are craftsmenWho know full well the art to bind men's limbs,But not to set them free.(Leads SAMARKOON when unbound towardsRASINGA, speaking to him as they go.}THE BRIDE : A DRAMA. 365Come, noble Samarkoon ! nay, look more gracious:If thou disdains to thank him for thy life,That falls to me, and I will do it gladly.(Presenting SAMARKOON to RASINGA.)This is the boon which thou hast granted me,The life of Samarkoon : a boon more preciousTo him who grants than who receives it. YetTake my most ardent thanks ; take many thanksFrom other grateful bosoms, beating near thee.ARTINA (kneeling to embrace the knees of rising).And mine ; O mine ! wilt thou not look uponme?I do not now repine that thou art changed :Be happy with another fairer dame,It shall not grieve me now.RASINGA (raising her).Away, Artina, do not thank me thus.Remove her, Samarkoon, a little space.Waving them off.)Juan de Creda, art thou satisfied ?Have I done well ?JUAN.Yes, I am satisfied.RASINGA (drawing himself up with dignity).But I am not ; and that which I have doneWould not have satisfied the generous Saviour366 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Who died upon the cross. Thy friend is pardon'd,And more than pardon' d ; he is now my brother,And I to him resign the mountain bride.\ A shout of joy bursts from all around:ARTINA folds SAMAR to her breast, andSAMARKOON falls at the feet O/"RASINGA.JSAMARKOON.My noble generous foe, whom I have wrong' d ;Urged by strong passions, wrong' d most grievously!Now may I kneel to thee without disgrace,For thou hast bound me with those bands ofstrengthThat do ennoble, not disgrace the bravest.RASINGA.Rise, Samarkoon ; I do accept thy thanksSince that which I resign is worth But cease !Speak not of this if it be possible,We'll think of this no more.(Turning to ARTINA.)And now, my only and my noble wife,And thou, my dauntless boy, stand by my side,And I, so flank'd, will feel myself in honour,Honour which lifts and warms and cheers theheart.And we shall have a feast within our walls jTHE BRIDE : A DRAMA.Our good De Creda, he will tarry with us ;He will not go tomorrow as he threaten'd.JUAN.I Ml stay with you a day beyond the time,And then I must depart j a pressing dutyCompels me so to do.RASINGA.But thou 'It return again, and bring with theeThe sacred Book which thou hast told me of?JUAN.I will return again and bring that book,If Heaven permit. But man's uncertain lifeIs like a rain-drop hanging on the bough,Amongst ten thousand of its sparkling kindred,The remnants of some passing thunder shower,Who have their moments, dropping one by one,And which shall soonest lose its perilous holdWe cannot guess.I, on the Continent, must for a timeA wand'rer be ; if I return no more,You may conclude death has prevented me.Enter MONTEBESA.RASINGA.Ha, mother ! welcome, welcome, Montebesa !There ; take again your daughter and her boy.368 THE BRIDE : A DRAMA.We Ve striven stoutly with a fearful storm,But, thanks to good De Creda, it is past ;And all the brighter shall our sky appear,For that the clouds which have obscured its faceWere of a denseness dark and terrible.The Scene closes.THE MATCHA COMEDY.IN THREE ACTS.VOL. III. B BPERSONS OF THE DRAMA.MEN.SIR CAMERON KUNLIFFE.FRANKLIN, Relation to Sir Cameron.BRIGHTLY, j Fr i ends to S i r Cameron.THORNHILL, JMASTER Larry, an idle urchin, Brother toEmma.Humphrey.Locksmith, Servants.WOMEN.LATITIA VANE.EMMA, her Niece.FLOUNCE, Waiting-maid to Letitia.THE HOUSEKEEPER of Sir Cameron.Ladies, Servants, <r.Scene, a Watering-place, and Sir Cameron's Seatin the neighbourhood.THE MATCH.ACT I.SCENE I. A low Parlour in a Lodging-house,with a Glass-door in the bottom of the Stage,opening into a Garden.Enter BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL.BRIGHTLY (after surveying the room).YES, these apartments will do very well; andyou shall have your study, if a place with oneshelf for books and a commodious chair to sleepin deserves the name, overhead.THORNHILL.But you forget the writing-table, the most importantthing of all.BRIGHTLY.Most important, indeed, for a poet who neverwrites any thing longer than a sonnet, makingB B 2372 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.progress at the astonishing rate of one coupletper day. The window-sill might do well enoughfor that.THORNHILL.But you think of former times, my friend jrhyming becomes easier by practice.BRIGHTLY.So it does, like all other things ; and I dare sayyou can now write two couplets per day with nogreat difficulty.THORNHILL.Don't trouble thy head about my progress;let us set "out on our visit to Sir Cameron. Hismansion is scarcely a mile off, I am told. He isa kind-hearted fellow ; he will be glad to see us.BRIGHTLY.Yes, if he do not take it into his head that wehave some covert design in our visit.THORNHILL.Some covert design !BRIGHTLY.Ay ; sounding his intentions as to standingfor the county : propitiating his patronage forsome itinerant artist or lecturer : introducingto his acquaintance some forward chaperon, witha troop of female cousins at her back, to invadethe daily peace of his home. O dear ! what willTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 3^3he not imagine, rather than that we are scamperingabout the country for holiday recreation,and have come ten miles out of our way to seehim.THORNHILL.You are somewhat hard upon him, methinks.Some events of his youth unhappily gave him abad opinion of mankind; for myself, I neverfound him suspicious.BRIGHTLY.If he thought you had wit enough to deceivehim, it might be otherwise. You may thankyour poetry, my dear Thornhill, for his confidence.THORNHILL.Nay, spare me, dear Brightly ; else I shall supposethou art a poet thyself, under the rose, andcanst not brook a rival.[MASTER Larry, who appears in Ike gardenwith a bow and arrow in his hand, dischargeshis arrow through the glass-door,and breaks one of the panes"]See that urchin in the garden ; he has broken apane of the window, and is running away.BRIGHTLY.He shan't escape, however. (Opens the window,runs after him, and returns dragging inLarry by the collar. You need not struggleEbbsTHE MATCH I A COMEDY.with me, little master ; I '11 keep you fast. Whydid you hit the window with your arrow ?Larry.Because I meant to hit the door.BRIGHTLY.I wish thou hadst been a better marksman.What will the landlady say to thee ?Larry.Ay, more words no doubt than I shall careto hear. Ah, miss Aimy, miss Aimy ! howmany scrapes I get into by you !BRIGHTLY.And who is miss Aimy, I pray?Larry.My arrow, Sir : that is the name I give her.THORNHILL.And a very appropriate one, methinks.BRIGHTLY.But what is thine own name ?Larry.Which of them, Sir?BRIGHTLY.How many hast thou ?Larry.Two godfathers, two grandfathers, and aTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 375brace of uncles, have furnished me with namesenow. How many do they come to ?THORNHILL.Names enough, no doubt, for any one but aGerman Prince. What school dost thou attend?Larry.None, sir.THORNHILL.Who teaches thee to read and write ?Larry.Any body, who has most time and most patience.THORNHILL.But art thou not to be put to school ?Larry.Yes, Sir, when aunt Betty can make up hermind, whether the old flogged way, or the Pestalozziway, or the Hamiltonian fashion, is bestfor my learning ; and whether a high situation, orawarm situation, or an eastern exposure, or awestern exposure, is best for my health; andwhether three hundred schoolfellows, or fiftyschoolfellows, or twenty schoolfellows, faggingor no fagging, be best for my morals.BRIGHTLY,Ha! ha! ha ! I will not ask whose nephew thouart. And thou hast a pretty sister too.B B 4376 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.Larry.Yes, Sir ; people do call her pretty, and she iscivil enough to believe them.BRIGHTLY.Out upon thee for a saucy knave! Thineaunt is here then ? And where does she live ?Larry.I can't tell you, Sir ! When she has found outwhich of the twenty houses she has been lookingat is the cheerfulness, and the cleanest, andthe most convenient, I suppose she will settlein it.BRIGHTLY.Go to her, my little master, and give my bestrespects, and say that an old friend will do himselfthe honour of waiting upon her presently.Nay, you need not look at the broken pane soruefully ; I will satisfy the landlady on that point.(Leads Larry into the garden, where he disappearsamongst the bushes, then returningto the front.)Ha ! ha ! ha ! Well, I can't help laughing for thesoul of me .THORNHILL.What tickles you so much ?BRIGHTLY.Those two originals come in one another's wayTHE MATCH I A COMEDY. 377again. There was a report of a love affair betweenthem several months ago, which went offupon some foolish difficulty or other ; and nowshe comes here to place herself in his neighbourhood.THORNHILL (aside.I hope it is only to throw far self in his way.{Aloud.} Pol ! it will all end, as it did before, inscruples, and fancies, and misapprehensions !Don't you think it will ?BRIGHTLY.I hope not : what a match they would make ifit could be effected !THORNHILL.How ! Suspicion and indecision put togetheras yoke-fellows !BRIGHTLY.Why not ? If they are together, two peoplemay lead an uneasy life, to be sure ; but it will,in all probability, save four from being in thelike condition.THORNHILL.It will never be effected.BRIGHTLY.I Ml bet my Rembrandt against your paddock,which I have long coveted for orchard ground,that it will be effected.J378 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.THORNH1LL.Well then, I take your bet that it will not.BRIGHTLY.Hush, hush ! Here comes one of the partiesconcerned.Enter SIR CAMERON KUNLIFFE.SIR CAMERON.Welcome, Brightly ; and Thornhill, also, welcomeboth to this little by-nook of dissipation !and when you took your route this way, I flattermyself you remembered that you have an oldfriend in the neighbourhood.BRIGHTLY.We did so, Kunliffe, and were now proposingto walk to your house. It is, I believe, within twomiles of the village.SIR CAMERON.A short distance, which I hope you will oftentraverse, on foot or on horseback, as suits yourconvenience. I saw your groom at the stabledoor, Thornhill, rubbing down that beautifulbrown nag of yours, and he told me you werehere.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 3?9Thrill.It is lucky you did; we might have gone toyour house else and missed you.SIR CAMERON.So you might. Did I not hear you talkingof a bet as I entered ? You will not be sillyenough to bet away that beautiful animal ?THORNHILL.O no ! it did not concern the nag.BRIGHTLY.It neither concerns the nag nor the nag'smaster ; yet it is a bet of some moment too.SIR CAMERON.No doubt, no doubt ; it was foolish in me tothink of the paces of a horse, when all the menageof our borough canvassers is approaching, anddoubtful enough, I wot, to tempt any better.THORNHILL.It did not concern the borough neither.SJR CAMERON.O ! you are close and mysterious, gentlemen.BRIGHTLY.To give you the pleasure of guessing.SIR CAMERON.Faith, you are mistaken in that. What pleasTHE MATCH : A COMEDY.sure should I have in guessing ? No man on earthhas less curiosity than myselfBRIGHTLY.I think I have known some men with less : hadyou said women, I should have assented morereadily.SIR CAMERON.Fy upon thee ! both men and women arenine-pins for thy bowl to roll at.THORNHILL.And he may have good bowling here, I trow ;there be men of many conditions in this by-nookof dissipation, as you call it, and I am surethere is one lady, at least, of so many minds andmoods, that she may very well stand for twenty.SIR CAMERON.Your bet concerns a lady, then ?BRIGHTLY.It would be great thrift to tell you that,who have no curiosity.SIR CAMERON.Well, well, and you have told it me, thoughyou are not aware of it.THE MATCH t A COMEDY. 381Enter MRS. FLOUNCE, coming forward verybriskly, and then pretending to draw back inconfusion.FLOUNCE.O dear! I beg pardon, gentlemen. I knewnot you were here I came in search of MasterLawry. My lady is frightened to death abouthim, but she does not know that I am comeafter him to this hotel. O ! she is in such aquandary ; she did not know where to send meafter him : for you know, gentlemen, a childmay break his bones or come to mischief anywhere.SIR CAMERON.Nobody will deny that, Mrs. Flounce.FLOUNCE.O lud, Sir Cameron ! are you in this hotel ?But you have a fine house in the neighbourhood,as the waiter tells me, not that I inquiredI enters into no matters as don't belong to me.SIR CAMERON.If you had inquired, Mrs. Flounce, I shouldhave taken it as a compliment.BRIGHTLY.And if your lady had desired you to inquire,it would have been taken as a compliment ofdouble value.382 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.FLOUNCE.She bid me inquire ! how could you think ofsuch a thing, Mr. Brightly, when she expresslyforbade me to inquire anything about it ?BRIGHTLY.And you are a woman of discretion, Mrs.Flounce, of very deep discretion. Still keepyour lady's counsel as you do now, and you willdeserve the best silk gown in her wardrobe.THORNHILL.And her best garnet brooch into the bargain.FLOUNCE.Oh, what are silk gowns and brooches to me !Master La wry ! Master Lawry ! That child isthe plague of our lives. Is he in that theregarden ? where shall I find him ?BRIGHTLY.You had better go to the fortune-teller, ifthere be such a person in the place; he mayknow about him as well as other stray goods.FLOUNCE.No, no ! I hates fortune-tellers ; they have toldme so many lies already. Good morning,gentlemen, I ax your pardon. I have beenvery rude ; shockingly rude indeed.[Exit, curtseying herself away to the door.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 383SIR CAMERON.But you will both walk to my house as youproposed, and I shall have the pleasure of attendingyou.THORNHILL.Have the goodness to wait till we have givensome orders about our luggage, and we are atyour command.\ Exeunt BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL.SIR CAMERONDid not know that my house is in this neighbourhood.Pretty innocence! Has she changedplans again? Does the wind set fair for asecond venture ? - I might have known shewas here by Franklin being so ready to come tome.That girl, Emma, stands between him andhis wits. And these two fellows casting upin this corner so unexpectedly, what may thismean? A bet, forsooth! are they after her,too ? But be canvassing or courtship the object,they shan't encompass me in their snares.Re-enter BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL.BRIGHTLY.Now we are ready to follow you. [Exeunt.384 THE MATCH: A COMEDY.SCENE II.An Apartment in Miss VANE'S House.Enter EMMA, with a small embroidering frame inher hand, which she puts upon the table, followedby LA WRY carrying a work-bag. Shethen sits down to her work.Larry.No, no, sister! no work now! you promisedI should have some skeins to hold.EMMA.And you shall hold them all, Lawry, whenthey are wanted. Am I to wind them before,only to amuse you, as one throws out a ball forthe kitten ? I must begin this ranunculus withone or other of these bright colours immediately.Larry.And I know why you are in such a hurry.EMMA.Dost thou, master conjurer?Larry.Ay, marry do I j for if you don't, Aunt BettyTHE MATCH I A COMEDY. 385will come to choose the colour for you, and thenit won't be begun for a week. O ! here she is ;1 must get out of the way of her errands, and directions,and re-directions, as fast as I can. I 'msure, if I could keep them all in my head, thelearning of Greek would be a joke to me.Enter LATITIA (catching hold of Larry as hetries to pass).LATITIA.Where art thou going, urchin ? hast thougiven my message to the coachman ?Larry.No, ma'am, but I '11 do it immediately, in thevery words you spoke. He must be at the backentry ten minutes before two.LATITIA.No, not quite so soon. (To EMMA.) Shall Isay half-past two, my dear, or a quarter beforethree ? Perhaps that may be too late. Tellhim half-past two, unless he shouldLarry.I '11 just give him the first message, Auntie,no more.[Breaks from her and exit.LATITIA.Impudent little runagate ! that child must beput to school forthwith.VOL. in. c c386 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.Enter a Servant with letters.But here are my letters, and they will relieveme, I trust, from many perplexities.EMMA.Yes, my dear aunt, if they do not leave asmany behind as they carry away.LATITIA.Peace, child j thou art so thoughtless thatnothing is a perplexity to thee. (Looks at theletters lying on the table Ha! here is ananswer to my application for the house. (Opensa letter and readsEMMA.And does the landlord agree to your terms ?LATITIA (in a hesitating slow drawl).Ye-s.EMMA.Then there is one difficulty surmounted.LATITIA (as before).Ye-s, so far surmounted ; but I have beenthinking further of it. The drawing-rooms aretoo large, and my dressing-room is too small,and there is no convenient closet for my curiositiesand china.IAsTHE MATCH I A COMEDY. 387EMMA.And will you give it up, after all, just whenhe agrees to your terms ?LATITIA.Nay, I don't know that. If my own apartmentwere better, and room for my curiosities,and if the back staircase were not so miserablynarrow, I should not hesitate for a moment.EMMA.But things are as they are, and cannot bealtered ; so you must either take the house, withits imperfections, or give it up.LATITIA.Ay, there it is : he is so unreasonable as todesire an immediate answer. I wish that wordimmediate were expunged from the vocabulary.If I had time, I could write to Lady Trinketabout it, and likewise Mr. Change, the bestjudge of houses in the world; but to commitmyself at once Oh ! what is to be done !What seal is that you are examining so minutely?EMMA.Two gules reversed on a field azure.LATITIA (eagerly.Ha ! from that quarter ! at it againEMMA.Did you not expect a second proposal whenc c 2388 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.your former treaty of marriage broke off becausehis fortune was deemed insufficient for yourfashionable plans of expense ? for, by the unexpecteddeath of his elder brother, some threemonths ago, that obstacle is removed.LATITIA (snatching the letter from her hand, andreading it eagerly.Thou art quite right, it is a second proposal ;and, oh ! what shall I do? (Traversing the roomin a disturbed manner') I shall appear sordidI shall appear mean I shall appear mercenaryin his eyes.EMMA.Not more so than when you declined his firstproposal on that ground. You will now appearto him, not very sentimental, indeed, but consistent.LATITIA.Oh ! but I did not ostensibly decline his offeron that ground, though that was the true one.What shall I do! Suffer him to think meanly ofmy motives ; and give up all my plans too ofliving a distinguished single woman, in a houseof my own, the patroness of arts, the encouragerof genius, the loadstar in society ! You knowall this, my dear child, you know what thewishes of my heart have been.THE MATCH I A COMEDY. 389EMMA.Indeed I knew that you spoke about it, but Idid not know that you wished for it.LATITIA.Ah! but I did I thought I did. (Pacingbackward and forward in an irresolute way ; thenstopping shorts) And now, when this house,this most desirable house, may be had upon myown terms !EMMA.But you forget, my dear aunt, that it wants acloset for your curiosities, and that the backstaircase is so miserably narrow.LATITIA.Do net distract me, Emma : tell me what todo.How does it strike you ? Would it not bebetter O, no! that won't do, neither. Othat Lady Totterdown or Mrs. Stall were here,that I might ask their advice ! What would youadvise me to do ?EMMA.The writer of that letter is not unreasonableenough to require an immediate answer: lay itaside for the present, and open the next. (Pointingto another letter')LATITIA (opening it).I am glad she has found time to answer me atc c 3390 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.last. You must listen to this, Emma ; it regardsthe education of Lawry. Mrs. Overall is awoman of a deeply philosophical mind ; and onsuch an important subject, I was anxious thatshe should give me her opinion.EMMA.The thing of all others she is most ready togive. And what is it ?Letitia (reading.I have been prevented by many avocationsfrom writing" I shan't read the apology,but pass on to the matter in question : " Educationof every kind has, till lately, proceededupon a wrong principle. Every body taughtthe same things, without regard to talent or capacity.Should not a boy's instruction be adaptedto his genius ? " She is very right there,Emma ; you need not smile. There is goodreason in what she says. " If he has a turn formathematics, would you make him a lawyer? Ifforensic eloquence, would you cram him withgrammar and Greek ? If for poetry, would youconfine him to a counting-house ? If for painting,would you entangle him in diplomacy?Apply all the force of tuition to his principal,his leading talent, and you will make a distinguishedman of him with little trouble."EMMA (laughing heartily.And how shall we discover poor Lawry'sTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 391talent, if playfulness and mischief be not rankedas natural endowments ? Pray forgive me, aunt :I am too flippant.LATITIA.Indeed, I think you are, child : listen to whatfollows : " And how fortunate it is for yourpurpose that Dr. Crany, one of our most celebratedphrenologists, is in at present.Let him examine your nephew's head, and hewill tell you at once what course to pursue."Enter BRIGHTLY.Mr. Brightly, I refer to you.BRIGHTLY.And what is the matter in question ?LATITIA.To educate my nephew according to the bentof his genius. Is not that right ?BRIGHTLY.Assuredly, when you can find it out.LATITIA.Dr.Crany, r the phrenologist, will do that for us.BRIGHTLY.Very willingly, I doubt not. I forgot whatnew lights philosophy throws on such mysteriesnow-a-days. Yes, by all means let the boy'sc c 4392 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.head be examined. Does this little girl make ajest of it ? Yes, yes, let him be examined, andthen you will be no longer undecided on thetreatment of your little will o' the wisp?EMMA.To be sure that would be something gained.BRIGHTLY.Let us try for it, at least; I'll go to the doctorforthwith.LATITIA (running after him as he is going out.no, no ! not yet : you are too sudden, toohasty, Mr. Brightly. I must have more time toconsider of it,BRIGHTLY.And let the doctor proceed on his tour, andrepent when the opportunity is past.LATITIA.Does he leave the place so soon ?BRIGHTLY.1 have heard so : this will be your only opportunity.LATITIA.Go, then, go ! O how hasty and teasingthese opportunities are !THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 3QSEMMA.Indeed, my dear aunt, you generally makethem so. \JExit BRIGHTLY.Enter a Servant.SERVANT.The carriage is waiting, Ma'am.LATITIA.Let it wait. It comes before the time.EMMA.Indeed, Ma'am, your coachman seldom makesthat mistake. By my watch he is half an hourafter it. (Looking at her watch')LATITIA.Come, come then ! Flounce ! Flounce !(calling off the Stage bring my shawl andbonnet. [Exeunt in a hurry.SCENE III.Court before LATITIA's House.Enter SIR CAMERON KUNLIFFE and MRS.FLOUNCE, speaking as they enter.SIR CAMERON.And Miss Vane is only gone out for a shortairing ?394 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.FLOUNCE.Yes, Sir Cameron ; that is to say, if shekeeps in the mind as when she set out. I neveranswers for more than that of any lady.SIR CAMERON.To be sure, Mrs. Flounce, your prudence iscommendable. And since she may probablyreturn so soon, I shall take the liberty of waitingin the parlour.FLOUNCE.O ! not there, Sir, if you please : you hadbetter wait in the harbour yonder ; the smell ofall them roses and honeysuckles will delight you.SIR CAMERON.I thank you, Ma'am. I will, by your leave,go into the parlour, and smell the roses anothertime. [Exit into the house.FLOUNCE.Plague take him for a very moral of perversity!for he 'II find Mr. Franklin in the parlour ; andhow many odd notions may come into his headthe cunning one himself would not guess. For,dear me! he has a marvellous gift for makingmuch out of nothing, as his valet at the hall tellsme. He's perversity personified; for if onewants him to turn to the right hand, for thatvery reason he turns to the left. [Exit.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 395SCENE IV.The Parlour.Enter SIR CAMERON, starting back as he enters.SIR CAMERON.Did I not see a man go hastily into that oppositedoor ? I am not the only person, I apprehend,who is waiting the return of the ladies.And my lady's maid too ; she is no novice in hercalling. " O, Sir ! had you not better wait inthe harbour yonder, and smell to the roses?"Well, well, what is all this to me ? I prefer her,I fear, with all her follies, to any other woman ;but, thank God ! I am still free : I have notcommitted myself. She is coming : I hear voicesin the hall her own voice. Why should avoice sound so sweet which so often repeats sillythings ?Enter LATITIA.LATITIA.Good morning, Sir Cameron. It is very goodin you to come so early to see us. How unexpectedthe pleasure of meeting you here !SIR CAMERON.To show my bodily presence two miles from396 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.my own house is not surely very wonderful,though it may be unexpected. However, I willnot mortify my vanity so far as to suppose itboth unexpected and unwelcome.LATITIA.How ridiculously grave you look ! Howshould one know how far your house is from thistown ?SIR CAMERON.I '11 answer you that question, if you will tellme in return, how long this place is to have thehonour of harbouring so charming a visiter.LATITIA.How all the world seem leagued to embarrassone with direct queries ! My plans are not yetsettled, and I don't know how long I may stay.The lease of a house requires some consideration.SIR CAMERON.And you will not stint it on that point, I know.But the lease of a house puts deeds, and bonds,and contracts of another kind into one's thoughts:I hope you will not dash any presumptuous hopewhich a poor bachelor like myself may have entertained,by owning a matrimonial plan in connectionwith the other.LATITIA.A matrimonial plan ! What has a singleTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 3 ( J7woman, who has entered into her thirty-secondyear, to do with matrimonial plans ?SIR CAMERON.When the spirit and bloom of five-and-twentybrighten a lady's countenance, I never think ofher age. Well then, matrimony has nothing todowith it?LATITIA.No, nothing at all : my house, that is to say,if I do take the lease, will be a cheerful spinster'shouse, where literati will assemble, amateurs sitin council, curiosities be examined, poems read,and all the bon-mots of the town be repeated ;if I can induce the learned and refined to honourwith their society such a humble individual asmyself.SIR CAMERON.What delightful intercourse ! with not oneword of scandal required to give it zest.LATITIA.Not one word.SIR CAMERON.And this charming arrangement is determinedupon ?LATITIA.Absolutely.398 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.SIR CAMERON.And woe worth the selfish man who shouldseek to turn aside your mind from such a refinedspeculation ! He would surely deserve condignpunishment.LATITIA.Nay, that were judging too uncharitably. Hemight give one an opportunity of proving thestrength of one's resolution, without incurringsevere censure.SIR CAMERON.But what if he should prove the weakness ofit : would he not then deserve to be called a veryselfish fellow ?LATITIA.I will give hard names to nobody : and I mustask your opinion of another affair, if you willhave the goodness to favour me with it. Whathad I better do in regard to my little idle nephew?I should like to give him a good education ; for,idle as he is, he is clever enough : and I shouldlike to avoid all fallacious and useless modes oftuition. I have been advised to have his headexamined by the famous phrenologist who isnow in the place ; will you do me the favour tobe present ?SIR CAMERON.I shall have the honour to obey your summonswhenever you please.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 3Q9LATITIA.Your friends, Brightly and Thornhill, havealso promised to be present, and here they come,opportunely.Enter BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL.BRIGHTLY.Away with you, KunlifTe, if you would notbe beset by half a dozen of ladies of tori, whohave laid their heads together to oblige you togive them a fte-champetre in your park. Theyknow that you are here ; and I have got thestart of them only a few paces,SIR CAMERON.Thank you ! thank you ! I hear their voiceswithout ; and I would not encounter the clamourof that beldame and her train for the best buckin my park.Enter three Ladies, as he is about to escape.FIRST LADY.Ho, Sir Cameron ! stop the fugitive. (Catchinghold of his sleeves You shan't escape tillyou have heard my speech, as the delegate of allthe fair ladies in . Your park, theybid me say, is fairy ground ; and they request tobe its happy fairies for one" day, to dance in itsglades, and and, I forget the rest. O yes !I am enjoined to THE MATCH : A COMEDY.SIR CAMERON.Nay, my good Madam ; sweet as the sound ofyour voice may be in my ears, I will trouble youto say no more ; your request is granted.SECOND LADY.O how delightfully ready !FIRST LADY.The day and the hour, Sir Cameron ?SIR CAMERON.The day and the hour which this lady (pointingto LATITIA) will do me the favour to name.FIRST LADY.No, no ! this is but a subterfuge ; you mustname it yourself.SIR CAMERON.Pardon me, ladies, pardon me ! Miss Vanewill fix the time. I am obliged to attend anappointment. Good morning, excuse me ;good morning. [Hurries away and exit.THIRD LADY.He is laughing at us ; I told you it would beso.FIRST LADY.But we '11 follow him : he must not escape so.[Exeunt Ladies.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 401Manent BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL.BRIGHTLY.It would require more courage than our friendpossesses to keep his ground as a bachelor lordof the manor, near a watering place like this.But what think ye of our bet ? There is a lifeand hilarity in his countenance which assures meyour paddock will soon become the orchard-groundof a certain worthy neighbour of yours ;I see it very clearly, with all its fruit trees inblossom.THORNHILL.We are all sanguine enough where our ownadvantage is concerned : I see your beautifulRembrandt as clearly on the walls of my library ;and all the connoisseurs of the county peepingat it through their fingers. But let us follow thegame. [Exeunt.[As tie last characters disappear, FRANKLINis seen peeping out from the inner room,and then comes forward"]FRANKLIN.The coast is clear at last. O, if I could catcha glimpse of her now ! And here she comes,most fortunately, as if she knew I was waitingfor her.VOL. III. D D402 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.Enter EMMA.Dear Emma ! I have been secreted in that closetwhile Sir Cameron, and your aunt, and a crowdof other visitors have been here in succession,which appeared as if it never would end. Nowthe hurly burly is over, and I am rewarded formy patience.EMMA.Ah, George ! Why must I chide you forcoming ?FRANKLIN.And do you chide me ?EMMA.I ought to do it ; you know very well that Iought.FRANKLIN.Yes, to come here is foolish : to listen to thesound of your voice ; to catch a glimpse of yourfigure through the shrubs as you play with yourbrother in the garden ; to follow your carriagewith mine eyes, and feel its very track on thesand like a talisman or charm to the fancy, isall very foolish, but a folly that is incorrigible.THE MATCH '. A COMEDY. 403EMMA.We must try, however: consider well that myfortune is very small.FRANKLIN.I cannot consider this ; but I ought to considerthat my own is still smaller.EMMA.And whatever I have, I shall divide with mybrother ; for he is a posthumous child, and hasnot one farthing of his own.FRANKLIN.I should deserve to be a slave in the galleys,could I wish thee to be one jot less generous.EMMA.With prospects so precarious and so distant,ought we to be often together, or to enter intoany engagement ?FRANKLIN.As far as incessant application to my professioncan make them less precarious, I will toil;no, no, I may not call it toil; the patriarch'sservitude for her whom he loved was sweet tohim, and seemed but a few days.D D 2404 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.EMMA.I dare not enter into engagements.FRANKLIN.Thou shalt not ; I will be engaged and thoushalt be free.EMMA.That is impossible : we may both change ; Icannot injure thee so far.FRANKLIN.How injure me ? I will be the happier all mylife for having loved thee, if I could only onceknow that I had ever been dear to thee : I wouldnot change such happiness to toEMMA.To be made Chancellor of England.Enter SIR CAMERON behind, and observing themin earnest discourse, coughs loud several timesto give them notice of his presence, withouteffect, and then comes forward.SIR CAMERON.How very easy it would be to play the eavesdropperat this interesting moment, when thingsTHE MATCH I A COMEDY. 405might be spoken not unwelcome to a curiousear. Thou art a happy fellow to engage suchunbroken attention from such an auditorYou are both too grave to answer me. YetI would have you to know, that I have beenmade a confidant in affairs of the heart, erenow.EMMA (aside to FRANKLIN).Conceal nothing" from Sir Cameron, but permitme to retire. [Exit.SIR CAMERON.She whispered in your ear as she went.FRANKLIN.Conceal nothing from Sir Cameron " werethe words.SIR CAMERON.Gentle, confiding creature ! and wilt thouobey her? thou wilt not. Thou wilt just tellme what is perfectly convenient, and no more.FRANKLIN.Nay, nay, cousin ; you wrong me. I will obeyher thoroughly, and I shan't tire you with along story neither.SIR CAMERON.Well, then, you shall walk home with me, andtell it by the way.D D 3406 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.FRANKLIN.I have left my hat in the little room. I '11join you immediately.SIR CAMERONKind, simple, confiding creatures ! He, too,so frank and open ! I love them both : ay, andI will behave nobly to them.Re-enter FRANKLIN with his hat.FRANKLIN.I must first run to the post-office for a letter Iexpect to receive ; but don't stop for me ; I '11join you at the end of the* street.SIR CAMERON.You have no love correspondence in any otherquarter, I hope.FRANKLIN.How can your mind harbour such a thought ?SIR CAMERON.The mind of one who has lived long in theworld is often forced to give harbour to manyan unwelcome thought.FRANKLIN.The letter I expect is from no fair lady, butfrom worthy Mr. Harding.THE MATCH I A, COMEDY. 407SIR CAMERON.Ha ! what have you to do with Mr. Harding ?FRANKLIN.I have had to do with him lately as a solicitor.SIR CAMERON.And on some serious business, no doubt.FRANKLIN.Serious enough for me ; the piecing up ofall the rags and remnants of that poor garment,my patrimony, that my shoulders may not beentirely bare, till my own industry shall earn formeanother covering. \ Exit.SIR CAMERON (alone).Harding his solicitor ! Ha, ha ! I like notthis. Can it be only concerning his own littleremnants of property ! It may be so ; I willnot doubt his word. I hate all unreasonablesuspicion. 1 shall hear his story, and I shalltouch upon the subject of Harding afterwards.I shall watch his looks ; and if he really knowany thing of the flaw in that bungled deed, Ishall find it out. \J&xit.D D 4408 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.ACT II.SCENE 1. The Library in SIR CAMERONKUNLIFFE's House.Enter MASTER Larry and the Housekeeper,speaking as they enter.HOUSEKEEPER.And you are come so far from home, Master,to look at a picture-book the book of ships, eh?Larry.And is that very surprising ?HOUSEKEEPER.To be sure one need not be much surprised ;for boys will wander for the very love of wandering; it is all one as though it made a part oftheir day's work.Larry.Ay, so they will ; and now give me the book,and turning over the leaves of it will makeanother part of my day's work.HOUSEKEEPER.But are you sure, young Sir, that Sir Camerongave you leave to look over them books ?THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 40QLarry.Why should I tell a lie about it ?HOUSEKEEPER.To be sure it would be letting the devil havetoo good a bargain.Larry.Yes ; lying for a small matter is great thrift ;yet I have heard of a woman, who called herselften years younger than she was, to make herage a proper match to her rose-coloured topknot.(Looking archly at her head-dress")HOUSEKEEPER.Say what you please, young master ; but ifSir Cameron gave you leave to look at his bookswhen he is absent, it is what he never allowed toany one before.Larry.I did not say he gave me leave to look atthem in his absence.HOUSEKEEPER.And what if he should return suddenly, andfind you turning over his books? that wouldmake a fine rumpus, I trow.Larry.Would he punish me ?410 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.HOUSEKEEPER.No, Sir, it is me that would be punished ; Ishould lose my place and be ruminated.Larry.Nay, nay ! don't be distressed, good Madam :I will take all the blame on myself, and say thatI entered in spite of you.HOUSEKEEPER.That excuse would not pass with him; hewould discharge me all the same. Heavenknows what trouble I have to keep my situationhere.Larry.Then I '11 go directly, and see the picturesanother time : don't be so distressed, my goodma'am.HOUSEKEEPER.Well, thou art a sweet creature after all, andI will run some risk to please thee. (Taking abook from the shelves and laying it on the tableLarry.O thank you, thank you ; how good you are.(Begins to turn over the leaves.) What a gallantship, with her sails set and her colours flying !I wish I were aboard of her.HOUSEKEEPER.Stop, stop ; as I 'm a Christian woman, yourfingers are all smeared with lollypops.THE MATCH: A COMEDY. 411Larry.Then you are no Christian woman, for that isthe stain of black cherries, and my hands havebeen washed since I ate them.HOUSEKEEPER.Let us make sure of it, however. (Takes ahandkerchief from her pocket and rubs one of hishands, while with the other he attempts to pullthe smart bow from her cap.} Mischief to thevery core of thee ! . Yet thou art a sweet creaturetoo ; and much pleasure may you havewith your book. [Exit by an opposite door.\WHle Larry is busy with his book, SIRCAMERON'S voice is heard without, and hestarts from the table, puts the book in itsplace, and looks round in dismay. ~]Larry.Where can I hide myself? Ay, that willdo. (Climbs upon the back of a library chairwhich stands close to a bookcase, and pulls downa map from its roller to conceal himselfeEnter SIR CAMERON.SIR CAMERON.The air of this day is oppressive ; I feel drowsyand tired. (Sits down in the chairs This seatis uneasy, the upholsterer has stuffed it verybadly. Let me see. (Pulls it out from the bookcase,and Larry drops down on the Jloor.}THE MATCH: A COMEDY.What have we here ! Hiding in my library !It is Lawry, by my faith. Get up, child :I hope thou art not hurt. He does not move !torpid as a dormouse ! Ho, there ! is nobodyat hand? Ho there! (Rings a bellvio-lently.} No limbs are broken, 1 hope.Enter Servants, and re-enter Housekeeper, allgathering about Larry.HOUSEKEEPER.A boy in this room, preserve me ! how got hehere ? Ay, them urchins will scramble andclimb, and make their way anywhere like verypolecats. He got no entrance here, I 'm sure, bythe door in a natural way. Dear me, dear me !SIR CAMERON.Don't make such a clamour about it : whocares how he entered. Examine whether he behurt, and I '11 despatch a man directly for a surgeon.He must be blooded. [Exit hastily.Larry (starting up from the floor.He will be a clever surgeon that finds mehere. [Exit running.OMNES.Let him go, he 's a clever imp, don't hinderhim.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 413Re-enter SIR CAMERON.SIR CAMERON.Where is he ? have you carried him to bed.FIRST SERVANT.His own legs have carried him off very nimbly.SIR CAMERON.Pursue him, arid fetch him back.HOUSEKEEPER.It will be to no purpose, Sir Cameron ; andthe sooner he gets to his own home the better,for the ladies will be alarmed at his absence.FIRST SERVANT (looking QUt}.He has cleared the lawn already ; catch himwho can.SIR CAMERON.Leave me.[Exeunt Servants, all but the Housekeeper.HOUSEKEEPER.1 fear you will be thinking, Sir, that I let himin.SIR CAMERON.Leave me, Mrs. Marmalade.HOUSEKEEPER.I just want for to say, Sir Cameron414 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.SIR CAMERON.I just want for to be alone.[Exit Housekeeper, tossing her head.That boy has come to the house in my absencefor some purpose or other. Their purposecannot be good who employ such means to effectit. (Looking up to the bookcases Concealedbehind that map, which he must have unrolledto cover him. Ha ! to scramble up to that veryshelf where the key of my iron box is concealedbehind the pamphlets. By my faith, and theyhave been disturbed too. Let me see. (Standingon the seat of the chair, to examine the uppershelf The key is gone ; devil take the cunninglittle varlet! he has stolen the key. (Pacingabout in a disturbed mannerly I was surprisedto hear that he had transactions with Harding.I see the whole business now. He knows ofthe cursed mistake in that testamentary deed.A base device to get it into his hands for inspection.(Advances to the front, and stands thoughtfully'with his arms across Suspicious ! had Inot been less suspicious than most people, Ishould have been aware of it before. O thatthere were less cause for suspicion in this vileworld ! Must we pass through it like infants orsimpletons to be happy ? what is reason givenus for but to be a defence and a guard ? Itmay, indeed, occasionally deceive us. It may,it may! that, alas, I know too well, Oh!THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 415my remembrance of that cruel hour is intolerable.Had I then been as a simple infant insteadof a reasoning man, how happy I mighthave been ! (Beating his foreheads Well, well,well ! there is no use in thinking of it now.She is happy with another, and prosperous andhappy may she be !Enter Humphrey.What dost thou want ? Did I ring the bell ?Humphrey.No, your honour; but a servant from MissVane is here, and his lady requests you will rememberyour promise to be present at the examinationof Master Lawry's head, and thecranium doctor is to be at her house at fouro'clock precisely.SIR CAMERON.My best respects to the lady, and I shall havethe honour of obeying her summons.exit Humphrey.If the organs of mischief and knavery be notdiscovered under the curly locks of that littleimp, the science, as they deem it, of phrenologyis a spider's web to catch flies withal. [Exit.416 THE MATCH: A COMEDY.SCENE II.An Ante-room.Enter HUMPHRIES and a Locksmith, carryinga basket with his tools.HUMPHRIES.You may set down your things here a bit,Mr. Cramp, till Sir Cameron rings his bell.Plague upon it ! to make all this ado about nothing.Plague take the whole tribe of inspectorsand inspectors, with all their cautions, and securities,and contrivances !LOCKSMITH.No, no, Mr. Grumbler ! you must not say soto a locksmith. My benison upon the wholetribe.HUMPHRIES.Yes, truly, thou hast made a pretty penny ofit here.LOCKSMITH.Not much neither : I have not changed a lockin this house these three months.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 417HUMPHRIES.Hast thou forgot the two inner presses in hisstudy, and the escritoire in his dressing-room ?LOCKSMITH.No, but I hope I shall soon ; for one job beatsanother from my mind.HUMPHRIES.Ay, thou thickest but of one thing at a time.I wish my master would do the same ; for he isnot one jot wiser for mixing up so many notionstogether, like cloaks hung upon a hall-pin, black,blue, and dirty, every one huddled over another:that he is not, I 'm sure.LOCKSMITH.I wonder such a plain, surly fellow as thouart should keep thy place in his service so long.HUMPHRIES.He takes my surliness for honesty.LOCKSMITH.And he is not one jot wiser for that, I shouldreckon.HUMPHRIES.No, Cramp ; he is not deceived. But as I amhonest, I must be treated like an honest man.LOCKSMITH.Certainly ; that is but reasonable. And howVOL. III. E E418 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.does Mrs. Marmalade contrive to stay here solong ? She is neither plain nor surly, I 'm sure.HUMPHRIES.Oh ! but she has one great advantage over me.LOCKSMITH.What is that?HUMPHRIES.He sees she is a fool ; and certes, she is thegreatest fool that ever had wit enough to keepaccount of household linen, and overlook themaking of pickles and preserves.LOCKSMITH.Yes, for certain, she has a great power of wordson every occasion, and few of them to the purpose.How has he patience to hear her?HUMPHRIES.I '11 tell you how : whenever he questions herabout any mischance in the family, he knowsvery well that all she tells him, in the first place,is false, but that it will soon be contradicted asshe goes on ; and that what she tells him lastwill be within a trifle of the truth. Besides, heis amused with her, and she is related to his oldnurse. For he is really a kind-hearted man, forall his odd notions and vagaries.THE MATCH: A COMEDY, 419LOCKSMITH.He is too wise, belike, to think there be anyhonest folk in the world.HUMPHRIES.No, no ! he thinks there may be a tithe ofhonest folk in it, but how to find them out,that is his perplexity. (Bell rings") Now, heis ready for you : follow me with your tools, anddo what you can for this cursed chest, elsethere will be no peace in the house for a week.\ Exeunt.SCENE III.An Apartment in the House of LATITIA.Enter EMMA and DR. Crane, by opposite sides.DR. Crane.Is it your summons, Madam, I have the honourof obeying ?EMMA.It is my aunt, Sir, who requested this favourof you, and she will be here immediately. Havethe goodness to be seated.DR. Crane.I prefer the position which allows me mostE E 2420 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.perfectly to contemplate the riches of that beautifulforehead. (Advancing towards her, whileshe retreats.) Music the music of the soul.Colours design comprehensiveness ! O !what a rich mine of charming capacity ! Pray,permit (putting out his hand to raise the hairfrom her forehead, as she has got to the wall, andcan retreat no fartherEMMA (preventing him).Have the goodness, Sir, to stand farther off:it is not my head that my aunt wishes you toexamine.Enter LATITIA, followed by BRIGHTLY andTHORNHILL.LATITIA.I am infinitely obliged to you, Doctor; butpray take no trouble with the head of this younglady, for her education is finished.DR. Crane.Is education ever finished, my good Madam,while one capacity remains unexplored and uncultivated? Our science is still in its infancy,and therefore the world is still in its infancy ;talents wasted time wasted tuition wastedreason wasted.THE MATCH : A COMEDY.BRIGHTLY (aside).Ay, there will be a great saving of reasonwhen it comes into use.THORNHILL.It is a supposed science, Sir, in which yourselfand some other distinguished philosophers placemuch confidence.DR. Crane.A supposed science, Sir ! it is a proved one.Proved by a successive inspection of the skullsof distinguished men, from remote antiquitydown to the present day.THORNHILL.And how have you procured them?DR. Crane.We have procured them, Sir, with much labourand very great expense.BRIGHTLY.You are very liberal, I dare say, to any personwho puts you in possession of a skull that confirmsthe rules of your science.DR. Crane.Certainly, Sir; his reward is great, and deservedlyso.THORNHILL.Yes, Doctor, permission to open the coffins ofE E 3THE MATCH : A COMEDY.the celebrated dead could not be easily obtained ;the reward must be in proportion.BRIGHTLY.And to him who should put you in possessionof a skull apparently adverse to your science,what would be his remuneration ?DR. Crane.The same, Sir ; when we are assured of theskull being genuine, we make no difference.But which proves the truth of the sciencewe have very, very seldom indeed, such askull offered to us.BRIGHTLY.An indubitable proof, indeed, Dr. Crany jI beg your pardon for having insinuated theslightest doubt. And, as you say, what a savingof time and of reason there will be, when, insteadof inquiring the past actions and propensities ofa man, you have only to run over his head withyour ringers, and become acquainted with hischaracter at once.DR. Crane.Exactly so ; and with the ladies' permissionI will tell an anecdote to illustrate the fact.LATITIA.Pray do, Doctor ; we are all fond of anecdotes.THE MATCH I A COMEDY. 428DR. Crane.A man was tried for murder at the Buryassizes; the evidence was deficient, and the juryretired to deliberate. But a clever phrenologist,having crept to the bar and peeped at the prisoner'shead, whose hair happened to be cut veryclose, descried the organs of destruction of suchan appalling size as left no hesitation on thesubject, and he could scarcely repress an exclamation,when the door of the jury-box opened,and the foreman pronounced the prisoner notguilty.THORNHILL.They decided according to the evidence.DR. Crane.Yes, Sir ; and till the laws of evidence arereformed, they cannot do otherwise. (LATITIAwhispers to EMMA, who retires,) But my story isnot yet finished. Six months afterwards theprisoner committed another murder, for whichhe was convicted and hanged. Now, had hebeen hanged for the first offence, he could nothave committed the second.BRIGHTLY.He must be very contentious, indeed, Doctor,who does not admit that.[Re-enter EMMA, lugging in Larry, andfollowed by SIR CAMERON.]E E 4THE MATCH: A COMEDY.EMMA.Come, come, Lawry, make no more wryfaces, but kneel down here, and let that gentlemanexamine your head.Larry.My head ! he will not flog that end of me.[The Doctor sits down, and Larry kneels."}DR. Crane (feeling his head).The organs of excursiveness : this young gentlemanplays truant pretty often.Letitia.O, what a true discovery ! he 5 s always runningabout. Proceed, proceed, if you please.DR. Crane.There is great paucity here in the organs ofattention, and those of application seem to bewanting entirely.LATITIA.O dear ! how true it is ! Your art discovershis nature at once. Pray proceed ; somethingelse may be discovered that will teach us howto manage him.SIR CAMERON.Keep him at home without his dinner till hehas learnt his lesson, and he will do well enough.THE MATCH : A COMEDY.LATITIA.Nay, you are rather too harsh, Sir Cameron.EMMA.But see, the Doctor has discovered somethingbetter now, for his whole countenance is enlightened.DR. Crane.Rejoice, rejoice with me, ladies ! the greatestphilosopher in England is at my feet.OMNES.What is it ! What is it ?DR. Crane.The organs of mathematics, superb, surprising,superlative. (Starting from his seat and skippingabout in ecstasy. Such an organ never yetrose proudly under the pressure of this thumb.Have you not frequently seen him tracing figureson a slate circles, triangles, and such like ?EMMA.Often enough, Doctor; but the figure he commonlytraces is more like a rickety boat with aflag to it than a triangle.LATITIA.Kneel again, La wry ; the Doctor may discoversomething more.DR. Crane.No, I have done ; I know him perfectly now.426 THE MATCH ! A COMEDY.Keep him at home, and get a mathematical tutorfor him immediately.SIR CAMERON.Yes, Doctor, excellent advice : keep the runagateat home, and keep him close to his figuresand his books.Larry (crying).Keep me to my books! I'll run off with thefirst band of gypsies that lights a fire on the common.What is all that examining for ? Youmight have known very well that if I would stickto my books I should read, without all this pother.DR. Crane.But you shall have books so suited to yournature, my boy, that you will delight to stay athome and read them.Larry.Wait till you find such books then ; and I '11stay at home when I like it.\lStxit ^ whimpering and muttering.DR. Crane.Shall I have the honour to examine the otherheads in this good company. (To LATITIA, in avery ingratiating tone. Madam, I know thatall I shall discover here pointing to her headmust be amiable.THE MATCH : A COMEDY.LATITIA.Excuse me, Doctor, I have not courage.DR. Crane (turning to SIR CAMERON).There is no lack of courage here, I presume.Allow me, Sir, to have the honour. What apromising forehead ! those brows, and that finespreading of the bone !LATITIA.Do, Sir Cameron; pray be examined; youwill oblige me so much.DR. Crane (aside).O ! it is Sir Cameron Kunliffe, I find.BRIGHTLY AND THORNHILL (speaking at the sametimelyDo, Kunliffe; you cannot refuse a lady's request.LATITIA (placing a chair).Sit down here, and the Doctor will bend overyou.SIR CAMERON (sitting down).If it must be so, I must ev'n submit.DR. Crane (as he examines his head).Contemplative very contemplative ; likesbooks better than hunting.LATITIA.How true !428 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.BRIGHTLY.Bravo, Doctor !THORNHILL.No wizard could have guessed better.DR. Crane.And here are organs that have been well developed; the theSIR CAMERON.Don't hesitate, Doctor ; name it, I beg,DR. Crane.The organ of inspection.BRIGHTLY.Bravo again, Doctor ! you have a very goodname for it ; and if there be such a thing as theorgan of suspicion, whereabout does it lie ? forI should think the two are pretty near neighbours.DR. Crane.They are ; but except when much developed,we do not call the last by that name j we call itsuggestiveness.BRIGHTLY.Ha, ha, ha ! what nice distinctions ! And, Isuppose, the organ of deceptiveness does not liefar off from either.THE MATCH : A COMEDY.DR. Crane.Excuse me, Sir, as an active quality it standsfar apart ; if you mean by it a passive one, wehave nothing to do with it.THORNHILL.Doctor, you have answered him welLSIR CAMERON.But, my good friends, I must have the organof patience, also, if I am to sit here till you haveasked all your fanciful questions. Don't mindthem, Dr. Crany, but go on your own way.[DR. Crane, after looking at the back of hishead 9 shrinks from it* and covers his eyeswith his hand.~\LATITIA.What is the matter, Doctor ?what is the matter ?Good heavens !DR. Crane.Don't inquire, Madam ; in the prosecution ofour science, we are subject to painful revulsion.May I beg a glass of water ?THORNHILL (having brought him a glass of water,which he drinks in a languid, affected manner.I hope you are better now, and will proceedwith what is so very interesting.430 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.DR. Crane.Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen, I examineno more to-day.SIR CAMERON (rising quickly.We had better take our leave, and your heads(to BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL) may wait forsome future occasion. (Bows to the Ladies,and speaks aside to BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL,as he goes off.} It is only a feint to get rid ofyour questions.[Exit l , followed by BRIGHTLY and THORN-hill.LATITIA.Good heavens ! Dr. Crany, do not keep me inthis agony : what have you discovered on thehead of Sir Cameron ?DR. Crane.Do not inquire, Madam, unless you have somevery particular reason for it. He is not a manto be exasperated. He is not a man to betrifled with. He is not a man to be conciliated.LATITIA.Is he so dangerous ?DR. Crane (looking about.Is there no one near us to listen ?THE MATCH : A COMEDY.LATITIA.No one ; tell us, for heaven's sake : is he mad ?is he dangerous ?DR. Crane.It is fearful to think what he is. He has theorgan of destruction on his head so strong.Oh ! half a dozen bloody murders would notexhaust that fearful capacity of mischief. I fearI distress you, ladies, but my duty compels meto it. Be secret, be secret. I dare not remainhere ; I will go to my lodgings and try to recoverfrom this very sudden shock. [Exit.LATITIA.Dear Emma, what do you think of this ? it isterrible.EMMA.If it be true.LATITIA.Do you doubt it ? You saw how unwilling hewas to speak, and the distress he was in.EMMA.If the distress was real, he will fly from thevicinity of a man so dangerous.LATITIA.Yes, we may judge by that ; let us be secret,and see the result. 1 must retire to my chamber; give me your arm. \ Exeunt.432 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.SCENE IV.A Garden.Enter SIR CAMERON KUNLIFFE, and walks backwardand forward for some time, muttering,before he speaks audibly.SIR CAMERON.It will not do; they must try some otherdevice before they get this into their custody.To make me their confidant with such seemingsimple honesty, and attempt such a trick afterall ! I shall be less easily deceived anothertime.Enter FRANKLIN.FRANKLIN.Walking quarter-deck in this gloomy nook !I have been seeking you every where, all overthe grounds.SIR CAMERON.And having found me, Sir, what is yourpleasure with me ?FRANKLIN.How is this, Sir Cameron ? You seem offendedwith me.THE MATCH I A COMEDY, 433SIR CAMERON.Why do you suppose that I am offended ?FRANKLIN.Your looks tell me so ; I would gladly interpretthem otherwise.SIR CAMERON.And you have learned to watch and interpretlooks, it seems : you are too young a man forthis.FRANKLIN.Why, a dog or an infant will do as much.SIR CAMERON.Fidelity and affection may do any thing.FRANKLIN.If I am destitute of those qualities, I haveharboured too long under your roost (A sullenpause on the part of SIR CAMERON.) Farewell,cousin : I shall visit Miss Vane and her nieceonce more, and then return to town.pSIR CAMERON (calling after him as he is going off).Hark ye, cousin ! you will see Mr. Harding,no doubt, when you are in town ; pray give myrespects to him my very profound respects.Exit FRANKLIN.O, that he had remained as I once knew him ! Ishould have loved him, I should have taken himto my heart. Vain wish ! the world is a schoolVOL. III. F F434< THE MATCH : A COMEDY.of perversion. (Walks to and fro again, andthen stops') Money, thou art truly styled theroot of all evil. I should soon, of my own accord,have declared the blunder of that stupidattorney, and should have behaved liberally andnobly. But now, what can I do ? It were sillinessit were cowardice to concede. No ; Iwill carry the suit through every court in Englandfirst, and live on a crust after all, if lawyerswill leave me as much.Enter THORNHILL.THORNHILL.You intended to ride this morning, but I amsorry I cannot accompany you. I have made anengagement with Miss Vane to try the newly discoveredorgan of her nephew, and will give himhis first lesson of mathematics forthwith.SIR CAMERON.Ha ! put by his aunt under your tuition ?THORNHILL.Why should this surprise you ? it is only anexperiment.SIR CAMERON.True, true ; we are all, now-a-days, busy withexperiments : we shall find out, by and by, somenew way of giving brains to a dunce, dexterity toawkwardness, boldness to timidity, ay, and stabilityto the wavering of a fair lady's will. FaithTHE MATCH I A COMEDY.and truth ! governing and law-making will onlybe matters of experiment. Make verses on thesubject, man, and publish them ; that will beanother experiment.THORNHILL.Nay, how far rhyme without reason will succeed,is no new experiment.SIR CAMERON.But there mil be reason in it, if thou dost notmar it with thy rhyme.Enter BRIGHTLY.THORNHILL.Welcome, Brightly ; you will help me to dealwith this moody man here. Have you any newsto tell that may amuse us ?BRIGHTLY.To be sure I have. The learned phrenologisthas suddenly disappeared from his lodgings ;and Miss Vane and her niece are preparing toset off for town.SIR CAMERON.Who told you this ? It cannot be true : thelast part of the story cannot be true.BRIGHTLY.Yet that is just the part of it that I am mostF F 2THE MATCH ! A COMEDY.assured of; for they are preparing the imperialof her carriage, and horses have been orderedfrom the inn. If you would have her remain,Kunliffe, you had better go speedily to wish hergood-bye.SIR CAMERON.Wish her to the devil !BRIGHTLY.Wishes are free to every one ; but eventhat wish may be expressed in a civil manner.Come away with me, Thornhill : themoody man will deal best with himself; and Ihave some curiosity to see that urchin get hislesson of lines and triangles before they go ; formany half hours and half minds may pass awayere his fair aunt is actually in her carriage.\ Exeunt BRIGHTLY and THORNHILL.SIR CAMERON (alone).Preparing to depart ! No notice given !The phrenologist too disappeared ! Yes, yes ;there is some compact in all this. His suddenillness too, and all those affected grimaces.Can he have persuaded her, that some terriblepropensities are revealed on the surface of mypericranium ; and can she be such a fool as tobelieve him ? Ay, ay ; a rich heiress has falleninto the hands of a cunning knave by a weakerdevice ere now. I must not linger here : I '11THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 437get to the bottom of this villainy before I restO, this world of knaves and fools ! why was mylot cast in it ? But, being so cast, shall I becomequietly the prey of cunning and deceit ?May I not use similar weapons in self-defence?No, no ! let her go : fortune was not my object ;and if 'she is fool enough to believe him, she isworthy of such a mate. Yet it makes me distracted.Oh, this perversity of mind ! She isfickle, she is foolish, she is fanciful, she is capricious,and her very faults endear her to myunaccountable feelings. He shall not haveher. His filthy fingers sprawling over my headfor such a villainous purpose : it is abominable.If deceit will not serve me, force shall.Enter Housekeeper, with a bundle in her hand.What brings you here, Marmalade ?HOUSEKEEPER.La, Sir ! nothing bad, I 'm sure. If she waitsat the back garden gate, it is for no bad purpose,I J m sure.SIR CAMERON.Who waits there ? Tell me plainly, and infew words.HOUSEKEEPER.Lord a* mercy ! why should I make manywords about it ? She has done it very badly,F F 3438 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.and I don't care who knows what a miserablemantua-maker she is.SIR CAMERON.Mantua-maker ! What does all this nonsensemean ?HOUSEKEEPER.It is nonsense, for certain ; and I says to her,says I, " What does it signify making the gowntoo long, only for to save the cutting of the stuffwhen I cannot take one step before me, withouttrampling it in the dirt?"SIR CAMERON.Is the gown here ?HOUSEKEEPER.Yes, Sir Cameron ; and she is waiting at theback gate to take it to be altered*SIR CAMERON.Ha ! let me see it.HOUSEKEEPER (taking a gown from the bundle).I hope you like the colour, Sir : it is gay, butgenteel. I never buys nothing that is vulgar.SIR CAMERON.Why should you, Marmalade ? People onlybuy what they want. And it is too long foryou ?THE MATCH ! A COMEDY. 439HOUSEKEEPER (shaking it out).A mort too long. The giantess that beats thedrum at Middleton fair might wear it and befitted.SIR CAMERON.Give it to me.HOUSEKEEPER.To you, Sir Cameron !SIR CAMERON.Ask no questions. The gown is mine : carryit back to your own room, and I '11 follow youimmediately. [Exit Housekeeper.] Yes, thiswill do ; she will provide me with shawl andbonnet besides, and I '11 be a match for thiscursed philosopher. [Exit.SCENE V.A Parlour in the House of LATITIA, and theGlass Door of a small Conservatory seen at oneside, with a Curtain drawn behind it.Enter FLOUNCE, who goes to the door, which sheopens in silence, giving a key to somebody inthe inside.FLOUNCE (alone).It was well I found the coast clear, and haveF F 4440 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.given him the key : he may now keep concealed,or come out as he pleases.Enter LATITIA.LATITIA.What wert thou doing in the conservatory ?Hast thou left any odd matters there ? But Ihave changed my mind again, and shan't set offtill the evening ; so you need not be in a hurry.FLOUNCE.I never am, Ma'am ; for the more I hurrymyself to obey your directions, the surer italways proves to be of no use.LATITIA.Thou art rather sharp, methinks : somethinghas ruffled thee. What strange awkward rantingwas that I saw thee speaking to a fewminutes since in the lane ?FLOUNCE.She did not tell me her name, Ma'am ; and Ihad too little curiosity to ask it. I never speakswhen there is no reason for it.LATITIA.A good rule, Flounce, which thou observes,with some exceptions. (Looking off the StageBut look yonder, a man coming in a strangeTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 441stealing manner along the passage : what bringshim here?FLOUNCE (turning round and looking.No good, I 'm sure ; for it is Doctor Crany :I know him by his legs.Enter DR. Crane, with his shoulders wrapt in acloak, and holding his hat before his face.LATITIA.Is it possible, my good Sir? I thought youwere ere now many miles hence, that you consideredyour life as in danger.DR. Crane.I will account for my being here ; but to yourears alone can I explain it.LATITIA (after motioning to FLOUNCE, who goesoffhandnow, Sir, if you please.DR. Crane.That I considered my life in danger is true.Ay, too truly in danger from the offence Imust have given to a man with such destructivepropensities.LATITIA.And why did you venture nevertheless toremain ?THE MATCH : A COMEDY.DR. Crane.Ah, dearest Miss Vane! can you ask thatquestion ? do not my eyes my fond languishingeyes answer it plainly, and tell you that Icould not think of saving my own life when thesafety of one whom I love far better than myselfis concerned.LATITIA.You astonish me.DR. Crane,.Let me entreat you to remain no longer inthe neighbourhood of such a dangerous person.I tremble to think of it.LATITIA.What can I do ?DR. Crane.Fly with me this very night. Fly with a manwho loves, who adores you, whose whole lifeshall be devoted to your happiness. (Kneels ather feet')LATITIA (recoiling from him indignantly*Off, base deceiver ! you have betrayed yourself; and thank Heaven you have! I see yourpurpose now : you have slandered a worthy gentlemanfor your own selfish ends.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 443DR. Crane.Slandered, Madam ! do you believe that theorgans of murder are not really on his head ?LATITIA.No, Sir ; neither that nor any bad thing do Ibelieve of him.DR. Crane.Have patience for a moment : I cannot sufferyou to run upon your own destruction. I imploreI beseech you for your own safety ! my chaiseis at the gate : if the present opportunity isneglected (Catching hold of her gown.)LATITIA.Unhand me ; let me go, or I will alarm thehouse, and bring some one to my assistance.[SiR CAMERON KUNLIFFE, bursting from theconservatory in woman's dress, shows himself,but hesitates to advancesLATITIA.O come, come, good Madam, come nearer.DR. Crane (turning round and perceiving SIRCAMERON).Good Madam ! and what is your pleasurehere, good Madam?SIR CAMERON (in a feigned voice).My pleasure is that you release that lady'shand from your unworthy hold : touch but the444 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.tip of her finger or the hem of her garment, ifyou dare; I will not permit the smallest breachof decorum in my presence.DR. Crane.You are a lady of an extreme delicacy, undoubtedly.SIR CAMERON.Yes, Sir, of a delicacy which must not beoffended.DR. Crane.I plainly perceive, Madam, that yours is entirelyof that description. I have the honour toobey your commands. (Stepping backward andbowing low.)SIR CAMERON (advancing on him with a deep,awkward curtsey.You are extremely polite, Sir; 1 have thehonour to thank you for your ready obedience.DR. Crane (stepping farther back and bowing asbefore).My obedience to you, Madam, expresses mydeference to the sex of whom you are the worthyrepresentative.SIR CAMERON (advancing as the other retreats,and curtseying again).Say rather, that part of the sex to whomTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 445gallants like yourself pay their readiest obedience.DR. Crane (still retreating.As you please, Madam, and I wish you goodday.SIR CAMERON.No, no, Sir, your company is too agreeable ; Iwill not part with it so soon.(Taking hold of his collar, and dragging himback to the front of the StageDR. Crane.Devil take her! she has the grasp and thepower of a moss-trooper.Enter BRIGHTLY.BRIGHTLY.What uncouth sight is here ; is there masqueradingin the house ?LATITIA.Indeed, there is some appearance of it. Thislady has come unexpectedly, and has done meunspeakable service ; for which I know not howto thank her enough.BRIGHTLY.But she steals away and avoids your acknowledgments.446 THE MATCH ! A COMEDY.LATITIA.My good Madam, you will not leave me sosoon.SIR CAMERON.Permit me to go out to the open air ; I amfaint and languid.BRIGHTLY.You had better put off your head-gear ; thatlarge bonnet, with so much hooding and mufflingunder it, would exclude the free air from yourface, though you were on the top of MountArarat. Permit me to assist in removing it.(SiR CAMERON puts out his hand to preventBRIGHTLY, and says something indistinctly Youspeak with such a soft, pretty voice, lady, thatI don't know one word you say.LATITIA (aside to BRIGHTLY).She is observant of forms, and will not havea gentleman's assistance. (Aloud to SIR Cameron.)Let me take off your bonnet, if I canreach it. (SiR CAMERON stoops, and she removesthe bonnets And this handkerchief, too (takesoff a handkerchief), and a great cap besides.What 's under all this !SIR CAMERON (calling out in his own voice afterDR. Crane, who is about to steal away).Look to Dr. Crany there, don't let him stealoff.THE MATCH : A Comedy. 447OMNES.Sir Cameron, Sir Cameron disguised !BRIGHTLY (ft) SlR CAMERON).How had you patience to endure all thesetrammels ?SIR CAMERON.I have been too fortunate under them to feelimpatient, but help me, an thou wilt, to get rid ofthem now. (Putting off his female attire, assistedty BRIGHTLY.) But where is the doctor? don'tlet him steal off.DR. Crane (advancing).No, Sir ; you need have no apprehension thatI shall steal off, as you are pleased to term it.I am too bold in my conscious innocence, and inthe principles of an incomparable science, toshrink from defending both. Have I not alreadygiven proofs of its truth and usefulness in thediscovery I have made of the talents of that unmanageableboy ? who may now be cultivated,from a mere vacant idler, into one of the deepestphilosophers of the age.Enter THORNHILL.BRIGHTLY.Here comes his tutor, very opportunely, tocorroborate your assertions, Dr. Crany. (Jb448 THE MATCH : A COMEDY,THORNHILL.) And pray what report have you tomake of the wonderful capacity of your pupil?THORNHILL.I have little to say on that subject.[A book is thrown after him from without."}BRIGHTLY.And even that little need not be said. (Pickingup the book.'} This dishonoured Euclid tellsthe tale plainly enough.Enter Larry (chased by FLOUNCE).FLOUNCE.Come away to your room, Master Lawry : Ofy, fy ! I beg pardon, Madam, for coming afterhim, but he gets worser and worser than ever,since that heathenish book there was put intohis hands.DR. Crane.I cannot suffer this defamation. Come here,young Sir, and I will show the organs of mathematicson your head of a most prominent andpromising size. (To FLOUNCE.) Pray make himstand still one moment, if you please. (FLOUNCEtakes hold of Larry, while the Doctor parts hishair with harbingers, and shews a lump'] There,gentlemen, you see it with your own eyes ; amore superb organ never met the sight or thetouch of a phrenologist.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 449FLOUNCE.Lord help you, doctor! that is the lump thatcame but the other day, after a blow from thebat-ball : two pennyworth of the oil of rosemarywould send it away in no time at all.DR. .Crane.Well, well ; there is no contending with prejudice,and the sooner I take my leave thebetter; if I am not to be considered as underconstraint. (Bowing affectedly to SIR CAMERON.)SIR CAMERON.You have my good leave now, learned Sir, togo where you please.BRIGHTLY (to DR. Crane as he retires.But won't you wait for a guard of protection,good Doctor, being in the neighbourhood of sotremendous an enemy ?\ Exit DR. Crane, bowing on either handas he retires.LATITIA.Nay, Mr. Brightly, let him off peaceably withno more taunts : I believe he has great faith inhis art, though he abuses it for his own basepurposes. I thank you all : to you, Mr. Thorn-hill,I am greatly obliged. And what shall I donow with this unruly boy? Why was I leftguardian to such a creature ?VOL. III. G G450 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.Larry.Never trouble your head about me, aunt ; Ican handle a rope and climb to the mast-head,and look over a hundred leagues of ocean, andvisit far-off shores, as well as any boy.LATITIA (kissing him).My dear creature, my dear boy ! that were ahard life for thee ; thou art too good for this.Larry.Not a whit, not a whit ! Am I too good forwhat Lord Nelson has done before me ?exit skipping and bounding lightly.Letitia.And now, credulous dupe as I have been,will you pardon me, Sir Cameron ?BRIGHTLY (preventing SIR CAMERON fromspeaking.Allow me to answer for you, Kunliffe, or youwill mar your present advantage. (To MissVANE.) You cannot surely expect, my dearlady, to be let off with impunity. Say your ownself what amends he ought to have : pronounceyour own punishment, and it shall be immediatelyinflicted.LATITIA.How provoking you are, Mr. Brightly ! howTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 451can I pronounce or think of any thing immediately? Do you determine it.BRIGHTLY.You give me leave to do so, on the spot, then ?LATITIA.no, no ! not immediately,BRIGHTLY.1 beg pardon, Madam, immediately is a positionyou dislike : I shall take time to consider ;and, at your tea-table, in the evening, it shall bepronounced.SIR CAMERON.Round which, I presume, we are all invited toassemble.LATITIA.Most assuredly ; 1 request all present to domethat honour. Excuse me now ; I must retire: the thoughts of my own folly make mequite bewildered and unwell. [Exit.BRIGHTLY.She must have a bad time of it, I think, if shesicken on every new proof of her folly. (Halfaside to THORNHILL).SIR CAMERON (overhearing and turning to himsharply).The caustic of thy tongue is intolerable : herG G 2THE MATCH t A COMEDY.worst fault is indecision ; and if she were wiserthan she is, who would like her the better for it ?BRIGHTLY.Not you, I can plainly perceive. (Aside toTHORNHILL, as SIR CAMERON hurries off. Thosewords augur well, methinks, for my paddock.THORNHILL.Don't bespeak your fruit trees, however, tillyou have won it. But let us follow him andlearn all that happened while he was under thatabsurd metamorphosis.BRIGHTLY.Ay, let us do so ; I have a great curiosity toknow every thing about it. Who would havethought of his dignity compromised under amantua and petticoat ?[Exeunt after SIR CAMERON.THE MATCH I A COMEDY. 453ACT III.SCENE I. A small Parlour in the HouseTitian ; enter EMMA, and walks about thoughtfully; presently enter FRANKLIN by anotherdoor.FRANKLIN.How fortunate I am to find you here !EMMA.How so ? you seem agitated.FRANKLIN.I have been sculking about the premises for achance of your coming into the garden, that Imight see you before I set off.EMMA.Set off! where are you going ?FRANKLIN.Anywhere, for I cannot stay longer here.EMMA.What is the matter ? Cannot stay ?FRANKLIN.I cannot stay a moment longer in Sir Cameron'shouse, and I don't like to go to another,G G 3454 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.which might give him pain. He has got astrange crotchet into his head about some keyor other, and I don't know what besides, and hehas spoken to me very unkindly.EMMA.I am sorry for it. But it will soon pass away.Those who are naturally suspicious are oftenunkind, and repent it afterwards.FRANKLIN.And why should I linger here, only tostrengthen what is but too strong already anadversary, which for your sake, dearest Emma,as well as my own, ought to be kept in check.Blessings on you, my sweet and generous friend !Only say that I may again visit you when youcome to town with your aunt, and I will takemy leave as cheerly as I may.EMMA.Surely you won't go now, when we are allassembling round my aunt's tea-table, on mattersof great importance, and you are one of the invited,you know. Be as testy with Sir Cameronas you please, but surely she deserves morecourtesy at your hands.FRANKLIN.And shall have it too, if it be a courtesy whichshe will be pleased with, and her little niece doesnot forbid. I think I hear them assembling jTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 455they are merry without. Pol, pol ! I care notafig for Sir Cameron.EMMA.You will join us by and by ; I must go nowto be useful.FRANKLIN.And I '11 be useful too. I J ll pour out the teafor you, Emma. That little delicate hand hasnot strength enough to lift a heavy teapot overallthe circle of cups and saucers that wait forthe fragrant stream from its bountiful spout.Care for Sir Cameron ! No j I care for nobodynow.EMMA.You will join us by and by, then ?FRANKLIN.Nay, I will go with you now, and lead you inboldly before them all. (Offering his arm.)EMMA.You are bold, of a sudden.FRANKLIN.I am bold or timid at any time, as the influenceof my little governess inspires.[Exeunt, and as they go off, FLOUNCE entersby the opposite side with a great nosegayof flowers in her hand, and stands gazingafter them, before she speaks"]G G 4456 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.FLOUNCE.Ay, poor young things ! you must have patience: matrimony is a very pretty thing, but itwill not knock at your door at this bout.Enter Butler, stealing behind her.BUTLER.And at whose door will it knock at this bout ?FLOUNCE.What is that to you, Mr. Long-ears ; you mayguess.BUTLER.One, mayhap, at whose door it will not haveto wait : ready entrance to the long expectedmay be depended upon.FLOUNCE.Long expected ?BUTLER.Yes ; and how long, Mrs. Flounce ? Someten or fifteen years, or thereabouts ?FLOUNCE.Say fifteen, an you will j what is that to mymistress ?BUTLER.O, it is your mistress you are thinking of.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 457FLOUNCE.And who was it you were thinking of, 1 shouldbe glad to know ?BUTLER.Not so very glad, neither, were I to answerof the mistress's maid." Well, well; don'tlook so grave. It is your mistress's door, then,that matrimony is now knocking at ; but whyshould you be so pert upon it ?FLOUNCE.I am forgetting my flowers.BUTLER.I '11 arrange them for you, and carry them tothe drawing-room presently. In the mean time,tell me why you are so pert upon this marriage ;it won't mend the profits of your place. (Takingthe nosegay from her, and arranging them in apot on a side-table while she speaks")FLOUNCE.No ; but it may prevent my profits from beingreduced. If she would remain as she is, withher lovers, and her confidants, and her flatterers,and her concerts, and her parties, and all propersuitable things that a rich lady ought to have, Ishould ask no better ; but if she takes it into herhead that a lady of thirty should give up gaydressing, and apply to her learning, and becomea book-fancier, and a blue-stocking virtuoso,458 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.what *s to become of my perquisites ? It wouldmake your hair stand on end, to hear all thenonsense I have heard about them there books.BUTLER.My hair makes no stirring at all when nonsenseis spoken. It would have a restless timeof it else in this family > so pray tell me.FLOUNCE.And, will you believe it whole shelves filledwith great volume ; and some of them fiendtake them ! with as much silk, gold, and vellumon their backs as would buy a gentlewoman agood gown.BUTLER.That will take nothing away from you, will it ?FLOUNCE.The man 's an ass altogether ! If my ladygives twelve guineas for the binding of an album,as they call it, and hundreds for prints, and oldstones, and rubbish, and rattletraps beside, whatgood will that do to me ? when, I dare say, she'llscrub off her wardrobe, and go about at last, asmy Lady Blackwater does, in a gown that ourcurate's wife would scarcely put on when shegoes visiting amongst all the poor sickly bodiesof the parish. I knows very well how it wouldbe ; so I hope marriage is now really at hand, tosave us from worse.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 459BUTLER.I hope so, too, Mrs. Flounce ; for I fear thefine books might injure the cellar as well as thewardrobe.FLOUNCE.O never fear that ; she would have poets andancient philosophers coming about her in plenty,and they like a good dinner and good wine aswell as any body ; much better than lovers do, Itrow. But we must gossip no longer here ; youhave set out the flowers beautifully; so takethem to the drawing-room directly.[Exeunt severally, Butler carrying theFlowers.SCENE II.A narrow Passage running along the front ofthe Stage.Enter Footman and a Boy, crossing and jostlingone another.FOOTMAN.Stupid oaf! what makes you run so?BOY.The gentlefolks want more bread and butter.460 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.FOOTMAN.Deuce choke them ! is all that was providedfor them done already ? and Master La wry goneto bed too. I hope they want nothing else ?BOY.Oh, but they do ! they wants more cream andmore cups and saucers.FOOTMAN.The devil they do ! they will never have donewanting. (Bell rings*) And they are as impatientas the Grand Turk : make haste, you oaf.[Giving Boy a kick as they hurry off andexeunt.SCENE III.The Scene opens, and discovers SIR CAMERONKUNLIFFE, BRIGHTLY, THORNHILL, LATITIA,EMMA, and FRANKLIN beside her, occasionallyemployed in pouring out tea, 8c., seated rounda Table, while laughing and talking is heard asthe Scene opens.SIR CAMERON.Ha, ha, ha ! and all that passes upon you, mygood Thornhill, for disinterested generosity.THORNHILL.And what should it pass for ?THE MATCH I A COMEDY. 461SIR CAMERON.Some expectation of a legacy, perhaps, fromthat old Lady Bountiful of the neighbourhood,who would like to enrich such an amiable philanthropist.THORNHILL.But that old lady was dead, KunlifFe.SIR CAMERON.O what a loss to the topers at the Cat andBagpipes ! for they will now be obliged to supporttheir own families and drink less.EMMA.Don't be so hard-hearted, Sir Cameron.BRIGHTLY.You must make some allowance for one whoholds a justice-court every Friday, and has all themisdoings of the parish brought before him.THORNHILL.Where, thanks to his natural gift of suggestiveness,he detects as much knavery, and dispensesas prompt justice, as the sage governorof Barataria.EMMA.And there is a droll look on his face at thismoment, as if some curious case had been latelybefore him.462 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.LATITIA.Is it so, Sir Cameron ? Do tell us about it.SIR CAMERON.As it proves the ingenuity of your sex and thesimplicity of ours, you shall have it. A countrygirl appeared in court the other day, who wouldoblige the booby son of a small farmer to marryher, because, on his account, she had refused theaddresses of a very advantageous match.EMMA.And how did she prove that ?SIR CAMERON.By calling upon the booby to declare that hehad listened at the window of an old malt-house,and heard the shrill voice of his mistress inearnest discourse within with a gruff voiced man,whose offers of marriage she refused very saucily,on account of her attachment to himself, poorsimpleton.BRIGHTLY.And whether do you call him simpleton, forbelieving his own ears, or for giving evidenceagainst himself?SIR CAMERON.For the first, assuredly. What one believes asafool, one is bound to declare as an honest man.And he would have smarted for his honesty, too,THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 463had it not been for the accidental intrusion of aplough-boy, who at the moment slipt softly intothe said malt-house, and discovered, that thoughtwo voices had issued from the house, there wasbut one person within.BRIGHTLY.Clever hussy ! she deserved a husband for thetrick.SIR CAMERON,And she should have had one suited to hermerits, could I have transferred to her a smart-lookingfellow, who had eloped with the prettiestgirl in the parish, on the evening of her ,just to take her out of his friend thebridegroom's hands, as he gallantly stated it.LATITIA.I think he was mated very suitably with thewoman he eloped with. The bridegroom waswell quit of her ; she was not worth contendingfor.SIR CAMERON.Yes ; but it was not for her they contended.No, truly ; the matter to be decided was,whether the man who had lost the bride, or theman who had got her, should pay the expensesof the wedding dinner.LATITIA.Oh, the worldly creatures !464 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.EMMA.But to return to the old subject of fashions,Mr. Brightly, which was interrupted by Mr.Thornhill's admiration of his friend's liberality.BRIGHTLY.Well, then, I ventured to say something,didn't I, against the short bunchy skirts andwide bladder-sleeves of the present belles, whoseem to make a mock of their grandmothers foraiming to appear tall and slender.EMMA.But their heads are dressed more simply, andtheir characters are altogether more unaffectedand natural and unpretending.BRIGHTLY.Not a jot ; such a woman as fourscore yearsago would have been seen at a public sale witha wide-flounced farthingale and a lapdog underher arm, bidding for a China mandarin, is nowto be met with at a morning lecture, with penciland note-book in hand, losing two words of thelearned professor's discourse for every one shewrites down./LATITIA.Nay, fie upon you for a discourteous knight !Do you come here on the summons of a lady toattend her tea-table, for the express purpose ofcasting ridicule on the whole sex ?THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 465BRIGHTLY.I thank you, Miss Vane, for reminding me ofthe purpose which brought me here ; and themore so, that it is to hold judgment on yourself.But it cannot be done in this informal lazy manner; let everybody stand round me, that I mayopen the proceedings with official decorum.\ They all rise from the tea-table and arrangethemselves on the front of the StagesLATITIA VANE, Spinster, is called for.LATITIA.Present in the court.BRIGHTLY.You compeer before me, charged with highcrimes and misdemeanors committed against theKing's liege subject, Sir Cameron Kunliffe, Baronet,tending to the great injury of his character,to the impeding his usefulness in the country,and to the destroying of his influence in socialsociety.LATITIA (holding up her. hands).What a wicked creature I must be ! But howdo you make 'it to appear against me, my LordJustice ?BRIGHTLY.It is proved against the defendant, that on theVOL. III. H H466 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.10th day of September of the present year, shesent for a certain phrenologist to her house, pretendingto know the dispositions of men by certainmarks on the surfaces of their pericranium,and did wittingly and with malice prepense persuadethe said Sir Cameron to submit his headto be examined by the said phrenologist.LATITIA.Wittingly, but not maliciously : had not foolishlybeen a better word ?EMMA.Surely you will change the word so far infavour of the defendant.BRIGHTLY.Not a bit : she wittingly entreated. him to runthe risk, knowing that there was risk, of losingthat which, we are told by high authority, isbetter than gold. Who will live in amity andconfidence with one who is scientifically provedto be predisposed to deeds of cruelty and destruction? Who will be connected with such aone? who will give his daughter in marriageto such a one ? who will accept of such a predisposedruffian for her husband?LATITIA.But it is all set right now, and has no evilconsciences.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 46?BRIGHTLY.I beg your pardon, lady : an evil report andits refutation are no fair match for one another.The first runs far a-field with the pace of a racehorse,the second follows after like a poor cudgelleddonkey, and never clears a fourth partof the ground.EMMA.You must own, my dear aunt, that this makesagainst you. I fear you will be obliged to standin the church porch, with a sheet about you, fordefamation.SIR CAMERON.That would spread evil report the further.BRIGHTLY.The prosecutor speaks reason ; that would beno compensation at all for the injury, and he willnot receive it as such.LATITIA.What can be done, then, Mr. Justice ?BRIGHTLY.When the character of a bachelor is so injuredby any woman, that he is, or may be, preventedfrom finding a suitable mate to solace his days,she is bound in honour bound to marry himherself.THORNHILL.A reparation, I believe, which they are geneH 2468 THE MATCH : A Comedy.rally willing to make : I beg pardon ; I mean, inmostcases.LATITIA.O dear, dear ! how wide you stray from thepurpose !BRIGHTLY.That is as it may afterwards appear, lady,THORNHILL.He has a sinister intention, Miss Vane.BRIGHTLY.Keep silence in Court, I say. The sinisterintention is on his side, who, for his own interest,would prevent you from being just. But Iwould not press the matter upon you too severely; the reparation shall be left to your owndiscretion ; but you must decide upon what it isto be, before the Court break up.LATITIA.Decide so soon I Will not tomorrow do, orthe day after tomorrow, or the day after that ?BRIGHTLY,No, neither tomorrow nor any following morrowwill do; you must pronounce your ownsentence before the Court break up.THE MATCH : A COMEDY, 469LATITIA (going about in a bewildered manner.O, dear ! what can I do ? what can I say ?how shall I decide ?BRIGHTLY.Shall I decide for you, Madam ?LATITIA.Do, do ! good Brightly, and don't tease me anymore.BRIGHTLY.And do you promise to abide by my judgment?LATITIA.I do promise : and you will be merciful.BRIGHTLY.Well, then, be it known to all present, thatinasmuch as you have nefariously injured theworthy baronet aforesaid, and it is your own indecisionthat prevents you from making him justreparation for the same, I adjudge that you, fromthis very time (looking at his watch), shall remainunder his command for five minutes and a halfbound afterwards faithfully to fulfil what in thisgiven time he shall decree.LATITIA.Let it be so; five minutes will soon.be over,and he will be merciful.H H 3470 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.SIR CAMERON.I fear you will not think so, Madam ; for Icommand you to marry me tomorrow morning,before eleven of the clock.Letitia.O, shocking haste and precipitation ! Noteven a few months allowed to prepare my !SIR CAMERON.Not one hour beyond what I have said.LATITIA.How peremptory you are !EMMA.The best quality, my dear aunt, that your husbandcan have to match with your indecision.LATITIA.What ! are you against me, child ? It is notfor your interest.EMMA.It is for my interest if it be for yours ; and letme put this hand, which has always been kind tome,into a stronger hand, that will bear the ruleover it in kindness. (Putting the hand of letitiainto that of SIR CAMERON, who receives itwith gallant respectsTHE MATCH : A COMEDY. 471SIR CAMERON.Thanks, gentle Emma ; to find a friend inthee is more than I expected.EMMA.Ah, Sir Cameron ! but you should have expectedit.THORNHILL.If he could, without proof, have supposed anyoneto be good, it should have been this younglady.BRIGHTLY.But he is too wise for that.SIR CAMERON.Spare me, spare me ; do not mar my presenthappiness by making me feel how little I deserveit.FRANKLIN (advancing from the rear to SIRCAMERON).And may I be permitted to offer, perhaps,unexpected congratulations ?SIR CAMERON.Yes, thou mayest, and also advise and devisewith my solicitor as much as thou wilt. Thatmatter shall be no longer an annoyance to me.FRANKLIN.What matter can you possibly allude to ?H H 4472 THE MATCH : A COMEDY.SIR CAMERON.O ! you are quite ignorant of a certain distortedtestament, the defects of which, by themanagement of a clever attorney, might beturned to thine own advantage : thou pleasesignorant, very ignorant of all this.BRIGHTLY.Ha, ha, ha! he will be an impudent fellowindeed if he, before my face, plead ignorant ofthat which he told me without reserve somethree or four years ago.SIR CAMERON.Is it possible ? did Hardy betray me then ?(To FRANKLIN.)FRANKLIN.No ; but his clerk employed to copy the deedrepeated to me soon after the very passage, wordfor word.SIR CAMERON.And thou hast known it all this while, andnever sought to take advantage of it till lately ?FRANKLIN.And you have known me all this while, nay,from my childhood, Sir Cameron, and can yetsuppose that I should wish to wrest from you bylawwhat natural justice and the intentions ofthe testator fairly bestow upon you.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 4/?3SIR CAMERON (covering his face with his hands).Say whatever you please to me : I am humbledto the dust ; my infirmity is crime.BRIGHTLY.Since you invite us to say whatever we please,I say that your crime has been punished already;for you have been oftener cheated and duped byyour own supposed knowledge and your distrustof mankind, than the veriest flaxen-headed simpletonin the parish.SIR CAMERON.Hold, hold, Brightly ; I will not succumb tothee so meekly. If you have any candour, youmust acknowledge I had cause for suspicion.Any man would have been startled at the disappearanceof that key after the mischievousurchin had been so strangely secreted in mylibrary.BRIGHTLY.Yes, a very strong circumstance, indeed, tojustify all this disturbance. Did not you giveme a key to let myself out by the small gate ofyour shrubbery ?SIR CAMERON.And what has that to do with it ?BRIGHTLY.It would not open the shrubbery-gate, and I4fJ4f THE MATCH : A COMEDY.went round another way. (Giving him a key.}But, perhaps, it might have opened your strongbox. I should have returned it to you sooner,had I not learned from your locksmith, that hehad already changed the lock of that most secretrepository.SIR CAMERON.The very key, I must, with confusion, acknowledge.Is it possible that I should have takenthe wrong key from that corner, and thathaving given a key to you should have entirelyescaped my memory ?BRIGHTLY.Every thing is possible, when the imaginationof a suspicious man is concerned.SIR CAMERON.I am beaten to the ground! I am lower inmy own opinion than my worst enemy wouldhave placed me, or even (pointing to BRIGHTLY)this good-natured friend. Dear Letitia, I amsensible of my infirmity ; I am incapable of beinga good husband to any woman ; and though ithas long been my ambition to be yours, I remityour engagement and restore you to your liberty.BRIGHTLY (eagerly.No, no, no ! she is too generous to desert youin your hour of humiliation.THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 4TJ5THORNHILL.Brightly, you are acting unfairly. You haveno right to suggest to the lady what she oughtto do.BRIGHTLY.I don't act unfairly : we were each left atliberty to influence.LATITIA.What is the meaning of this altercation ?BRIGHTLY.I care not for your paddock.THORNHILL.Nor I for your picture ; but let each of thembe lost or won fairly.LATITIA.What, in the name of wonder, are they disputingabout? (To SIR CAMERON.)SIR CAMERON.There is a bet in the case, I dare say.BRIGHTLY (to SlR CAMERON).And if there be, your searching fancy willfind it out.SIR CAMERON.It concerns my marriage with Miss Vane 5THE MATCH I A COMEDY.tricky fellows ! I wish we could contrive tomake, you both lose.THORNHILL.That is impossible ; but at least let us wait tillit be absolutely decided. The lady may accepther proffered liberty, or may change her mind,before eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.Letitia.Ay, now is my turn to have my infirmity exposed.But it only convinces me that I am amore suitable match for Sir Cameron, who in hisstate of humiliation, as he calls it, will learn tohave patience with me ; and I restore to him thehand he has released.BRIGHTLY.Bravo ! they are an equal match, and a happyunion may it prove.SIR CAMERON (tO FRANKLIN).Come hither, cousin. You look less happythan I could wish ; and happy as I now am, Iwish to make myself a little happier. I havesaid that the thoughts of that bungled deed shallannoy me no more. I cannot part with thatsmall estate upon which my mansion is placed,with its park and ancient oaks around it.But the full value of the whole you shall receivefrom me, as soon as proper deeds of conveyance,THE MATCH : A COMEDY. 477in which there shall be no mistakes, can be* madeout.FRANKLIN.It is too much, cousin ; I cannot I cannotreceive it*Sill CAMERON.Fie upon thee, man ! hast thou an infirmity,too, the infirmity of pride ? It will promotemy happiness : and it may enable thee, as soonas thou art in the receipt of ninety poundsa year from thy profession, to promote thineown, if thou canst prevail upon some good girlto unite her fate with thine. Dost thou wotof such a one ? perhaps thou dost.THORNHILL (aside, eyeing FRANKLIN and EMMAanxiously.Now is the critical moment to strengthen myhopes or my fear.[FRANKLIN approaches EMMA timidly, 'whomotions him away, and he obeys, whileTHORNHILL, with his face brightening up,goes close to her on the other side"]THORNHILL (aSlde\I see how it is, charming Emma ; and may itnot encourage me to hope that the engagingchild from whose innocent head I cut off this fair478 THE MATCH I A COMEDY.curl (taking from his breast a paper some tenyears ago, will now, in her womanhood, showme some favour?BRIGHTLY (overhearing him).You have a very soft voice, Thornhill, but myears are quick. What is the meaning of thesegentle approaches ?EMMA (to THORNHILL).Can my memory be so treacherous ? Havewe ever met before last spring, when I saw youin Brook Street?THORNHILL.Yes, gentle creature, I saw you at your uncle'sin Cheshire, where you were my harmless playfellow,and I became, by your own consent,possessed of this cherished token, (turning toFRANKLIN, who goes up to him sternly -,) whichshall be taken from me only with my life.BRIGHTLY.Thornhill, thou art making a fool of thyself.The pretty child who was thy playfellow, andon whose head that curl once grew, bears indeedthe same name with this lady, is her cousin, andhas a strong resemblance to her, but is, I believe,at this moment in Rutlandshire, collecting prettypoesies for her album. Send her one of thyTHE MATCH : A COMEDY.sonnets, and thou wilt stand in as great favourwith her as ever.THORNHILL.Why did you not tell me this before ?BRIGHTLY.How should I divine all the romantic fanciesof thy brain ?SIR CAMERON.I think his patience in giving that restlessurchin lessons from Euclid, might have led youpretty near the truth.BRIGHTLY.To be sure it might have done so, had Natureendowed me with the organ of suggestiveness.SIR CAMERON.Say no more upon that subject, I beseech you.Any blackguard may henceforth pull my watchfrom its pocket, and I will only suppose that hewants, as the crowd presses round, to see whatit is o'clock, poor youth !Letitia.And I will be so constant to my purpose, thatthe most methodical lady of a parish districtmay make an appointment with me, and be sureof my being at her door, as her household clockgives warning for the hour. I will not even480 THE MATCH '. A COMEDY.change the colour of a scarf or a top-knot, havingonce said to my milliner, " It shall be this."BRIGHTLY.But how long will it be ere you have said so,when all the other colours of the rainbow arelaid in array before you ?Letitia.No more sarcastic insinuations ! Sir Cameronand I will endeavour to reform ; and agood beginning is equal to half the task, whenthere are Kind friends to give encouragement.[The Curtain drops.APPENDIX.VOL. HI.1 IAPPENDIX.THE TRAGEDY ON WITCHCRAFT.THE subject of this drama was first suggested to me byreading that very curious and original scene in the " Bride ofLammermuir," when the old women, after the division oflargess given at a funeral, are so dissatisfied with their shareof it, and wonder that the devil, who helps other wicked peoplewilling to serve him, has never bestowed any power orbenefits upon them. It appeared to me that the gifted authorhad come within one step of accounting for a very extraordinarycircumstance, frequently recorded in trials for thecrime of witchcraft, the accused themselves acknowledgingthe crime, and their having had actual intercourse withSatan and other wicked spirits. This was a confession thatwas sure to be followed by a cruel death, and the conjecturesproduced to account for it have never been satisfactory. Ithas been supposed that, previously to their trial, from crueltreatment and misery of every kind, they desired to have anend put to their wretched existence, even at the stake. Butthis is surely not very probable ; for, if a fair trial by unprejudicedjudges acquitted them of the crime, a circumstancenot likely to happen, it was still in their power toget rid of life in the first river or pond deep enough todrown them, or by some other means less dreadful than fireand faggot. Neither can it be supposed that such confessions,at least all of them, were made in a state of delirium. It ismore reasonable to suppose that some of those unhappycreatures, from the state of their minds, and from real cri1 2484 APPENDIX.substances leading to it, actually did believe themselves tohave had intercourse with the Evil One, consequently to bewitches; and the design of the play is to illustrate this curiouscondition of nature. Soon after the publication of thatpowerful and pathetic novel, I mentioned my thoughts uponthe subject to Sir Scott, and urged him to pursue thenew path he had just entered into. That I was unsuccessfulin my suit, and failed to persuade him to undertake thesubject, all his warm admirers and who are not? mustregret, a regret that will not be diminished by the perusalof the Tragedy on Witchcraft. The language made use of,both as regards the lower and higher characters, is prettynearly that which prevailed in the West of Scotland aboutthe period assigned to the event, or at least soon after it ;and that the principal witch spoke differently from the othertwo, is rendered probable from her being a stranger, and herrank in life unknown. Even in those days the well-educatedclasses were distinguished from their neighbours on thesouth side of the Tweed, by their accent and pronunciation,rather than any actual difference of words.The story is entirely imaginary, one circumstance excepted,viz. the piece rent from the gown of the supposedwitch, produced in court as a proof that she had actuallybeen present, though invisible, in the chamber of the tormentedpatient, a real circumstance, mentioned, I believe,in one of the trials for witchcraft, though I forget where.APPENDIX. 485NOTE TO THE HOMICIDE."As it has been thought, by a gentleman professionallyconversant on these subjects, that the scene on boardof ship is only fitted for a melodrama, and perhaps withjustice, I have subjoined what follows, to be substituted inits room by any manager of a theatre, who may be of thesame opinion, and who may, at the same time, consider thisdrama as worthy of representation. The simplest way, nodoubt, would have been to have omitted the objectionablepart altogether, and to have placed the following scenes in thebody of the piece ; but as my own opinion on the subject doesnot entirely coincide with that above mentioned, I have preferredthis mode of removing the difficulty. Since our two principaltheatres are of such large dimensions, and possess so manycapabilities of effect from scenery and from light, I can seeno reason why some of the divisions of a regular drama maynot occasionally receive the advantage of such powerfulauxiliaries. And, indeed, I am scarcely entitled to call thisa regular piece, consisting, as it does, of three acts, andwritten chiefly in prose, that it might be the better adapted toa large theatre, in which blank verse cannot be so readilyunderstood.i i 3486 APPENDIX.SCENE I.The Entrance-hall of a small Inn on the Sea-shore:knocking heard at the Door.Enter Landlady.LANDLADY.Who can it be, making such a noise at this untimely hour ?(In a loud voice.) What do you want at this late hour ? andwho are you ?VOICE (without).I am a storm-beaten, benighted traveller, and shelter forthe night is what I want, good dame ; open your door andreceive me.LANDLADY.You travel late for a lone person. ( Opens the door.)Enter CLAUDIEN.Come in, then, and I will do the best I can for you. Therain must have fallen in torrents, methinks, to put you in thiscondition.CLAUDIEN.Yes, I have had water enough, good dame ; let me drymyself by the fire, if there be one still burning in the house.LANDLADY (after looking at him steadfastly).Preserve me ! is the Mermaid gone a wreck ?APPENDIX. 487CLAUDIEN.What mayest thou of the Mermaid ?LANDLADY.She sailed from port yesterday morning, and my poor boyis on board.CLAUDIEN.Where he is still in safety, I doubt not ; so make thyselfeasy, and blow up the embers of thy fire, that I may drymyself.LANDLADY.Lord be gracious to me I Did I not see thee embark withthe other passengers ? If that ship be sailing on the sea,what art thou ? (He remains silent, and she looks at him stillmore intently?) In the name of the blessed Saints, departfrom me ! thou art nothing now that either fire maywarm or roof may shelter. Leave me, in the holy name ofSt. Francis !CLAUDIEN.Nay, if thou deny me succour, in my present condition,thou wilt make a ghost of me, indeed. Let me pass on tothe fire, I beseech thee ![Exit, passing her quickly, and she follows him, holdingup her hands in amazement.SCENE II.The Sea-shore by early dawn.Enter Mariners and Passengers, carrying small packages andvarious matters in their hands.FIRST PASSENGER.Thank God we are on dry land again, though we be drivenback to the same coast.i i 4-488 APPENDIX.FIRST MARINER.And ship and cargo safe, too ; you may thank me forthat.SECOND MARINER.Thank thee for it !FIRST MARINER.Ay, marry ! had we not lightened our vessel of that unhallowedmurderer, she and all she contained would havebeen, long ere now, at the bottom.FIRST PASSENGER.Say no more of that : it makes the blood turn in my veinsto think of it. If all the unhallowed part of our livingfreight had been so disposed of, we should have come toshore most grievously curtailed of our numbers.Enter Landlady, with a small basket.THIRD MARINER.By our blessed Lady I there comes my mother.LANDLADY.My dear boy ! art thou safe ? Thou hast had a sad boutof it on that stormy sea, since I parted with thee yesterdaymorning.FIRST MARINER,Good landlady, we are in want of food and a good fire towarm us by ; show us the nearest way to thy house, whichis not far off, as I guess.LANDLADY (pointing).Hold on your way along the shore, and I '11 overtake youpresently, when I have gathered a few more of theselimpets.[Exeunt Mariners, fyc. Manent only Landlady andThird Mariner.APPENDIX, 489THIRD MARINER.May the devil choke them with the first morsel they eat !I wish they would go to any house but thine.LANDLADY.Why dost thou say so, my dear boy ?THIRD MARINER.I '11 tell thee a secret, mother ; I '11 sail with those men nomore, if I can effect my escape.LANDLADY.What makes thee say so ?THIRD MARINER.I '11 tell thee why, and in few words, too, though it is astory to make one's ears tingle. There was a noble passengeron board, and when the storm raged at its pitch, and wewere in jeopardy, some exclamations which fell from his lipsmade one who stood near him imagine that he must needs beamurderer.LANDLADY.Mercy on us I did he own himself such ? remorse wringsstrange tales from parched lips in the hour of danger.THIRD MARINER.He confessed having shed blood, but with no deliberateintention ; and I could pawn my life upon it that he spokethe truth. Yet those cowardly devils durst not abide theperil of the storm in his company.LANDLADY (tossing up her arms).And they cast him overboard ITHIRD MARINER.Nay : the stoutest of them all durst not lay a finger onhim. He kept them off with his drawn sword, till he gained490 APPENDIX.the prow of the ship, which was driving towards land, andthen, raising his arms to heaven (I shall never forget thesight of his noble figure as the passing lightning gave it toour eyes for a moment), threw himself into the deep.LANDLADY.It is, indeed, a fearful tale. But he is no murderer, I '11be sworn to it ; and he is safe on shore at this moment,where he would never have been, had he done the deed ofblood. He is in my house.THIRD MARINER.Where those men must not find him. What shall wedo?LANDLADY.Run thou, and give him notice of their coming ; and conducthim, if he pleases, to , where he may get on boardof some other vessel, and quit the country undiscovered.THIRD MARINER.So I will, mother, and go to the world's end with him, too,if he will suffer me.LANDLADY.Make haste ; and I '11 overtake those miscreants, and leadthem to the house by any way but the nearest.Exeunt severally.APPENDIX. 491PREFACE TO THE BRIDE."To see the mind of a child awaking by degrees from thedreamy indistinctness of infancy to a clearer observation ofwhat he beholds around, and a capacity to compare andto reason on the differences and resemblances he perceives,is a most pleasing and interesting sight ; so in a fargreater degree does the rousing a race or nation from itsinfancy of ignorance and delusion, interest and excite everymind of any feeling or reflection. It was from this naturalsympathy that I heard with the most sensible pleasure, somemonths ago, of the intended translation of my Drama, calledThe Martyr," into the Cingalese language, as a work whichmight have some good effects upon a people of strong passions,emerging from a state of comparative barbarism, andwhose most effectual mode of receiving instruction is frequentlythat of dramatic representation, according to thefashion of their country. A gentlemen to whom Ceylonowes the great benefits conferred on a people by the pureand enlightened administration of justice, and to whose strenuousexertions they are also indebted for the invaluableinstitution of a trial by native juries*, entertained thisopinion of the Drama in question, and afterwards did methe farther honour to suppose that I might write" something,more peculiarly appropriate to the circumstances ofthat island, which would naturally have a stronger moraleffect on the minds of its inhabitants. Pleased to be made,The measures above alluded to are detailed in the Asiatic Journalfor June, 1827. They are the different measures which were carriedinto effect by Sir Alexander Johnston when he was President of HisMajesty's Council in Ceylon, and of which Mr. Brougham made honourablemention in his speech on the present state of the law in February,1828.492 APPENDIX.in the humblest degree, an instrument for their good, I mostreadily promised to endeavour at least to do so. And whenthey read this piece, or when it is brought before them inrepresentation, they will regard it as a proof that their formerjudge and friend, though now absent and far separated fromthem, still continues to take a deep interest in their welfare.So considered, it will not fail to make an impression on theirminds to which its own power or merit would be altogetherunequal.But should the individual effects of this Drama be everso inconsiderable, the profits arising from its publication inEngland may be the means of procuring translations intothe Cingalese language of more able and useful works, andmake, as it were, a first though a low step towards highermoral eminence. In these days, when many excellent menare striving, at the expense of health and ease, and allthat is valued by the world, to spread the light of Christianityin the East ; when the lamented Bishop Hebe, withthe disinterested devotion of an apostle, joined to the mildness,liberality, ability, courteousness, and good sense whichpromote and grace every laudable undertaking, has provedhimself to be the genuine and noble follower of his blessedMaster who would not be willing to lend some aid and enjoymentto so excellent a purpose ? I hope, and strongly hope,that good will be derived, even from such a feeble effort asthe present ; and that the time will come when the differentraces of the East will consider every human creature as abrother ; while Englishmen, under whose rule or protectionthey may live, will contemn that policy which founds itssecurity upon ignorance. All past experience is unfavourableto the unmanly and ungenerous maxim. And in thepresent time, when perfect undisturbed ignorance cannot beobtained, the preservation of it in a middle state, to take nohigher view of the subject, will be found to be a very precariousand expensive means of governing. But do I notwrong my countrymen, connected with the East, in suppose493ing that the great proportion of them do entertain suchnarrow views ? Of this at least I am thoroughly persuaded ;that if such a supposition does not wrong them at present, itwill do so grievously some years hence : for the ignorance Ispeak of is that which stands opposed to the useful, simplelearning, which promotes industry and charity. Of thosesuperfluous acquirements which the overstrained refinementof modern plans of education seems anxious to extend to thelower classes of society, I do not speak.But I must beg leave to retract what I have said above asto making a first step in this desirable progress : one ofMrs. Hannah More's Sacred Dramas was translated into thelanguage of Ceylon several, I believe many, years ago, andwas much liked and admired by the natives. A second or third,or any rank, so as it be a step at all, is honour enough for me.And now let me address a few words to those whom Ishall never see, whom many, many leagues of ocean dividefrom any spot of earth on which my foot hath everrested or shall ever rest ; those for whose especial use thefollowing Drama was written, and in whose country the storyof it is supposed to have happened.I endeavour to set before you that leading precept of theChristian religion which distinguishes it from all other religions,the forgiveness of injuries. A bold and fiery-temperedpeople is apt to consider it as mean and pusillanimous toforgive; and I am persuaded that many a vindictive andfatal blow has been inflicted by those, whose hearts at thesame moment have yearned to pardon their enemies. ButChristians, who, notwithstanding the very imperfect mannerin which they obey and have obeyed the precepts and exampleof Jesus Christ, do still acknowledge them, and havetheir general conduct influenced by them, are they afeeble and unhonoured race ? Look round you in your ownland, in other countries most connected with your own, andyou will acknowledge that this is not the case. You will,therefore, I hope, receive in good part the moral of my story.APPENDIX.I wished to have found some event in the real history ofCeylon, that might have served as a foundation for myDrama ; but not proving successful in my search, which, circumstancedas I am, could not but be very imperfect, Ihave of necessity had recourse to imagination. But thereis one person or character in it which is truly your own,though placed in an imaginary situation ; and any country inthe world might be proud to claim it " Remember," saidthe son of the first Cigar of the Canadian country to hiselder brother, who had clung for protection to his wretchedmother, when she and all her children were condemned todeath by a late king of Candy, "remember that we arethe sons of a brave man, and should die as becomes his sons ;I will be the first to receive the stroke of the headsman."The land which hath produced a child so brave and noble,will also, under favourable circumstances, be fruitful of braveand noble men ; and in proportion as her sons become generousand humane, they will also increase in valour and dignity.The little Samar, then, of my play, is what the son of thefirst Cigar would have been in his place, and as such Icommend him to your favour and attention.The views which I have given of the religion of Juan DeCreda are true to all that you will find in the history andprecepts of Jesus Christ, whenever you are inclined to readthose books of our sacred Scripture which we call the Gospels;containing his history, and written by men who werehis immediate followers and disciples, being eye and earwitnesses of all that they relate ; and let no peculiar opinionsor creeds of different classes of Christians ever interferewith what you there perceive plainly and generallytaught. It was given for the instruction of the simple andunlearned ; as such receive it.Wishing you all prosperity, as a brave and virtuous people,for brave ye are, and virtuous I hope ye will become, Ibid you farewell !APPENDIX.NOTES TO THE BRIDE."NOTE I. p. 283.With bleeding limbs drain d by a hundred leeches"Very small leeches which infest many of the woods ofCeylon, and torment travellers.NOTE II. p. 392." Doombras mountain ridge,Dividing ardent heat from chilling clouds" fyc.A high mountainous ridge in Ceylon, where the one sideis sunny, clear, and warm, the other cloudy, wet, and cold.NOTE III. p. 299.Evn like Niwane when the virtuous soul" fyc.The final reward of the virtuous after death, according tothe Boodhoo religion, is perfect rest or insensibility ; andthat state, or the region in which it takes place, is calledNiwane*.NOTE IV. p. 329.When Boodhoo s rays, beneath the noon's blue dome" fyc.Bright rays which appear in the middle of the day, surpassingthe brightness of the sun, and are supposed to foretelevil.NOTE V. p. 335.Oh Kattragam, terrific deity! " fyc.The name of the Cingalese Spirit of Evil, or God ofDestruction.THE END.LONDON :Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE,New Street Square.