RECOLLECTIONSEXCURSION TO THE MONASTERIESOFALCOBACA AND Batavia.LONDON :PRINTED BY SAMUEL BENTLEY,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.M-j. Published bv R. Benchu 1^RECOLLECTIONSEXCURSION TO THE MONASTERIESALCOBACA AND Batavia.BY THE AUTHOR OF " Rather.LONDON:RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,^ublijJljer in (»9iUinan) to ^.\i Plajcsiti).1835./ADVERTISEMENT.The other day, in examining somepapers, I met with very slight notes ofthis Excursion. Flattering myself that,perhaps, they might not be totally unworthyof expansion, I invoked the powersof memory — and behold, up rose thewhole series of recollections I am now submittingto that indulgent Public, which hasshown more favour to my former sketchesthan they merited.London,•O June 1835.t%-CONTENTS.FIRST DAY.Supreme command given to two distinguished Prelatesto visit the Monasteries of Alcoba^a and Batavia, and aroyal wish expressed that the Author should accompanythem. — Preparations in high style for the Journey. — Thegeneral Rendezvous. — Departure. — Nossa Senhora de Lus.Lumiares. — Domain of the Monks of St. Vincent. — Receptionthere. Page 1SECOND DAY.A Morning Walk. — Boundless Orchards of Orange andApricot. — The River Trancao. — Magnificent Bay-tree,A Fishing-party. — Happy Inclosure. — An AfternoonRamble to the Palace of the Patriarch, and its immenseParterre. — Musical contest between Frogs and Nightingales.. 12THIRD DAY.Curious Conversation with an Ex-missionary from China.—Wonders of the Imperial Gardens. — Strange Belief of theEmperor of China. . . . . . . .18Vlll CONTENTS.FOURTH DAY.A first-rate Blessing. — The Duke d'Alafoens' Chateau.The great Highway to the Caldas. — Extensive Fertility.Cadufaiz. — Boundless Vineyard. — Eggs of the Sun. — Acalm Retirement. — Peaceful State of Portugal compared toother parts of the Continent. . . . Page 26FIFTH DAY.A Ramble over the Hills. — Beautiful Grotto. — Reminiscencesof Gil Bias. — Journey resumed. — First Sight ofAlcoba^a. — Pompous Reception. — The Three Graces ofHoliness. — Gloomy Church. — Sepulchral Chapel of Pedrothe Just and Inez. — Interrupted Reveries. — EnormousKitchen. — Hospitable Preparations. — The Banquet Hall. —The Banquet, — Tiresome Minuets. — Ineffectual Offer. —Ceremonious " Good Nights." . . . . 31SIXTH DAY.Endless Corridors and a grim-looking Hall. — Portrait ofSt. Thomas a Becket. — Ancient Cloister. — Venerable Orange-trees.— Sepulchral Inscriptions. — The Refectory SolemnSummons to Breakfast. — Sights. — Gorgeous Sacristy. —Antiquities. — Precious Specimen of Early Art. — Hour ofSiesta. — A Noon-day Ramble. — Silence and Solitude. —Mysterious Lane. — Irresistible Somnolency of my Conductor.— An unseen Songstress. — A Surprise. — Donna Francisca,her Mother and Confessor. — The World of Alco-baa awakened, — Return to the Monastery. — Departurefor Batavia. — The Field of Aljubarota Solitary Vale. —Reception at Batavia. — Enormous Supper. — Ecstasies ofCONTENTS. IXan old Monk. — His sentimental Mishap. — Night Scene. —Awful Denunciations Page 44SEVENTH DAY.Morning, — The Prior of Batavia. — His Account of theNocturnal Wanderer. — A Procession. — Grand Facade ofthe Great Church. — The Nave. — Effect of the golden andruby light from the windows. — Singularly devout celebrationof High Mass, — Mausoleum of John the First andPhilippa. — Royal Tombs. — The Royal Cloisters. — PerfectPreservation of this regal Monastery. — Beautiful Chapterhouse.— Tombs of Alphonse the Fifth and his Grandson.Tide of Monks, Sacristans, Novices, &c. — Our Departure.— Wild Road. — Redoubled kindness of my Receptionby the Lord Abbot, and why. — Dr. Ehrhart's visit tothe Infirmary, and surgical raptures. — A half-crazed Poetand his doleful tragedy. — Senhor Agostinho in the characterof Donna Inez de Castro. — Favouritism, and itsreward. . 74EIGHTH DAY.Too much of a good thing. — My longing for a Ramble.Sage resolves A Gallop. — Pure and elastic Atmosphere.— Expansive Plain. — Banks of the River.— MajesticBasilica of Batavia. — Ghost-like Anglers. — Retrospection.The Conventual Bells. — Conversation with the Prior. —A frugal Collation. — Romantic Fancies. — The Dead Storkand his Mourner. — Mausoleum of Don Emanuel. — PerverseArchitecture. — Departure from Batavia. — Twilight. — Returnto Alcoba9a. . . . . . . .118X CONTENTS.NINTH DAY.Lamentations on our Departure, and on the loss of MonsieurSimon. — Mysterious Conference. — A sullen Adieu. —Liveliness of the Prior of St. Vincent's. — Pleasant Surprise.Vast and dreary Plain. — A consequential Equerry. — AnInvitation. — The Bird-Queen. — Fairy Landscape. — TheMansion. — The great Lady's Nephews. — Reception by herExcellency. — Her attendant Hags. — The great Lady'squestions about England and dismal ideas of London. —The Cuckoo. — Imitations. — Dismay of her Sublime Ladyshipand her Hags. — Our Departure from the bird-riddenDominions. — Cultivated Plain. — Happy Peasantry, andtheir gratitude to the Monks of the Royal Convent. —Their different feelings towards the great Lady. — FemalePeasants bearing Offerings to our Lady of Nazare. — SeaView. — Pedraneira. — Banquet of Fish. — Endless RavineAlfagirao. — Arrival at the Caldas. — Sickly Population. —Reception of Dr. Ehrhart. — His Visit to the Invalids, andcontempt of the Medical Treatment of the place. — A determinedBore — His Disaster. . . . Page 141TENTH DAY.Knavish Procedure. — Leave the Caldas. — Obidos. — hamlet. — Exquisite Atmosphere. — PastoralHymns to St. Anthony. — Bonfires on the Eve of his FestivalReception at Cadafaiz — Delightful change. . 176ELEVENTH DAY.Excursion to a Franciscan Convent. — A Miracle — Countryresembling Palestine. — Innumerable Assemblage of Pea-contents.XIwants. — Their sincere Devotion. — Sublime Sight. — Observationsof the Prior of Aviz. — The Benediction. — AncientPortuguese Hymn. — Its grand effect on the present occasion.— Perilous descent from the Mountain. — A Mandatefrom the Prince. — Evening. — Music and a Morisco Dance.Page 181TWELFTH DAY.Dreary expanse of Country between Cadafaiz and Que-lus.— Arrival at the Palace. — Court Lumber. — Observationsof the Marquis of Anjeja relative to the Prince-Regent. —Promised Audience of his Royal Highness. — Visit to theforbidden Gardens Surprise of an African Gardener. — APavilion. — Night-scene. — Preparations for a Fete. — TheInfanta's Nymph-like Attendants. — The young Marquis ofMarialva. — Interview with her Royal Highness. — A Race —A Dance. — The Prince's Summons Conversation withhim. — Character of that Sovereign. — Baneful influence ofhis despotic Consort. — Unhappy Aspirants to Court Benefits.Private Conference with the Marquis. — The Prince-regent'sAfflictions. — His Vision. — Anjeja's urgent Request. —Terrible Cries from the Queen. — Their effect on me. — MyDeparture from the Palace. 196ALCOBACA AND Batavia.FIRST DAY.Supreme command given to two distinguished Prelates tovisit the Monasteries of Alcoba^a and Batavia, and aroyal wish expressed that the Author should accompanythem. — Preparations in high style for the Journey. —The general Rendezvous. — Departure. — Nossa Senhorade Lus. — Lumiares. — Domain of the Monks of St. Vincent.—Reception there.3rd June, 1794.The Prince Regent of Portugal, for reasonswith which I was never entirely acquainted,took it into his royal head, onefair morning, to desire I would pay avisit to the monasteries of Alcoba^a andBatavia, and to name my intimate andparticular friends, the Grand Prior of Aviz,and the Prior of St. Vincent's, as my cone2 AN EXCURSION TOdoctors and companions. Nothing couldbe more gracious, and, in many respects,more agreeable ; still, just at this moment,having what I thought much pleasantengagements nearer home, I cannotpretend that I felt so much enchanted asI ought to have been.Upon communicating the supreme commandto the two prelates, they discoverednot the smallest token of surprise ; itseemed they were fully prepared for it.The Grand Prior observed that the v^^eatherwas dreadfully hot, and the roads execrable: the other prelate appeared more animated,and quite ready for the expedition.I thought I detected in one corner of hislively, intelligent eye, a sparkle of hopethat, when returned from his little cruiseof observation, the remarks it was likelyenough to inspire might lead to more intimateconferences at Queluz, and bringhim into more frequent collision withroyalty.ALCOBApA. 3As my right reverend companions hadarranged not to renounce one atom of theirhabitual comforts and conveniences, and totake sith them their confidential acolytesand secretaries, as well as some of theirfavourite quadrupeds, v^^e had in the trainof the latter-mentioned animals a rarerabble of grooms, ferradors, and mule-drivers.To these, my usual followers beingadded, we formed altogether a caravanwhich, camels and dromedaries excepted,v^ould have cut no despicablefigure even on the route of Mecca orReached-Ali !The rallying point, the general rendezvousfor the whole of this heterogeneousassemblage, was my quinta of San Jose,commanding in full prospect the entranceof the Tagus, crowded with vessels arrivingfrom every country under the heavens,messengers of joy to some, of sorrow toothers, but all with expanded sails equallybrightening in the beams of the cheerfulB 24 AN EXCURSION TOsun, and scudding along over the bluesparkling waves with equal celerity.Here I am, my dear friend," said theGrand Prior to me as I handed him out ofhis brother the old Marquis of Marialva'smost specifying dormeuse, which had beenlent to him expressly for this tn/ing occasion." Behold me at last," (at last indeed,this being the third put-off I had experienced,)" ever delighted with your company,but not so much so with the expeditionwe are going to undertake."I hope it will not turn out so unpleasantafter all," was my answer : " for myown part, I quite long to see Alcobapa."So do not I," rejoined the Grand Prior ;but let that pass. Is Ehrhart come ?is Franchi ready ? Has the first securedthe medicine-chest he was in such anagony about the other day, and the secondthe piano-forte he swore he would breakto pieces unless it would get into bettertune ?"ALCOBACA. 5All safe — all waiting — and dinner too,my dear Lord Prior ; and after that, let usget off. No easy matter, by the bye, evenyet, some of the party being such adeptsat dawdling."Why the Grand Prior should have dreadedthe journey so much I really could notimagine, every pains having been taken tomake it so easy and smooth. It was settledhe should loll in his dormeuse or in my,chaise just as he best pleased, and look atnothing calculated to excite the fatigue ofreflection ; topographical inquiries were tobe waived completely, and no questionsasked about who endowed such a churchor raised such a palace. We were to proceed,or rather creep along, by short andfacile stages ; stopping to dine, and sup, andrepose, as delectably as in the most commodiousof homes. Everything that couldbe thought of, or even dreamed of, for ourconvenience or relaxation, was to be carriedin our train, and nothing left behind but6 AN EXCURSION TOCare and Sorrow ; two spectres, who, hadthey dared to mount on our shoulders,would have been driven off with a highhand by the Prior of St. Vincent's, thanwhom a more delightful companion neverexisted since the days of those polishedand gifted canons and cardinals who formedsuch a galaxy of talent and facetiousnessround Leo the Tenth.We were absolutely roused from our repast,over which the Prior of St. Vincent'sgay animated conversation was throwingits usual brilliance, by a racket and hubbubon the sea-shore that was perfectlydistracting. The space between my villaand the sea was entirely blocked up, halfthe population of Belem having pouredforth to witness our departure. The lubberlydrivers of the baggage-carts werefighting and squabbling amongst themselvesfor precedence. One of the mostlumbering of these ill-constructed vehicles,laden with a large heavy marquee, had itsALCOBAfA. 7hind wheels ahead well buffeted by thewaves. At length it moved off; and thenburst forth such vociferation and suchdeafening shouts of "Long live the Prince!"and " Long live the Marialvas, and all theirfriends into the bargain !" — the Englishmanof course included — as I expected,would have fixed a headache for life uponthe unhappy Grand Prior.Amongst other noises which gave himno small annoyance, might be reckonedthe outrageous snorting and neighing ofboth his favourite high-pampered chaise-horses,out of compliment to one of mydelicate English mares, who was trying toget through the crowd with a most engagingair of sentimental retiring modesty.Half laughing and half angry lest someunfortunate kick or plunge might depriveme of her agreeable services, I refrainednot from crying out to the Grand Prior,For pity's sake, let us dawdle and doodleno longer, but drive through this mob if8 AN EXCURSION Toitbe possible. You see what a disturbancethe glorious fuss which has been makingabout this journey has occasioned ; yousee the result of a surfeit of superfluities :really, if we had been setting forth to explorethe kingdom of Prester John, or theidentical spot where Don Sebastian lefthis bones, (if true it be that the shores ofAfrica, and not some pet dungeon of KingPhilip's, received them,) we could scarcelyhave gotten together a grander array ofincumbrances. At this rate, we shall haveoccasion to put our tent in requisition thisvery night, unless we defer our journeyagain, and sleep under my roof at SanJose."No, no," said the Prior of St. Vincent's ;"we shall sleep at my convent's pleasantquanta of Total. I shall set oiFwith mypeople immediately to prepare for yourreception."The deed followed the word : his attendantmuleteers cracked their whips inALCOBA^A. 9the most imposing style — his ferradorspushed on — the crowd divided — a passagewas cleared ; the Grand Prior, ordering hisdormeuse to follow, got into my enormoustravelling chaise, and by the efforts of sixstout mules we soon reached Bemfica.Beyond this village, a shady lane overhungby elms brought us to Nossa Senhorade Lus ; a large pile of buildings inthe majestic style which prevailed duringthe Spanish domination in Portugal, butmuch shattered by the earthquake. Fromhence we passed on to Lumiares, throughintricate paved roads bordered by aloes,sprouting up to the height of ten or twelvefeet, in shape and colour not unlike giganticasparagus.Lumiares contains a quanta belongingto the Marquess of Anjeja, upon whichimmense sums have been lavished for thewise purpose of peeling alleys in quaintmosaic patterns, red, black, and blue ;building colossal reservoirs for gold and10 AN EXCURSION TOsilver fish, painting their smooth plasteredsides with divers flaming colours, and cuttinga steep hill into a succession of stiffterraces, under the sole pretext, one shouldthink, of establishing flights of awkwardnarrow marble steps to communicate onewith the other, for they did not appear tolead to any other part of the garden.The road from Lumiares to Lours isconducted along a valley, between slopingacclivities variegated by fields of grain andwild shrubby pastures. The soft air of theevening was delightful ; and the lowing ofherds descending from the hills to slaketheir thirst after a sultry day, at springsand fountains, full of pastoral charm.It grew dark when we passed the villageof Tota], and crossing a bridge over theriver Trancao, entered the woody domainof the monks of St. Vincent. Lightsglimmering at the extremity of an avenueof orange-trees directed us to the house, alow picturesque building, half villa, halfALCOBAfA. 11hermitage. Our reception was so trulyexhilarating, so perfectly all in point ofcomfort and luxury that the heart of manoreven churchman could desire, that wewillingly promised to pass the whole oftomorrow in this cheerful residence, anddefer our further progress till the dayfollowing.12 AN EXCURSION TOSECOND DAY.A Morning Walk. — Boundless Orchards of Orange andApricot. — The River Trancao. — Magnificent Bay-tree.A Fishing-party. — Happy Inclosure. — An AfternoonRamble to the Palace of the Patriarch, and its immenseParterre. — Musical contest between Frogs and Nightingales.4th June.The sunbeams entering my windowssummoned me to enjoy the fresh morningbreeze blowing over the uninterruptedmass of foliage which fills up the wholevalley belonging to the convent.After breakfast we walked amongst well -cultivated vegetables, fields of Indianwheat as healthy and vigorous as anythat ever flourished in the islands whichfloat about like rafts on the Lake ofALCOBA^A. 13Mexico, and the most extensive orchardsof orange, apricots, and other fruit trees,perhaps in Portugal. Every inch ofground within this enclosure is turnedto the most advantageous account : theoranges alone produce from seven to eightthousand crusades a year. A very activelay-brother has the management of thisfortunate spot, and is continually extendingits limits over the bare hills in theneighbourhood, many of which are comprisedwithin the domain of the fathers.The river Trancao, which runs throughthe garden, is diminished to a brook atthis season ; but that brook is clear, andflows rapidly. Its rocky edges, worn intoirregular shapes by winter torrents, bloomwith the rose-coloured flowers of theoleander. Their appearance was strikinglybeautiful — many of these shrubshad attained the height of fifteen or sixteenfeet.But one of the grandest objects of the14 AN EXCURSION TOvegetable world which ever met my sightis a bay-tree, situated in the thickest partof the orange orchards, above which ittowers majestically, clothed with luxuriantboughs that glisten with health andvigour. It consists of about thirty stems,none less than two feet, and some thirty-eightinches in diameter, springing fromone root, and rising to the height of sixty-fourfeet. I loitered away the sultryhours of mid-day most pleasantly underits deep, fragrant shade.The Prior had ordered a fishing-partyfor our amusement ; — no great amusement,however, for one who detests the sight ofwretched animals, inveigled from theircool aquatic homes, and cast on a drybank, gasping for life and distending theirjaws in torment. Full often have I fanciedwhat woful grimaces we children ofAdam would be compelled to make, shouldever the colossal inhabitants of a superiorplanet be permitted on some dread day ofAlcoran A. 1 5retribution to drop down on the earth onan angling tour, and fish us out of ourelement for their dinner or recreation. Nowant of sport need be apprehended in thiscase — plenty would bite. Men have ingeneral such wide-open appetites for theobjects of their individual pursuit, that,only render the bait sufficiently tempting,and I promise they swallow it, hook and all.So few set any bounds to their voraciousness,that a shark might be chosen presidentof a temperance society with equaljustice. Courtesy obliged both the GrandPrior and Doctor Ehrhart, as well as myself,to remain much longer than we wishedon the banks of the river, witnessing thejoy of the anglers, and the struggles ofthe expiring fish.About two, we returned home, throughshady alleys of curious citron-trees, collectedfrom every part of the Portuguesedominions on this and on the other sideof the ocean, divided by tall canes mantledIG AN EXCURSION TOwith vines, which promise, like every plantin this happy enclosure, an abundant produce.The nightingales were singing inthe recesses of woods impenetrable to thesun, and at the same time, I am sorry toadd, frogs were croaking a deep thorough-bassto this enchanting melody.We dined late for the sake of devouringthe produce of our fishery, prepared bythe fishermen themselves — a sort of ma-melmotte,which my famous Simon, themost incomparable of cooks, declared,with a smile of ineffable contempt, wasonly fit to be placed before persons dyingwith hunger and cast away on some desolateisland.In the cool of the evening we drovethrough the village of Total to a palaceof the Patriarch, containing nothing veryremarkable, except a vestibule with a tribunelooking into a church. The wallsof this gallery are lined with the richestmarbles of Spain and Portugal, disposedALCOBACA. 17in panels, and ornamented with an overwhelmingprofusion of doubly and treblygilt bronze ornaments, in that style oflavish expenditure carried to such triumphantexcess by that most magnificentof modern Solomon, King John the Fifth.After seeing ourselves reflected on allsides in tablets innumerable, polished likemirrors, we repaired to an immense parterre— the flattest, the richest in red andyellow flowers, and the most like a Turkeycarpet, of any I ever had the vexation ofvisiting either in Holland or Germany. Iwas glad to escape from this far-spreadexpanse of pomposity and dulness, andreturn to the simple orange thickets of myamiable friend, where I walked till almostmidnight, listening to the nightingales,who at length had shamed the frogs tosilence.18 AN EXCURSION TOTHIRD DAY.Curious Conversation with an Ex-missionary from China." —Wonders of the Imperial Gardens. — Strange Belief of theEmperor of China.5th June.The first sounds I heard upon awakeningthis superiorly fine and glowingmorning, was not " the charm of earlybirds," but the obstreperous rattle of aviolent altercation, or, in simple truth,a downright squabble which broke out, inthe vestibule adjoining my room, betweenthe Grand Prior's secretary and a confidentialattendant of my good friend of St.Vincent's.You know," said the first-mentionedALCOBACA. 19shrill-voiced consequential personage, " mymaster is too lazy to stir from his shadyquarters whilst the sun shines out in sofierce a manner."You know," answered the other, " thatwe have business of urgency at Alcoba^a,and the Prince Regent's command to performit with the less delay the better."You do not pretend," rejoined the secretary," do you, to force on his excellencywhether he will or not ?"What, does he mean to loiter the wholeday in our garden of Eden ? Shall we notadvance as far as Cadafaiz in the cool ofthe evening ?"Not we : his excellency has made uphis mind to take his fill of repose, and I amnot the man to contradict him."Then you are a rebellious fool for yourpains, and have forgotten his royal highness'sexpress orders. — Go on drinking thewaters of Lethe if you dare."c 220 AN EXCURSION TOVa beer," &c. -" Go, drink the filthiestpuddle in these orchards," rejoinedthe waspish and irritated secretary.Tingle, tingle, tingle, went the GrandPrior's silver bell ; off ran the disputants,and out came I into the vast echoing vestibule,opening, by as many glazed doors asthere are days in a month, into the orangeorchards.If ever a decent excuse could be offeredfor perfect laziness, it was to be found inthe warm, enervating atmosphere, loadedwith perfume, which universally investedthis pleasant umbrageous region. Nowonder my Lord of A viz, the most consummateprofessor of" il dolce far niente" in allPortugal, and Altare to boot, could notbe withdrawn from it without infinite reluctance.He could hardly even be persuadedto traverse a short avenue whichled to a summer pavilion on the banks ofthe river, where our morning collation wasprepared. The Prior of St. Vincent's had aALCOBA^A. 21sort of romantic scheme of having our repastspread out on a little remnant of greenswardwhich the heats had spared, andsitting down to it in the Oriental style ;but his illustrious colleague gently intimateda preference to chairs and tables.In addition to our usual party I founda certain padre, Machado, or Azevedo, orsome such name, who had not been longreturned from China — nay, from Pekin itself.During his residence at Macao, hehad learnt sufficient English from one ofthe padres of our Canton factory — thechaplain, I suppose — to read Sir WilliamChambers' most florid essay on Chinesegardening. I asked him how many wordsof truth there might happen to be in allthis luxuriant description ? He answered,not in plain English, but in a most delectablejargon, half Chinese sing-song, halflingua franca — " There be thousand."You don't mean to assure me," said I,22 AN EXCURSION TOthat our famous architect's most wonderfulaccount of the magical splendour ofYven-ming-Yven and Tchang-tchung-Yvenis not exaggerated ?"It is not, '' answered the padre insound Portuguese, having quitted thestraits and shallows of very scanty Englishfor the full flow of his vernacularlanguage : — " I have seen greater wondersthan he — I have seen in the depth ofwinter a whole extent of garden warmedby a deliciously mild and scented vapour,and all the trees covered with silken leavesand artificial flowers, and, on a pool ofwater, as clear and transparent as the skyit reflected, hundreds of gaily-enamelledducks, formed of metal, swimming bymechanism, and by mechanism openingall their bills and uttering their accustomedsound with their usual volubility,and swallowing the food the eunuchsof the palace cast to them, — ay, and re.-ALCOBAfA. 23turning it again, to all appearance mosthappily digested, the emperor standing byall the while, laughing at my surprise, andbelieving himself neither more nor less,I am entirely convinced, than an incarnationof the god Fo !"Dreadful !" exclaimed the Grand Prior:I wonder he has not shared the fate ofNebuchadnezzar !"He should have been sent to grassat once," observed the Prior of St. Vincent's.That would have been a pity," rejoinedthe ex-missionary ; " for, notwithstandinghis Tartarean nonsense about incarnationsand such like, and the impossibility Iexperienced of making him comprehendour own ineffable mysteries, I must declarehim to be a wise monarch and anexcellent man."That is more difficult to believe thanall you have told us," observed the Grand24 AN EXCURSION TOPrior, " when we reflect upon the horridimpiety of believing one's self Fo."There is no lie in the world people willnot believe," replied the missionary, " providedthey are often told it by flatterersin whom, for the very reason they oughtnot, they take delight in placing confidence; and when all the princes of theblood, all the courtiers, and all the mandarinsof the different tribunals, are continuallypouring forth addresses at thefoot of the throne, assuring his imperialmajesty Rien-Long, that he is the son ofheaven, a god upon earth ! what wouldyou have him do ?"Go to the devil his own way, as there isno other remedy," said our hospitable hostwith a hearty laugh. " We are to conclude,no doubt, you did your best to bring himround : perhaps you may succeed betteranother time." — (The padre was on the eveof returning to his mission.) — " And nowlet us go to mass," continued the Prior,ALCOBA^A. 25bowing to his excellency of Aviz, " andpray for the emperor's conversion !"So to mass they went, and then fishing; an d the evening of this day was likethe morning — . all warmth, and chat, andidleness.26 AN EXCURSION TOFOURTH DAY.A first-rate Blessing. — The Duke d'Alafoens' Chateau. —The great Highway to the Caldas. — Extensive Fertility.Cadafaiz. — Boundless Vineyard. — Eggs of the Sun. —A calm Retirement. — Peaceful State of Portugal comparedto other parts of the Continent.6th June.At length it pleased heaven to inspirethe Grand Prior with sufficient resolutionto proceed ; the last dregs of excuses forloitering being exhausted. The air hadbecome much cooler ; and the sun beingovercast, we experienced a first-rate blessing— that of travelling under a canopy ofclouds, which had the kindness not to dispersetill we passed Al Private, a chateaubelonging to the Duke d'Alafoens.This sumptuous abode, with pompousALCOBA^A. 27high roofs, and courts, and avenues, asFrenchified as their illustrious master, isplaced in a valley which would have beenpleasant enough had any other trees exceptthe pale leaden-coloured olive happenedto predominate.After jolting along in rather a convulsivemanner for about a league, and receivingmany a pinch from my alarmed andnervous companion, we emerged from achaos of ruts and sandbanks into the greathighway v^^hich leads to the Caldas throughAlhambra, Povos, and Villa Franca.All these places, not unpleasantly situatedon the banks of the Tagus, havequintus, palaces, and hidalgo, as well astheir betters ; but the country which surroundsthem is pretty nearly as flat, andas rich in ditches, sluices, and other meansof irrigation, as the environs of Antwerpitself. Her most faithful majesty sometimesresorting to the Caldas, the road iskept in tolerable repair.28 AN EXCURSION TOAt every league, pedestals with vasesupon them meet the eye ; and at no verydistant intervals, architectural fountains,which have not yet entirely forgotten thepurpose for which they were erected, andstill contrive to dribble out a scanty andturbid stream.As we approached Carregado, scenes ofboundless plenty began to expand themselves; unlimited fields of Turkish corn,fine barley, and black Sicilian wheat, theears bending to the ground with theirweight.We now abandoned the high road inorder to reach Cadafaiz, another ampledomain under the government of ourhospitable friend, where we arrived latein the afternoon. There we found Ourselvesin a most comfortable antiquatedmansion, perfectly cool and clean ; thefloors neatly matted, the tables coveredwith the finest white linen, and, in brightclear crafts of Venetian glass, the mostALCOBAfA. 29beautiful carnations I ever met with, evenat Genoa in the Durazzo Gardens.The wide latticed windows of the apartmentallotted to me commanded the viewof a boundless vineyard in full luxuriantleaf, divided by long broad tracts of thymeand camomile, admirably well kept andnicely weeded. From this immense seaof green leaves rose a number of plum,pear, orange, and apricot trees ; the latterprocured by the monks directly from Damascus,and bearing, as I can testify, thatmost delicious fruit of its kind called " eggsof the sun" by the Persians ; — even insectsand worms seem to respect it, for notrace could I discover of their havingpreyed on its smooth glowing rind andsurrounding foliage.Beyond these truly Hesperian orchards,very lofty hills swell into the most picturesqueforms, varied by ledges of rock, andcompletely inclose this calm retirement ;wild healthful spots of delicate herbage,30 AN EXCURSION TOwhich the goats and sheep, whose bells Iheard tinkling in the distance, are scarcelymore partial to than myself.How often, contrasting my present situationwith the horrid disturbed state ofalmost every part of the Continent, did Ibless the hour when my steps were directedto Portugal ! As I sat in the nook ofmy retired window, I looked with complacencyon a roof which sheltered no scheminghypocrites, — on tables, on which perhapsno newspaper had ever been thrown,and on neat white pillows, guiltless ofpropping up the heads of those assassinsof real prosperity — political adventurers.The very air which kept playing aroundmy temples seemed to breathe contentment; it was genially warm, not oppressive,and brought with it the intermingledfragrance of mountain herbs and nativeflowers.ALCOBAfA. 31FIFTH DAY.A Ramble over the Hills. — Beautiful Grotto. — Reminiscencesof Gil Bias. — Journey resumed. — First Sight ofAlcoba^a. — Pompous Reception. — The Three Graces ofHoliness. — Gloomy Church. — Sepulchral Chapel of Pedrothe Just and Inez. — Interrupted Reveries. — EnormousKitchen. — Hospitable Preparations. — The Banquet Hall.The Banquet. — Tiresome Minuets. — Ineffectual Offer.Ceremonious " Good Nights."7 th June.Not long after daybreak, whilst all thedews of the morning were still waiting tobe dried up, I took a ramble over the hills,and, on one of their level summits, discoveredan irregular opening with rudesteps leading down to a little cavern hewnout of a pumice rock, blessed with a tinkleAN EXCURSION TOling spring, and mantled all over with thedeliciously-scented flowers of the Loniceratribe in wild luxuriant profusion, — exactlythe sort of grotto described in Gil Biasas the resort of Algerine pirates. ThereI proposed reading my favourite pocket-companionsMonteith and Manuel MariaBocage, in total solitude, and sharing thedeep reveries of these intellectual andCowley-like poets : but fate denied methe enjoyment of such dreamy happiness.The sober reality of proceeding on ourexpedition, and particularly of paying avisit to the Caldas, was enforced by myright reverend conductors.Having a presentiment that the saidCaldas were as hot as the suburbs atleast of the infernal regions, I begged andintreated we might not stop at such aclose, stifling, unpoetical place, but, aftertaking refreshment under our tent in theopen country, make the best of our wayboldly and resolutely to Alcoba^'a.ALCOBACA. 33"Impossible!" said the Grand Prior.Possible !" exclaimed the Prior of St.Vincent. The vote of the latter carriedit, and we got on three or four leagues ata good round pace ; the bells of our mulessounding cheerily, and their drivers singingin chorus, to the surprise, if not delight,of my English grooms and attendants.Thus far all had gone on, as to road,pretty tolerably ; but we had scarcely leftthe Caldas in arrear about two miles onthe right, before " the way was all before uswhere to choose ;" no distinct track for suchlumbering carriages as we were burthenedwith being visible. In attempting to advance,we stuck fast : both the mules andtheir drivers seemed so sincerely alarmedat the prospect before them, and reducedto such utter despair, that my right reverendfellow-travellers, who most fullysympathised in these not unfounded terrors,determined to call the posse comitatusto our aid. A messenger was despatchedD34 AN EXCURSION TOfor that purpose to a neighbouring village,of which I never suspected the existence, itbeing completely buried in a deep narrowravine, not unlike one of those enormousruts which many people fancy they havediscovered in the moon. The messengersoon returned with a very efficient magistrate,and thirty or forty stout well-clothedpeasants.A village Hercules putting his shoulderto the wheel, we got out of this scrape ;but it was only to fall into another, andso on from bad to worse till patience itselfwas exhausted. The day was wearingapace ; we had not advanced upon ourvoyage of discovery at the rate of abovethree miles in two hours. The carriageslaboured and rolled like vessels on aswelling sea after a storm. At lengthropes were applied to steady them, deafeningshouts of encouragement addressed tomen and mules, and in an hour more wewere approaching Alcoba^a.ALCOBACA. 35The first sight of this regal monasteryis very imposing ; and the picturesque,well-wooded and well-watered village, outof the quiet bosom of which it appears torise, relieves the mind from a sense ofoppression the huge domineering bulk ofthe conventual buildings inspire.We had no sooner hove in sight, and weloomed large, than a most tremendous ringof bells of extraordinary power announcedour speedy arrival. A special aviso, orbroad hint from the secretary of state,recommending these magnificent monks toreceive the Grand Prior and his companionswith peculiar graciousness, the wholecommunity, including fathers, friars, andsubordinates, at least four hundred strong,were drawn up in grand spiritual array onthe vast platform before the monastery tobid us welcome. At their head the Abbothimself, in his costume of High Almonerof Portugal, advanced to give us a cordialembrace.D 236 THE MONASTERY OFIt was quite delectable to witness withwhat cooing and comforting the LordAbbot of Alcobaca greeted his right reverendbrethren of Aviz and St. Vincent'sturtle-doves were never more fondle-some,at least in outward appearance.Preceded by these three graces of holiness,I entered the spacious, massive, and somewhataustere Saxon-looking church. Allwas gloom, except where the perpetuallamps burning before the high altar diffuseda light most solemn and religious —(inferior twinkles from side chapels andchantries are not worth mentioning). Tothis altar my high clerical conductors repaired,whilst the full harmonious tonesof several stately organs, accompanied bythe choir, proclaimed that they were inthe act of adoring the real Presence.Whilst these devout prostrations wereperforming, I lost not a moment in visitingthe sepulchral chapel, where lie interredPedro the Just and his beloved Inez.ALCOBAfA. 37The light which reached this solemn recessof a most solemn edifice was so subduedand hazy, that I could hardly distinguishthe elaborate sculpture of the tomb,which reminded me, both as to designand execution, of the Beauchamp monumentat Warwick, so rich in fretwork andimagery.Just as I was giving way to the affectingreveries which such an object could notfail of exciting in a bosom the least susceptibleof romantic impressions, in came theGrand Priors hand in hand, all three together." To the kitchen," said they inperfect unison, — " to the kitchen, and thatimmediately; you will then judge whetherwe have been wanting in zeal to regaleyou."Such a summons, so conveyed, was irresistible; the three prelates led the way to,I verily believe, the most distinguishedtemple of gluttony in all Europe. WhatGlastonbury may have been in its palmy38 THE MONASTERY OFstate, I cannot answer ; but my eyes neverbeheld in any modern convent of France,Italy, or Germany, such an enormous spacededicated to culinary purposes. Throughthe centre of the immense and nobly-groinedhall, not less than sixty feet indiameter, ran a brisk rivulet of the clearestwater, flowing through pierced woodenreservoirs, containing every sort and sizeof the finest river-fish. On one side, loadsof game and venison were heaped up ;on the other, vegetables and fruit in endlessvariety. Beyond a long line of stovesextended a row of ovens, and close tothem hillocks of wheaten flour whiterthan snow, rocks of sugar, jars of thepurest oil, and pastry in vast abundance,which a numerous tribe of lay brothersand their attendants were rolling out andpuffing up into an hundred different shapes,singing all the while as blithely as larks inacorn-field.My servants, and those of their revel39rend excellencies the two Priors, werestanding by in the full glee of witnessingthese hospitable preparations, as wellpleased, and as much flushed, as if theyhad been just returned from assisting atthe marriage at Cana in Galilee. " There,"said the Lord Abbot, — " we shall notstarve : God's bounties are great, it is fitwe should enjoy them." — (By the bye, Ithought this allegro, contrasted with thepenseroso of scarecrow convents, quitedelightful—" An hour hence supper willbe ready," continued the Lord Abbot, " inthe meanwhile, let me conduct you to yourapartment ; it has only bare walls, for welearnt of your arrival too late this morningto put up our fine hangings."I found the apartment, which wascomposed of an ante-room, saloon, andbedchamber, lofty and rather pleasant.Though the walls were naked, the ceilingwas gilt and painted, the floor spreadwith Persian carpets of the finest texture,40 THE MONASTERY OFand the tables in rich velvet petticoats,decked out with superb ewers and basinsof chased silver, and towels bordered withpoint-lace of a curious antique pattern,a strange mixture of simplicity andmagnificence. I had my own bed pitchedin one of the spacious alcoves, to the apparentsurprise, if not displeasure, of themonk appointed to give me attendance.However, I made myself very comfortable ;took a foot-bath as serenely as if I hadbeen at Abraham's tent-door, and waitedin a perfect refreshing calm till threethundering knocks at the outward portalannounced the Abbot himself coming tolead me to the banquet-hall.We passed through a succession of cloistersand galleries, which the shades ofevening rendered dimly visible, till weentered a saloon, superb indeed, coveredwith pictures, and lighted up by a profusionof wax tapers in sconces of silver.Right in the centre of this stately roomALCOBA^rA. 41stood a most ample table, covered withfringed embroidered linen, and round itfour ponderous fauteuils for the guest andthe three prelates ; so we formed a verycomfortable partie quarrel.The banquet itself consisted of not onlythe most excellent usual fare, but raritiesand delicacies of past seasons and distantcountries ; exquisite sausages, potted lampreys,strange messes from the Brazils,and others still stranger from China (ediblebirds' nests and sharks' fins), dressedafter the latest mode of Macao by a Chineselay brother. Confectionery and fruitswere out of the question here ; they awaitedus in an adjoining still more spaciousand sumptuous apartment, to which we retiredfrom the effluvia of viands and sauces.In this apartment we found Franchiand the Grand Prior of Aviz's secretary,the Prior of St. Vincent's acolyte, andten or twelve principal personages of theneighbourhood, most eager to enjoy a42 THE MONASTERY OFstare at the stranger whom their lordlyabbot delighted to honour. The tablebeing removed, four good-looking novices,lads of fifteen or sixteen, demure evento primness, came in, bearing cassolettesof Goa filigree, steaming with a fragrantvapour of Calambac, the finest qualityof wood of aloes.This pleasing ceremony performed, thesaloon was cleared out as if for dancing.I flattered myself we were goingto be favoured with a bolero, fandango,or perhaps the sofa itself, — a dance asdecent as the ballets exhibited for therecreation of Muley Liezit, his most exemplaryMarchese majesty. A crowd ofclarion and guitar players, dressed insilk dominoes like the serenaders in Italianburlettas, followed by a posse of youngmonks and young gentlemen in seculardresses as stiff as buckram, began an endlesssuccession of the most decorous andtiresome minuets I ever witnessed, tenALCOBA^A. 4Stimes longer, and alas ! ten times less ridiculous,than even the long minuet atBath.Tired to death of remaining motionless,and desirous of exhibiting something alittle out of the common way, I gentlyhinted a wish to dance, and that I shouldhave no objection were one of the threeright reverend Priors to take me out.It would not do — they kept their state.Yawning piteously, I longed for the hourwhen it should become lawful to retireto bed ; which I did right gladly whenthe blessed hour came, after good-fighting,and being good-nigh ted with anotherround of ceremony.44 THE MONASTERY OFSIXTH DAY.Endless Corridors and a grim-looking Hall. — Portrait of St.Thomas a Becket. — Ancient Cloister. — Venerable Orange-trees.— Sepulchral Inscriptions. — The Refectory. — SolemnSummons to Breakfast. — Sights. — Gorgeous Sacristy.Antiquities. — Precious Specimen of Early Art. — Hourof Siesta. — A Noon-day Ramble. — Silence and Solitude. —Mysterious Lane. — Irresistible Somnolency of my Conductor.— An unseen Songstress. — A Surprise. — Donna francesca,her Mother and Confessor. — The World of Alco-baa awakened. — Return to the Monastery. — Departurefor Batavia. — The Field of Aljubarota. — Solitary Vale. —Reception at Batavia. — Enormous Supper. — Ecstasies ofan old Monk. — His sentimental Mishap. — Night Scene. —Awful Denunciations.8th June.I ROSE early, slipped out of my pompousapartment, strayed about endless corridors— not a soul stirring. Looked into aAlcoran. 45gloomy hall, much encumbered with gildedornaments, and grim with the ill-sculpturedeffigies of kings; and another immensechamber, with white walls coveredwith pictures in black lacquered frames,most hideously unharmonious.One portrait, the full size of life, bya very ancient Portuguese artist namedVasquez, attracted my minute attention.It represented no less interesting a personagethan St. Thomas a Becket, andlooked the character in perfection ; — loftyin stature and expression of countenance ;pale, but resolute, like one devoted todeath in his great cause ; the very beingDr. Lingered has portrayed in his admirableHistory.From this chamber I wandered downseveral flights of stairs to a cloister ofthe earliest Norman architecture, havingin the centre a fountain of very primitiveform, spouting forth clear water abundantlyinto a marble basin. Twisting46 THE MONASTlillY OFIand straggling over this uncouth massof sculpture are several orange-trees,gnarled and crabbed, but covered withfruit and flowers, their branches grotesqueand fantastic, exactly such as a Japanesewould delight in, and copy on his casketsand screens ; their age most venerable,for the traditions of the convent assuredme that they were the very first importedfrom China into Portugal. Therewas some comfort in these objects ; everyother in the place looked dingy and dismal,and steeped in a green and yellowmelancholy.On the damp, stained and mossy walls,I noticed vast numbers of sepulchral inscriptions(some nearly effaced) to thememory of the knights slain at the battleof Aljubarota : I gave myself no troubleto make them out, but continuing mysolitary ramble, visited the refectory, asquare of seventy or eighty feet, bloomedby dark-coloured painted windows,ALCOBAfA. 47and disgraced by tables covered with notthe cleanest or least unctuous linen inthe world.I had proceeded thus far, when threevenerable fathers, of most grave and solemnaspect, made their appearance; towhom having bowed as lowly as Abrahamdid to his angelic visitors, I received asmany profound obeisance in return, anda summons to breakfast. This I readilyobeyed : it wanted three-quarters of eight,and I was as hungry as a stripling novice.The Prior of Aviz having supped tooamply the night before, did not appear;but he of St. Vincent's, all kindness andgood digestion, did the honours with cordialgrace, and made tea as skilfully asthe most complete old dowager in Christendom.My Lord of Alcoba^a was absent,— engaged, as I was told, and readilybelieved, upon conventual affairs of urgentimportance.The repast finished, and not soon, our48 THE MONASTERY OFwhole morning was taken up with seeingsights, though not exactly the sights Imost wished to see. Some MSS. of thefourteenth century, containing, I havebeen assured, traditional records of Pedrothe Just and the Severe, were what Iwished for ; but they either could not orwould not be found ; and instead of being-allowedto make this interesting research,or having it made for me, we were conductedto a most gorgeous and glistening-sacristy,worthy of Versailles itself, adornedwith furbelows of gilt bronze, flauntingover panels of jasper and porphyry :copes and vestments, some almost asancient as the reign of Alfonso Henries,and others embroidered at Rome withgold and pearl, by no means barbaric, weredisplayed before us in endless succession.One of the sacristans or treasurers whohappened to have a spice of antiquarianism,guessing the bent of my wishes, produced,from a press or amber elaborately carved,ALCOBAfA. 49the identical candlesticks of rock-crystal,and a cross of the same material, studdedwith the most delicately-tinted sapphires,which were taken by the victorious Johnthe First from the King of Castile's portablechapel, after the hard-fought conflictof Aljubarota ; and several golden reliquaries,as minutely chased and sculpturedas any I ever saw at St. Denis, thoughwrought by St. Ely's holy hands : one inparticular, the model of a cathedral in thestyle of the Sainte Chapelle at Paris, struckme as being admirable. Ten times atleast did I examine and almost worshipthis highly-wrought precious specimen ofearly art, and as many times did my excellentfriend the Prior of St. Vincent's,who had come in search of me, express awish that I should not absolutely wearout my eyes or his patience.It is growing insufferably warm," saidhe, " and the hour of siesta is arrived; andI cannot help thinking that perhaps itE50 THE MONASTERY OFwould not be unpleasant for you to retireto your shady chamber : for my part, Ican hardly keep my eyes open any longer.But I see this proposal does not suit you —you English are strangely given to locomotion,and I know full well that of allEnglish you are not the least nimble.Here," continued he, calling a youngmonk, who was sitting by in a nook of thesacristy peeling walnuts, " suspend thatimportant occupation, and be pleased toaccompany this hidalgo to any part ofyour domain he likes to ramble to."Right willingly," answered this sproutof holiness : " whither shall we go ?"Through the village, into the opencountry, if you have no objection," answeredI ; " to any point, in short, where I mayenjoy rural scenery, trees, and rocks, andrunning waters."Trees, and rocks, and running waters !"re-echoed the monk with a vacant stare.Had you not better visit our rabbit .51ren — the finest in this world ? Though, tobe sure, the rabbits, poor things ! are allasleep at this time of day, and it wouldbe cruel to disturb even them."This was a broad hint, but I wouldnot take it. The monk, finding I wasbent on he could not imagine what pursuit,and that there was no diverting mefrom it, tucked up his upper garments,shadowed his sleek round face with anenormous straw hat, offered me anotherof equal size quite new and glossy, and,with staves in our hands, we set forthlike the disciples journeying to Emmaus insome of Poelemburg's smooth landscapes.We passed through quadrangles afterquadrangles, and courts after courts, till,opening a sly door in an obscure corner,which had proved a convenient sally-port,no doubt, for many an agreeable excursion,we found ourselves in a winding alley,bordered by sheds and cottages, with irregularsteps leading up to rustic porchesE 252 TOE monastery OFand many a vine-bower and many a trellisedwalk. No human being was to beheard or seen ; no poultry were paradingabout ; and except a beautiful white macawperched on a broken wall, and nestlinghis bill under his feathers, not asingle member of the feathered creationwas visible. There was a holy calm inthis mid-day silence — a sacredness, as ifall nature had been fearful to disturb theslumbers of universal Pan.I kept, however, straggling on — impiously,it would have been thought inPagan times — between long stretches ofgarden-walls overhung by fig-trees, theair so profoundly tranquil that I actually\ heard a fruit drop from a bough. SometimesI was enticed down a mysteriouslane by the prospect of a crag and a Moorishcastle which offered itself to view atits termination, and sometimes under ruinedarches which crossed my path in themost picturesque manner. So I still .5Stinned my devious course with a pertinacitythat annoyed my lazy conductor —past utterance, it seems ; for during ourwhole excursion we scarcely exchangeda syllable.At length, he could bear with my no longer ; an irresistiblesomnolency came over him ; and, stretchinghimself out on the bare ground, in thedeep shadow of some tall cypress, he gaveway to repose most delectably. I wasnow abandoned entirely to myself, unsubduedby the quiet of the place, and asactive as ever. Some tokens of animation,however, in other beings besides myselfwould not have been displeasing — thedead silence which prevailed began tooppress me.At length, a faint musical murmur stoleupon my ear: I advanced towards thespot whence it seemed to come — a retiredgarden-house at the end of a pleasantavenue, which, to add to its pleasantness,54 THE MONASTERY OFhad been lately watered. Drawing nearerand nearer, my heart beating quickly allthe while, I distinguished the thrillingcadences of a delightful Basilica (sinhache* vem da Bahia), — well-known sounds.I looked up to a latticed window justthrown open by a lovely arm — a well-knownarm : — " Gracious heavens ! DonnaFrancisca, is it you ? What brought youhere ? What inspired you to exchangeQueluz and the Ajuda for this obscureretirement?""Ascend these steps, and I will tellyou : but your stay must not exceed tenminutes — not a second more."Brief indeed," answered I : "I seethere is no time to lose."Up I sprung — and who should receiveme ? Not the fascinating songstressnot the lady of the lovely arm, but hersedate though very indulgent mother.I know whom you are looking for," saidthe matron ; "but it is in vain. You haveALCOBAfA. 55heard, but are not to see, Francisca, whois no longer the giddy girl you used todance with ; her heart is turned, — nay,do not look so wild, — turned, I tell you,but turned to God. A most holy manasaint, the very mirror of piety for hisyears — he is not yet forty, only think ! —operated this blessed change. You knowhow light-hearted, and almost indiscreetlyso, my poor dear heart's comfort was.You recollect hearing, and you were terriblyangry, I remember, that the EnglishPadre told the Invade it was shameful howvery rapturously my poor dear girl rattledher castanets, and threw back her head, andput forward every other part of her dearlittle person, at the Factory ball — ShameON HIM, scandalous old crabbed heretic ?Well, it so happened that my Lord HighAlmoner came to court upon state affairs,accompanied by the precious man I havebeen talking of, — the most exemplarymonk in that noble convent, and its right56 THE MONASTERY OFhand. One day at Queluz he saw mydaughter dancing divinely, as you knowshe did ; he heard her sing, — you knowhow she warbles — she still warbles; hesaid, (and he has such an eye,) that underthe veil of all this levity were lurkingthe seeds of grace. ' I will developed them,'exclaimed this saint upon earth, in a transportof holy fervour. So he set about it,and a miraculous metamorphosis did heperform : my gay, my dissipated child,became an example of serious piety ; noflirting, no racketing, nothing but piousdiscourse with this best of discoursers.Two months passed away in this exemplarymanner. When the time came formy Lord High Almoner to return, ourholy friend was in duty bound to accompanyhim. What was to be done ? francescahad forgotten everything and everybodyelse in this sinful world ; she existedbut for this devout personage ; she livedbut in his holy smiles when he approvedALCOBAfA. 57her conduct, and almost died under his reproofwhen any transient little fault of hersoccasioned his enjoining her severe penances: and I shudder to think how severethey sometimes were ; for, would youbelieve it ? he has made her submit to flagellation— and, more than once, to goadingwith sharp points. In due course,the hour of departure arrived. ' We mustall die,' said Francisca ; ' my hour is come.'She looked all she said : she pined andlanguished, and, I am convinced, wouldhave kept her word, if I had not said,Dearest child, there is but one remedy :it is the will of God we should go toAlcoba^a ; and to Alcoba^a we will go,let all your uncles, cousins, and adorerssay what they choose to the contrary.'So we took this house and this garden —a nice little garden — only look at thesepretty yellow carnations ! — and we are veryhappy in our little way, entirely given uptodevotion, under the gjLiidancc of our58 THE MONASTERY OFincomparable spiritual director, who allowsus to want for nothing, even in this world.See what fruit ! what fine sweetmeats ! whata relishing Melg^^o ham ! look at thesebaskets !"She was just lifting up the rich damaskcovers thrown over them, when a mostvigorous " Hem ! hem ! ! hem ! ! !" in therustic street snapped short the thread ofher eloquence, by calling her to the balconywith the utmost precipitation — " JesuMaria Jose !— he comes ! he comes !" Hadshe seen a ghost instead of a very substantialfriar, she could not have startedwith greater abruptness : her scared looksshowed me the door so intelligibly that Iwas off in a twinkling; it would havebeen most indiscreet — nay, sacrilegious, toremain a moment longer.It was now half-past one, and the worldof Alcobapa was alive again — the peasanthad resumed her distaff, the monk hisbreviary, the ox his labour, and the soundALCOBAfA. 59of the nora, or water-wheel, was heard inthe land. The important hour of dinnerat the convent I knew was approaching :I wished to scale the crag above the village,and visit the Moorish castle, whichlooked most invitingly picturesque, withits varied outline of wall and tower ; butI saw a posse of monks and novices advancingfrom the convent, bowing andbeckoning me to return.So I returned, — and 'twas well I did, asit turned out. Fourteen or fifteen sleekwell-fed mules, laden with paniers ofneat wicker-work, partially covered withscarlet cloth, were standing about thegrand platform before the convent ; andthe reverend father, one of the prime dignitariesof the chapter, who was waitingat the entrance of the apartment assignedto me, pointing to them, put me in mindthat last night I had expressed a vehementwish to visit Batavia ; adding most graciously,that the wishes of a person so60 THE MONASTERY OFstrongly recommended to them as I hadbeen by the good and great Marquis ofPonte de Lima were laws.This very night, if it so please you,"said his reverence, " we sleep at Batavia.The convent is poor and destitute, unworthy— nay, incapable of accommodatingsuch guests as my lords the Grand Priors,and yourself ; but I hope we have providedagainst the chill of a meagre reception.These mules will carry with them whatevermay be required for your comfort.To-morrow, I hope, you will return to us ;and the following day, should you inflictupon us the misfortune of losing yourdelightful society, myself and two of mycomrades will have the honour of accompanyingyou as far back as one of ourfarms called Pedraneira, on your return toLisbon."There was nothing on my part to objectto in this arrangement ; I fancied too Icould discern in it a lurking wish to beALCOBAfA. 61quit of our most delightful society, andthe turmoil and half-partial restraint itoccasioned. Putting on the sweetest smilesof grateful acquiescence, to hear was toobey ; everything relating to movementsbeing confirmed by the terzetto of GrandPriors during our repast — copious andsplendid as usual.The carriages drew up very soon afterit was ended ; my riding horses werebrought out, all our respective attendantsmustered, and, preceded by a long stringof sumpter-mules and baggage-carts, withalltheir bells in full jingle and all theirdrivers in full cry, off we set in most formidableai'ray, taking the route of Alju-baryta.Our road, not half so rough as I expected,led us up most picturesquely-shapedsteep acclivities, shaded by chesnuts,with here and there a branchingpine, for about a league. We then foundourselves on a sort of table-land ; and, a62 AN EXCURSION TOmile or two further, in the midst of astraggling village. There was no temptationto leave the snug corner of ourcomfortable chaises ; so we contented ourselveswith surveying at our perfect easethe prospect of the famous plain, whichformed the termination of a long perspectiveof antiquated houses.Here, on this very plain, was fought in1385 the fierce battle which placed thediadem of Portugal on the brow of theglorious and intrepid bastard. It wasdown that ravine the Castilian cavalrypoured along in utter confusion, so hotlypursued that three thousand were slain.On yonder mound stood the King of Castile'stent and temporary chapel, which heabandoned, with all its rich and jewelledfurniture, to the conquerors, and scamperedoff in such alarm that he scarcelyknew whether he had preserved his headon his shoulders, till safe within the wallsof Santarem, where he tore his hair andBATALIIA. 63plucked off his beard by handfuls, andraved and ranted like a maniac. — Thedetails of this frantic plumage are to befound in a letter from the Constable NunAlvarez Pereira to the Abbot of Alcoba^a.I tried to inspire my right reverendfellow-travellers with patriotic enthusiasm,and to engage them to cast a retrospectiveglance upon the days of Lusitania glory.Times present, and a few flasks of mostexquisite wine, the produce of a neighbouringvineyard, engrossed their wholeattention. "Multo bon — primerose— excellente,"were the only words that escapedtheir most grateful lips.The Quiz de Fora of the village, a dabblerin history — for he told us he had readthe Chronicles, and who stood courteouslyand obsequiously on the step of our ,handing us the precious beverage— made some attempts to edge inaword about the battle, and particularlyabout a certain valiant English knight,64 AN EXCURSION TOwhose name he did not even pretend toremember, but who might have been arelation of mine for aught he knew tothe contrary. Well, this valiant knight,who had vanquished all the chivalry ofFrance and England, had the honour ofbeing vanquished in his turn by the flowerof warriors, the renowned Magic : a greathonour too, for Magic had excellenttaste in the choice of his antagonists, andwould only fight with the bravest of thebrave. *' Even so," continued the worthymagistrate, bowing to the earth, " as ourgreat Camoens testifies." — No answer toall this flourish except " Ten thousandthanks for your excellent wine : driveon." And drive on we did with redoubledbriskness.The highest exhilaration prevailedthroughout our whole caravan. All myEnglish servants were in raptures, readyto turn Catholics. My famous Frenchcook, in the glow of the moment, unpa-Batavia. 65critically declared Clos de Vougeot, puddlecompared to Aljubarota, — divine, perfumed,ethereal Als baryta ! Dr. Ehrhartprotested no country under the sun equaledPortugal for curiosities in mineralogy,theology, and theology — which ologyhe was now convinced was the best ofthem all. Franchi mounted one of myswiftest coursers — he had never venturedto mount before — and galloped away likethe King of Castile on his flight to San-tares.The Grand Prior and all hisecclesiastical cortege fell fast asleep ; andit would have been most irreverent not tohave followed so respectable an example.I can therefore describe nothing of theremainder of our route.The sun had sunk and the moon risen,when a tremendous jolt and a loudscream awakened the whole party. PoorFranchi lay sprawling upon the ground ;whilst my Arabian, his glossy sides streamingwith blood, was darting along like oneFG6 THE MONASTERY OFof the steeds in the Apocalypse ; happilyhis cast-off rider escaped with a slightcontusion.My eyes being fairly open, I beheld aquiet solitary vale, bordered by shrubbyhills ; a few huts, and but a few, peepingout of dense masses of foliage ; and highabove their almost level surface, the greatchurch, with its rich cluster of abbatialbuildings, buttresses, and pinnacles, andfretted spires, towering in all their pride,and marking the ground with deep shadowsthat appeared interminable, so farand so wide were they stretched along.Lights glimmered here and there in variousparts of the edifice ; but a strongglare of torches pointed out its principalentrance, where stood the whole communitywaiting to receive us.Whilst our sumpter-mules were un-lading,and ham and pies and sausageswere rolling out of plethoric hampers,I thought these poor monks looked onBATALIIA. 67rather enviously. My more fortunate companions— 'Uo wretched cadets of the mortificationfamily, but the true elder sonsof fat mother church — could hardly concealtheir sneers of conscious superiority.A contrast so strongly marked amused menot a little.The space before the entrance beingnarrow, there was some difficulty in threadingour way through a labyrinth of panniers,and coffers, and baggage, — and mules,as obstinate as their drunken drivers, whichis saying a great deal, — and all our grooms,lackeys, and attendants, half asleep, halfmuddled.The Batavia Prior and his assistantslooked quite astounded when they sawa gauze-curtained bed, and the GrandPrior's fringed pillow, and the Prior ofSt. Vincent's superb coverlet, and basins,and ewers, and other utensils of glitteringsilver, being carried in. Poor souls ! theyhardly knew what to do, to say, or be at —F 268 THE MONASTERY OFone running to the right, another to theleft — one tucking up his flowing garmentsto run faster, and another rebuking himfor such a deviation from monastic decorum.At length, order being somewhat reestablished,and some fine painted waxtapers, which were just unpacked, lighted,we were ushered into a large plain chamber,and the heads of the order presentedby the humble Prior of Batavia to theirsuperior mightiness of San Vincent andAviz. Then followed a good deal of gossipingchat, endless compliments, stilllonger litanies, and an enormous supper.One of the monks who partook of it,though almost bent double with age, playedhis part in excellent style. Animatedby ample potations of the very best Alju-baryta that ever grew, and which wehad taken the provident care to bringwith us, he exclaimed lustily, " Well,this is as it should be — rare doings ! suchBatavia. 69as have not been witnessed at Bataviasince a certain progress that great KingJohn the Fifth, made hither more thanhalf a century ago. I remember everycircumstance attending it as clearly asthough it had only taken place last week.But only think of the atrocious impudenceof the gout ! His blessed Majesty hadhardly set down to a banquet ten timesfiner than this, before that accursed malady,patronized by all the devils in hell,thrust its fangs into his toe. I was atthat period in the commencement of mynoviciate, a handsome lad enough, andhad the much-envied honour of layinga cloth of gold cushion under the augustfeet of our glorious sovereign. No soonerhad the extremities of his royal personcome in contact with the stiff embroidery,than he roared out as a mere mortalwould have done, and looked as blackas a thunder-storm ; but soon recoveringhis most happy benign temper, gave me70 THE MONASTERY OFa rouleau of fine, bright, golden coin,and a tap on the head, — ay, on this oncecomely, now poor old shrivelled head.Oh, he was a gracious, open-hearted, gloriousmonarch — the very King of Diamondsand Lord of Hearts ! Oh, he is in Heaven,in Heaven above ! as sure — ay, as sureas I drink your health, most esteemedstranger."So saying, he drained a huge silvergoblet to the last drop, and falling backin his chair, was carried out, chair andall, weeping, puling, and worse than drivelling,with such maudlin tendernessthat he actually marked his track with aflow of liquid sorrows.As soon as an act of oblivion had beenpassed over this little sentimental mishapby effacing every trace of it, we all roseup and retired to rest : but little rest,however, was in store for me ; the heatof my mid-day ramble, and perhaps somebaneful effect from our moon-lit journey,Batavia. 71the rays of our cold satellite having fallenwhilst I was asleep too directly on myhead, had disordered me ; I felt disturbedand feverish, a strange jumble of ideasand recollections fermented in my brain —springing in part from the indignant feelingswhich Donna Francisca's fervour forher monk, and coldness for me, had inspired.I had no wish to sleep, and yetmy pleasant retired chamber, with cleanwhite walls, chequered with the reflectionof waving boughs, and the sound of arivulet softened by distance, invited itsoothingly. Seating myself in the deep-recess of a capacious window which waswide open, I suffered the balsamic air andserene moonlight to quiet my agitatedspirits. One lonely nightingale had takenpossession of a bay-tree just beneath me,and was pouring forth its ecstatic notesat distant intervals.In one of those long pauses, when silenceitself, enhanced by contrast, seemed72 THE MONASTERY OFto become still deeper, a far differentsound than the last I had been listeningto caught my ear, — the sound of a loudbut melancholy voice echoing through thearched avenues of a vast garden, pronouncingdistinctly these appalling words" Judgment ! judgment ! tremble at theanger of an offended God ! Woe to Portugal! woe ! woe !"My hair stood on end — I felt as if aspirit were about to pass before me ; butinstead of some fearful shape — some horridshadow, such as appeared in vision toElisha, there issued forth from a darkthicket, a tall, majestic, deadly-pale oldman : he neither looked about nor abovehim ; he moved slowly on, his eye fixedas stone, sighing profoundly; and at thedistance of some fifty paces from the spotwhere I was stationed, renewed his dolefulcry, his fatal proclamation : — '' Woe !woe ! " resounded through the still atmosphere,repeated by the echoes of vaultsBatavia. 73and arches ; and the sounds died away,and the spectre-like form that seemed toemit them retired, I know not how norwhither. Shall I confess that my blood rancold — that all idle, all wanton thoughts leftmy bosom, and that I passed an hour ortwo at my window fixed and immovable ?Just as day dawned, I crept to bed andfell into a profound sleep, uninterrupted,I thank Heaven, by dreams.74 THE MONASTERY OFSEVENTH DAY.Morning. — The Prior of Batavia. — His Account of the NocturnalWanderer. — A Procession. — Grand Facade of theGreat Church. — The Nave. — Effect of the golden andruby light from the windows.— Singularly devout celebrationof High Mass. — Mausoleum of John the First andPhilippa. — Royal Tombs. — The Royal Cloisters. — PerfectPreservation of this regal Monastery. — Beautiful Chapterhouse.— Tombs of Alphonse the Fifth and his Grandson.— Tide of Monks, Sacristans, Novices, &c. — Our Departure— Wild Road. — Redoubled kindness of my Receptionby the Lord Abbot, and why. — Dr. Ehrhart'svisit to the Infirmary, and surgical raptures. — A half-crazedPoet and his doleful tragedy. — Senhor Agostinhoin the character of Donna Inez de Castro. — Favouritism,and its reward.9th June.A DELIGHTFUL coming sun was shiningin all its splendour, when I awoke, andran to the balcony, to look at the gardenand wild hills, and to ask myself tentimes over, whether the form I had seen.Batavia. 75and the voice I had heard, were real orimaginary. I had scarcely dressed, andwas preparing to sally forth, when a distincttap at my door, gentle but imperative,startled me.The door opened, and the Prior ofBatavia stood before me. " You were disturbed,I fear," said he, " in the dead of thenight, by a wailful voice, loudly proclaimingsevere impending judgments. I heard italso, and I shuddered, as I always do whenI hear it. Do not, however, imagine thatit proceeds from another world. Thebeing who uttered these dire sounds isstill upon the earth, a member of our convent— an exemplary, a most holy man — ascion of one of our greatest families, and anear relative of the Duke of Aveiro, ofwhose dreadful, agonizing fate you musthave heard. He was then in the pride ofyouth and comeliness, gay as sunshine,volatile as you now appear to be. He hadaccompanied the devoted duke to a THE MONASTERY OFtous ball given by your nation to ourhigh nobility : — at the very moment whensplendour, triumph, and merriment wereat their highest pitch, the executioners ofPombal's decrees, soldiers and ruffians,pounced down upon their prey ; he toowas of the number arrested — he too wasthrown into a deep, cold dungeon : hislife was spared ; and, in the course ofyears and events, the slender, lovely youth,now become a wasted, care-worn man,emerged to sorrow and loneliness.The blood of his dearest relatives seemedsprinkled upon every object that methis eyes ; he never passed Belem withoutfancying he beheld, as in a sort of frightfuldream, the scaffold, the wheels on whichthose he best loved had expired in torture.The current of his young, hot blood wasfrozen ; he felt benumbed and paralysed ;the world, the court, had no charms forhim ; there was for him no longer warmthin the sun, or smiles on the human count77penance : a stranger to love or fear, or anyinterest on this side the grave, he gave uphis entire soul to prayer ; and, to followthat sacred occupation with greater intenseness,renounced every prospect ofworldly comfort or greatness, and embracedour order.Full eight-and-twenty years has heremained within these walls, so deeply impressedwith the conviction of the Duke ofAveiro's innocence, the atrocious falsehoodof that pretended conspiracy, and the consequentunjust tyrannical expulsion of theorder of St. Ignatius, that he believes — andthe belief of so pure and so devout a manis always venerable — that the horrors nowperpetrating in France are the direct consequenceof that event, and certain ofbeing brought home to Portugal ; whichkingdom he declares is foredoomed to desolation,and its royal house to punishmentsworse than death.He seldom speaks ; he loathes convertsTHE MONASTERY OFnation, he spurns news of any kind, heshrinks from strangers ; he is constant athis duty in the choir — most severe in hisfasts, vigils, and devout observances ; hepays me canonical obedience — nothingmore : he is a living grave, a walkingsepulchre. I dread to see or hear him ; forevery time he crosses my path, beyond theimmediate precincts of our basilica, hemakes a dead pause, and repeats the sameterrible words you heard last night, withan astounding earnestness, as if commissionedby God himself to deliver them.And, do you know, my lord stranger, thereare moments of my existence, when I firmlybelieve he speaks the words of prophetictruth : and who, indeed, can reflectupon the unheard-of crimes committing inFrance — the massacres, the desecrations,the frantic blasphemies, and not believethem ? Yes, the arm of an avenging God isstretched out — and the weight of impendingjudgment is most terrible.Batavia. 79"But what am I saying ? — why should Ifill your youthful bosom with such apprehensions? I came here to pray your forgivenessfor last night's annoyance; whichwould not have taken place, had not thebustle of our preparations to receive yourillustrious and revered companions, theLord Priors, in the best manner our humblemeans afford, impeded such precautionsas might have induced our reverendbrother to forego, for once, his dreary nocturnalwalk. I have tried by persuasionto prevent it several times before. Tohave absolutely forbidden it, would havebeen harsh — nay, cruel — he gasps so piteouslyfor air : besides, it might have beenimpious to do so. I have taken opinionsin chapter upon this matter, which unanimouslystrengthen my conviction that thespirit of the Most High moves within him ;nor dare we impede its utterance."I listened with profound seriousnessto this remarkable communication; — the80 THE MONASTERY OFPrior read in my countenance that I didso, and was well pleased. Leading theway, he conducted me to a large shadyapartment, in which the plash of a neighbouringfountain was distinctly heard.In the centre of this lofty and curiously-groinedvaulted hall, resting on a smoothIndian mat, an ample table was spreadout with viands and fruits, and liquorscooled in snow. The two Prelates, withthe monks deputed from Alcoba^a to attendthem, were sitting round it. Theyreceived me with looks that bespoke theutmost kindness, and at the same timesuppressed curiosity ; but not a word wasbreathed of the occurrence of last night,with which, however, I have not thesmallest doubt they were perfectly wellacquainted.I cannot say our repast was lively orconvivial ; a mysterious gloom seemedbrooding over us, and to penetrate thevery atmosphere — and yet that atmosphereBatavia. 81was all loveliness. A sky of intense azure,tempered by fleecy clouds, discovered itselfbetween the tracery of innumerable arches ;the summer airs {aure festive) fanned usas we sat ; the fountain bubbled on ; theperfume of orange and citron flowers waswafted to us from an orchard not far off:but, in spite of all these soft appliances,we remained silent and abstracted.A sacristan, who came to announcethat high mass was on the point of celebration,interrupted our reveries. We allrose up — a solemn grace was said, andthe Prior of Batavia taking me most benignantlyby the hand, the prelates andtheir attendants followed. We advancedin procession through courts and cloistersand porches, all constructed with admirableskill, of a beautiful grey stone, approachingin fineness of texture and apparentdurability to marble. Young boysof dusky complexions, in long white tunicsand with shaven heads, were busilyG82 Tick MONASTERY OFemployed dispelling every particle of dust.A stork and a flamingo seemed to keepmost amicable company with them, followingthem wherever they went, andreminding me strongly of Egypt and therites of Isis.We passed the refectory, a plain solidbuilding, with a pierced parapet of thepurest Gothic design and most preciseexecution, and traversing a garden courtdivided into compartments, where grewthe orange trees whose fragrance we hadenjoyed, shading the fountain by whosemurmurs we had been lulled, passedthrough a sculptured gateway into anirregular open space before the grandwestern facade of the great church —grand indeed — the portal full fifty feetin height, surmounted by a window ofperforated marble of nearly the samelofty dimensions, deep as a cavern, andenriched with canopies and imagery in astyle that would have done honour toBATALIIA. 83William of Wykeham, some of whose disciplesor co-disciples in the train of thefounder's consort, Philippa of Lancaster,had probably designed it.As soon as we drew near, the valves of ahuge oaken door were thrown open, andwe entered the nave, which reminded meof Winchester in form of arches andmouldings, and of Amiens in loftiness.There is a greater plainness in the walls,less panelling, and fewer intersections inthe vaulted roof; but the utmost richnessof hue, at this time of day at least, wasnot wanting. No tapestry, however rich —no painting, however vivid, could equalthe gorgeousness of tint, the splendourof the golden and ruby light whichstreamed forth from the long series ofstained windows : it played flickeringabout in all directions, on pavement andon roof, casting over every object myriadsof glowing mellow shadows ever in undulatingmotion, like the reflection ofG 284 THE MONASTERY OFbranches swayed to and fro by the breeze.We all partook of these gorgeous tints —the white monastic garments of my conductorsseemed as it were embroideredwith the brightest flowers of paradise, andour whole procession kept advancing investedwith celestial colours.Mass began as soon as the high prelaticpowers had taken their stations. It wascelebrated with no particular pomp, noglittering splendour ; but the countenanceand gestures of the officiating priests werecharacterised by a profound religious awe.The voices of the monks, clear but deep-toned,rose pealing through vast and echoingspaces. The chant was grave andsimple — its austerity mitigated in someparts by the treble of very youngchoristers. These sweet and innocentsounds found their way to my heart —they recalled to my memory our ownbeautiful cathedral service, and — I wept !My companions, too, appeared unusuallyBatavia. 85affected; their thoughts still dwelling, nodoubt, on that prophetic voice which neverfailed to impress its hearers with a sensationof mysterious dread.It Alas in this tone of mind, so wellcalculated to nourish solemn and melancholyimpressions, that we visited themausoleum where lie extended on theircold sepulchres the effigies of John theFirst, and the generous-hearted, noble-mindedPhilippa ; linked hand in handin death as fondly they were in life. —This tomb is placed in the centre of thechapel.Under a row of arches on the right,fretted and pinnacled and crocketed inthe best style of Gothic at its best period,lie, sleeping the last sleep, theirjustly renowned progeny, the Regent PedroDuke of Coimbra, whose wise administrationof government, during the minorityof his nephew and son-in-law Alfonsothe Fifth, rendered Portugal so86 THE MONASTERY OFprosperous, and whose death, by the vilesttreachery, on the field of Alfarubeira, wasthe fatal consequence of bitter feud andcivil jealousies; the Infante, Dom John,a man of pure and blameless life ; Fernando,whose protracted captivity inAfrica was a long agony, endured withthe resigned and pious fortitude of aChristian martyr ; and Henry, to whomhis country is beholden for those triumphantmaritime discoveries, the result ofhis scientific researches unerringly pursuedin calm and studious retirement.All these princes, in whom the highbearing of their intrepid father, and theexemplary virtues and strong sense of theirmother, the grand-daughter of our Edwardthe Third, were united, repose, after theirtoils and suffering, in this secluded chapel,which looks indeed a place of rest andholy quietude ; the light, equably diffused,forms as it were a tranquil atmosphere,such as might be imagined worthy to sur-batavia.87round the predestined to happiness in afuture world.I withdrew from the contemplation ofthese tombs with reluctance ; every objectin the chapel which contains them beingso pure in taste, so harmonious in colour;every armorial device, every mottled samuel,so tersely and correctly sculptured,associated also so closely with historicaland English recollections — the garter, theleopards, the fleur-de-lis, " from haughtyGallia torn ;" the Plantagenet cast of thewhole chamber conveyed home to my bosoma feeling so interesting, so congenial,that I could hardly persuade myself tomove away, though my reverend conductorsbegan to show evident signs of impatience.The Prior of St. Vincent's observed tome,that as my Lord High Almoner expectedus back to dinner, and had set hisheart upon an omelette a la provencale,which he eagerly desired might be tossed88 THE MONASTERY Orup by my divine (as he was pleased to callhim) French cook, we had no time to lose.We were therefore hurried unmercifullythrough the royal cloisters, a glorioussquare of nearly two hundred feet, surroundedby most beautifully-proportionedarches, filled up with a tracery as quaintas any of the ornaments of Rosin chapel,but infinitely more elegant : it is impossibleto praise too warmly their tasteful anddelicate ramifications.I could not fail observing the admirableorder in which every — the minutest nookand corner of this truly regal monasteryis preserved : not a weed in any crevice,not a lichen on any stone, not a stain onthe warm-coloured apparently marble walls,not a floating cress on the unsullied watersof the numerous fountains. The ventilationof all these spaces was most admirable; it was a luxury to breathe the temperatedelicious air, blowing over the freshherbs and flowers, which filled the com-BATALIIA. 80apartments of a parterre in the centre ofthe cloister, from which you ascend by afew expansive steps to the chapter-house,a square of seventy feet, and the moststrikingly beautiful apartment I ever beheld.The graceful arching of the roof,unsupported by console or column, is unequalled; it seems suspended by magic ;indeed, human means failed twice in constructingthis bold unembarrassed space.Perseverance, and the animating encouragementof the sovereign founder, atlength conquered every difficulty, and thework remains to this hour secure and perfect.This stately hall, though appropriatedto the official resort of the living, is also aconsecrated abode of the dead. On a raisedplatform in the centre, covered withrich palls, are placed the tombs of Alfonsothe Fifth, and his grandson, a gallant,blooming youth, torn from life, and hisnewly-married consort, the Infanta of90 THE MONASTERY OFCastile, and its fairest flower, at the earlyage of seventeen : with him expired thebest hopes of Portugal, and of his father,the great John the Second.My conductors, a great deal less affectedthan myself, would not allow me even onemoment to ruminate and moralize uponvicissitudes and bereavements — they quiteurged me along ; and, to aid their activeintentions, a tide of monks, sacristans, novices,seminaries, and the Lord knows whobeside, appeared all of a sudden flowingforth from every cell and cloister : theyhad been all congregated, it seems, to dous honour and bid us adieu. The Prior,with his hands crossed on his breast, mademe a low obeisance, and then opening hisarms, gave me a cordial embrace.Our army of attendants, mules, horses,and carriages, were all in waiting, readydrawn up at the same portal by which wehad entered the night before. A grandinterchange of salutations having takenRATALHA. 91place, we departed, the fatal voice, I verilybelieve, sounding in the ears of most ofus — it certainly did in mine.To dissipate impressions which hungheavily upon me, I asked permission ofmy illustrious companions to mount myhorse, and to leave them to the easeand comfort of their capacious chaise ;they of course returning by Aljubarota,and I by a short cut, over some of thewildest be pined, and be-rosemary, andbe-lavender country I ever met with.Franchi, who was perfectly well acquaintedwith this wilderness, steered my coursethrough all its mazes and straggling pathsof sand and turf, alternately, borderedby the gum-cistus in full flaring flower,so strongly scented as almost to commandme to go to sleep.Dr. Ehrhart had taken his departureseveral hours before, charged with the importantmission of conveying my culinaryartist, the incomparable Monsieur Simon,92 THE MONASTERY OFto the longing arms of My Lord HighAlmoner ; and, above all, by a vehementimpulse to visit the infirmary of the convent,which he had been told containedan unusual number of patients, many ofwhom were afflicted with unusual disorders.This was attraction for him inan irresistible shape, and he most gladlyleft Batavia, and all its historical glories,(tombs, altars, and chapels, finished orunfinished,) to enjoy it.I cannot describe in too glowing coloursthe increased jubilation with which I hadthe glory of being received by my LordAbbot upon my return ; for not only didhe pass the threshold of his majestic portalsto bid me welcome, but his principalconfidant and factotum, the Sub-Prior,(whose strongly marked features werequite in the style of some of the fineststudies of Masaccio,) assisted me to dismount,and condescendingly held mystirrup. From all these redoubled attend93tons, I plainly perceived that the windhad changed in my favour several pointssince yesterday : and what do you thinkhad produced this agreeable alteration ?the omelette a la provencale.Oh, my dear, most excellent stranger!"(my name for the time being had totallyescaped him,) exclaimed his right reverence," what a treasure you possess inthat admirable artist — o grande Simao!he has had the kindness to cast a newlight over my stoves, — he is liberalityitself; for, instead of locking up his knowledge,he has diffused it throughout mywhole kitchen. Here — " continued he,pulling out some scrawls which Franchi hadtranslated from the original French intovery aboriginal Portuguese — " Here arereceipts, with marginal notes and illustrations,I mean to preserve, as carefullyas I would a string of pearls, till mylast hour. But, is it true, is it possible,you can be meditating to leave us so94 THE MONASTERY OFsoon ? Some bird of evil note whisperedin my ear that you were determined toleave us tomorrow morning. Let me conjureyou not to think of it : one daymore, at least, do I pray and beseech youto bestow on us. My revered lords thePriors of Aviz and St. Vincent's haveconsented to comply with my request,subject to your approval — Oh do not refusethem and me !"Whatever your right reverence andmy illustrious friends so earnestly desirecannot meet on my part with the slightestimpediment," answered I with a reverentialobeisance.Now then," rejoined the Prior, clappinghis hands in ecstasy, " we shallhave that famous dish the admirable Simonpromised me, — a macedon, worthy ofAlexander the Great ; most happy, mostgrateful do I feel myself. But time is onthe wing — let us profit whilst we can.I see you wish to refresh yourself by aALCOBApA. 95change of dress in your own apartment :be it so — but don't be long ; dinner shallbe on table the moment you are ready ;and you know, good becomes bad, inthe case of dishes at least, if we wait asecond beyond the auspicious time'*Such logic was irresistible ; I made allthe haste required, and we sat down, Ican truly say, to one of the most deliciousbanquets ever vouchsafed a mortal on thisside Mahomet's paradise. The macedonwas perfection, the ortolans and quailslumps of celestial fatness, and the sautesand bechamels beyond praise ; and a certaintruffle cream so exquisite, that myLord Abbot forestalled the usual graceat the termination of repasts, most piouslyto give thanks for it.The dinner was about half over, when incame Dr. Ehrhart in high spirits, rubbinghis hands with triumphant glee, and talkingto himself, as he was often wont, in thepurest Alsatian. He had passed a couple96 THE MONASTERY OFof hours in the infirmary, and had visitedall its closets of vials and galli pots. Thedrugs were not such (he informed us)either in quantity or quality as he couldwarmly commend ; but the stock of maladies,to the alleviation of which theywere destined, most ample. He had founda pretty sprinkling of complicated cases, —some highly curious, and, no doubt, piquant:one in particular, an ulcer of tremendoussize, exhibited every freak dame Naturewas capable of playing upon such anoccasion, — suppuration in one corner, callosityin another. He spoke of it inraptures, and regretted our stay was toolimited to allow his committing to paperan exact delineation of this magnificentobject in all its glow of colouring. Hespoke handsomely also of the compoundfracture of somebody's left leg. But whenhe came to the description of a sweet, simpleperennial sore (simplex immunities),which had continued during a series ofALCOBAfA. 97years to ebb and flow as regularly as theocean, his enthusiasm knew no bounds.He said it was a most singular case . — abeautiful case ; a case so remarkable, sounprecedented, that he was determined allEurope should ring of it from side to side.He would throw his thoughts upon it intoa dissertation of the length of at leastsixty pages that he would — and dedicateit to his native university. Then, burstingforth into a torrent of Latin, renderedunintelligible to all but the frequentersof Strasbourg or Colmar by the most villanousAlsatian twang, addressed himselfpoint-blank to my Lord Abbot.His right reverence, by no means pleasedat being roused from the joys of the tableby such an appeal and upon such a subject,very coolly replied, "that he made itarule never to speak or hear the Latinlanguage out of the choir, if he could possiblyhelp it." This so palpable a rebuffsilenced the good doctor, who had recourseII98 THE MONASTER V OVto copious libations of generous wine todispel the disappointment it occasioned ;for he saw plainly that neither the fierceulcer nor the gentle sore would meet withthat attention from the supreme disposerof all things at Alcobaca, he was convincedthey deserved so richly.Notwithstanding the plastic effects ofgood cheer and flowing cups, my inestimablephysician continued growling in anunder tone during the whole remainderof our repast. And now the fulness oftime for removing from the banquet-hallto the adjoining saloon being come, werepaired to another table, where all thedelights of fruit and confectionary awaitedus. Observing a good deal of whisperingand message-sending between the Priorsand their confidential attendants goingforward, accompanied by nods and winks,I thought something particular for ourspecial amusement was in contemplation ;ALCOBA^'A. 99nor was I deceived: the agreeable littlemystery was soon cleared up by the entranceof a tall, hook-nosed, personage, in a tarnished courtsuit ; who advanced with measured strides,beating with one hand a slow and solemntattoo upon a roll of parchment which hecarried in the other.I could not conceive what patent ordocument was about to be unfolded, whenthe personage giving the parchment aquick twirl with his bird-claw-like fingers,it displayed itself in the shape of a theatricalbill, engrossed in large charactersflaming with vermilion and gold. Onthis scroll I read most distinctly that —this night, by the grace of God and theespecial permission of the Abbot of Alco-papa. High Almoner of Portugal, &c. &c.&c. would be enacted the excruciatingtragedy of Donna Inez de Castro, and thecruel murder of that lovely lady and herH 2100 THE MONASTERY OFtwo innocent royal infants, represented onthe stage : the part of Donna Inez bySenhor Agostinho Jose.The murder of the two royal infants !"exclaimed I ; " what means this ? Weknow too well, alas ! how the Lady Inezwas disposed of ; but her two sweet babesescaped from the fangs of the tyrant — didthey not, my good Lord Abbot ?"To be sure they did," replied hisright reverence : " but this fine drama isnot the production of one of our nationalbards ; — an Italian gentleman, who hasdone us the honour of partaking of ourhospitality for several years, and acquiredin perfection our language, is the author ;and, being a stranger, cannot be expectedto feel so acutely for those precious infantsas we Portuguese do : he therefore askedmy leave to have them murdered, in orderto add to the effect of the catastrophe.Rather than thwart a person of suchtranscendent abilities, and my very .101titular friend, I consented. He had halfa mind to make them fall by their mother'sown poniard in a fit of frenzy :but I could not allow of that ; it wouldhave been stretching a little too far — don'tyou think so ?"Recollecting the stretches I had oftenmet with at home in historical novels —witness Miss Lee's " Recess" and manyothers — I made no objection, and turningto the bard, who was standing by wraptinto future murders, praised his sublimeefforts in the tragic vein — the terrible via —in the most glowing terms I could muster.Animated by these grateful eulogies,he vociferated with dreadful vehemence,Let me but live a few years longer, andI will be the death of half the regalpersonages in the Portuguese history, aftermy own fashion and no other. I willslay them magnificently on the battlefield,though they died in their brocadedbeds with all their courtiers puling102 THE MONASTERY OFaround them ; I will sink them in theocean, though they expired on dry land ; —their agonies in the act of drowning shallbe horrible ; — nay, more, I will call uponthe Prince of the Morning, upon Luciferhimself, to bear them away for some secretsin or compact, though the prayers of thechurch had been exhausted to avert sucha direful calamity."I thought this was a stretch with a vengeance: the Abbot, I plainly saw by hiscountenance, was of the same opinion ; but,giving his ample shoulders a kind commiseratingshrug, (for the bard was aspecial favourite,) contented himself withwhispering to me — " Sta dodo — sta dodo ;the man 's mad — all poets are."The Grand Prior of Aviz, who seemedto have no doubt of the truth of this observationin the present instance, lookedat the bard with an expression of alarmthat was almost ludicrous, and shrinkingback in his chair, exclaimed piteously —ALCOBA^A. 1 03What, Donna Inez and her childrenbutchered upon the stage ? I shall neverbe able to stand this ; my eyes wouldbecome fountains, and we have had weepingenough lately," (alluding perhaps tothe liquefaction scene of last night :) " tragediesof so deep a dye as this we arepromised, affect my nerves in the mostpainful manner' So saying, he retiredwithout further ceremony, accompaniedby two reverend fathers, dignitaries of theconvent, who professed the same clericalaversion to scenes of bloodshed.As soon as they had departed to a quietgame of volta rete in their own snugquarters, the Lord Abbot, observing it wasgrowing late, (for we had passed a mostunconscionable time at table,) invited meto repair, under his Sub-Prior's guidance,to a theatre which had been temporarilyfitted up in the most distant part of thisimmense edifice, of the extent of which,as well as of the endless variety of its104 THE MONASTERY OFcloistered galleries, cells, chapels, andchambers, I had not till this momentan adequate idea. Our peregrinations,therefore, were none of the shortest orleast intricate. We passed through severalgalleries but feebly lighted, disturbing,I fear, the devotions of some agedmonks, who were putting up their orisonsbefore a lugubrious image of our Lady ofthe Seven Colours, placed under a mostsumptuously fringed and furrowed canopyof purple velvet.Farther on, another vast corridor branchedoff to that part of the convent allottedto scholars and novices. Not a few ofthese gentle youths were pursuing thestudy of the Jew's harp, and twangingaway most proficient. All these scuddedoff upon our approach, — the whole partyhad been at high romps, I suspect, fromtheir flushed and blowzy appearance, —wishing us, I dare say, in purgatory, orALCOBA^A. 105a worse place, for having intruded upontheir recreations.Advancing with due gravity, the valvesof a lofty architectural door, with a pompousinscription on the pediment in goldencharacters, were unfolded, and we enteredan extraordinarily spacious, covedsaloon, which appeared to have been assignedto holier purposes, for there wasan organ in a recess on one side of it.Across the whole end of this apartment wasextended an immense green curtain, withthe insignia of the convent emblazonedupon it in vivid colours ; the centre of thesaloon was occupied, as might have beenexpected, with many a row of polishedoaken benches ; but what I did not expectwas an assemblage of more than onehundred venerable fathers, sitting in solemnranks, as if they had been assistingat an ecumenical council, some wipingtheir spectacles, and some telling their106 THE MONASTERY OFbeads. An effluvia, neither of jasmine norroses — in short, that species of high conventualfrowziness which monastic habits andgarments are not a little apt to engender,affected my lay nerves most disagreeably.The Prior of St. Vincent's, perceivingthe uneasy curl up of my nose, whisperedhis neighbour, vs^ho whispered a second,v^ho whispered a third, and presently amost grateful vapour of fragrant herbsand burnt lavender filled the room.Through its medium appeared descendingfrom a portal, by a flight of mostspacious steps, the Lord Abbot himselfin grand costume. He insisted, with apositiveness which I could not avoidobeying, that I should take his abbatialchair next the orchestra, and placed himselfon another equally ponderous, concedingthe one on my right hand to thePrior of St. Vincent's.We were no sooner settled, than half-a-dozensharp-toned fiddles, a growlingALCOBAfA. 107bass, two overgrown manliness (lutesI suppose I ought to style them), and apair of flutes most nauseously weededupon by two wanton-looking, blear-eyedyoung monks, who it would be charitableto suppose had caught cold at somemidnight choral service, struck up a mostsingular and original species of antiquatedoverture. It was full of jerking passagesin the style of " Les Folies d'Espagne,"and ended with a fugue that was in perfection.Instead of the curtains drawing up atthe conclusion of this strange musicalfarrago, there was a tedious pause, andI had full time to look round on theaudience. Not five monks off my fauteuil,I caught the evil eye of Donna Francisca'sdirector, sitting apart from the rest of theassembly, and looking more terrificallyglum than any saint I ever beheld onan Italian sign-post, or in a Germanprayer-book.108 THE MONASTERY OFI was trying to account for the delayof the performance, when sounds not unlikethose which often proceed from adisturbed hen-roost became audible. Franchi'svoice sounded predominant in thisstrange hubbub ; and I found out afterwardsthat he had been fruitlessly attemptingto persuade the Lady Inez (one ofthe most ungain hobbledehoys I ever metwith) to abjure an enormous pair of jinglingear-rings, and to reduce a sweepingtrain he kept floundering over at everystep, to the proportion of those in fashionamongst the tragedy queens of the Salitritheatre. Anything in the shape of metropolitancriticism wounded the awkwardstripling's provincial amour-propre sodeeply, that he threatened hysterics andan appeal to the Lord Abbot. This wasconclusive ; Franchi gave way, the LadyInez retained her overflowing robes andher ear-rings, and the curtain rose.Said his right reverence, whispering toALCOBACA. 109me over the arm of my ponderous chair,If you had heard Agostinho's declamationonly two months ago, you wouldhave been enchanted — his tones were sotouching, so pathetic : his voice is now alittle broken down ; but you, who havean ear, will soon discover that it is onthe high road of becoming a grand baritone: and as for his action, I am convincedyou will soon allow nothing wasever more sublime."Just as I was on the point of replying tothis warm encomium in a strain of correspondenteulogy, my Lord Abbot gentlymurmured, " Hush, hush ! don't you hearthe Lady Inez ?" I certainly did — andwell I might, for a louder bellow wasnever given by the flower of any dairy.No cow bereaved of her last-dropped youngone ever uttered sounds more doleful : theyincreased in depth and disparity, till theforlorn damsel, advancing to the lights onthe stage, cried out, " Cru-el, cru-el!" The MONASTERY OFdressing, I suppose, the phantom of herredoubled father-in-law, — " and wouldstthou slay my innocents ? Hast thou discoveredmy peaceful retirement ? Wherefly — where run ?" She then continued, inaflow of at least one hundred lines, topicture her agonising fears, her dire presentiments,her frightful dreams ; and,with looks that were meant to tear ourfeelings to the last tatter, she thus describedher most terrific vision :On thy wan disk, O pale and ghastly moon !I saw portray'd a vengeful countenance ;And whilst upon it I did wildly gaze,Methought it wore the semblance of the King —(Now gelid horror chained me for her own.)I tried to fly — I fled, but all in vain,The dreaded face pursued me.If I turn'd back, 'twas there ; if I advanced,The stern, cold image seem'd to freeze my soul,Changing the genial current of my bloodInto a substance more severe than stone.Avaunt, my hapless babes ! approach me not,Lest by some fatal petrifying powerYour limbs be fix'd in durance.Alcoran A. 1 1 1Donna Inez, by good luck, declaimedthis magnificent piece of nonsense in atolerably even key, and with really so justan emphasis, that the enraptured bard,laying aside his prompting-book, could notresist exclaiming, " What do you think ofthat ?"— « E boa, e boa !" replied the LordAbbot. And the whole assembly, both beforeand behind the scenes, re-echoed withone accord this favourable sentiment, andnothing but " E boa, e boa !" was heardfrom one end of the saloon to the other.Such universal encouragement did notfail to produce its effect upon DonnaInez, — rather too much so ; for the highernotes of her semi-soprano voice having regainedthe ascendant, she squalled out ofall mercy. My sense of hearing is painfullyacute, and I hardly know what Iwould not have given for cotton to stopmy ears with. However, they had soon arespite, Heaven be praised ' the second actbeing totally employed by the plots and112 THE MONASTERY OFcontrivances of the King and his counsellors,— quiet, chatty people, as loyal andcomplaisant as King Arthur's courtiers,Noodle, Doodle, and Foodie, in the incomparabletragedy of Tom Thumb.In act the third, to my infinite astonishment,I found his majesty totally unacquaintedwith the little circumstance ofDonna Inez having favoured his recreantson with a brace of children : he more thansuspected espousals had taken place betweenthem, but he little thought anyfruits from the degrading match were inexistence.Upon his prime counsellor'sdisclosing the fact, he asks with a perfidiouscoolness, " What are they like ?" —Doves, my dread lord," answers thecounsellor with infinite suavity : to whichthe infuriated monarch replies with avoice of thunder,It matters not, I'll tear their felon hearts —Parish they shall !"And with this horrid menace quits theALCOBA^A. 113stage in a paroxysm of ungovernable fury,still repeating behind the scenes " Perishthey shall !" which was repeated again andagain from the top of a ladder, by an olddignified monk, a passionate lover of thedrama, but who being decorously shy ofappearing on the open boards, had takenthe part of Echo, which he performed toadmiration.Act the fourth offered nothing very loudor remarkable ; but in act the fifth, horrorand terror were working up to the highestpitch ; two determined assassins had beenprocured — their looks most murderous —the children ran off — the assassins pursued— shrill and bitter squeaking wereheard at the farthest extremity of thestage, such as a desperate conflict betweenrats or mice often produces behind oldwalls or wainscoting. The audience appearedprodigiously affected ; most of themstood up, stretching out their necks like aflock of alarmed turkeys. This dreadfulk114 THE MONASTERY OFhurry-skurry ended by the first assassin'sseizing the eldest infant by its beautifulhair, and tossing it apparently dead uponthe stage. Three or four drops of pigeon'sblood, squeezed out of some invisible receptacle,added a horrible appearance ofreality to the foul deed.It was now the other infant's turn to bemurdered; and murdered it was, in a stylethat would not have disgraced one ofHerod's best practitioners. The poor helplessinnocent, who appeared to be mostdreadfully frightened in right earnest, deliveredits little dying speech with somuch artlessness, that I was not surprisedto see tears fall and hear sobs heave allaround me. In short, affliction was almostexhausted to the last drop before DonnaInez was driven in, who, after calling tothe sun, moon, and stars for vengeance, inaccents at times most deep, at others mostpiercing, was immolated, by three distinctstabs of a poniard, upon the bodies of herchildren.ALCOBA^A. 115The deed so completely done, his mostrevengeful majesty, gloomier than Dis, andlooking more truculent than ever the Kingof Judea was supposed to have done, enteredwith royal and stately step — stoodgloating a minute or two over the horridspectacle, and then, with the hoarse note ofa carrion crow, croaked forth, " I am satisfied."The curtain fell ; and puttingaside its folds with a withered hand tremblingwith agitation, out issued the bardhimself to speak an epilogue in his owncharacter. It was tiresome and pompousenough, God knows, and concluded with atirade, not exactly a la Camoens, prettynearly as follows :Lord of the firmament, couldst thou blaze on,Urging thy coursers through the plains of light.And not start back, affrighted at the deed !Moon, veil thy orb — be quench'd, ye conscious stars,Never again to sparkle as before !Every soul in the assembly seemed tostand aghast, imprecating vengeance onI 2116 THE MONASTERY OFthe ruthless monarch, and feeling for themurdered innocents to their heart's core.Donna Inez was called for by my LordAbbot, and embraced by his right reverencemost blubbering. The kindheartedPrior of St. Vincent's wept aloud,I tried my best, though in a lower key,to imitate him ; the Poet was lauded tothe skies, and received from the fountainheadof all good within these precinctssomething more solid than praise — arichly embroidered purse, heavy andchinking, which he deposited in one ofhis lank pockets, after making a gratefulprofound inflexion.And now," said my Lord Abbot, " letus dry our tears and go to supper ; and inorder to give merit its just due, the Poetand Agostinho shall be of the party."Why not?" said the Prior of St. Vincent's." Why not ?" echoed I, — " providedwe have neither the king nor themurderers."ALCOBAfA. 117As sunshine so frequently follows darkand drizzling weather, nothing could bemore blithe or even frolicksome than ourrepast. The Grand Prior of Aviz, whomwe found already placed near the hospitableboard with his two card companions,talking over their game, congratulatedhimself warmly upon having escaped sucha severe assault upon the pathetic feelings,and enjoyed the festivity of the momentwithout alloy. So we all did ; and it wasat a very late hour of one of the blandestsummer nights I ever experienced thatwe retired to our apartments.1J8 THE MONASTERY OFEIGHTH DAY.Too much of a good thing. — My longing for a Ramble. —Sage resolves — A Gallop. — Pure and elastic Atmosphere.— Expansive Plain. — Banks of the River. — MajesticBasilica ofBatalha. — Ghost-like Anglers. — retrospection.— The Conventual Bells. — Conversation withthe Prior. — A frugal Collation. — Romantic Fancies. — TheDead Stork and his Mourner. — Mausoleum of Don Emanuel.— Perverse Architecture. — Departure from Batavia.Twilight. — Return to Alcoba^a.June 10.One may have too much of the goodand grand things of this wicked worldafter all. I began to be tired of such perpetualgormandizing — the fumes of banquetsand incense — the repetition of pompousrites — the splendour of illuminatedaltars and saints and madonnas, in fusty saloons,under still further canopies. My soullonged for an opener expanse — the canopyof the heavens. So I said to myself, " Dr.ALCOBAfA. 119Ehrhart may enjoy his infirmary; Franchi,his endeavours to introduce a purer tasteof costume on the ruler of Alcobaca'stemporary theatre ; the Priors, their cardsand their devotions ; I will place the incomparableSimon at my Lord Almoner'suninterrupted disposal — they may tossomelets and season satellites to theirhearts' content, and, this being a day bycourtesy entitled meagre, select the finestfish from their choicest reservoirs, if they sofancy. I pant like a hart for living waters :I am determined to follow the course ofthe river I noticed yesterday, windingits fresh sparkling stream between aromaticthickets ; and should it lead mealong its banks all the way to Batavia, somuch the better. I have not seen half Iwanted to see in that holy spot ; and whatlittle I did see floated before me like theshadows of a dream. I must be more intimatelyacquainted with the unfinishedmausoleum of Don Emanuel, of which I120 THE MONASTERY OFhave heard and read so much ; — in short,I must breathe, which I can hardly be saidto do in this too rich, too luxurious, tooheavy atmosphere."These sage resolves being taken andcommunicated in due form to my rightreverend companions, and by them to theruling power of Alcobapa, (for I did notwish to disturb my Lord Abbot's slumbers,even with the good news of my havinggiven up Monsieur Simon to his guidance,)I mounted my Arabian, patted his glossyneck, and whispering in his ear, " Nowwe will repair to the desert — you willthink of your native wilds, and I of mine'*off I galloped.The fertile meadows and enclosures immediatelyround the convent were soonpassed, and so were the chesnut woodshanging on the steeps crowned by theMoorish castle. My courser in full proof,pampered by the rich provender he hadbeen so abundantly supplied with, set nobounds to his exertions, and I had hardlyALCOBA^A. 121gained the level on the summit of thehills towards Aljubarota, before he fairlyran away with me. The country people,who, to do them justice, appeared veryindustriously employed, could not, however,help leaving their work to stare atthe velocity of my scamper, distendingtheir eyes as wide as they could possibly bedistended when they beheld my Arabianon full stretchWith flying speed outstrip the rapid wind,And leave the breezes of the morn behind."The morn itself was most exhilarating :1 never breathed in any atmosphere so pureor so elastic — it seemed to sparkle withlife and light. The azure bloom investingthe line of mountains which shelter Leiriawas most beautiful. I longed to transfertheir picturesquely-varied outline to theleaves of my sketch-book ; but it was invain I wished to stop for that purpose —neither snaffle nor curb could arrest thespeed of my courser.122 THE MONASTERY OFAt length, after a most inveterate gallopof at least five miles right a-head, persuasioneffected what force was completelyunequal to. He gave a lively, good-humoured,playful neigh, obeyed my much-lovedvoice, and halted. We were standingon an expanse of the smoothest sand,as firmly bound together as the nicestrolled walks of a regal garden ; here andthere patches of anemones and fragrantbrushwood, cistus, lavender, and rosemary,varied the surface in irregular forms, likethose of islands and continents distinctlydefined on a map. No object affordedthe smallest indication of human existence— neither the pointed roof of a shepherd'shovel, nor even a curling smoke.As far as the eye could reach, one uniformwaste of level shrubs extended itself,bathed in the same equal purple light,and fanned by the same delightful air,impregnated with the same balsamic odour ;an elysium without inhabitants, — unless,ALCOBAfA. 123indeed, the souls of the departed werehovering about this serene and tranquilregion, invisible to mortal eye.Perhaps my Arabian beheld objects weareforbidden to gaze at ; for he startedand pawed the ground, and snorted withsuch vehemence that I almost expectedevery moment to see fire flash from hisnostrils. By degrees this violent fermentsubsided, and he became calm ; what wesuperciliously call instinct seemed to pointout to him that the region into whichhe had been pleased to carry me wastotally barren of refreshment, and uponloosening his bridle, and allowing him totake what route he pleased, most prudentlydid he trace back his steps betweenentangled bushes, till I found myselfunder the shade of a forest of pineand chesnut, through which I descendedto the margin of the river I so particularlywished to explore : and twenty times didI bless myself for having determined to124 THE MONASTERY OFfollow the banks of this beautiful stream,the scenery they presented having a castso novel and uncommon.A broad path, or rather causeway, perfectlyhard and dry, led me between agigantic growth of canes, knotted likethe bamboo ; bulrushes of enormous size,and osiers, the tallest I had ever seen,waving their fresh green leaves high abovemy head, which they completely screenedfrom the sun. The coolness they diffused,their incessant whispers, and the clearcurrent of the river rippling among theirstems, was so grateful both to the eyeand ear, that I kept listening and lingeringon, unwilling to emerge from thisstrange wilderness, and almost fancyingI beheld one of those forests of weedsand grasses which, some five or six hundredthousand years ago, afforded refugeto a stupendous variety of monsters.Happily no icthyosaurus— no tortoise fiftyfeet in diameter, with paddles thrice asALCOBA^A. 125large as the helm of a first-rate man-of-war,oppressed me with their presence. Isaw no living objects, except a shoal offish,with scales as bright as silver, swiftlydarting under the low arches formed bythe luxuriant vegetation ; and lizards asgreen as emeralds, ascending the sides ofthe causeway, and looking at me, Ithought, with kind and friendly eyes.For more than half a league did Icontinue along the path, hemmed in byaquatic plants of extraordinary vigour,springing from the richest alluvial soil.At length, just as I was beginning to thinkthis world of reeds and osiers had no termination,the stream took a sudden bend,which I followed, and making the bestof my way through every obstacle, escapedinto an open space and open daylight.Right before me, at the extremity of anassemblage of hillocks, some bare, somecovered with flowering heaths, but destituteof human or animal inhabitants,126 THE MONASTERY OFstood the lofty majestic basilica of batavia,surrounded by its glorious huddleof buildings, from this point most picturesquelyforeshortened. I could hardlybelieve so considerable and striking a groupof richly parapeted walls, roofs, andtowers, detached chapels, and insulatedspires, formed parts of one and the sameedifice : in appearance it was not merelya church or a palace I was looking at,but some fair city of romance, such asan imagination glowing with the fanciesof Ariosto might have pictured to itselfunder the illusion of a dream.Keeping my eyes fixed on a prospectwhich I tried to persuade myself partookless of the real than the visionary, I traversedan extensive level of sunburnt turf,and, on the other side of the hillocksbounding the lawn, again found myselfon the banks of the river, which herepresented the loveliest of mirrors — so calm,so pellucid, that I thought it a thousandBatavia. 127pities no pleasant objects were reflectedfrom its surface, than a long line of ghostlikefathers, each with a fishing-rod projectingfrom his piebald drapery, anglingon with pale and patient countenances. Idid not perceive the melancholy prophet inthis rank and file, — and I was not sorry ;I dreaded to encounter his witheringglance, to hear his foreboding voice ; forI had been told he often pressed propheciesupon those least inclined to seekthem, and I shrank from any knowledgeof the horrors he might possibly discloseto me. Far from desiring to catch eventhe shadow of coming events, I said to myself,in the nervous language of Dryden,Seek not to know what must not be reveal'd ;Joys only flow where fate is most conceal'd.Too busy man would find his sorrows more,If future fortunes he could know before ;For by that knowledge of his destiny,He would not live at all, but always die."Not above one hundred yards from thespot selected by the reverend fathers for128 THE MONASTERY OFtheir quiet recreation, the river, as if tiredof being cahii and placid, flowed with abrisker current, and rushing over a ledgeof rocks, became all froth and foam. Thelight spray occasioned by its rapid movementrefreshed the herbage on its banksso invitingly, that I leapt off my courser,and allowed him to profit as much as hepleased by the abundant pasture.Throwing myself on the solid ground,I kept intensely poring over the stream,lost and absorbed in the train of interestingyet melancholy recollectionswhich all that had occurred to me since1 first entered this fair realm of Portugalwas so well calculated to excite.T thought (alas ! how vainly now !)of offers I had slighted with so muchlevity ; of opportunities which, had theybeen grasped with a decided hand, mighthave led to happy results, and stemmeda torrent of evils. Since that period, thegerm of destructiveness, which mightBATALIIA. 129then have been trodden down, has riseninto a tree fraught with poisons, darkeningthe wholesome light, and receiving nourishment,through all its innumerably variedfibres, from the lowest depths of hell.Whilst I was watching the constantflow of waters, and giving way to a tideof regrets in my own bosom equallyceaseless, the full rich tones of the conventualbells came booming over thewatery levels — a summons the monksdared not disobey. Putting up their ,they all dispersed in silence, withthe exception of one, whom I joyfully recognisedupon his nearer approach, andwho seemed to feel equal pleasure in recognisingme.To what lucky chance," said the Prior,(for it was he who had advanced to me,)"are we indebted for the renewal of avisit I scarcely ventured to flatter myselfwould have taken place so soon ?"To the genuine desire," answered I,K130 THE MONASTERY OFnot only of assuring you once more ofmy real veneration, but a wish to examinethe mausoleum of Don Emanuel,which I totally neglected in the hurry ofyesterday — .You remember how they pushedme along ?"He smiled ; and I could not help thinking,from the cast of his countenance, thata few details of our Alcoba^a banquets andcomputations would not have been ill received.Being, however, too discreet totell tales out of this pious school, I saidnothing of our gay supper, of my LordAbbot's epicurean worship, of MonsieurSimon, or of the Poet, or of " our tragedy,"or Senhor Agostinho, (ycleped DonnaInez), or of Donna Franciscans director, —though I had his cursed name on the tipof my tongue, ready to bolt out with notafew bitter animadversions upon a speciesof piety which had deprived me ofmany and many an hour of cheerfulnessand joy.Batavia. 131Repressing, upon reflection, every sparkof curiosity, as befitted a holy personageweaned from idle gossip, the good Priormost charitably observed, " that my horsestood in need of more substantial refectionthan he could find on the river banks ;and that, although he could not offerluxuries such as I had been accustomedto, the simple fare his far from wealthyconvent afforded would be served up tomemost gladly."Taking himself my horse by the bridle,he ushered me across the lawn into thesame quadrangular cool and lofty chamberI had supped in before. A veryyouthful-looking lay brother received myArabian into his charge with great delight,and stroked its mane and kissed its neckin a transport of childish fondness.As to me, though I was treated withless enthusiasm, there was no want of theutmost cordiality in my reception. Animmense earthen platter, containing a sar2132 THE MONASTERY OFvoury mess of fish and rice, vegetablesdelicately fried after the Italian fashion,caraffes of wine, baskets of ripe and fragrantfruit, pomegranates, apricots, and oranges,were neatly arranged on a marble table,having in its centre a rock of transparentice, shining with ten thousand prismaticcolours. To this frugal collation I satdown with the most sincere appetite, andwas waited upon with hospitable glee bythe angels of this wilderness — two laybrothers and as many novices, — all ofwhom appeared enchanted with an opportunityof making themselves of someuse in this mortal existence. The Prior,crossing his hands on his bosom, entreatedme to dispense with his attentions for halfan hour, the choir service imperativelyrequiring his presence.As soon as he had taken his departure,followed by his friars and novices, I gavemyself wholly up to the enjoyment ofthose romantic fancies the surroundingBatavia. 133scenery was so admirably well adapted toinspire. Two stately portals, thrown wideopen to catch the breezes, admittedviews of the principal courts and cloistersof this unequalled monument of thepurest taste of the fourteenth century.A tranquil, steady sun-light overspreadtheir grand broad surfaces. The gracefulspire, so curiously belted with zones of therichest carved work, rose high above theornamented parapets, relieved by a softand mellow evening sky. None of themonks were moving about ; but I heardwith a sort of mournful pleasure theirdeep and solemn voices issuing from thegreat porch of the transept nearest thechoir.The young Egyptian-looking boys inwhite linen tunics I had noticed at myfirst visit were all at their accustomed avocations,dislodging every atom of dust fromthe deeply-indented tracery. The flamingowas there, but I missed the stork, —131- THE MONASTERY OFand knew but too soon the cause of hisbeing missed ; for, upon ascending thesteps before the chapter-house, I discoveredhim lying stretched out upon thepavement stiff and dead. One of the boysstood bending over him in an attitudeexpressive of the deepest sorrow. Theyouth saw I compassionate him, and murmuredout in a low desponding voice :This poor bird followed me all the wayfrom my home in Alemtejo — a long distancefrom Batavia. He was the joy ofmy life, and dearly loved by my mother,who is dead. I shall never see her againin this world, nor hear the cheering cryof this our fond household bird, callingme up in the morning : he will receiveno more crumbs from my hand — he willkeep faithfully by my side no longer. Ihave no one now in this grand place wholoves me !" And he burst into a flood ofbitter tears, and it was a relief to myBATALIIA. 135own heart — a great relief — to join in hismourning.The Prior, who happened to come upat the moment, could not at first imaginewhat had affected me ; but when I pointedto the boy and the lifeless stork, heentered into my feelings with his characteristicbenevolence, and spoke words ofcomfort to the poor weeping child, withsuch true parental kindness as seemed toassure him he had still a friend. Touchedto the heart, the boy fell on his knees, andkissed the pavement and his stork at thesame time. I left him extending his armsto the good Prior in an act of supplication,which I learnt afterwards had not beentreated with cold indifference.And now the Prior, with his wontedsolemn and courteous demeanour, offeringto be himself my guide to the mausoleumof Don Emanuel, we traversed a wildernessof weeds, — this part of the conventual136 THE MONASTERY OFprecincts being much neglected, — and entereda dreary area, surrounded by theroofless, unfinished cluster of chapels, onwhich the most elaborately sculpturedprofusion of ornaments had been lavished,as often happens in similar cases, to novery happy result. I cannot in consciencepersuade myself to admire such deplorablewaste of time and ingenuity — " the quips,and cranks, and wanton wiles" of a corrupt,meretricious architecture ; and whenthe good Prior lamented pathetically theunfinished state of this august mausoleum,and almost dropped a tear for the deathof Emanuel its founder, as if it had onlyoccurred a week ago, I did not pretendto share his affliction ; for had the buildingbeen completed according to the designwe are favoured with by that dulldraftsman Murphy, most preciously uglywould it have been ; — ponderous andlumpish in the general effect, exuberantlylight and fantastic in the detail.Batavia. 137it was quite a mercy that it was neverfinished. Saxon wrinkling and crank-linesare bad enough ; the preposterouslong and lanky marrow-spoon-shapedarches of the early Norman, still worse ;and the Moorish horse-shoe-like deviationsfrom beautiful curves, little better.I have often wondered how persons ofcorrect taste could ever have toleratedthem, and batten on garbage when theymight enjoy the lovely Ionic so prevalentin Greece, the Doric grandeur of theParthenon, and the Corinthian magnificenceof Balbec and Palmyra. If, however,you wish to lead a quiet life, bewarehow you thwart established prejudices.I began to perceive, that to entertain anydoubts of the supreme excellence of DonEmanuel's collops and fortificationsamounted to heresy. Withdrawing, therefore,my horns of defiance, I reserved mycriticisms for some future display to amore intelligent auditor, and chimed in138 THE MONASTERY OFat length with the Prior's high-flown admirationof all this fillagree, and despairfor its non-completion ; so we parted goodfriends. My Arabian was brought out,looking bright and happy ; I bade a mostgrateful adieu to the Prior and his attendantswarm of friars and novices, andbefore they had ceased staring and wonderingat the velocity with which I wascarried away from them, I had reached asandy desert above a mile from Batavia.Night was already drawing on — themoon had not yet risen — a dying glow,reflected from the horizon above the hills,behind which the sun had just retired, wasthrown over the whole landscape. " Eragia r hora" — it was that soothing, solemnhour, when by some occult, inexplicablesympathy, the interior spirit, folded upwithin itself, inclines to repel every grovellingdoubt of its divine essence, andfeels, even without seeking to feel it, theconsciousness of immortality.Batavia. 139The dying glow had expired ; a sullentwilight, approaching to blackness, prevailed:I kept wandering on, however,not without some risk of being soon acquaintedwith the mysteries of a futureworld ; for had not my horse been notonly the fleetest, but the surest of footof his high-born tribe, he must have stumbled,and in dangerous places, for suchabounded at every step. As good fortunewould have it, all the perils of the waywere got over ; the grand outline of thecolossal monastery and its huge churchemerged from the surrounding gloom ;innumerable lights, streaming from theinnumerable casements, cast a broad gleamover the great platform, where my LordAlmoner and his guests were walking toand fro, enjoying the fresh evening air,and waiting my return, they were pleasedto say, with trembling anxiety.The first question I was asked uponentering the grand illuminated saloon140 THE MONASTERY OFWas, how I had fared, and whether I didnot feel half-dead for want of refreshment.We, for our parts," exclaimed my LordAbbot, " have been the happiest of thehappy : your great Simon has surpassedeven my expectations. And now, toanother proof of his transcendent skill, —now to supper."ALCOBAfA. 141NINTH DAY.Lamentations on our Departure, and on the loss of MonsieurSimon. — Mysterious Conference. — A sullen Adieu. — Livelinessof the Prior of St. Vincent's. — Pleasant Surprise. —Vast and dreary Plain. — A consequential Equerry. — AnInvitation. — The Bird-Queen. — Fairy Landscape. — TheMansion. — The great Lady's Nephews — Reception by herExcellency. — Her attendant Hags. — The great Lady'squestions about England and dismal ideas of London. —The Cuckoo. — Imitations. — Dismay of her Sublime Ladyshipand her Hags. — Our Departure from the bird-riddenDominions. — Cultivated Plain. — Happy Peasantry, andtheir gratitude to the Monks of the Royal Convent. —Their different feelings towards the great Lady. — FemalePeasants bearing Offerings to our Lady of Nazare. — SeaView.— Pedraneira. — Banquet of Fish. — Endless Ravine.Alfagirao. — Arrival at the Caldas. — Sickly Population.Reception of Dr. Ehrhart. — His Visit to the Invalids,and contempt of the Medical Treatment of the place. —A determined Bore — His Disaster.June 11 til.Great were the lamentations in Alco-bala when the hour of our departure THE MONASTERY OFrived, — a voice of wailing scarcely equaledin Rama when Rachel wept for herlost children. Here, I am perfectly convinced,that had my Lord Abbot beenpermitted, like spiritual lords in our owncountry, to avow the legal paternity of adozen brats, he would sooner have sparedthe whole treasure than have lost theadvice and exertions of a being he veneratedabove all others without any exception— a matchless cook. It was a cruelseparation : the artist himself, who had asusceptible heart, as well as a hand giftedwith the most exquisite sauce-makingsensibilities, was far from being callousto the raptures of such a discriminatinggourmand as the ruler of Alcobapa. Toremain in this holy place, to quit myservice, I verily believe never entered thehead beneath his milk-white betasseledcook-cap; but he was visibly moved bythe rapturous eulogies, still more perhapsby the generous presents I suspect heALCOBA^A. 143had received ; he saw with great commiserationhow acutely the Lord Abbotfelt his departure. Pity, we all know,melts the heart to love, and love full oftento devotion ; so, when we repaired, oneand all, to take a parting mass beforesetting out on our journey. MonsieurSimon, though little given to demonstrationsof piety, fell to thumping his breastwith such vehemence, that I could notresist saying to him as we came out ofchurch, " Simon, my Lord Abbot seemsto have quite reconverted you ; you arebecoming astonishingly religious." — " Ah,Monsieur," said he, " on le sera, a moins ;Monseigneur rend la religion si aimable."I thought now, as the equipages, horses,&c. were all marshalled before the grandentrance, we were actually ready to setout. No such thing : the Grand Priorof Aviz, taking me aside for a moment,whispered in my ear that he had stilla few words of great importance in store144 THE MONASTERY OFfor my Lord Almoner, and begged me tocast another look at my favourite portraitof St. Thomas of Canterbury whilst hedelivered them.Calling his colleague of St. Vincent's,they both entered a private room of audienceadjoining the hall of pictures, fromwhich my Lord Almoner had not yetstirred; and notwithstanding the doorshad been immediately closed, I heard aloud storm of indistinct but angry wordsapproaching to tempest, the exact importof which it is not in my power to reveal,supposing I had the inclination; but Ilearned afterwards (though rather vaguely)from one of the Prior of St. Vincent'sconfidants, that they related to certainmysteries, certain despotic imprisonments,certain grotto-like communications, betweenthis sacred asylum and anothernot less monastic, though tenanted bythe fairer portion of holy communities —the daughters of prayer and penitence.ALCOBA^A. 145Providence, that tempers the wind tothe shorn lamb, and does kind things nowand then to pets and favourites, was nottotally ungracious to my Lord Almonerupon this occasion. Had it not, by directingthe semi-inquisitorial visit of the twoprelatical missionaries, given his right reverenceof Alcobaca's thoughts serious occupation,they might have dwelt far morepainfully upon the departure of his belovedSimon ; the sharp edge of his afflictionsin this particular was taken off bythe reflections which the late stormy conferencehad inspired.When he came forth to accompany usto our carriages, as the rules of courtesydemanded, I observed a marked change inhis deportment and countenance ; therewere no longer those sunny smiles, thosecooing and chuckling, which had greetedmy revered companions upon their arrival.A sullen, sulky gloom — a but half-subduedexpression of anger pervaded his every146 THE MONASTERY OFlook and gesture : coldly and formally,therefore, did we take our leave. Notabove half of the community were drawnout in complimentary array, and that halflooked strange and suspicious, as if theyconjectured something had happened unpleasantand awkward. The two fathersdeputed to attend us to Pedraneira gotinto one of their heavy conventual vehicles,and, in their capacities of conductors, ledthe van. I looked back as we drove off;and, there stood my Lord Almoner, withhis eyes fixed on the pavement, before thegrand portal, immovable, and as if he hadbeen turned to stoneThe Grand Prior of Aviz having somethingvery confidential to discuss with hissecretary, begged me to excuse his accompanyingme in my carriage : the Prior ofSt. Vincent's took his place ; an exchange Ihad no cause to complain of, his conversationbeing so full of hilarity and life. Thisflow of cheerful good spirits did not, .147ever, carry him beyond the limits of themost perfect discretion : not a syllablethat had the slightest reference to painsor pleasures below ground escaped hislips — not the smallest hint — no, not abreath.All attempts to gain information uponthis curious point proving fruitless, wepraised fine weather and fine prospects,and deprecated bad roads. We had nooccasion, however, to do so; for scarcelyhad we turned the angle of one of the vastwalled inclosures belonging to the convent,and expected to sink into some frightfulrut or sandy furrow, when an immensebody of well-clothed peasants, with theirstrong bright tools slung over their sturdyshoulders, met us with loud vives, and thetranquillizing assurance that the whole wayto Pedraneira had been smoothed by theirexertions : so we rolled along over firmgravel and compact heath-faggots mostdelightfully.L 2148 RETURN FROMWe soon reached the banks of my favouriteriver, and crossed over a very bridge, without parapets,to its opposite shore — a vast and drearyplain. We were beginning to experiencethe effects of heat rather oppressively,when we entered a forest of pine, andfelt much invigorated by fragrant, genialbreezes, — shade was out of the question,most of the trees being tall andsapless.In one of the least frequented parts ofthis superannuated forest, the career ofour caravan was suddenly arrested by amost imposing cocked-hatted personage,booted up to the chin, like West's heroesin his picture of the Battle of the Boyne,bestriding a managed horse, decked outin all the pride of burnished pistol andgold-laced holster.This most consequential of equerries,with as much solemnity as if he had beenreading a state proclamation, invited us, inALCOBAfA. 149the name of his mistress, a lady of highcaste and importance, to screen ourselvesfrom the meridian heats in her quantahard by ; a most blessedly shady place, inwhich she had congregated, I verily believe,half the birds in the country — thoseleast in repute, such as kites, owls, andbuzzards, not excepted.]My Lord of Aviz was still too deeplyengaged in confidential discourse with hissecretary to much relish making a halt andgetting out of his carriage ; but the Priorof St. Vincent's and myself were perfectlydisposed to accept the invitation, havinglearnt, during our course of Alcoran a gossip,too many curious particulars about thiseminent lady-patroness of the featheredtribe, not to feel extremely curious to beadmitted into the penetralia of the asylumshe afforded them ; a favour rarely granted,and which sprang most probably out of astrong curiosity to see and fondle my belovedArabian, not my own dear self — her150 RETURN FROMmost excellent ladyship professedly notcaring one pip of an orange for strangersof any description or quality, unless theywere blessed with four feet, or a naturalmantle of feathers.Preceded by the right pompous and justifiedequerry, we diverged from the mendedtrack into an avenue of dwarfish cork-trees,leading straight to a lofty wall, whichextended far to the right and left of agrand massive Tuscan gateway. The widespace before this stately entrance exhibitedthe refreshing sight of marble troughsbrimful of the clearest water ; heaps ofoats and barley, amply sufficient to supplythe wants of our mules ; and paniers ofbread and oranges, under very substantialcanvass awnings.My reverend companions, as in dutybound, went immediately to offer theirhomage to the bird queen ; but I beggedto be excused for the moment, promisingthat as soon as my Arabian had been re-ALCOBAfA. 151fresher and brightened up by a goodrubbing, I would lead him myself to thefoot of the throne of these dominions.Having gained this respite, the wholeparty dispersed as seemed best in theireyes, and I entered perfectly alone thedeeply shaded inclosure — without exceptionone of the strangest scenes of fairylandever conjured up by the wildestfancy.As far as the eye could stretch, extendeda close bower of evergreens, myrtle, bay,and ilex, not to mention humble box, lofty,broad, and fragrant ; on either side, archesof verdure most sprucely clipped, openedinto large square plats of rare and curiousflowers ; and in the midst of each of thesetrim parterres, a fountain inclosed withina richly-gilded cage, containing birds ofevery variety of size, song, and plumage ;paroquet with pretty little flesh-colouredbeaks, and parrots of the largest species,looking arch and cunning, as they152 RETURN FROMkept cracking and grinding walnuts andfilberts between their bills as black asebony.In one of these inclosures I noticed animmense circular basin of variegated marble,surrounded by a gilt metal balustrade,on which were most solemnly percheda conclave of ararat and cockatoos. Theirunited screeching and screaming uponmy approach gave the alarm to a multitudeof smaller birds, which issued forthin such clouds from every leaf and sprayof these vaulted walls of verdure, thatI ran off as if I had committed sacrilege,or feared being transformed by art-magicinto a biped completely rigged out withbeak, claws, and feathers.The strange green light which faintlypervaded the closely-lowered alleys — thearomatic odour universally diffused — therustle of wings, the chirping and twitteringabove my head and on every side ofme, was so completely bewildering andALCOBAfA. 153magical, that I almost doubted whetherever again I should be permitted toemerge into common life or commondaylight. The soft, perfumed, voluptuousatmosphere of this seemingly enchantedgarden, induced a languor andlistlessness to creep over me I scarcelyever felt before.Just as I was giving way to this gentleindolence, and had sunk down by themarble basin soothed by the bubblingof its little quiet jet-d'eau, I heard theheavy tramp of the solemn equerry, — andthere he was true enough. " Be pleased,sir," said he, making a bow which thestiffest and most formal dancing-masterof the days of Louis the Fourteenth wouldhave gloried in, — " be pleased to complywith the urgent request of my Lord Priorof Aviz, who is waiting with impatienceto have the honour of presenting you tomy most illustrious and most excellentmistress."154. RETURN FROMOh !" answered I, " by all means ;nothing less than the attractions of yourmost illustrious and most excellent lady'sfeathered favourites could have detainedme from her presence — pray lead meto it."The wsij was not long, but most delightful,under a continued arbour ofexotic plants, looking as healthful as ifthey had been quite at home in Portugal— born and bred there for centuries.On either side, more flower-beds, andmore birds, some at liberty and some incages.The house itself, at which we arrivedin due course, though of an extent quiteremarkable, was far from presenting apalace-like appearance, being in heightonly one story. Its verandas, however,commanded respect : they were extremelyspacious, paved and balustrade withmarble.Under the terraces they supported, wereALCOBAfA. 1 55offices innumerable, not unlike rabbit-burrowsin the realm of Brooding, outof, and into which, were continually creepinga great number of tawny colouredmenials, very slightly clothed indeed, allbusily engaged in tending the featheredrace committed to their charge : for halfthese burrows, or arched chambers, orwhatever we please to call them, wereclosed with light trellises of wire, forming,after all, no very pleasant aviaries. Certainmost horribly discordant screeching,which pierced my ears every now andthen, seemed to indicate that the birdsof the establishment were not so happyor judiciously governed as their sovereignmistress imagined — the case of subjects inmostdominions.On the lowest step of a grand flightof steps leading up to the principal veranda,stood three young gentlemen, agedfourteen, fifteen, and sixteen years, thenephews of the great lady, as like one to156 RETURN FROISIthe other as if they had been not onlytwins, but triplets ; all sleek, and smooth,and sallow ; all dressed in obsolete court-dressesof blue and silver tissue, eachwith his powdered hair in a silken bag,each with his little cut-steel-hilted sword,and each with a little abdominal bulgethat promised in the course of a very fewyears to become a paunch of considerabledignity. In close attendance upon thesehopeful youths, were a stripling page, ahalf-crazed buffoon, an ex-jesuit, and adwarf; personages indispensable to a nobleand well-constituted Portuguese establishment.Down went all their heads the momentI drew near, and down went mineto the very earth in return for so muchcourtesy.We ascended the steps all togetherright lovingly, the three youths marchinghand-in-hand. Nothing could exceedthe decorous behaviour of these sweetyoung gentlemen ; it did honour to their/ALC0BA9A. 157preceptor, who had brought them up in themost commendable fear of the devil and (/of taking birds' nests ; — the latter, of allcrimes, was esteemed the most heinous inthose dominions.Independently of my fondness for bruteanimals, I am not unapt, cameleon-like, totake the colour of what happens to passaround me. It might be supposed, therefore,that I entered fully into the fashionof the place, and expressed my fondnessand admiration of every species of birdit had pleased God in his infinite goodnessto create, with enthusiasm. So disposed,and in this blessed trim, I enteredthe grand saloon of the great lady's residence.Her excellency was seated at itsupper end in a high-backed wicker chair,stuck close to the wall. Seven or eightold hags, of a most forbidding aspect, allin black, and all more sincerely bearded,I make no doubt, than the CountessGrimaldi's attendants, were ranged to the158 RETURN FROMright and left, on narrow benches; formingone of the ugliest displays of living tapestrymy eyes had ever encountered.The two Priors, who, to their no greatdelight, one may easily imagine, formedpart and parcel of this odious assembly,had reserved a wicker chair, the coolnessof which was completely neutralizedby a red velvet cushion, for thestranger— the unhappy stranger, who feltalready quite sufficiently annoyed andsweltered.As soon as we had exchanged an infinityof salutations, and several capaciousgolden snuff-boxes had gone their roundswith as much regularity as the planets,four antiquated damsels entered the presence,bearing trays, heaped high withcandied apricots and oranges, and, stillsweeter than all the sweetmeats ever confectioner,a preparation of the freshesteggs ever laid, with the richest sugar everdistilled from the finest canes ever grownALCOBAfA. 159in the Brazils for private consumptionunder the most skilful management.To these succeeded another entree ofci-devant young women, who presented us,upon embossed silver salvers, goblets ofcut glass, containing the coldest andpurest water.Right opposite to where we sat, formallymarshalled all of a row, the younghidalgo and their preceptor, who had enlistedDoctor Ehrhart, Franchi, and thetwo Priors' secretaries into their ranks,were seated on stools, not in the leastsuperior either in shape or dimensions tothose used for milking in the homeliestbarons of our own dear farming country.It was some time before any sounds, exceptthe whirring and whizzing of enormouscockchafers, and the flirting of fansalmost as large as the vans of a windmill,were audible. At length the great ladybroke silence, by asking me whether wehad any birds in England : to which,160 RETURN FROMrising from my chair, I replied with a lowobeisance, that, thanks be to God, we wereblessed with an immense number.Indeed !" rejoined her excellency ; " Ithought your country too cold to allowthem, sweet dears, to build their nests andenjoy themselves."Yes," observed the Jesuit, " the. climateof your island must be very bitter.Camoens, whose authority none can dispute,calls itA grande Angleterre die de neveBoreal sempre abunda.(Canto 6, stand. 42.)Which being undoubtedly the case,"continued the bird-queen, " that greatnumber you boast of must be imported:indeed, I understood as much from an oldservant of my father's, who made a fortuneby dealing in Canary-birds, and takingthem to your great town, where youcan hardly distinguish night from day, ashetold me. But what will not the lureALCOBAfA. I6lof gain make us submit to ? He was continuallyresorting to that black place withhis living wares, (how I pity them !) and,to be sure, he gained sufficient, though healmost coughed his lungs out, to buy anice quanta in my neighbourhood. He isan excellent judge of everything that concernsbirds ; knows how to treat them inmounting-time, which few do ; and for thesagacity with which he discovers an incipientpip, and stops its progress, I mayventure to affirm from long experience, hehas no equal. But tell me fairly, mostestimable Englishman, have you any nativebirds in your island ?"Yes, madam," was my triumphant reply," we have ; one in particular — seldomseen, but often heard — the cuckoo."I had scarcely pronounced that name,when an exact imitation of its well-knownsound burst forth from Franchi and thebuffon, who was standing behind hisstool, to the high glee of the young gen162 RETURN FROMtheme, their page and dwarf, and the evidentdismay of her sublime ladyship andher hags in waiting. They looked as ifthey could have pinched us all as sharplyas the snuff in their ample boxes. Inshort, surprise and anger at Franchi's wantof decorum, and a suspicion, perhaps, ofbeing what we call quizzed, in our vernacularslang, began to manifest itself; whenthe solemn equerry announced with hiswonted solemnity, that our carriages werein waiting, and my Arabian at the door,ready to receive the honour of a caressfrom his most illustrious and excellentmisl:*ess.Overjoyed at this intelligence, the twoPriors and myself, all heartily tired of ourformal sitting, rose up without a moment'sdelay ; so did the great lady, and her trainof hags and dismal damsels, following eachother one by one. As soon as this dolorousprocession reached the gateway, agreat number of gigantic dark-brown um-ALCOBA^A. 163bells were spread forth, and under theirdeep shade my astonished courser, withhis fine arched neck held down by a coupleof grooms, was patted in succession bythe lank, cold fingers of the bird-queenand her antiquated attendants ; then followedas many curtseys, and as low as thedry stiff knees that performed them couldcontrive to drop; and the Grand Prior ofAviz signifying that he had no furtheroccasion for the attendance of his confidentialsecretary, I got into his dormeuse,ordered my Arabian to follow, and bade,I hope and trust, an eternal adieu to thisregion of screaming birds, clipped hedges,and sour-visaged old women.It was some time before we cleared thewalls of these bird-ridden dominions, agreat deal more extensive than I apprehended.Our route, distinctly marked out byits recent mending, led us across a plainin the highest state of cultivation, forminga most agreeable contrast to the raggedM 2164 RETURN FROMweather-beaten forest and pompous idleinclosure we had left behind. Here everyobject smiled; here every rood of land wasemployed to advantage, the Lombard systemof irrigation being perfectly understoodand practised. Every cottage, apparentlythe abode of industrious contentment,had its well fenced gardenrichly embossed with gourds and melons,its abundant waterspout, its vine,its fig-tree, and its espalier of pomegranate.The peasantry, comfortably clad in substantialgarments, looked kindly and un-enviouslyat our splendid caravan, becausetheir hearts were expanded by good treatment,their granaries amply stored, theirflocks numerous and healthy, and theirlandlords, the rich monks of Alcobaca,neither griping nor tyrannical. Whenthe Prior of Aviz stopped to converse withthese good people, which he frequentlydid, and inquired with his usual affableALCOBACA. 165benignity, " Who taught you to till yourland so neatly ? to manure it with somuch judgment ? to raise such crops ofgrain ? to spare your cattle all forcedoppressive labour? to treat their youngwith so much gentleness ?" the answerwas prompt and uniform, — " Our indulgentmasters and kind friends, the monksof the royal monastery''The pleasure my excellent friend receivedfrom this communication beamedforth from his ingenuous countenance, ashenoted down the result of his inquirieson his tablets ; a set-off, perhaps, in hisopinion, to the strange mysterious reporthe had received of certain unedifyingfrailties. Whatever snares of the evil-onemy kind hosts of Alcoba^a may have falleninto beneath ground, few communities everconferred more solid benefits upon its surfaceto all their dependants.Very different were the replies to ourqueries about the great lady : shrugs of166 RETURN FROMthe shoulder, and shaking of the head,gave us to understand most plainly, that,as far as her territorial influence extended,luckily small in comparison with that ofthe great convent — it was of a nature moreblighting than genial, less charitable thanoppressive. And as to her birds, they werea flagrant nuisance — whole flights of herdoves, parrots, kites, finches, and thrushesbeing allowed to commit with the mostperfect impunity every species of depredationbest suited to their habits and propensities.We were all so enchanted with thesescenes of rural delight and joy, that weordered our carriages not to be drivenalong too rapidly. We had to pass theriver again and again over the same sortof ruinous bridges as we had met with inthe immediate vicinity of Alcobapa. Myrevered companion could not repress sensationsof terror as we jolted up and downsteep arches unprotected by any parapet —ALCOBA^A. 167sensations which the most fervid exhortationson my part to put faith in SaintAnthony could not subdue; so out hetrundled into all the dust and offal of theroad.After not less than three or four ofthese rather dangerous transits, we mounteda heathy, pastoral hill, browsed by goats,and met a long string of female peasants,bearing offerings of various kinds to ourLady of Nazare ; and presently the sanctuary,to which they were going' in pilgrimage,discovered itself on the brow ofa craggy eminence shelving down to theAtlantic.Much praise cannot in truth be lavishedupon this edifice, which is neither considerablenor picturesque ; but the coloursof the wide unlimited ocean, so pure, sovivid, so beautifully azure, made up forall other deficiencies, and, joined to thereviving freshness of the sea-breeze, gavemy spirits the most delightful and PEDRANEIllA.mated flow. Gay, agile, and buoyant, Ileaped out of the carriage the moment itstopped, and was immediately received intothe arms and garlick-scented embrace ofthe two aged fathers, our harbingers, whohad preceded us to Pedraneira.This most opulent farm-mansion, thecapital of the conventual domains in thesequarters, had very much the air of anoriental caravanserai, with stables for mulesand courts surrounded with arches, castellatedgranaries, and vaulted chambers,incrusted with clean glossy tiles, by nomeans indifferently painted with scripturaland legendary subjects. In thelargest and coolest of these apartmentswe were regaled with a magnificent banquetof fish, caught near the rocks of Pedicle,and reckoned the best upon thewhole line of the coast.Being a fast-day, except a few hashes ofpork for heretics, savoury as the flesh-potsof Egypt, nothing unorthodox was servedPEDRANEIRA. 169up. Dr. Ehrhart, however, partook ofevery ragout set before him indiscriminately,to the scandal of our hosts, themonks and their attendants. All the restof the company having made their election,stuck to fish with true Catholic propriety.Our repast quickly dispatched, and theaged fathers most kindly thanked and mostwillingly dismissed from their attendance,for, to say truth, they were not onlyintolerably efficient but inveterately prosy,— we made haste to set forth in orderto reach the Caldas before night. As longas we continued on the shore enjoying thevast marine prospect and the unceasingsound of the waves, nothing could be pleasant; but when we entered an almostendless ravine, its banks entirely coveredwith the strong healthy flowers of the Palavercorniculaturn, our progress was slowand tedious. To this ravine succeededanother, diversified by a more agreeable170 THE CALDAS.sort of vegetation — the yellow lupin in allits fragrance.At some distance we saw a Moorishcastle, standing proudly on an insulatedeminence, presenting a grand mass : itbears also a grand name, Alfagirao. Thispicturesque object, the stillness and softhues of evening, and the perfume of thelupins, were circumstances too pleasingnot to make us regret our arrival at theCaldas with quite sufficient light to distinguishall its ugliness ;— its dull monotonoushouses, with their coarse green and shutters flapping to andfro in the dusty breeze ; and its heavyverandas, daubed over with yellow ochre,and striped in places with blue and red,in patterns not unworthy of Timbuctoo orAshantee.In my eyes, the whole of this famousstewing-place wore a sickly unprepossessingaspect. Almost every third or fourthperson you met was a quince-colouredTHE CALDAS. 171apothecary, accoutred like a courtier onhis march to the drawing-room, and carryingmany a convenient little implementin a velvet bag, as pompously as if he hadbeen a lord chancellor; and every tenthor twelfth, a rheumatic or palsied invalid,with his limbs all twist, and his mouthall awry, being conveyed to the baths inachair. You could hardly move withoutrunning your head against the voluminouswig of some medical professor, and hearingthe formidable stump of his gold-headedcane.The news of the advent of a great Germandoctor, ex-physician to the householdof his ex-majesty the most Christian King,soon spread itself throughout the Cal-cas; and we had not set our feet on thehot flag-stones of this physical emporiumabove five or six minutes, before a deputationof the faculty arrived. These sagescame on purpose to introduce themselvesto Dr. Ehrhart, and entreat the honour of172 THE CALDAS.his company on a professional tour to theirprincipal patients. His account of thewoful condition and appearance 6f thewretched invalids in their respective tubsand cisterns, related in Alsatian French,sound Latin, and broken Portuguese, wasmost original.I found many of them," said the indignantdoctor, " with galloping pulses, excitedalmost to frenzy by the injudiciousapplication of these powerful waters, andothers with scarcely any pulses at all.The last will be quiet enough ere long ;and considering what dreadful work thesedetermined Galenists drive amongst them,with their decoctions, and juleps, andspiced boluses, and conserve of mummy,and the devil knows what, I expect a generalgaol-delivery must speedily take place,and the souls of these victims of explodedquackeries be soon released from theirwretched bodies, rendered the worst ofprisons by a set of confounded bunglers."THE CALDAS. 173Never shall I forget the indignant scowlmy angry doctor cast upon the contemnersof simple and vegetable medicine. Hisebullitions of wrath remained unpacifiedtill he had swilled down the contents ofan ample giraffe of wine, diluted with onlya very few drops of water, accompanied bya platter of those savoury bulbs whichgeese are so often stuffed with in England,for the express purpose, he openly avowed,of decreasing flatulence, and expelling theprince of the air and all his satellites. 1thought the Prior of St. Vincent's wouldnever have ceased laughing at this speciesof exorcism. The Portuguese have in generala strong relish for coarse practicaljokes ; and I am far from pretending thatthis one was not most decidedly of thenumber.The master and mistress of the largerambling habitation assigned to us thoughtproper to light up with their own handsall the tapers in the Bohemian glass174 THE CALDAS.sconces and chandeliers of the barn-likesaloon on their ground-floor. Such a glare,equal at least to that of a ridotto in asecond-rate Italian town, was as sure toexcite notice and attract passengers, as aflaming candle every moth and father-longingsin its neighbourhood. We were,therefore, in no want of company.Our tea-table, which we had prudentlyestablished as far beyond the influence ofDoctor Ehrhart's regale as possible, wassoon surrounded by all the fashion notunder immediate medical restraint thathappened to be at the Caldas : old buckramofficers, not much the wiser forhaving served under the Count de laLippe ; pot-bellied hidalgo, who had notyet been stewed down to less unseemlyproportions; and desembargadors and menof the law, as greedy as sharks, and asheavy as cart-horses.One of the most ponderous of the setapersonage of some political importance.THE CALDAS. 175and a distinguished graduate of the Universityof Coimbra, was half inclined toturn restive, because I would not sitdown by him and explain in minutedetail some passages in Blackstone's Commentariesabout which he was eager ofinformation. Pushing my chair awayfrom this determined bore, he pushedhis after me with such vehemence, thata conflict must have ensued, perhapsto my total discomfiture, had not hischair been killed under him ; — both backand legs gave way, and down he fell flaton the gritty floor. Everybody's sides inthe room shook with laughter — even thespare ribs of the Count de la Lippe'sancient martinet officers.176 THE CALDAS.TENTH DAY.Knavish Procedure. — Leave the Caldas. — Obidos. — Amorishamlet — Exquisite Atmosphere. — PastoralHymns to St. Anthony. — Bonfires on the Eve of hisFestival. — Reception at Cadafaiz. — Delightful change.June 12.We have been all cheated at a ferociousrate by one of those harpies called procedures,who, under the mask of administeringjustice, and superintending hospitals,and so forth, contrive to divert everylittle rill of royal beneficence into theirown pockets. This knave was so accustomedto the sweets of monopolies, that hebought up half the fowls, turkeys, andprovisions in the place, and then dealtthem out to our numerous caravan at hisOBIDOS. — CERCAL. 177own price. 1 refused seeing this cormorant; which was lucky, as I understood hejoins insolence to knavery, — a compoundwhich would have called forth my bestmanual exertions, occasioned delay, andvery probably given but too much employmentto Doctor Ehrhart.It was so delightful a morning, — so temperate,for there weren't any clouds — sobalsamic, for a slight shower had latelyfallen, — that I could not find it in my heartto be out of humour long. We had notleft the Caldas in arrear half an hour,before we saw Obidos, with its towers andbattlemented walls, rising above a forestof pines, and connected with the neighbouringhills by a long stretch of aqueduct.These hills being clothed with athick vegetation of dwarf ilex, and myrtle,look at a distance as uniformly green asif covered with turf.Cereal, where our dinner was prepared,is a pleasant little assemblage of reed178 CERCAL.covered sloping sheds and pointed hovels,at the feet of shrubby acclivities. Beforethe entrance of this aboriginal-lookinghamlet, is an irregular lawn, bounded byinclosures with bamboo fences, twinedover with convolvuli of various colours,forming a labyrinth of cheerful lanes,through which whole families of turkeys,consequential fathers, bustling mothers,slim aunts, and half-fledged cousins, werewandering about, clucking, and whistling,and gobbling, with all the well-knownvolubility of their native language.Though mid-day and in mid-June, theheat was moderate ; the sky, of a paletender blue, inexpressibly serene andbeautiful. To breathe the soft air of sucha climate, is in itself no trifling luxury;it seemed to inspire new life into everyvein : and if to those gifts of Nature theblessings of a free government and therefinements of art were added, more philosophythan I am master of would beCARIIEGADO. 179required, not to murmur at the shortnessof our existence.Our road in the evening lay betweenlofty slopes partially covered with bushesof rosemary and lavender in the fullestbloom. The sun went down behind thechain of hills which form the coast of thesea, just as we reached a quanta belongingto Fgrjaz, at present governor of Madeira.As we approached the rich cultivatedplains framed in by the hills aroundCadafaiz, we heard the country people,men, women, and children, singing hymnsto Saint Anthony as they returned homefrom reaping.Near Carregado we left the high roadto take that of Cadafaiz. The wholecountry was blazing with fires in honourof tomorrow's festival. I counted aboveone hundred shining bright amongst theolive-trees ; whilst a number of grotesquefigures, withered hags, and meagre imp-lines,kept glancing about before them,N 2180 CADAFAIZ.in the style of those visions the illuminatioften contrive to conjure up, to deludeand hamhoozle their dupes and victims.At Cadafaiz itself, that most comfortableof rustic manorial mansions, the Prior ofSt. Vincent's, who had preceded us abovean hour in his light chaise, drawn by twopotent mules, was waiting our arrival.The Prior of Aviz uttered a hearty " thankGod," as he sunk down in an arm-chairof most ample dimensions. Dr. Ehrhartrecommended us all to dilute, after hisexample, as freely as possible ; and Franchiunpacked his piano forte. Recollectionsof the Caldas and all its apothecaries, — notto mention its dust, its glare, its bustle,and its onions,-^made me value the calmand cleanliness of this retired abode stillmore highly. O the delightful, refreshingchange ! Were I to live as many yearsas I have often been wished to do bymy good friends the Spaniards, I shouldnot forget how keenly I enjoyed it.CONVENT ON THE HILL. 181ELEVENTH DAY.Excursion to a Franciscan Convent. — A Miracle. — Countryresembling Palestine. — Innumerable Assemblage of Peasants.— Their sincere Devotion. — Sublime Sight. — Observationsof the Prior of Aviz, — The Benediction. — AncientPortuguese Hymn. — Its grand effect on the presentoccasion. — Perilous Descent from the Mountain. — AMandate from the Prince. — Evening. — Music and aMorisco Dance.June 13.I SHOOK off laziness manfully, not abovean hour after sunrise ; so did the GrandPrior of Aviz ; — an effort, our hospitablehost observed, worthy to be classed amongstthe choicest of St. Anthony's miracles.Not a member of our caravan but seemedto feel the Saint's benign and holy in-182 Franciscan CONVENT.fluence. One would have thought itpervaded the very atmosphere ; foreven Dr. Ehrhart — no ardent devotee —desired to join our solemn pilgrimage tothe Franciscan convent, on the summitof an exceedingly high hill, where thegrand mass of the day was to be celebrated.The good Doctor having promisednot to stop our procession by getting outof his vehicle and botanizing by the roadside,we set forth, after a slight breakfast,and wound our long array up the acclivityby a tedious, serpentine, rugged track.We had attained a sort of resting-place,not more than one hundred yards beneaththe summit, when a stout lubber, dressedin goats' skins, carrying a sickly brat inhis arms, bolted forth from between twothorny bushes, looking like one possessed,and bawling out, " A miracle ! a miracle !My child was at the point of death, whenthe saint appeared to me in a dream, andtold me to give it the raspings of a cow-countryRESEMBLING PALESTINE. 183horn : I did — and there you see it isalive and hearty."Hearty at least were Dr. Ehrhart's expressionsof surprise at this most pastoralremedy ; he kept repeating " raspings ofcow-horn, raspings of cow-horn !" so often,that I beseeched him, for St. Anthony'ssake, to remain quiet; and we proceeded, thelOut with his brat, having joined the greatconcourse of people on the top of the hill,still crying out, " A miracle ! a miracle \"and I am happy to add, for the honourof faith, my most perfect conviction thatnot a soul of the crowd — and a great crowdit was — but firmly believed him.Arrived at length at the point to whichwe had been tending, I fancied myselfsuddenly transported to Palestine ; a plainperfectly flat and arid presented itself,diversified alone by the low columnedarcades and belfries of the convent, incliningto the ruinous, and bearing astrong resemblance in form and tint to184 FRANCISCAN CONVENT.the views I have seen of the semi-gothicchapels and cells at Jerusalem and Nazareth.Scattered all over from one end tothe other of this extensive level, (for itstretched out above a mile,) vv^ere drovesof asses, a few mules of superior casteglaringly caparisoned, and peasants withoutnumber, of all ages and sexes, sittingin clusters upon the ground, employedas busily in gathering together the fragmentsof a general repast, as if they hadjust partaken of some miraculous supplyof loaves and fishes.This was all mighty well, and admirablyadapted to prompt a desire of sketching,for nothing could be more picturesquethan these varied groups ; but the comfortof comforts was to witness how gratefullydevout they appeared, how perfectly convincedthat they stood under the open eyeof the Saint, and that by acting in conformitywith his precepts, they might deserve,at the inevitable hour, his efficaciousFRANCISCAN CONVENT. 185patronage. In the mean time I saw notokens of riot or intemperance, no brandishingof knives, no drunken disputes orw^allo wings.When the bells of the convent gavenotice that service was going to begin, thegroups that were scattered over the plainrapidly joined together, and moved in onedense body, one vast multitude, six orseven thousand at least, to the wide nakedspace before the entrance to the church,which, though not inconsiderable in itsdimensions, was far too small to contain atwentieth part of so numerous a congregation.The community, consisting of from thirtyto forty monks, all young men, many withfeatures as regular as the fine Grecianheads on the Syracuse medals, but lookingpale and attenuated, were standing onthe long line of steps. Their superiorpresented the banner of the Saint to myrevered companions, who having saluted it186 FRANCISCAN CONVENT.with profound reverence, we entered thechurch. I looked back from the portalupon the multitude, which extended itselflike a sea to a great distance ; all silent,all kneeling, all with their moistened andglistening eyes (for many wept throughreligious fervour ) fixed on the illuminationwhich streamed from the high altar,and which appeared to them, I have nodoubt, a cheering light, a sacred pharos,shining to conduct them to that havenwhere the ardent in faith and the contritein spirit meet their eternal reward.Oh !" said the excellent Prior of Avizto me, as he pressed my hand with parentalkindness, "this is a sight which relievesand elevates my heart. How glowingand sincere the piety of these plaincountrymen ! how consolatory their firmconfidence in protection from above ! Andyet these warm, ennobling feelings — feelingswhich raise our nature above thedust — are precisely those the vile syco-FRANCISCAN CONVENT. 187plants of the evil principle, the bloodstainedmonsters of France, pant to eradicate.The suppressors of institutionsvrhich tend to soothe those laceratingcares humanity is subject to, and to absorbin the glorious prospect of the future thecorroding misery of the present, are, infact, suppressors of happiness, — the delegatesof that dread invisible agency, v\^hich,under an endless variety of speciousmasks, is ever in movement, seeking v^homand what it may devour."Not one vrord had I to say against thisreasoning; for how often have I thoughtmyself, that these experiments upon thehuman mind, to which the Prior of A vizalluded, are as abhorrent to men of pureand kindly feeling, as those of the hellishMajestie upon the unoffending animalshe submits to the most horrible and lingeringtorture, and for purposes equallyproblematical.The " Ite, missa est" having been prossFRANCISCAN CONVENT.bounced, the Prior of Aviz, trembling withemotion and evidently much affected, wasconducted in procession by the monks totheir sacristy, to put on his pontifical vestments,and, next, to the steps before theentrance, where, looking up to the effigyon the banner, again displayed by thesuperior of the convent, he bestowed, as ifimmediately delegated by the Saint himselfto perform that sacred office, a solemn,heartfelt benediction.At that moment, when every knee wasbent and every head was bowed, the ancientand venerable hymn appointed forthis festival, so dear to the natives of Portugal— so often sung by their armies intheir proud days of conquest on the eveof going into battle, rose with one accord,as from one heart, from the whole of thevast assemblage. The perfect unison of somany thousand manly voices, mingled withthe clearer tones of children and their mothers,filled the summer air with a volumeFRANCISCAN CONVENT. 189of sound more intellectually harmoniousthan any which ever reached my ear fromthe artificial efforts of musicians and choristers.Prayer does not always ascendwith the greatest fervency from beneathgilded vaults or gorgeous cupolas ; it is inthe free untainted desert, under Nature'sown sky, that man seems to communemore deeply with his God. Impressed withthat sentiment, the bare rocks, the scatteredstones, the withered turf, rankedhigher in my estimation than all thesplendours of regal magnificence ; and thesimple congregation assembled together inthis wild and desolate place to thank theAlmighty for his blessings, appeared farsuperior in my eyes to those pharisaicgatherings attracted to church by worldlymotives and. the parade of idle vanity.So very thick was the concourse ofpeople, and so profoundly were they affectedby the late most solemn benediction,that it was no easy matter for the190 FRANCISCAN CONVENT.prelate to pass between their still kneelinggroups to regain the sacristy in order tobe divested, of his heavy cope, the peoplepressing forwards to kiss his hand in suchtides, and with such earnestness, that hefelt fatigued and jaded. Nor was his lassitudedestined to a speedy termination :he had hardly resumed his customary habiliments,when our egress from the churchwas absolutely impeded by a processionof young lads, dressed in a style as antiqueas the Moorish domination in Portugal ;some carrying baskets of fruit and corn ;some, on an ornamented sledge, an immensemass of wax fashioned into theshape of a gigantic taper ; and some, a numberof lambs bedecked with ribands andflowers.I thought, when I saw presented on thesteps before the altar these living offerings,not one of which I understood, to myheart's content, was devoted to the knife,but all destined to be reared with careFRANCISCAN CONVENT. 191and tenderness — I thought even their bleatingmight reach the throne of universalbeneficence. We well know how positivelythe inspired David declares, in oneof his Psalms, that the ear of God is opento the supplications of all his creatures, towhom, as well as to us, he has impartedthe blessings of light, of sleep, and of nutriment,— "qui dat juvenis escam ipsumet pulls corvorum invocations cum."When I communicated to my reveredfriend the feelings which throbbed in myown bosom, and reminded him of thefervid effusion of the prophet king, hereplied : " Most entirely do I sympathisewith the holy monarch. Man, in the delusionof pride, may arrogate to himselfan exclusive supremacy ; but fully persuadedam I, that the same principle oflife which animates the wisest and brightestof mankind, pervades the boundlesscreation in all its forms and branches ; andwhen that principle prompts the cry of192 FRANCISCAN CONVENT.distress or the expression of gratitude inthe humblest animal, neither pass unheededby the Divine Creator, nor arethey poured forth to him in vain. Theseare my own interior sentiments," continuedthe venerable prelate. " And theyare mine also," I could not repress exclaiming.At length the procession, after depositingall its offerings, having retired intothe secret courts and penetralia of theconvent, the crowd began to disperse; apassage was cleared between the remaininggroups of the multitude, and we regainedour carriages, much to the relief ofthe Grand Prior, who was experiencingan almost total exhaustion.What with the sun-rays from above,and the rolling stones below, our descentwas not only broiling, but dangerous:many of our mules stumbled, and one felldown dead, half crushing the driver in itsfall. The stoppage and confusion this sadRETURN TO CADAFATZ. 193accident occasioned in one of the narrowestparts of our perilous track exposedus to scorching heat for half an hour.We arrived at last at our cool, shadyquarters, as brown as mummies, and asdry as cinders.The first living objects that met us atthe massive portal, surmounted by a hugemarble cross, which defends the entranceof the orange orchard immediately aroundthe mansion, were two special couriersin the royal livery, magnificently badgedand booted, just arrived with a writtenmandate from the Prince, summoning thetwo Priors to an audience tomorrow atthe palace of Queluz, precisely at three.They delivered me also a very kind letterof invitation from the Marquis of Anjeja(then lord in waiting) to dine with himat the same hour.Really," said our most amiable host,a little ruffled by this peremptory command," we did not expect a summons to194 CADAFAIZ.communicate observations upon Alcobacaso soon, — on our way home, too, God blessus ! without being allowed time to shakeoff the dust from our garments, and makeourselves decent and comfortable. But anuncontrollable love of gossip is inherentin the character of royalty, and as indelible: we have nothing to do but toobey."So saying, and so sighing, with manyan ejaculation from the inmost soul oflaziness, both Priors wrote answers tothe royal mandate ; I did the same to theMarquis of Anjeja, and the couriers departed.After every comfort and ablution ourpleasant retired chambers could afford, wepartook of a delicious repast, and of allthe blandishments which delicate dishesand iced sherbets could bestow on thewilling palate. To these delights succeeded,on the part of the Lord Priors at least,a most comfortable nap, and then a strollCADAFAIZ. 195in the long-bo were alleys of the quanta ;and then the evening perfume of orange-flowersand jasmine, and the eveningsong of birds, — music, also, from Franchi,accompanied on the guitar by two novices,who played from their heart and soulmost ravishingly, — and then a dance oftrue oriental fervour, performed by achosen band of the morisco-dressed processionists,who had been drawn down,not from heaven, like the Angel to St.Cecilia, but from the convent on the hill ;where, I have little doubt, their freaks andgambols were sadly missed, and the temporarydeprivation of such amusing frolicsheartily regretted.196 Quells.TWELFTH DAY.Dreary expanse of Country between Cadafaiz and Queluz. —Arrival at the Palace. — Court Lumber. — Observations ofthe Marquis of Anjeja relative to the Prince-Regent. —Promised Audience of his Royal Highness. — Visit to theforbidden Gardens. — Surprise of an African Gardener. —A Pavilion, — Night-scene — Preparations for a Fete. —The Infanta's Nymph-like Attendants. — The young Marquisof Marialva. — Interview with her Royal Highness.A Race. — A Dance. — The Prince's Summons. — Conversationwith him. — Character of that Sovereign. —Baneful influence of his despotic Consort. — UnhappyAspirants to Court Benefits. — Private Conference withthe Marquis. — The Prince-Regent's Afflictions. — HisVision. — Anjeja's urgent Request. — Terrible Cries fromthe Queen — Their effect on me. — My Departure fromthe Palace.14th June.The morning was the very essence ofsummer — and summer in Portugal, consequentlytremendously hot. Such heatwas oppressive enough, but the GrandQuells. 197Prior thought early rising still more abominable,and notwithstanding the Priorof St. Vincent's exhortations to set forthwhilst any degree of coolness lingered inthe atmosphere, there was no persuadinghim to move before half-past eight.Being myself pretty well seasoned tomeridian excursions, and bronzed all overlike a native Portuguese, I set the sun atdefiance, mounted my Arabian, and steeringmy course as directly as was possiblewithout the aid of a compass, traversedthe wide expanse of country between and Queluz ; — and a sad drearyexpanse it was, exhibiting only now andthen a straggling flock, looking pretty andpastoral — a neglected quanta of orange-treeswith its decaying garden-house, theabode of crime or innocence, whicheveryou like best to fancy — or a half-ruinedwindmill, with its tattered vans, revolvinglackadaisically in the languid andfeeble breeze.198 Quells.Exactly at the hour named, 1 arrived,not a little endured and wearied, at thepalace of Queluz. The chaises belongingto the Priors of Aviz and St. Vincent'swere waiting before the royal entrance, forboth prelates were still closeted with thePrince Regent. Blessing Heaven that Ihad nothing to do with the business, whateverit might be, that was in agitation, Igladly took refuge from the intolerablesunshine in the apartments allotted to thelord in waiting ; — shabby enough theywere, bare as many an English countrychurch, and not much less dingy.The beings who were wandering aboutthis limbo, or intermediate state, belongedchiefly to that species of living furniturewhich encumber royal palaces — walkingchairs, animated screens, commodes andconveniences, to be used by sovereigns inany manner they like best ; men whohad little to feed on besides hope, andwhose rueful physiognomies showed plainlyQuells. 199enough the wasting effects of that emptydiet, — weather-beaten equerries, superannuatedvendors,* and wizened pages. Thewhole party were yawning over dusty card-tables.Making them many low bows, whichwere returned with equal courtesy, I passedforward into an interior apartment,where the Marquis of Anjeja and his sonthe Conte de Villagers were waiting forme,and immediately dinner was servedup. Our repast was not particularly distinguishedby good cheer or lively conversation.As soon as it was over, and the motleytribe of attendants who had crowded tumultuouslyround our table sent abouttheir no business at all, the Marquis observedto me in a very subdued and rathermelancholy tone, that the Prince had beenA Vendor is something less than a Camarista, or chamberlain,and something more than a groom of the bedchamber.200 Quells.greatly disturbed of late by strange apprehensionsand stranger dreams ; that histemper was much ruffled, and that something,he could not tell what, bore heavilyon his mind. He would have entered, Ibelieve, into further details of still greaterimportance, had not a page called himaway to the royal presence.I shall return in half an hour," saidhe, " and finish what I had to say to you."This half hour exceeded three quarters,and two quarters added to that ; but theypassed rapidly, for both the young Conteand myself, oppressed by a warm atmosphere,and lulled by the drone of humble-bees,and the monotonous buzzing of courtiersand lacqueys, in the adjoining apartments,had fallen fast asleep.When I awoke from this happy state offorgetfulness, one of my servants, who hadfollowed me from Cadafaiz with a changeof dress, took me into a room which aprincipal attendant of the palace hadQuells. 201given up to him, and out of which Iissued completely renovated, and met theMarquis hastily bearing to me the interestingintelligence, that in the course ofthe evening, or as soon after nightfallas possible, the Prince Regent wouldgive me an audience. " In the interveningtime," he added, " if you wish to seethecurious birds and flowers last sentfrom the Brazils, the gardens, though accessibleof late to very few persons, shallbe open to you. Villagers would mostgladly accompany you, but even he hasnot been in the habit of straying aboutthem for some time past. As to myself,the Prince has a long series of deputationsand petitions to receive, and it is my dutyto remain near his royal person on theseoccasions : so pardon my not offering myselfas your guide. At the extremity ofthe avenue you see from these windows,stands a pavilion well worthy your attention,and I rather wish you might principleQuells.pally employ it in examining the paintingsand china, till the moment arriveswhen the Prince will be at leisure to receiveyou."I bowed, the Marquis and his son bowedalso, and I entered the grand avenue, wonderingwhat in the name of mystery allthese precautions could mean. The enigmawas not long in meeting with some explanation.A gardener, who had left myservice only last year, and was now establishedprime guardian of carnations andanemones in this regal paradise, advancedtowards me with looks of the greatest surprise,and touching the extremities of mygarments with his exuberant lips — for hewas neither more nor less than a negro —stammered out, " Most excellent sir, bywhat chance do I see you here, where sofew are permitted to enter ?" — " By thechance of having the Prince's permission."Ah, sir," continued he, " it is the Princesswho reigns here almost exclusively."Quells. 203Well," answered I, '' her indignation, Ihope, will not visit me too severely : hereI am, and here I shall continue."With a low salam in the style of a regularBostangi, the poor African, not alittle confounded, humbly retired, and leftme at full liberty to enter the pavilion,whose richly gilded trellised doors stoodwide open. Many entertaining objects,arabesque paintings by Costa full of fireand fancy, and mandarin josses of themost supreme and ridiculous ugliness,kept me so well amused that half an hourglided away pretty smoothly.The evening was now drawing towardsits final close, and the groves, pavilions',and aviaries sinking apace into shadow :a few wandering lights sparkled amongstthe more distant thickets, — fire-flies perhaps— perhaps meteors ; but they did notdisturb the reveries in which I was whollyabsorbed.So then," thought I within myself,204 Quells.the Infanta Donna Charlotte is becomethe predominant power in these lovelygardens, once so profusely adorned andfondly cherished by the late kind-heartedand saintly king. She is now Princess ofBrazil and Princess Regent ; and whatbesides, Heaven preserve me from repeating!"Reports, I well knew, not greatly to thegood fame of this exalted personage, hadbeen flying about, numerous as butterflies ;some dark-coloured, like the wings of thedeath-head moth, and some brilliant andgay, like those of the fritillaria.This night I began to perceive from abustle of preparation already visible in thedistance, that a mysterious kind of fetewas going forwards ; and whatever mayhave been the leading cause, the effectpromised at least to be highly pleasing.Cascades and fountains were in full play ;a thousand sportive jets deem were sprinklingthe rich masses of bay and citron,Quells. 205and drawing forth all their odours, as well-taughtwater is certain to do upon allsuch occasions. Amongst the thickets,some of which received a tender lightfrom tapers placed low on the groundunder frosted glasses, the Infanta's nymphlikeattendants, all thinly clad after theexample of her royal and nimble self, wereglancing to and fro, visible one instant,invisible the next, laughing and talkingall the while with very musical silver-tonedvoices. I fancied now and then Iheard gruffer sounds ; but perhaps I wasmistaken. Be that as it pleases Lucifer,just as I was advancing to explore a duskylabyrinth, out came, all of a sudden, myvery dear friend Don Pedro, the youngMarquis of Marialva.What ! at length returned from Alco-baa," said he, lifting me a foot off theground in a transport of jubilation ; "whereis my uncle ?"Safe enough," answered I, perhaps in-206 ' Quells.discreetly : " he lead his audience five orsix hours ago, and is gone home snug tohis cushions and cauda da galena. I amwaiting for my turn."Which will not come so soon as youimagine," replied Don Pedro, " for thePrince is retired to his mother's apartments,and how long he may be detainedthere no one can tell. But in the meanwhilecome with me. The Princess, whohas learnt you are here, and who hasheard that you run like a greyhound,wishes to be convinced herself of thetruth of a report she thinks so extraordinary."Nothing so easy," said I, taking himby the hand ; and we sprang forwards, notto the course immediately, but to an amphitheatreof verdure concealed in thedeepest recess of the odoriferous thickets,where, seated in the oriental fashion on arich velvet carpet spread on the grass, Ibeheld the Alcina of the place, surroundedQuells. 207by thirty or forty young women, everyonefar superior in loveliness of featureand fascination of smile to their augustmistress.How did you leave the fat waddlingmonks of Alcoba^a," said her royal highness." I hope you did not run races withthem ; — but that would indeed have beenimpossible. There," continued she, " downthat avenue, if you like, when I clap myhands together, start ; your friend Pedroand two of my donzellas shall run withyou — take care you are not beaten."The avenue allotted for this amusingcontest was formed of catalans and orangetrees, and as completely smooth and levelas any courser, biped or quadruped, uponwhom all the bets in the universe weredepending, could possibly desire. Thesignal given, my youthful friend, all ardour,all agility, and two Indian-lookinggirls of fourteen or fifteen, the very originals,one would have thought, of those208 Quells.graceful creatures we often see representedin Hindoo paintings, darted forthwithamazing swiftness. Although I hadgiven them ten paces in advance, exertingmyself in right earnest, I soon left thembehind, and reached the goal — a marblestatue, rendered faintly visible by lampsgleaming through transparent vases. Ithought I heard a murmur of approbation ;but it was so kept down, under the terrorof disturbing the queen, as to be hardlydistinguishable.Muy bien, muy bien," said the Princessin her native Castilian, when we returnedto the margin of the velvet carpet uponwhich she was still sitting reclined, andmade our profound obeisance. ^' I seetheEnglishman can run — report has notdeceived me. Now," continued her royalhighness, " let me see whether he candance a bolero ; they say he can, and likeone of us : if that be true — and I hope itis, for I abhor unsuccessful enterprises —Quells. 209Antonio shall be his partner, — and she isby far the best dancer that followed mefrom Spain."This command had been no soonerissued, than a low, soft-flowing choir offemale voices, without the smallest dissonance,without the slightest break, —smooth, well-tuned, and perfectly melodious,— filled my ear with such enchantment,that I glided along in a deliriumof romantic delight.My partner, an Andalusian, as full offire and animation as the brightest beautiesof Cadi and Seville, though not quiteso young as I could have wished her tobe, was rattling her castanets at a mostintrepid rate, and raising her voice to ahigher pitch than was seemly in theseregions, when a universal " Hush, hush,hush !" arrested our movements, suspendedthe harmonious notes of the choir,and announced the arrival of the Marquisof Anjeja.210 Quells.After a thousand kind and courteouscompliments he was pleased to pay me, hebegged another thousand pardons of thePrincess for having ventured to interrupther recreations : " But, madam," continuedhe, " the Prince Regent has been waitingseveral minutes for the Englishman, andI leave you to judge whether he has aminute to lose."Her Royal Highness looked rather blankat this intelligence, and, compassionatemy disappointment, held out her hand,which I kissed with fervour, and three orfour of her attendants as many silkenhandkerchiefs, which I found very convenientin removing those dews which notonly the night, but such violent exerciseas I had lately taken, occasioned. Panting,and almost breathless, I quitted the enchantedcircle with great reluctance.What a contrast the dark, dull antechambersof the palace presented to thatlively and graceful scene ! It was in theQuells. 211long state gallery where the Prince habituallyreceives the homage of the courtupon birthdays and festivals, — a pompous,richly gilded apartment, set round with colossalvases of porcelain, as tall and as formalas grenadiers, — that his Royal Highnesswas graciously pleased to grant me audience.He was standing alone in this vast room,thoughtful, it appeared to me, and abstracted.He seemed, however, to brightenupon my approach ; and although hewas certainly the reverse of handsome,there was an expression of shrewdness, andat the same time benignity, in his very uncommoncountenance, singularly pleasing :it struck me that he had a decided look,particularly about the mouth, of his father'smaternal ancestors. John the Fifthhaving married the Archduchess, daughterof the Emperor Charles the Sixth, he hadtherefore an hereditary claim to thosewide-spreading, domineering lips, which sop2212 Quells.remarkably characterised the House ofAustria, before it merged into that ofLorraine.Welcome back from Alcobaca!" said hisRoyal Highness to me, with the most condescendingkindness : " I hope your journeywas pleasant — how did you find theroads ?"Not half so bad as I expected, especiallyupon our return from the great convent,the reverend fathers having summonedall their numerous dependents tomend them with astonishing expedition ;the Lord Abbot took care of that."He takes excellent care of himself, atleast," observed the Prince, — " nobody better.Is it not true that he is become mostgloriously corpulent, and fallen passionatelyin love with the fine French cookeryyou gave him an opportunity of enjoying?"I perceived by this sally that the GrandPrior had been a faithful narrator of ourQuells. 213late proceedings, as was proved more andmore by the following queries.You had a stage-play too, had younot ? The fathers at Mara have often regaledme with performances of a similarnature ; and many a hearty laugh have Ihad at them, and with them, before now. Idare say you must have thought them halfout of their senses ; their poet particularly,who, I hear, is one of the most ridiculousbuffoons, the most impudent blockhead{tolerao) in the kingdom. I shall send forhim one of these days myself ; they say heis highly diverting, and I want somethingto cheer my spirits. Every despatch fromFrance brings us such frightful intelligence,that I am lost in amazement and horror ;the ship of the state in every country inEurope is labouring under a heavy torment,— God alone can tell upon whatshore we shall be all drifted !"With these prophetic words, most solemnlyand energetically pronounced, the214 Quells.Prince thought fit to dismiss me, honouringme again with those affable expressionsof regard which his excellent heart neverfailed to dictate. Let me observe, whilstthe recollections of the interviews I havehad with this beneficent sovereign remainfresh in my memory, that not one of hissubjects spoke their native language —that beautiful harmonious language, withgreater purity and eloquence than himselfWhen in his graver moods, there was apromptitude, a facility in his diction, mostremarkable : every word he uttered wasto the purpose, and came with the fullestforce. When he chose to relax, —which he certainly was apt enough todomore than now and then, — a quaintnational turn of humour added a zest tohis pleasantries, that, upon my enteringheart and soul into the idiom of the language,has often afforded me capital entertainment.No one knew how to winpopular affection, after its own fashion,Quells. 215more happily than this well-intentioned,single-minded prince. Had it not beenfor the baneful influence of his despoticconsort, — her restless intrigues of all hues,political as well as private — her wantonfreaks of favouritism and atrocious acts ofcruelty, — his reign would have gone downto the latest times in the annals of hiskingdoms surrounded with a halo of gratitude.Upon my reaching the great portal ofthis silent gallery, and fumbling to openits valves — for this extremity of the apartmentwas but very feebly illuminated, — theMarquis, who had been giving some ordersto somebody of whom I only caught aglimpse, spared me the trouble of furtherrattling at locks or door-knobs, and weentered together another shadowy world —another immense saloon. Here, by thewan light of one solitary lustre, containingbut half its complement of yellowish waxtapers drooping with dismal snuffs, I Quells.vere some fifteen or twenty unhappy aspirantsto court benefits still loitering andlingering about. The sovereign of Portugalwas at this period as completely despoticas the most decided amateur of unlimitedmonarchy could possibly desire : they whoentered these palace regions came with asmany hopes of success and fears of thecontrary as if they were resorting to a tableof hazard. The sovereign, in their eyes,was Chance personified ; his decrees foror against you, modestly styled avisos, werepieces of advice to the judicial obeyers ofhis commands, which, if once obtained,were never slighted.Most of the victims of this system, atthis time in this great hall assembled, appearedvisibly suffering under the sicknessof hope deferred. " Five hours have I beenwalking up and down, to and fro, to nopurpose," said an old General, my veryparticular acquaintance. " Is there nochance yet of delivering my memorial intoQuells. 217his royal highness's own hand ?" whisperedanother veteran, decorated withscars as well as orders ; " None," answeredthe Marquis : " the Prince is retired forthe night, and you had better follow hisexample."Had there been more light, we shouldhave been fastened upon by a greaternumber of petitioners ; but, thanks to thepervading gloom, we slipped along half-undiscovered.Our next movements were directedthrough an ante-chamber of large size andmuch simplicity, for its walls were quiteplain, and the roof as unornamented as thatof a barn. A few expiring lamps gave meanopportunity of perceiving another assemblageof the votaries of royal favourin some of its shapes, less dignified thanthe company we had just quitted, butwho had been equally eager, and who nowwere equally exhausted, — country magistrates,sea captains, provincial noblesse.218 Quells.and I know not who besides ; some ofthem, if truth may be spoken, lookingmore like the had than the beau ideal ofbandits and bravoes ; but what they werein reality, thank God, I am perfectlyignorant. Anjeja paid them no attentionas we passed on through their openingranks : his looks, though not his voice,told me plainly enough,Non rational di lor,Ma guard e passa.These looks seemed to tell me at the sametime that he wished to converse with meinprivate.I was tired of close conferences in closeapartments ; I longed for the refreshingsea-breezes of my quanta on the banksof the Tagus; the very name of which(San Jose de Ribs-mar) was music to myears at this moment. A page announcedthat my carriages, just arrived from Cada-fais, were in waiting. This was tantalizingindeed : I would have taken leave of myQuells. 219most obliging Marquis without any verydeep regret after all, but he would notlet me off so soon as I eagerly desired ; heabsolutely insisted upon taking me intoan interior apartment I had never visitedbefore, where we sat down, — for hereatleast, were plenty of chairs and sofas, —and he addressed me with considerableemotion in the following manner :"You see, his royal highness is moregloomy than he used to be."Upon the whole," answered I, " hisspirits are less depressed than I was ledto imagine : my friends the Priors seemto have regaled him with many a goodstory about convents, for he laughedseveral times at my Lord Almoner's charitiesof all kinds beginning so comfortablyat home."Ah !" replied Anjeja, "you little think,notwithstanding this apparent levity, whatan accumulated weight of sorrows presshim down : he is the most affectionate of220 Quells.sons, the most devoted ; and being such,feels for his mother's sufferings with theacutest poignancy. Those sufferings arefrightfully severe, more heart-rending thanany words of mine can express. Thisvery evening he knelt by the Queen'scouch above two hours, whilst, in a paroxysmof mental agony, she kept crying outfor mercy, imagining that, in the midst ofa raging flame which enveloped the wholechamber, she beheld her father's image acalcined mass of cinder, — a statue in formlike that in the Terreiro do Pace, but incolour black and horrible, — erected on apedestal of molten iron, which a crowd ofghastly phantoms — she named them, Ishall not — were in the act of draggingdown. This vision haunts her by nightand by day ; and should she continueto describe it in all its horrible detailsagain and again to my royal master, I fearhis brain will catch fire too. There is aremedy — my relation, her confessor, knowsQuells. 221it well — there is a medicine, and of thehighest and most salutary kind — suchmight be administered — restitutions mightbe made — infernal acts revoked, and justicerendered. But hitherto the powersof evil — certain demons in the shape ofsome of Pombal's ancient counsellors, andothers equally culpable, though not so oldin iniquity, have impeded measures whichwould conciliate the disaffected, and althoughthey might excite the gibes andmurmurs of the disciples of new doctrines,would attach all us, the ancient nobles ofthe realm, to the House of Braganzamore closely than ever. May I ask, hasthe Prince ever touched upon this subjectto you ? I think Marialva told me hehad, and once in his presence."I answered, " If he did, it was ambiguously,and with so much slightness thatit passed like a fleeting cloud."After a long pause, during which An-jenaappeared lost in thought, he said to222 Quells.me with the greatest earnestness, "If, atthe next audience the Prince may giveyou, he should pour forth his sorrows forhis mother's malady into your bosom, —which I have reason to conjecture heshortly may, for I know that he feels himselftowards you affectionately well inclined"(sumamente affeifoado), " remember the kindregard you entertain for our family,' (hemeant the Noronhas in general, fromwhich great house all the Marialvas arepaternally descended,) " remember to let itsuggest such observations as may further agreat and interesting cause. T wish alsoyou would dwell particularly on what thelate Archbishop, your devoted friend, mayprobably have said to you upon this subject.Whatever that may have been, giveit the turn we wish, and do not let it loseany charm in the narration."I could hardly repress a smile at thisurgent request to launch forth beyond theexact limits of truth, if not of probability ;Quells. 22iifor I perfectly recollected the good Archbishop's-opinions were everything butfavourable to the reversal of those attainders.However, I preserved a decorousgravity. I said nothing ; but I contrivedthat my looks should express a dispositionto second his wishes the first opportunityof doing so that might present itself.At this moment, the most terrible, themost agonizing shrieks — shrieks such asI hardly conceived possible — shrieks morepiercing than those which rung throughthe Castle of Berkeley, when Edward theSecond was put to the most cruel andtorturing death — inflicted upon me a sensationof horror such as I never felt before.The Queen herself, whose apartment wasonly two rooms off from the chamber inwhich we were sitting, uttered thosedreadful sounds : " Ai Jesus ! Ai jesus!" did she exclaim again and againin the bitterness of agony.I believe I turned pale ; for Anjeja224 Quells.said to me, " I see how deeply you areaffected : think what the sufferings mustbe that prompt such cries ; think whata son must feel, and such a son as ourroyal master."I undoubtedly thought all this, and agreat deal more : not only the tears in myeyes, but the faltering of my voice, expressedthe intensity of my feelings. TheMarquis, far from displeased at the effectproduced upon me, embraced me withredoubled kindness. Notwithstanding myentreaties for him to remain in his apartment,he was determined, after I hadtaken leave, to conduct me to the outwarddoor of the palace ; nor did he cease gazing,I was afterwards told, upon the carriagewhich bore me away, till the soundof the wheels grew fainter and fainter, andeven the torches which were borne beforeit became invisible.NOTES.Theatre in a distant part of the Convent, p. 103.My readers need not start at the idea of a play in aconvent, and a synod of reverend fathers assisting atits representation. Such entertainments were often resortedto at Mara to dispel the profound ennui of thatroyal and monastic residence — the Escurial of Portugal.Upon these occasions, the actors, orchestra, and audiencewere all monks, with the exception of his lateMajesty, John the Sixth, and a few especial layfavourites.II.Grotto-like communications, p. 144.The lively and intelligent Miss Parted's charmingdescription of her visit to this famous convent, subsequentto the predatory incursion of the French, andprevious to its final desecration by their imitators, theniculorn Portuguese, cannot be too warmly commended.She paints the supreme beauty of the young monk shecaught a peep at (p. 77), and who manifested himselfQ226 NOTES.more fully, (see p. 89,) in a fervid and animated style,which does credit to the discriminating eye of the fairand susceptible authoress. Her hints (p. 100) of asubterranean road from the monastery of Alcobaga to aBernardine nunnery in the neighbourhood, are far morepalpable than any I can pretend to have received. Theyafford the finest play to the imagination. We immediatelyassign the handsome monk as beautiful a partner ;and the picture becomes complete.III.The Bird-Qneeri's garden, Sc. p. 151-163.This fine, trim garden was suffered to fall into totalruin, and its feathered inhabitants were dispersed anddestroyed, upon the death of their mistress, whichoccurred about ten months after the period of myvisit. The French armies, in their devastating marchesand counter-marches through Portugal, completed thework of desolation, by cutting down the pine-forest,and grubbing up even the very roots for fuel.IV.The Monks of the Royal Monastery, p. 165.The revenue of this royal monastery, at the period ofmy excursion to it, considerably exceeded 24,000/.and the charities such wealth enabled the monks to dispensewere most ample, and judiciously applied. Thetraces of John the Fifth's munificence were then visiblein all their freshness and lustre. Since those goldendays of reciprocal good-will and confidence between thelandlord and the tenant, the master and the servant, whatNOTES. 227cruel and arbitrary inroads have been made upon individualhappiness ! What almost obsolete oppressionshave been revived under new-fangled, specious names !What a cold and withering change, in short, has beenperpetrated by a well-organized system of spoliation,tricked out in the plausible garb of philosophic improvementand general utility !V.Alfagirau, p. 170.Tradition informs us that it was at this castle, which,from a distance at least, looks magnificently picturesque,that the good king Don Deniz sometimes held hissplendid and opulent court. He was husband to St.Isabel, one of the purest gems of the Roman calendar.From this virtuous and exemplary queen descended theless saintly Constance of Castile, duchess of York. Theaccounts given by chroniclers of the wealth and prosperityof Don Deniz, the successful impulse he gave toagriculture, and the quantity of gold extracted underhis auspices from the sands of the Tagus, appear incrediblein our days of almost universal scepticism.VI.The hellish Magendie, p. 187.I had copied, for insertion here, a record of theseatrocious experiments, which appeared in most of thenewspapers of the time, and were even alluded to in]parliament ; but, upon reading it over, although itwould fully justify the epithet I have bestowed onthis keen anatomist, the details are so heart-sickens228 NOTES.ing, so horrible, that I shrink from their further dissemination.VII.The young Marquis of Marialva, p. 205.From this mild night, I have been told repeatedly,may be traced the marked predilection of the futureempress-queen for this graceful young nobleman — apredilection about which much has been said and moreconjectured.THE END.LONDON :PRINTED DY SAMUEL BENTLEY,Dorset Street, Fleet Street.