THE BRIDGEWATER TREATISESON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE CREATIONTREATISE IVTHE HAND ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGNBY SIR CHARLES BELL K. H. F. R, S.THE HANDITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGNSIR CHARLES BELL K.G.HF.R.S. L.&E.LONDONWILLIAM PICKERINGC. WHITTINOHAM, Took COURT, CHANCERY LANE.NOTICE,THE series of Treatises, of which the present is one, ispublished under the following circumstances :The RIGHT HONOURABLE and REVEREND FRANCISHENRY, EARL of BRIDGEWATER, died in the month ofFebruary, 1829 ; and by his last Will and Testament, bearingdate the 25th of February, 1825, he directed certainTrustees therein named to invest in the public funds thesum of Eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, withthe accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposalof the President, for the time being, of the Royal Societyof London, to be paid to the person or persons nominatedby him. The Testator further directed, that the person orpersons selected by the said President should be appointedto write, print, and publish one thousand copies of a workOn the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifestedin the Creation ; illustrating such work by all reasonablearguments, as for instance the variety and formation ofGod's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms; the effect of digestion, and thereby of conversion ;the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite varietyof other arguments; as also by discoveries ancient andmodern, in arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature.He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the saleof the works so published should be paid to the authors ofthe works.VIThe late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determiningupon the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions ofthe Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrenceof a nobleman immediately connected with thedeceased, Mr. Davies Gilbert appointed the following eightgentlemen to write separate Treatises on the differentbranches of the subject as here stated :THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, Did.ON THE POWER, WISDOM, AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE ADAPTATIONOF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL ANDINTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.JOHN KIDD, M. D. F.R.S.REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.THE REV. WILLIAM Wheel, Mea. F.R.S.FELLOWASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS CONSIDERED WITHREFERENCE TO NATURAL THEOLOGY.SIR CHARLES BELL, K. H. F.R.S.THE HAND : ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGN.PETER MARK ROGET, M D.Fellow OK AND SECRETARY TO The ROYAL SOCIETY.ON ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY.VllTHE REV. WILLIAM Auckland, Did. F.R.S.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY IN THEUNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.THE REV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M. A. F.R.S.ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.WILLIAM PROUT, Med. F.R.S.ON CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTIONOF DIGESTION.His ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF SUSSEX, Presidentof the Royal Society, having desired that no unnecessarydelay should take place in the publication of theabove mentioned treatises, they will appear at short intervals,as they are ready for publication.PREFACE.WHEN one has to maintain an argument,he will be listened to more willingly if he isknown to be unblessed, and to express hisnatural sentiments. The reflexion containedin these pages have not been suggested bythe occasion of the Bridgewater Treatises,but arose, long ago, in a course of study,directed to other objects. An anatomicalteacher, who is himself aware of the higherbearings of his science, can hardly neglectthe opportunity which the demonstrationsbefore him afford, of making an impressionupon the minds of those young men who,for the most part, receive the elementsof their professional education from him ;and he is naturally led to indulge insuch trains of reflexion, as will be found inthis essay.So far back as the year 1813, the lateexcellent vicar of Kensington, Mr. Kennel,X PREFACE.attended the author's lectures, and found himengaged in maintaining the principles of theEnglish school of Physiology, and in exposingthe futility of the opinions of thoseFrench philosophers and physiologists, whorepresented life as the mere physical resultof certain combinations and actions of parts,by them termed Organization.That gentleman thought that the subjectadmitted of an argument which it becamehim to use, in his office of " Christian Advocate"* This will show the reader that thesentiments and the views, which a sense ofduty to the young men about him inducedthe author to deliver, and which Mr. Kennelheard only by accident, arose naturally outof those studies.It was at the desire of the Lord Chancellorthat the author wrote the essay on " AnimalMechanics ;" and it was probably from abelief that the author felt the importance ofthe subjects touched upon in that essay, thathis lordship was led to do him the furtherhonor of asking him to join with him inillustrating the " Natural Theology" ofDr. Paley.An office in the University of Cambridge.PREFACE. XIThat request was especially important, asshowing, that the conclusions, to which theauthor had arrived, were not the peculiar oraccidental suggestions of professional feeling,nor of solitary study, which is so apt to leadto enthusiasm, but that the powerful andmasculine mind of Lord Brougham was directedto the same object: that he, who inearly life was distinguished for his successfulprosecution of science, and who has neverforgotten her interests amidst the most arduousand active duties of his high station,encouraged and partook of these sentiments.Thus, from at first maintaining that designand benevolence were every where visible inthe natural world, circumstances have graduallydrawn the author to support theseopinions more ostentatiously and elaboratelythan was his original wish.The author cannot conceal from himself thedisadvantages to which he is exposed incomingbefore the public, not only with awork, in some measure extra-professional,but with associates, distinguished by classicalelegance of style, as well as by science.He must entreat the reader to remember thathe was, early and long, devoted to the studyXli PREFACE.of anatomy ; and with a feeling (right orwrong) that it surpassed all other studies, ininterest and usefulness. This made him negligentof those acquirements which wouldhave better fitted him for the honourableassociation in which he has been placed :and no one can feel more deeply that thesuggestions which occur in the intervals ofan active professional life, must always beunfavorably contrasted with what comes ofthe learned leisure of a College.The author has to acknowledge his obligationto Davies Gilbert, esq. late Presidentof the Royal Society, for having assigned tohim a task of so much interest. When heundertook it, he thought only of the pleasureof pursuing these investigations, and perhapstoo little of what the public were entitled toexpect from an Essay composed in circumstancesso peculiar, and forming a part inthis great argument."CONTENTS.CHAP. I. INTRODUCTORY . . . it ;. .,; . ," r . .,;:, 1CHAP. II. DEFINITION OF THE HAND . ' , ; '"' .' 16Its Mechanism . '. . . ' . /'.'.' ^' . 18Conformity of the Skeleton to the Extremity . . 19Bones of the Extremity not adapted to Man alone . 20Fossil Bones exhibit the Extent of the System ! .' 22Animals the most uncouth, in every Respect adaptedto their Condition . -' ti ; i - '.' ( .-'.'.' c ' . 24Mistaken Compassion for Animals ,j -v. ,,, . . 26Animals suited to the progressive Changes of theEarth and Elements * . ^. - i' . 30Succession and Grouping of Animals . '' - . . 36CHAP. III. THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF THE HAND 41Comparative View of the Anatomy of the Shoulder . 45The Arms wanting in a Boy y ; r a ',.: ' ',"*- . 52The Structure of the Horse's Shoulder . < *' , .' . 54In the Chelonian Order ' * V .1 , ' ' . . 59The Humerus. Spirit in which the Demonstrationshould be given . ? . , ;;. ; ;f, ; ,' , . . 66Peculiarities in the Mole . . ( ,: . .' ,: '.- . 69Bat . . . . . . , . . . p-fcyA r, . ; ,,'. 70Ant-eater . . . . . 72Adaptation of the Anatomy in Birds . .' ' . 74The Anatomy of the Fore Arm . '": -V ." : " . 79The Action of the Splint Bone in the Horse . . 83Xiv CONTENTS.PageHorse's Foot 86Of Ruminants 89Contrast in the Bone of the Elephant and the Camel 91Megalonix 92Mechanism of the Lion's Claw . . . . 93Criticism by Cuvier 94The Foot of the Quadrant-.^ . ; . . 96Of Amphibia . v " . . . . . . 99Plesiosaurus and Ichthyosaurus . . . . 101Peculiarities and Provisions of the Human Hand . 104CHAP. IV. OF THE MUSCLES OF THE ARM AND HAND 107Action of the Muscles of the Arm . - . 1 08Interchange of Velocity for Force, exemplified in theMuscles of the Ann . , . ^ ^ : . , TT? n , >. 112Illustrated by the Lever and Fly-wheel . 113Muscles of the Lion's Extremity . . . . 117Vital Property of the Muscles . . . .118Peculiarities in the Circulation of the Extremities assubservient to muscular Action . . . . 119Of the Right and Left Hands . . . .121CHAP. V. THE SUBSTITUTION OF OTHER ORGANS FORTHE HAND . '*.~i v '*'/-. - '- : . " '.-*"' .' '-; 124CHAP. VI. THE ARGUMENT PURSUED, FROM THE COM-Paradise ANATOMY . . . . .132CHAP. VII. OF SENSIBILITY AND TOUCH . . . 148The Sensibility of the Surface compared with that ofthe deeper Parts . . ', :,; . 152Pain the Safeguard of the Body . . . .156The protecting Sensibility of the Eye compared withthe Sensibility of the Heart . . . . 1 60Pleasurable Sensations could not have been the Motivesto Action 166CHAP. VIII. OF THE SENSES GENERALLY, IntroductoryTO THE SENSE OF TOUCH . . .169The Sense of Touch . . ' -". 176CONTENTS. XVPageOf the Cuticle . 180The Hoofs of Animals and their Sensibility . . 183CHAP. IX. OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE . . . 189Of the Sensibility of the Infant to Impressions, andgradual Improvement of the Sense of Touch . 1 89Of the same in Insects and Fishes . . 198Loss of the Sense . . . , . . 202Pleasures arising from the Muscular Sense . . 203CHAP. X. THE HAND NOT THE SOURCE OF INGENUITYOR CONTRIVANCE, NOR CONSEQUENTLY OF MAN'SSUPERIORITY . . \ 206The Subject illustrated by the Organs of Speech . 212The Ingenuity of the Hand has made a Revolution inthe Arts .214Changes in the Globe and successive Epochs . . 216CONCLUSION . . . . . . 222ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS.THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF THE SOLID STRUCTUREOF THE ANIMAL BODY CONSIDERED 227Substitute for the Skeleton in the lower Animals . 228Mechanical Properties in Bone, or in the trueSkeleton . . . . 233The Muscular and Elastic Forces . . . 242COMPARISON OF THE EYE WITH THE HAND . . . 245The Motion of the Eye considered in regard to theEffect of Light and Shade in a Picture , . 265ADDITION TO THE CONCLUDING CHAPTER . . . 275APPENDIX.Explanation of Terms . . . . ; ; . 283THE HAND,ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTS,AS EVINCING DESIGN.CHAPTER I.IF we contemplate any natural object, especiallyany part of animated nature, fully and in all itsbearings, we can arrive only at this conclusion :that there is design in the mechanical construction,benevolence shown in the living properties,and that good predominates : we shall perceivethat the sensibilities of the body have a relationto the qualities of things external, and that delicacyof texture is a necessary consequence ofthis relation.Wonderful, and exquisitely constructed, as themechanical appliances are for the protection ofthis delicate structure, they are altogether insufficient; and a protection of a very different kind,which shall animate the body to the utmost INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.exertion, is requisite for safety. Pain, whilst it is anecessary contrast to its opposite pleasure, is thegreat safeguard of the frame. Finally, as toman,we shall be led to infer that the pains andpleasures of mere bodily sense (with yet morebenevolent intention) carry us onward, throughthe development and improvement of the minditself, to higher aspirations.Such is the course of reasoning which I proposeto follow in giving an account of the hand andarm, contrasting them with the correspondingparts of living creatures, through all the divisionsof the chain of vertebrated animals.When I first thought of extending my noteson this subject, it appeared to me that I mighthave many other topics more prolific in proofs ofdesign, and more interesting ; but I now findthat there is no end to illustration, and that thesubject branches out interminably.Some may conceive that as I have for my titlethe Human Hand, and the relation of the solidstructures of the animal frame, it will lead me toconsider the body as a machine only. I neithersee the necessity for this, nor do I acknowledgethe danger of considering it in that light. I embarkfearlessly in the investigation, convincedthat, yielding to the current of thought, and givingthe fullest scope to enquiry, there can be nohidden danger if the mind be free from viciousbias. I cannot see how scepticism should ariseINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 3out of the contemplation of the structure andmechanism of the animal body.Let us for a moment think what is the naturalresult of examining the human body as a piece ofmachinery, and let us see whether it makes thecreation of man more or less important in hisrelation to the whole scheme of nature.Suppose that there is placed before us a machinefor raising great weights, be it the simplest of all,the wheel and axle. We are given to understandthat this piece of mechanism has the property ofmultiplying the power of the hand. But a youthof subtile mind may say, I do not believe that itis possible so to multiply the power of the hand ;and if the mechanician be a philosopher, he willrather applaud the spirit of doubt. If he condescendto explain, he will say, that the piles driveninto the ground, or the screws which unite themachinery to the beams, are the fixed pointswhich resist in the working of the machine ; thattheir resistance is a necessary condition, since itis thrown, together with the power of the hand,on the weight to be raised. And he will add thatthe multiplication of wheels does not alter theprinciple of action, which every one may see inthe simple lever, to result from the resistance ofthe fulcrum or point, on which it rests.Now grant that man's body is a machine, whereare the points of resistance ? are they not in theground he stands upon ? This leads us to enquire4 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.by what property we stand. Is it by the weightof the body, or, in other words, is it by theattraction of the earth ? The terms attraction, orgravitation lead at once to the philosophy of thequestion. We stand because the body has weight,and a resistance, in proportion to the matter ofthe animal frame, and the magnitude of the globeitself. We wait not at present, to observe theadjustment of the strength of the frame, theresistance of the bones, the elasticity of the joints,and the power of the muscles to the weight of thewhole. Our attention is directed to the relationswhich the frame has to the earth we are placedupon.Some philosophers, who have considered thematter curiously, have said, that if man weretranslated bodily to another planet, and were itsmaller than the earth, he would be too light, andhe would walk like one wading in deep water.If the planet were larger, the attraction of hisbody would make him feel as if his limbs wereloaded with lead ; nay, the attraction might be sogreat as to destroy the fabric of the body, crushingbones and all.*However idle these fancies may be, there is nodoubt that the animal frame is formed with a duerelation to the earth we inhabit, and that theThe matter of Jupiter is as 330,600 to 1000 of our Earth.The diameter of Pallas is 80 miles; the Earth is 7,911 miles indiameter.INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.parts of the animal body, and we may say thestrength of the materials, have as certainly a correspondencewith the weight, as the wheels andlevers of a machine, or the scaffolding whichsustains them, have relation to the force andvelocity of the machinery, or the load that theyare employed to raise.The mechanism and organization of animalshave been often brought forward for a differentpurpose from that for which I use them. Wefind it said, that it is incomprehensible that an allpowerful Being should manifest his will in thismanner ; that mechanical contrivance implies difficultiesovercome : and how strange it is, theyadd, that the perceptions of the mind, whichmight have been produced by some direct means,or have arisen spontaneously, are received throughan instrument so fine and complex as the eye ;and which requires the creation of the element oflight, to enter the organ and to cause vision.For my own part, I think it most natural tocontemplate the subject quite differently. Weperhaps presume too much, when we say, thatlight has been created for the purpose of vision.We are hardly entitled to pass over its propertiesas a chemical agent, its influence on the gases,and, in all probability on the atmosphere, itsimportance to vegetation, to the formation of thearomatic and volatile principles, and to fructification,its influence on the animal surface by6 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.invigorating the circulation, and imparting health.In relation to our present subject, it seems morerational to consider light as second only to attraction,in respect to its importance in nature, and asalink connecting systems of infinite remoteness.To have a conception of this we must tutorour minds, and acquire some measure of thevelocity of light, and of the space which itfills. It is not sufficient to say that it moves200,000 miles in a second ; for we can comprehendno such degree of velocity. If we arefurther informed that the earth is distant fromthe sun 95,000,000 of miles, and that light traversesthe space in 8 minutes and l-8th, it is butanother way of affirming the inconceivable rapidityof its transmission. Astronomers, the powerof whose minds affords us the very highestestimate of human faculties, the accuracy ofwhose calculations is hourly visible to us, haveaffirmed that light emanates from celestial bodiesat such vast distance, that thousands of yearsshall elapse during its progress to our earth : yetmatter impelled by a force equal to its transmissionthrough this space, shall enter the eye, andstrike upon the delicate nerve with no other effectthan to produce vision.Instead of saying that light is created for theeye, and to give us the sense of vision, is itnot more conformable to a just manner of consideringthese things that our wonder and ourINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 7admiration should fix on the fact, that thissmall organ, the eye, is formed with relation to acreation of such vast extent and grandeur : andmore especially, that the ideas arising in the mindthrough the influence of that matter and thisorgan, are constituted a part of this vast whole !By such considerations we are led to contemplatethe human body in its different relations.The magnitude of the earth determines thestrength of our bones, and the power of ourmuscles ; so must the depth of the atmospheredetermine the condition of our fluids, and theresistance of our blood vessels ; the common actof breathing, the transpiration from the surfaces,must bear relation to the weight, moisture, andtemperature of the medium which surrounds us.A moment's reflection on these facts proves to usthat our body is formed with a just correspondenceto all these external influences.These views lead us to another consideration,that the complexity of our structure belongs toexternal nature, and not of necessity to the mind.Whilst man is an agent in a material world,and sensible to the influence of things external,complexity of structure is a necessary part of hisconstitution But we do not perceive a relationbetween this complexity and the mind. Fromaught that we learn by this mode of study, themind may be as distinct from the bodily organsas are the exterior influences which give themexercise.8 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.Something, then, we observe to be common toour planet and to others, to our system and toother systems; matter, attraction, light; whichnearly implies that the mechanical and chemicallaws must be the same throughout. It is perhapstoo much to affirm, with an anonymous author,that an inhabitant of our world would find himselfat home in any other, that he would be likea traveller only, for a moment perplexed bydiversity of climate and strangeness of manners,and confess, at last, that nature was every whereand essentially the same. However this maybe,all I contend for is, the necessity of certainrelations being established between the planetand the frames of all which inhabit it ; betweenthe great mass and the physical properties ofevery part ; that in the mechanical constructionof animals, as in their endowments of life, theyare created in relation to the whole, plannedtogether and fashioned by one Mind.The passiveness which is natural in infancy, andthe want of reflection as to the sources of enjoymentwhich is excusable in youth, become insensibilityand ingratitude in riper years. In theearly stages of life, before our minds have the fullpower of comprehension, the objects around usserve but to excite and exercise the outwardsenses . But in the maturity of reason, philosophyINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 9should present these things to vis anew, with thisdifference, that the mind may contemplate them :that mind which is now strengthened by experienceto comprehend them, and to entertain agrateful sense of them.It is this sense of gratitude which distinguishesman. In brutes, the attachment to offspring for alimited period is as strong as in him, but it ceaseswith the necessity for it. In man, on the contrarythe affections continue, become the sources of allthe endearing relations of life, and the very bondsby which society is connected.If the child, upon the parent's knee, is unconsciouslyincurring a debt, and strong affectionsgrow up so naturally that nothing is more universallycondemned than filial ingratitude, we havebut to change the object of affection, to find thenatural source of religion itself. We must showthat the care of the most tender parent is innothing to be compared with those provisionsfor our enjoyment and safety, which it is notonly beyond the ingenuity of man to provide,but which he can hardly comprehend, while heprofits by them.If man, of all living creatures, be alone capableof gratitude, and through this sense be capablealso of religion, the transition is natural ; sincethe gratitude due to parents is abundantly moreowing to Him " who saw him in his blood, andsaid, Live."10 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.For the continuance of life, a thousand provisionsare made. If the vital actions of a man's framewere directed by his will, they are necessarilyso minute and complicated, that they would immediatelyfall into confusion. He cannot draw abreath, without the exercise of sensibilities as wellordered as those of the eye or ear. A tracery ofnervous cords unites many organs in sympathy, ofwhich, if one filament were broken, pain andspasm, and suffocation would ensue. The actionof his heart, and the circulation of his blood, andall the vital functions are governed through meansand by laws which are not dependant on his will,and to which the powers of his mind are altogetherinadequate. For had they been under the influenceof his will, a doubt, a moment's pause ofirresolution, a forgetfulness of a single action atits appointed time, would have terminated hisexistence.Now, when 'man sees that his vital operationscould not be directed by reason that they areconstant, and far too important to be exposed toall the changes incident to his mind, and thatthey are given up to the direction of other sourcesof motion than the will, he acquires a full senseof his dependance. If man be fretful and wayward,and subject to inordinate passion, we perceivethe benevolent design in withdrawing thevital motions from the influence of such capricioussources of action, so that they may neitherINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 11be disturbed like his moral actions, nor lost in amoment of despair.Ray, in speaking of the first drawing of breath,delivers himself very naturally : " Here, methinks,appears a necessity of bringing in theagency of some superintendant intelligent being,for what else should put the diaphragm and themuscles serving respiration in motion all of asudden so soon as ever the foetus is brought forth?Why could they not have rested as well as theydid in the womb ? What aileth them that theymust needs bestir themselves to get in air tomaintain the creature's life ? Why could theynot patiently suffer it to die ? You will say thespirits do at this time flow to the organs ofrespiration, the diaphragm, and other muscleswhich concur to that action and move them."But what raises the spirits which were quiescent,&c., I am not subtile enough to discover."We cannot call this agency, a new intelligencedifferent from the mind, because, independentlyof consciousness, we can hardly so define it. Butthere is bestowed a sensibility, which being roused(and it is excited by the state of the circulation,)governs these muscles of respiration, and ministersto life and safety, independently of the will.When man thus perceives, that in respect to allthese vital operations he is more helpless than theinfant, and that his boasted reason can neithergive them order nor protection, is not his insensateINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.ability to the Giver of these secret endowmentsworse than ingratitude? In a rational creature,ignorance of his condition becomes a species ofingratitude ; it dulls his sense of benefits, andhardens him into a temper of mind with which itis impossible to reason, and from which no improvementcan be expected.Debased in some measure by a habit of inattention,and lost to all sense of the benevolence of theCreator, he is roused to reflection only by overwhelmingcalamities, which appear to him magnifiedand disproportioned ; and hence arises aconception of the Author of his being more interror than in love.There is inconsistency and something of thechild's propensities still in mankind. A piece ofmechanism, as a watch, a barometer, or a dial,will fix attention a man will make journeys tosee an engine stamp a coin, or turn a block ; yetthe organs through which he has a thousandsources of enjoyment, and which are in themselvesmore exquisite in design and more curiousboth in contrivance and in mechanism, do notenter his thoughts ; and if he admire a livingaction, that admiration will probably be moreexcited by what is uncommon and monstrous,than by what is natural and perfectly adjustedto its office by the elephant's trunk, than by thehuman hand. This does not arise from an un-introductoryCHAPTER. 13willingness to contemplate the superiority ordignity of our own nature, nor from an incapacityof admiring the adaptation of parts. It is theeffect of habit. The human hand is so beautifullyformed, it has so fine a sensibility, that sensibilitygoverns its motions so correctly, every effort ofthe will is answered so instantly, as if the handitself were the seat of that will ; its actions are sopowerful, so free, and yet so delicate, that it seemsto possess a quality instinct in itself, and there isno thought of its complexity as an instrument, orof the relations which make it subservient to themind ; we use it as we draw our breath, unconsciously,and have lost all recollection of thefeeble and ill-directed efforts of its first exercise,by which it has been perfected. Is it not thevery perfection of the instrument which makesus insensible to its use ? A vulgar admiration isexcited by seeing the spider-monkey pick upa straw, or a piece of wood, with its tail; orthe elephant searching the keeper's pocket withhis trunk. Now, fully to examine the peculiarityof the elephant's structure, that is to say, from itshuge mass, to deduce the necessity for its form,and from the form the necessity for its trunk,would lead us through a train of very curiousobservations, to a more correct notion of thatappendage, and therefore to a truer admirationof it. But I take this part in contrast with thehuman hand, merely to show how insensible we14 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.are to the perfections of our own frame, and tothe advantages attained through such a form.We use the limbs without being conscious, or, atleast, without any conception of the thousandparts which must conform to a single act. Toexcite our attention, we must either see the actionsof the human frame performed in some mode,strange and unexpected, such as may raise thewonder of the ignorant and vulgar ; or by aneffort of the cultivated mind, we must rouseourselves to observe things and actions, of which,as we have said, the sense has been lost by longfamiliarity.In the following essay, I shall take up thesubject, comparatively, and exhibit a view of thebones of the arm, descending from the humanhand to the fin of the fish. I shall in the nextplace review the actions of the muscles of thearm and hand ; then proceeding to the vital properties,I shall advance to the subject of sensibility,leading to that of touch ; afterwards, Ishall shew the necessity of combining the muscularaction with the exercise of the senses, andespecially with that of touch, to constitute in thehand what has been called the geometrical sense.I shall describe the organ of touch, the cuticleand skin, and arrange the nerves of the handaccording to their functions. I shall then enquireinto the correspondence between the capacitiesand endowments of the mind, in comparison withINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 15the external organs, and more especially with theproperties of the hand ; and conclude by showingthat animals have been created with a referenceto the globe they inhabit ; that all their endowmentsand various organization bear a relation totheir state of existence, and to the elements aroundthem ; that there is a plan universal, extendingthrough all animated nature, and which hasprevailed in the earliest condition of the world ;and that, finally, in the most minute or mostcomprehensive study of those things we everywheresee prospective design.CHAPTER II.WE ought to define the hand as belonging exclusivelyto man corresponding in sensibility andmotion with that ingenuity which converts thebeing who is the weakest in natural defence, tothe ruler over animate and inanimate nature.If we describe the hand as that extremitywhich has the thumb and fingers opposed toeach other, so as to form an instrument of prehension,we extend it to the quadrant ormonkeys. But the possession of four hands byanimals of that class implies that we include theposterior as well as the anterior extremities.Now the anterior extremity of the monkey is asmuch a foot as the posterior extremity is a hand ;THE HAND, ITS MECHANISM, ETC.both are calculated for their mode of progression,climbing, and leaping from the branches of trees,just as the tail in some species is converted into ahand, and is as useful an instrument of suspensionas any of the four extremities.*The armed extremities of a variety of animalsgive them great advantages; but if man pos-thisis a sketch of the Coaita, or Spider Monkey, so calledfrom the extraordinary length of its extremities, and its motions.The tail answers all the purposes of a hand, and the animal throwsitself about from branch to branch, sometimes swinging from thefoot, sometimes by the hand, but oftener and with a greater reachby the tail. The prehensile part of the tail is covered only withskin, forming an organ of touch, as discriminating as the hand.The Caraya, or Black howling monkey of Guiana, when shot,O18 THE WHOLE SKELETONsessed any similar provisions, he would forfeithis sovereignty over all. As Galen, long since,observed, " did man possess the natural armour ofthe brutes, he would no longer work as anartificer, nor protect himself with a breast-plate,nor fashion a sword or spear, nor invent a bridleto mount the horse and hunt the lion. Neithercould he follow the arts of peace, construct thepipe and lyre, erect houses, place altars, inscribelaws, and through letters hold communion with thewisdom of antiquity :" " ubique licet liter arumet manum benefices etiam nunc colloquy cumPlate, cum Aristotle, cum Hippocrate"But the hand is not a distinct instrument ; noris it properly a superadded part. The wholeframe must conform to the hand, and act withreference to it. Our purpose will not be answeredby examining it alone ; we must extend our viewsto all those parts of the body which are in strictconnexion with the hand. For example, thebones from the shoulder to the finger ends, havethat systematic arrangement which makes it essentialto examine the whole extremity ; and inis found suspended by its tail, round a branch. Naturalists havebeen so struck with the property of the tail of the Ateles, as tocompare it with the proboscis of the elephant ; they have assuredus that they fish with it.The most interesting use of the tail is seen in the Opossum.The young of that animal entwine their tails around theirmother's tail and mount upon her back, where they sit secure,while she escapes from her enemies.CONFORMS TO THE EXTREMITY. 19order fully to comprehend the fine arrangementof the parts, which is necessary to the motionsof the fingers, we must also compare the structureof the human body with that of other animals.Were we to limit our enquiry to the bones ofthe arm and hand in man, no doubt we shouldsoon discover their provisions for easy, varied,and powerful action ; and conclude that nothingcould be more perfectly suited to their purposes.But we must extend our views to comprehend agreat deal more, a greater design.By a skeleton, is understood the system ofbones, which being internal, gives the characteristicform to the animal, and receives the actionof the exterior muscles. This system belongs,however, only to one part of the animal kingdom,that higher division, the animals vertebrata,which includes the whole chain of beings, fromman to fishes.The function of the greatest consequence tolife is respiration ; and the mode in which this isperformed, that is to say, the manner in whichthe decarbonization of the blood is effected throughits exposure to the atmosphere, produces a remarkablechange in the whole frame work of theanimal body.Man, the mammalia, birds, reptiles, andfishes have much of the mechanism of respirationin common ; and there is a resemblance throughthem all, in the texture of the bones, in the action20 THE BONES OF THE EXTREMITYof the muscles, and in the arrangement of thenerves. They all possess the vertebral columnor spine ; and the existence of this column, notonly implies an internal skeleton, but that particularframe-work of ribs, which is suited tomove in breathing. But the ribs do not move ofthemselves, they must have appropriate muscles ;and these muscles must have their appropriatenerves; and for supplying these nerves theremust be a spinal marrow. The spinal canal isas necessary to the spinal marrow as the skull isto the brain. So that we come round to understandthe necessity of a vertebra, to the formationof the spinal marrow ; and the reader may comprehendhow much enters into the conception ofthe anatomist or naturalist, when the term isused, a vertebrated animal, viz : an internalskeleton, a particular arrangement of respiratoryorgans, and a conformity in the nervous system.It is to this superior division that I shall limitmyself, in making a review of the bones of theupper extremity.Were I to indulge in the admiration naturallyarising out of this subject, and point out thestrength and the freedom of motion in the upperextremity at the ball and socket joint of theshoulder, the firmness of the articulation of theelbow, and yet how admirably it is suited to theco-operation of the hands, the fineness of themotion of the hand itself, divided among theNOT ADAPTED TO MAN ALONE. 21joints of twenty-nine bones, it might be objectedto with some show of reason ; and it might be said,the bones and the forms of the joints which youare admiring, are so far from being peculiarlysuited to the hand of man, that they may be foundin any other vertebrated animal.But this would not abate our admiration, itwould only induce us to take a more comprehensiveview of nature, and remind us that ourerror was in looking at a part only, instead ofembracing the whole system ; where by slightchanges and gradations hardly perceptible, thesame bones are adjusted to every condition ofanimal existence.We recognize the bones which form the upperextremity of man, in the fin of the whale, in thepaddle of the turtle, and in the wing of the bird.We see the same bones, perfectly suited to theirpurpose, in the paw of the lion or the bear, andequally fitted for motion in the hoof of the horse,or in the foot of the camel, or adjusted for climbingor digging in the long clawed feet of the sloth orbear.It is obvious, then, that we should be occupiedwith too limited a view of our subject, were we toconsider the human hand in any other light thanas presenting the most perfect combination ofparts : as exhibiting the parts, which in differentanimals are suited to particular purposes, so combinedin the hand, as to perform actions the most2*2 FOSSILIZED Ones SHEWminute and complicated, consistently with powerfulexertion.The wonder still is, that whether we examinethis system in man, or in any of the inferiorspecies of animals, nothing can be more curiouslyadjusted or appropriated ; and we should be inclinedto say, whatever instance occupied ourthoughts for the time, that to this particularobject the system had been framed.The view which the subject opens to us, is unbounded.The curious synthesis by which weascertain the nature, condition, and habits of anextinct animal, from the examination of its fossilremains, is grounded on a knowledge of the systemof which we are speaking. A bone consists ofmany parts ; but for our present purpose it is onlynecessary to observe that the hard substance, thephosphate of lime, which we familiarly recognizeas bone, is every where penetrated by membranesand vessels as delicate as those which belong to anyother part of the body. Some bones are found withtheir animal part remaining, others are fossilized.The phosphate of lime loses its phosphoricacid, and the earth of bone remains incorruptible,while the softer animal matter undergoes theprocess of decomposition, and is dissipated. Thebone in this condition may become fossilized;silicious earth, or lime in composition with iron,or iron pyrites, may pass by infiltration into theinterstices of the original earthy matter, and inTHE EXTENT OF THE SYSTEM. 23this state it is as permanent as the solid rock. Itretains the form, though not the internal structureof bone ; and that form, in consequence of theperfect system which we have hinted at, becomes aproof of revolutions the most extraordinary. Themind of the enquirer is carried back, not merelyto the contemplation of animal structure, but byinference, from the system of animal organizationto the structure of the globe itself.The bones of large animals and in great varietyare found imbedded in the surface of the earth.They are discovered in the beds of rivers, they arefound where no waters flow, they are dug up fromunder the solid limestone rock. The bones thusexposed, become naturally a subject of intenseinterest, and are unexpectedly connected withthe enquiry in which we are engaged. Amongother important conclusions they lead to thisthat there is not only a scheme or system ofanimal structure pervading all the classes ofanimals which inhabit the earth, but that theprinciple of this great plan of creation was inoperation, and governed the formation of thoseanimals which existed previous to the revolutionsthat the earth itself has undergone : that the excellenceof form now seen in the skeleton of man,was in the scheme of animal existence long previousto the formation of man, and before thesurface of the earth was prepared for him orsuited to his constitution, structure, or capacities.24 ANIMALS THE MOST UNCOUTHA skeleton is dug up which has lain undermany fathoms of rock : being the bones of ananimal which lived antecedent to that formationof rock, and at a time when the earth's surfacemust have been in a condition very differentfrom what it is now. These remains prove,that all animals have been formed of the sameelements, and have had analogous organsthat they received new matter by digestion, andwere nourished by means of a circulating fluidthat they possessed feeling through a nervoussystem, and were moved by the action ofmuscles that their organs of digestion, circulation,and respiration were modified by circumstances,as in the animals now alive, andin accordance with their habits and modes ofliving. The changes in the organs are butvariations in the great system by which newmatter is assimilated to the animal body, andhowever remarkable these may be, they alwaysbear a certain relation to the original type asparts of the same great design.In examining these bones of the ancient world,so regularly are they formed on the same principlewhich is evident in the animals now inhabitingthe earth, that on observing their shape,and the processes by which their muscles wereattached, we can reduce the animals to whichthey belonged, to their orders, genera, andSUITED TO THEIR CONDITION. 25species, with as much precision as if the recentbodies had been submitted to the eye of theanatomist. Not only can we demonstrate thattheir feet were adapted to the solid ground, or tothe oozy bed of rivers, for speed, or for graspingand tearing ; but judging by these indications ofthe habits of the animals, we acquire a knowledgeof the condition of the earth during their periodof existence ; that it was suited at one time to thescaly tribe of the lacerta, with languid motion ;at another, to animals of higher organization,with more varied and lively habits ; and finallywe learn, that at any period previous to man'screation, the surface of the earth would havebeen unsuitable to him.On comparing some of the present races ofanimals, with the fossil remains of individuals ofthe same family, some singular opinions on theirimperfections have been expressed by Buffon,and adopted by Cuvier. The animals I allude toare of the tardigrade family ; the Ai,* in which,as they believe, the defect of organization isthe greatest ; and the Unjust which they consideronly a little less miserably provided forexistence.Bradypus Tridactylus : bradypus (slow footed), tridactylus(three toed), of the order EDENTATA (wanting incisor teeth).f Bradypus didactylus.26 MISTAKEN COMPASSION FORModern travellers express their pity for theseanimals : whilst other quadrupeds, they say,range in boundless wilds, the sloth hangs suspendedby his strong arms, a poor ill-formedcreature, deficient as well as deformed, his hindlegs too short, and his hair like withered grass ;his looks, motions, and cries conspire to excitepity ; and, as if this were not enough, they saythat his moaning makes the tiger relent and turnaway. This is not a true picture : the sloth cannotwalk like quadrupeds, but he stretches outhis strong arms, and if he can hook on hisclaws to the inequalities of the ground, he dragshimself along. This is the condition whichauthorizes such an expression as " the bungledand faulty composition of the sloth." But whenhe reaches the branch or the rough bark of atree, his progress is rapid ; he climbs hand overhead,along the branches till they touch, and thusfrom bough to bough, and from tree to tree ; heANIMALS OF PECULIAR FORM. 27is most alive in the storm, and when the windblows, and the trees stoop, and the branches waveand meet, he is then upon the march.The compassion expressed by these philosophersfor animals,* which they consider imperfectlyorganized, is uncalled for; as well mightthey pity the larva of the summer fly, whichcreeps in the bottom of a pool, because it cannotyet rise upon the wing. As the insect has noimpulse to fly until the metamorphosis is perfect,and the wings developed, so we have noreason to suppose that a disposition or instinctis given to animals, where there is no correspondingprovision for motion.The sloth may move tardily on the ground, hislong arms and his preposterous claws, may be anincumbrance, but they are of advantage in hisnatural place, among the branches of trees, inobtaining his food, and in giving him shelter andsafety from his enemies.We must not estimate the slow motions ofanimals by our own sensations. The motion ofthe bill of the swallow, or the fly-catcher, incatching a fly, is so rapid that we do not seeit, but only hear the snap. On the contrary, howvery different are the means given to the chameleonfor obtaining his food ; he lies more still thanthe dead leaf, his skin is like the bark of theThe subject is pursued in the end of the following chapter.28 MISTAKEN COMPASSION FORtree, and takes the hue of surrounding objects.Whilst other animals have excitement conformingto their rapid motions, the shrivelled face ofthe chameleon hardly indicates life ; the eyelidsare scarcely parted ; he protrudes his tonguewith a motion so imperceptible towards the insect,that it is touched and caught more certainlythan by the most lively action. Thus, variouscreatures living upon insects, reach their prey bydifferent means and instincts ; rapidity of motion,which gives no time for escape, is bestowed onsome, while others have a languid and slowmovement that excites no alarm.The loris, a tardigrade animal, might be pitiedtoo for the slowness of its motions, if they were notthe very means bestowed upon it as necessaryto its existence. It steals on its prey by night,and extends its arm to the bird on the branch,with a motion so imperceptibly slow, as to makeANIMALS OF PECULIAR FORM. 29sure of its object.* Just so, the Indian perfectlynaked, his hair cut short, and his skin oiled,creeps under the canvas of the tent, and movinglike a ghost, stretches out his hand, with so gentlea motion as to displace nothing, and to disturb noteven those who are awake and watching. Againstsuch thieves, we are told, that it is hardly possibleto guard ; and thus, the necessities or viciousdesires of man subjugate him, and make him acquire,by practice, the wiliness which is implantedas instinct in brutes ; or we may say that, in ourreason we are brought to imitate the irrationalcreatures, and so to vindicate the necessity fortheir particular instincts, of which every classaffords an instance. We have examples in insects,as striking as in the loris, or the chameleon.Evelyn describes the actions of the spider(aranea scenic) as exhibiting remarkable cunningin catching a fly. " Did the fly, (he says,)happen not to be within a leap, the spider wouldFor our purpose, it may be well to notice other characters ofthis, and similar animals which prowl by night. They are inhabitantsof the tropical regions. Now, the various creatures whichenliven the woods in the day-time, in these warm climates, havefine skins, and smooth hair ; but those have a coat like animalsof the arctic regions. What is this, but to clothe them, as thesentinel is clothed, whose watch is in the night. They have eyestoo, which, from their peculiarity, are called nocturnal, beingformed to admit a greater pencil of rays. For this purpose theglobe is large and prominent, and the iris contractile, to open thepupil to the greatest extent. We have seen how all their motionsand instincts correspond with their nocturnal habits.30 Fossil ANIMALS SUITED TOmove towards it, so softly, that its motion seemednot more perceptible than that of the shadow ofthe gnomon of a dial' 4 "I would only remark further on these slowmotions of the muscles of animals; that wearenot to account this a defect, but ratheran appropriation of muscular power. Since insome animals the same muscles which move theirmembers in a manner to be hardly perceptible,can at another time act with the velocity of aspring.Now Buffon, speaking of the extinct species ofthe tardigrade family, considers them as monstersby defect of organization ; as attempts of naturehi which she has failed to perfect her plan ;that she has produced animals which must havelived miserably, and which are effaced as failuresfrom the list of living beings. The Baron Cuvierdoes not express himself more favorably, whenhe says of the existing species, that they have solittle resemblance to the organization of animalsThe passage continues " if the intended prey moved, thespider would keep pace with it exactly as if they were actuated byone spirit, moving backwards, forwards, or on each side withoutturning. When the fly took wing, and pitched itself behind thehuntress, she turned round with the swiftness of thought, andalways kept her head towards it, though to all appearance as immoveableas one of the nails driven into the wood on which was herstation ; till at last, being arrived within due distance, swift aslightning she made the fatal leap, and secured her prey."Evelyn, as quoted by Kirby and Spence.THE TIME OF THEIR EXISTENCE. 31generally, and their structure is so much in contrastwith that of other creatures, that he couldbelieve them to be the remnants of an order unsuitableto the present system of nature ; and ifwe are to look for their congeners, it must be inthe interior of the earth, in the ruins of theancient world.The animals of the Antediluvian world werenot monsters ; there was no lusus or extravagance.Hideous as they appear to us, and like the phantomsof a dream, they were adapted to thecondition of the earth when they existed. Icould have wished that our naturalists had giventhe inhabitants of that early condition of theglobe, names less scholastic. We have theplesiosaurus, and plesiosaurus dolichodeirus, wehave the ichthyosaurus and megalosaurus, andiguanodon, pterodactyles, with long and shortbeaks, tortoises, and crocodiles; and these arefound among reeds and grasses of gigantic proportions,algae and foci, and a great variety of32 - MAN SUITED TO THE PRESENTmollusca of inordinate bulk, compared with thoseof the present day, as ammonites and nautili.Every thing declares, that these animals inhabitedshallow seas, and estuaries, or great inlandlakes : that the surface of the earth did not riseup in peaks and mountains, or that perpendicularrocks bound in the seas ; but that it was flat,slimy, and covered with a loaded and foggyatmosphere. There is, indeed, every reason tobelieve that the classes mammalia and birdswere not then created ; and that if man hadbeen placed in this condition of the earth, theremust have been around him a state of thingsunsuited to his constitution, and not calculatedto call forth his capacities.But looking to the class of animals as we haveenumerated them, there is a correspondence ;they were scaly ; they swam in water, or creptupon the margins ; there were no animals possessedof rapidity of motion, and no birds ofprey to stoop upon them ; there was in short,that balance of the power of destruction andof self preservation, which we see now to obtainin higher animals since created, with infinitelyvaried instincts and powers for defence or attack.It is hardly possible to watch the night andsee the break of day in a fine country, withoutbeing sensible that our pleasantness perceptionsrefer to the scenery of nature, and that we havefeelings in sympathy with every successiveCONDITION OF THE EARTH. 33change, from the first streak of light, until thewhole landscape is displayed in valleys, woods,and sparkling waters ; and the changes on thescene are not more rapid than the transitions ofthe feelings which accompany them. All thesesources of enjoyment, the clear atmosphere andthe refreshing breezes, are as certainly the resultof the several changes which the earth's surfacehas undergone, as the displaced strata within itscrust are demonstrative of these changes. Wehave every reason to conclude that these revolutions,whether they have been slowly accomplishedand progressively, or by sudden, vastand successive convulsions, were necessary toprepare the earth for that condition which shouldcorrespond with the faculties to be given to man,and be suited to the full exercise of his reason,as well as to his enjoyment.If a man contemplate the common objectsaround him if he observe the connection betweenthe qualities of things external and theexercise of his senses, bet r een the senses soexcited, and the condition of his mind, he willperceive that he is in the centre of a magnificentsystem, and that the strictest relation is establishedbetween the intellectual capacities andthe material world.In the succeeding chapter we shall take acomparative view of the anatomy of the arm,D34 THEORY OF THE SUCCESSION OFand we shall be led to observe some very extraordinarychanges, as we trace the same partsthrough different genera and species of animals.In doing this, we are naturally called upon tonotice certain opinions which prevail on thesubject.We have already hinted, that geologists havediscovered, that in the stratified rocks there isproof of a regular succession of formations inthe crust of the earth, and that animals of verydifferent structure have been imbedded, and arepreserved in them. In the earlier formed strataanimals are found which are low, as we chooseto express it, in the chain of existence ; inhigher strata, oviparous animals of great bulk,and more complex structure, are discovered ;above the strata containing these oviparous reptiles,there are found mammalia ; and in thelooser and more superficial stratum are the bonesof the mastodon, megatherium, rhinoceros, andelephant, &c. We must add that geologists agreethat man has been created last of all.Upon these facts, a theory is raised, thatthere has been a succession of animals graduallyincreasing in the perfection of their structure ;that the first impulse of nature was not sufficientto the production of the highest and mostperfect, and that it was only in her matureefforts that mammalia were produced. We areled to this reflection : that the creation of aANIMALS FROM SIMPLE TO COMPLEX. 35living animal, the bestowing of life on a corporealframe, however simple the structure of that body,is of itself, an act of creative power so inconceivablygreat, that we can have no title to presumethat the change in the organization, such as theprovision of bones and muscles, or the productionof new organs of sense, is a higher effort of thatpower. We have a better guide in exploring thevarieties of animated nature, when we acknowledgethe manifest design with which all is accomplished; the adaptation of the animals, theirsize, their economy, their organs, and instrumentsto their condition.Whether we make the most superficial ormost profound examination of animals in theirnatural state, we shall find that the varietiesare so balanced as to ensure the existence ofall. This, we think, goes far to explain, first,why the remains of certain animals are foundin certain strata, which imply a peculiar conditionof the earth's surface ; and, secondly,why these animals are found grouped together.For, as we may express it, if there had been anerror in the grouping, there must have been adestruction of the whole ; the balance which is necessaryto their existence having been destroyed.We know very well that so minute a thing as afly, will produce, in twenty-four hours, millions,which, if not checked, will ere long darken theair, and render whole regions desolate : so that30 OF THE SUCCESSION ANDif the breeze does not carry them in due timeinto the desert, or into the ocean, the destructionwill be most fearful.As in the present day every creature has itsnatural enemy; or is checked in production,sometimes by a limited supply of food, sometimesby disease, or by the influence of seasons ;and as in the whole a balance is preserved, wemay reasonably apply the same principle inexplanation of the condition of things as theyexisted in the earlier stages of the world's progress; certainly, this view is borne out, by whatwe have as yet discovered in the grouping ofanimals, in the different stratifications or depositsof the earth.If the Naturalist or Geologist, exploring therocks of secondary formation, should find inclosedwithin them animals of the class Molucca,it agrees with his preconceived notions, that onlyanimals of their simple structure were in existence,at the time of the subsidence of thatmatter of which the rock consists. But if thespine of a fish, or a jawbone; or a tooth, bediscovered, he is much disturbed, because, hereis the indication of an animal having been atthat time formed on a different type, on thatplan which belongs to animals of a superiorclass. Whereas on the supposition that animalsare created with that relation to circumstances,which we have just alluded to, it would onlyGROUPING OF ANIMALS. 37imply that certain animals, which had hithertoincreased undisturbed, had arrived at a periodwhen their numbers were to be limited ; or thatthe condition of the elements, and the abundanceof food were now suited to the existence of aspecies of the vertebrata.The principle then, in the application of whichwe shall be borne out, is, that there is an adaptation,an established and universal relation betweenthe instincts, organization, and instruments ofanimals on the one hand, and the element inwhich they are to live, the position which theyhold, and their means of obtaining food on theother ; and this holds good with respect to theanimals which have existed, as well as thosewhich now exist.In discussing this subject of the progressiveimprovement of organized beings, it is affirmedthat the last created of all, man, is not superiorin organization to the others, and that if deprivedof intellectual power, he is inferior to the brutes.I am not arguing to support the gradual developmentand improvement of organization ; but,however indifferent to the tendency of the argument,I must not admit the statement. Man issuperior in organization to the brutes, superiorin strength in that constitutional property whichenables him to fulfil his destinies by extendinghis race in every climate, and living on everyvariety of nutriment. Gather together the most38 OF THE SUCCESSION ANDpowerful brutes, from the arctic circle or torridzone, to some central point they will die, diseaseswill be generated, and will destroy them. Withrespect to the superiority of man being in hismind, and not merely in the provisions of hisbody, it is no doubt true ; but as we proceed, weshall find how the Hand supplies all instruments,and by its correspondence with the intellect giveshim universal dominion. It presents the lastand best proof of that principle of adaptation,which evinces design in the creation.Another notion which we meet w r with, is, thatthe variety of animals is not a proof of design, asshowing a relation between the formation of theirorgans, and the necessity for their exercise ; butthat the circumstances in which the animal hasbeen placed, have been the cause of the variety.The influence of these circumstances, it is pretended,has in the long progress of time, produceda complication of structure out of an animalwhich Alas at first simple. We shall reserve thediscussion of this subject until we have the databefore us ; which, of themselves, and withoutmuch argument, will suffice to overthrow it. Imay notice here another idea of naturalists, whoare pleased to reduce these changes in the structureof animals into general laws. They affirmthat in the centre of the animal body there is nodisposition to change, whilst in the extremitieswe see surprising variations of form. If this be aGROUPING OF ANIMALS. 39law, there is no more to be said about it, theenquiry is terminated. But I contend that theterm is quite inapplicable, and worse than useless,as tending to check enquiry. What then isthe meaning of this variation in the extremitiesand comparative permanence towards the centreof the skeleton ? I conceive the rationale to bethis, that the central part, by which in fact theymean the skull, spine, and ribs, are permanentin their offices ; whilst the extremities varyand are adapted to every exterior circumstance.The office of the back part of the skull is to protectthe brain, that of the spine to contain thespinal marrow, and the ribs to perform respiration.Why should we expect these parts to varyin shape while their office remains the same?But the shoulder must vary in form, as it doesin motion. The shape of the bones and thejoints of the extremities must be adapted to theirvarious actions, and the carpus and phalangesmust change, more than all the rest, to accommodatethe extremity to its different offices.Is it not more pleasing to see the reason of thismost surprising adjustment, than merely to sayit is a law ?There is yet another opinion, which will suggestitself by the perusal of the following chapter, tothose who have read the more modern works onNatural History. It is supposed that the sameelementary parts belong to all animals, and that40 SUCCESSION AND GROUPING OF ANIMALS.the varieties of structure are attributable to thetransposition and moulding of these elementaryparts. I find it utterly impossible to follow upthis system to the extent which its abettors wouldpersuade us to be practicable. I object to it as ameans of engaging us in very trifling pursuitsand of diverting the mind from the truth ; fromthat conclusion, indeed, to which I may avowit to be my intention to carry the reader. Butthis discussion also must follow the examples,and we shall resume it in a latter part of thevolume.CHAPTER III.The Comparative Anatomy of the Hand.lis this enquiry, we have before us what in thestrictest sense of the word is a system. All theindividuals of the extensive division of the animalkingdom which we have to review, possess acranium for the protection of the brain, a heart,implying a peculiar circulation, five distinguishableorgans of sense ; but the grand peculiarity,whence the term vertebrata is derived, is to befound in the spine ; that chain of bones whichconnects the head and body, and, like a keel,serves as a foundation for the ribs; or as thebasis of that fabric which is for respirationI have said, that we are to confine ourselves toa portion only of this combined structure; toseparate and examine the anterior extremity, and42 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYto observe the adaptation of its parts, through thewhole range of these animals. We shall view itas it exists in man, and in the higher division ofanimals which give suck, the mammalia in thosewhich propagate by eggs, the oviparous animals,birds, reptiles, amphibia, and fishes ; and weshall find the bones which are identified by distinctfeatures, adjusted to various purposes, in allthe series, from the arm to the fin. We shall recognizethem in the mole, formed into a powerfulapparatus for digging, by which the animal sooncovers itself, and burrows its way under ground.In the wing of the eagle we shall count everybone adapted to a new element, and as powerfulto rise in the air, as the fin of the salmon is tostrike through the water. The solid hoof of thehorse, the cleft foot of the ruminant, the retractileclaw of the feline tribe, the long folding nails ofthe sloth, are among the many changes that arefound in the adjustment of the chain of bones,which in man, ministers to the compound motionsof the hand.Were it my purpose to teach the elementsof this subject, I should commence with examiningthe lowest animals, and trace the bonesof the anterior extremity as they come to resemblethe human arm, and to be employed for a greatervariety of uses in the higher animals ; but as mypresent object is illustration only, I shall beginwith the human hand, and compare its parts.OF THE SHOULDER.With this view, I shall divide the extremity intothe shoulder, arm, and hand, and treat eachsubdivision with a reference to its structure inanimals.OF THE SHOULDER.In viewing the human figure, or human skeleton,in connection with our present subject, we44 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYremark the strength and solidity of the lowerextremities, in contrast with the superior. Notonly are the lower limbs longer and larger thanthose of any other animal, but the pelvis is wider,and the obliquity of the neck of the thigh bonegreater. The distances of the large processeson the upper ends of the thigh bones (the enchanters,)from the sockets, are also greater than inany of the vertebrata. Altogether the strengthof these bones, the size and prominence of theirprocesses, the great mass of the muscles of theloins and hips, distinguish man from every otheranimal ; they secure to him the upright posture,and give him the perfect freedom "of the arms, forpurposes of ingenuity and art.At the head of this chapter is a sketch of theChimpanzee,* an ape which stands high in theorder of quadrant, yet we cannot mistake hisSimia troglodytes, from the coast of Guinea, more human inits form, and more easily domesticated than the orang-outang 1 .We would do well to consider the abode of these creatures in a stateof nature vast forests extending in impenetrable shade below,whilst above, and exposed to the light, there is a scene of verdureand beauty; this is the home of those monkeys and lemurswhich have extremities like hands. In many of them the hinderextremity has the more perfect resemblance to a hand ; in theCoaita (p. 1 7) we see the great toe assuming the characters ofa thumb, whilst in the fore paw the thumb is not distinguishable,being hid in the skin. In short, these paws are not approximationsto the hand, corresponding with a higher ingenuity, but areadaptations of the feet, to the branches on which the animals climband walk.OF THE SHOULDER. 45capacities : that the lower extremities and levis,or hips, were never intended to give him the erectposture, or only for a moment ; but, for swinging,or for a vigorous pull, who can deny him power inthose long and sinewy arms.The full prominent shoulders, and the consequentsquareness of the trunk, are equally distinctiveof man, with the strength of his loins ;they indicate a free motion of the hand.OF THE BONES OF THE SHOULDER.The bones of the shoulder, being those, whichgive firm attachment to the upper extremity, andwhich afford origins to the muscles of the arm andfore arm, are simple, if studied in man, or, indeed,in any one genus of animals ; but considered in referenceto the whole of the vertebral animals, theyassume a very extraordinary degree of intricacy.We shall, however, find that they retain theirproper office, notwithstanding the strange variationsin the form of the neighbouring parts. Inmanthey are directly connected with the greatapparatus of respiration ; but in other animals weshall see the ribs, as it were, withdrawn fromthem, and the bones of the shoulder, or fundamentalbones of the extremity, curiously andmechanically adapted to perform their office,without the support of the thorax. We shallnot, however, anticipate the difficulties of this4(> COMPARATIVE ANATOMYsubject, but look first upon that which is mostfamiliar and easy, the shoulder of man in comparisonwith the varieties in the mammalia.The clavicle, or collar bone, is that which runsacross from the breast bone to the top of theshoulder. The square form of the chest, and thefree exercise of the hand, are very much owingto this bone. It keeps the shoulders apartfrom the chest, and throws the action of themuscles upon the arm bone, which, but for it,would be drawn inwards, and contract the upperpart of the trunk.If we take the motions of the anterior extremityin different animals, as our guide, we shall seewhy this bone is perfect in some, and entirelywanting in others. Animals which fly, or dig,or climb, as bats, moles, porcupines, squirrels,A. Triangular portion of the Sternum. B. B. Clavicles, c. c.Scapulae. D. Coracoid process of the Scapula. E. Acromionprocess of the Scapulae.OF THE SHOULDER.ant-eaters, armadillo, and sloths, have thisbone, for in them, a lateral or outward motionis required. There is also a certain degree offreedom in the anterior extremity of the cat, dog,martin, and bear ; they strike with the paw, androtate the wrist more or less extensively, and theyhave therefore a clavicle, though an imperfect one.In some of these, even in the lion, the bone whichhas the place of the clavicle is very imperfect indeed; and if attached to the shoulder, it does notextend to the sternum : it is concealed in theflesh, and is like the mere rudiments of the bone.But, however imperfect, it marks a correspondencein the bones of the shoulder to those of thearm and paw, and the extent of motion enjoyed.When the bear stands up, we perceive, by his48 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYungainly attitude and the motion of his paws,that there must be a wide difference in the bonesof his upper extremity, from those of the ruminantor solitude. He can take the keeper's hatfrom his head, and hold it; he can hug ananimal to death. The ant-bear especially, as heis deficient in teeth, possesses extraordinary powersof hugging with his great paws ; and, althoughharmless in disposition, he can squeezehis enemy, the jaguar, to death. These actions,and the power of climbing, result from the structureof the shoulder, or from possessing a collarbone,however imperfect.Although the clavicle is perfect in man, therebycorresponding with the extent and freedom of themotion of his hand, it is strongest and longest,comparatively, in the animals which dig or fly,as in the mole and the bat.Preposterous as the forms of the kangarooappear to us, yet even in this animal we see arelation preserved between the extremities. Hesits upon his strong hind legs and tail, tripodlike, with perfect security, and his fore paws arefree. He has a clavicle, and possessing thatbone and the corresponding motions, is not withoutmeans of defence ; for with the anterior extremitieshe seizes the most powerful dog, andthen, drawing up his hinder feet, he digs his sharppointed hoofs into his enemy, and striking out,tears him to pieces. Though possessed of no greatOF THE SHOULDER. 49speed, and without horns, teeth, or claws, and, aswe should suppose, totally defenceless, nature hasnot been negligent of his protection.*There is in the form of the kangaroo, and especially in itsskeleton, something incongruous, and in contrast with the usualshape of quadrupeds. The head, trunk, and fore paws, appearto be a portion of an animal, unnaturally joined to another ofgreater dimensions and strength. It is not easy to say what are,or what were, the exterior relations corresponding with the verypeculiar form of this animal ; but the interior anatomy is accommodated,in a most remarkable manner, to the enormous hinderextremities.The uterine system of the female is diminutive, and does notundergo the development, which universally takes place in otheranimals. The young, instead of remaining within the mother forthe period of gestation, become, by some extraordinary mode ofexpulsion, attached to the teats ; where they hang by the mouth,covered by an exterior pouch, until, from minute and shapelessthings, they are matured to the degree in which the young of otheranimals are usually produced. The artery which supplies themilk glands, is the epigastric, a branch of the great artery of thethigh ; and in this curious manner is the provision for the youngdrawn from the great limbs of the mother, certainly the partbest enabled to supply it.I think I perceive the reason of this very peculiar manner ofbringing forth the young, to be, in the form of the animal andits upright position. The argument would stand thus, were wehere at liberty to discuss it : I . An upright position of the motherrequires a pelvis of a peculiar and complex construction. 2. Apelvis, of this construction, requires that the form of the offspringshall accurately correspond, and that the anterior part of the foetusshall much exceed in size the posterior parts. 3. But the kangaroois, in shape, the very reverse, the head could not, consistentlywith the conformation of the whole animal, be larger than the hipsand hinder extremities. 4. Nature has accomplished her worksafely, and by the simplest means, by anticipating the period ofthe separation of the foetus, and providing for the growth of theE50 COMPARATIVE STRUCTURE OFIt cannot be better shown, that the function oruse of a part, determines its form, than by lookingto the clavicle and scapula of the bird.Three bones converge here, to the shoulderjoint, the tusculum, clavicle, and scapula ; butnone of these have the resemblance which theirnames would imply The scapula is the long thinoffspring, exterior to the circle of bones through which its birthmust take place. It will, perhaps, be objected to this reasoning,that the order didelphis (with a double womb) embraces animalswhich have no such remarkable disproportion in the hinder extremities.THE BONES OF THE SHOULDER. 51bone, like the blade of a knife ; and the clavicleis that stronger portion of bone which is articulatedwith the breast bone : this leaves the tusculumas a new part. Now I think, that thetusculum, or fork bone, which in carving, wedetach, after removing the wings of a fowl, correspondswith the form and place of the clavicle ;and if we so consider it, we may then take thestrong bone, commonly called the clavicle, as aprocess of the irregularly formed scapula. Howeverthis may be, what we have to admire in birds,is the mode in which the bones are fashioned, tostrengthen the articulation of the shoulder, andto give extent of surface for the attachment ofmuscles.Another peculiarity in birds is, that there isnot an alternate motion of the wings ; their extremities,as we may continue to call them, movetogether in flying ; and, therefore, the claviclesare joined, forming the tusculum.OF THE SCAPULA.IF we attend to the scapula, or shoulder-blade,we shall better understand the influence of thebones of the shoulder, on the motions and speedof animals. The scapula is that flat triangularbone, which lying on the ribs, and cushioned withmuscles, shifts and revolves with each movementof the arm. The muscles con verge from all sidestowards it, from the head, spine, ribs, and breast52 THE ARMS WANTINGbone. These acting in succession, roll the scapulaand toss the arm, in every direction. When themuscles combine in action, they fix the bone,and either raise the ribs in drawing breath, orgive firmness to the whole frame of the trunk.Before I remark further on the influence ofthe scapulae on the motions of the arm, I shall givean instance in proof of a very important functionwhich they perform. Hearing that there was alad of fourteen years of age, born without arms,I sent for him. I found that indeed he hadno arms, but he had clavicles and scapulae.When I made this boy draw his breath theshoulders were raised, that is to say, the scapulaewere drawn up, were fixed, and became thepoints from which the broad muscles of the chestdiverged towards the ribs, to draw and expandthem in respiration. We would do well to rememberthis double office of the scapula andits muscles, that, whilst it is the very foundationof the bones of the upper extremity, and neverwanting in any animal that has the most remoteresemblance to an arm, it is the centre and pointd'appui of the muscles of respiration, and acts,in that capacity, where there are no extremitiesat all !We perceive, that it is only in certain classes ofanimals, that the scapula is joined to the trunkby bone, that is, through the medium of a clavicle; and a slight depression on a process of theIN A BOY. 53scapula, when discovered in a fossil state, willdeclare to the geologist, the class to which theanimal belonged. For example, there are broughtover to this country the bones of the Megatherium,an animal, which must have been as large as theelephant ; of the anterior extremity there is onlythe scapula ; and on the extremity of the process,which is called acromion, of that bone, there is amark of the attachment of a clavicle. This pointsout the whole constitution of the extremity, andthat it enjoyed perfect freedom of motion. Othercircumstances will declare whether that extensivemotion was bestowed, so that the animal mightdig with its huge claws like some of the eden-tate,or strike like the feline tribe.Some interest is attached to the position of thescapula, in the horse. In him, and in other quadrupeds,with the exceptions which I have made,there is no clavicle, and the connection betweenthe extremity and the trunk, is solely throughmuscles. That muscle, called serratus magnus,which is a large one in man, is particularly powerfulin the horse ; for the weight of the trunkhangs upon this muscle. In the horse, as inmostquadrupeds, the speed results from thestrength of the loins and hinder extremities, forit is the muscles there which propel the animal.But were the anterior extremities joined to thetrunk firmly, and by bone, they could not withstandthe shock from the descent of the whole54 ANATOMY OF THEweight thrown forwards ; even though they wereas powerful as the posterior extremities, theywould suffer fracture or dislocation. We cannotbut admire, therefore, the provision in all quadrupedswhose speed is great, and whose spring isextensive, that, from the structure of their bones,they have an elastic resistance, by which theshock of descending is diminished.If we observe the bones of the anterior extremityof the horse, we shall see that the scapulais oblique to the chest ; the humerus, oblique tothe scapula ; and the bones of the fore arm at anangle with the humerus. Were these bonesconnected together in a straight line, end to end,the shock of alighting would be conveyed throughHORSE'S SHOULDER. 55a solid column, and the bones of the foot, or thejoints, would suffer from the concussion. Whenthe rider is thrown forwards on his hands, andmore certainly when he is pitched on his shoulder,the collar bone is broken, because in man, thisbone forms a link of connection between theshoulder and the trunk, so as to receive the wholeshock ; and the same would happen in the horse,the stag, and all quadrupeds of great strengthand swiftness, were not the scapulae sustained bymuscles, and not by bone, and did not the bonesrecoil and fold up.The horse-jockey runs his hand down thehorse's neck, in a knowing way, and says, " thishorse has got a heavy shoulder, he is a slowhorse!" He is right, but he does not understandthe matter; it is not possible that theshoulder can be too much loaded with muscle,for muscle is the source of motion, and bestowspower. What the jockey feels, and formshis judgment on, is the abrupt transition fromthe neck to the shoulder, which, in a horse forthe turf, ought to be a smooth undulating surface.This abruptness, or prominence of theshoulder, is a consequence of the upright positionof the scapula; the sloping and light shoulderresults from its obliquity. An upright shoulderis the mark of a stumbling horse: it does notrevolve easily, to throw forward the foot.Much of the strength, if not the freedom andrapidity of motion, of a limb, will depend on the00 ANATOMY OF THEangle at which the bones lie to each other ; for,this mainly affects the insertion, and, consequently,the power of the muscles. We know,and may every moment feel, that when the armisextended, we possess little power in bending it ;but as we bend it the power is increased ; whichis owing to the change in the direction of theforce acting upon the bone ; or, in other words, becausethe tendon becomes more perpendicular tothe lever. A scapula which inclines obliquelybackwards, increases the angle at which it liesA. Scapula. E. Humerus. B. Tuberosity of the Humerus.c. Olecranon, or projection of the Ulna. n. Radius.HORSE'S SHOULDER. 57with the humerus, and, consequently, improvesthe effect of those muscles which pass from itto the humerus. We have only to turn to theskeleton of the elephant, the ox, the elk, or thestag, to see the confirmation of this principle.When the scapula is oblique, the serratus muscle,which passes from the ribs to its uppermost part,has more power in rolling it. When it lies at rightangles with the humerus, the muscles which areattached to the latter, (at B.) act with moreeffect. And on the same principle, by theoblique position of the humerus, and, consequently,its obliquity in reference to the radiusand ulna, the power of the muscle inserted(at C.) into the olecranon, is increased. On thewhole, both power and elasticity are gained bythis position of the superior bones of the fore-leg.It gives to the animal that springs, a larger stretchin throwing himself forwards, and security, in asoft descent of his weight. A man, standingupright, cannot leap or start off at once ; he mustfirst sink down, and bring the bones of his extremitiesto an angle. But the antelope, or othertimid animals of the class, can leap at once, orstart off in their course without preparation :another advantage of the oblique position of theirbones when at rest.These sketches with the pen are from theskeleton of the elephant and the camel. The legof the former is obviously built for the purposeof sustaining the huge bulk of the animal,58 COMPARISON OF THE BONESwhilst in the camel we have a perfect contrast.OF THE ELEPHANT AND CAMEL. 59Were we to compare the bones of these largeranimals with any form of architecture, we mightsay, it was the Egyptian, or rather like theCyclopean walls of some ancient city ; they arehuge and shapeless, and piled over each other,as if they were destined more to sustain theweight, than to permit motion.We further perceive, from the comparison ofthese sketches, that if the humerus be placedobliquely, it must necessarily be short, otherwiseit would throw the leg too far back, and make thehead and neck project. It is one of the " points"of a horse to have the humerus short. And notonly have all animals of speed this character, butbirds of long flight, as the swallow, have shorthumeri. This is owing, I think, to anothercircumstance, that in the wing, the short humeruscauses a quicker extension ; for the furtherextremity of the bone moving in a lesser circle,makes the gyration be more rapid.If we take the bones of the shoulder as adistinct subject, and trace them comparatively,we shall be led to notice some very curiousmodifications in them. We have already seenthat there are two objects to be attained in theconstruction of these bones. In man, and mammalia,they constitute an important part of theorgan of respiration ; and they conform to thestructure of the thorax. But we shall find thatin some animals, this function is in a manner withdrawnfrom them ; the scapula? and the clavicles60 BONES OF THE SHOULDERare left without the support of the ribs. Thesebones forming the shoulder, therefore, require additionalcarpentry ; or they must be laid togetheron a new principle. In the batrachian order, forexample in the frog, the thorax, as constituted ofribs, has disappeared ; the mechanism of respirationis altogether different from what it is in themammalia. Accordingly, we find that the bonesof the shoulder are on a new model ; they form abroad and flat circle,* sufficient to give secureattachment to the extremity, and affording alarge space for the lodgement of the muscleswhich move the arm. Perhaps the best exampleof this structure is in the siren and proteus; where the ribs are reduced to a very fewimperfect processes, attached to the anteriordorsal vertebrae; and where the bones of theextremity, being deprived of all support fromThe Scapula, Clavicle, Sternum, and Coracoid bone may berecognized in this figure of the bones of a Frog.IN THE CHELONIAN ORDER. 61the thorax, depend upon themselves for security.Here the bones, corresponding to the sternum,clavicles, and scapulae, are found clinging to thespine, and forming, like the pelvis, a circle, to thelateral part of which the humerus is articulated.In the chelonian order, the tortoises, we seeanother design accomplished, in the union of thesebones ; and the change is owing to a very curiouscircumstance. The spine and ribs of these animalsform the rafters of their strong shell ; andconsequently they are external to the bones ofthe shoulder. The scapulae and clavicles beingthus within the thorax, and having nothing in theirgrasp, neither ribs nor spine, they must necessarilyfall together, and form a circle, in order toafford a fixed point to which the extremity maybeattached. It would, indeed, be strange if, nowbeing joined for the purpose of giving attachmentto the humerus, and in circumstances, as we may62 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYexpress it, so very new, they preserved any resemblanceto the forms which we have beencontemplating in the higher animals. In thisfigure,* we have the bones of the shoulder ofthe turtle ; and it is readily perceived how muchthey have changed both their shape and theiroffices. That part which is most like a scapulain shape, lies on the fore part, instead of the backpart ; and the bones which hold the shouldersapart, abut upon the spine, instead of upon thesternum. Hence it appears idle to follow outthese bones under the old denominations, or suchas are applicable to their condition in the higheranimals.In fishes, where the apparatus of respirationA. Scapula. B. Acromion process, c. Coracoid bone. D.Glenoid cavity.OF THE BONES OF THE SHOULDER. 63has undergone another entire change, and wherethere are no proper ribs, the bones which giveattachment to the pectoral fin, are still called thebones of the shoulder ; and that which is namedscapular appendage, is, in fact, attached to thebones of the head. So that the whole consists ofa circle of bones, which, we may say, seek securityof attachment by approaching the moresolid part of the head, in defect of a firm foundationin the thorax.Thus, the bones which, in a manner, give afoundation to those of the anterior extremity,have been submitted to a new modelling, in correspondencewith every variety in the apparatusof respiration ; and they have yet maintainedtheir pristine office.A. Clavicle. B. Coracoid bone. c. A new bone, introducedinto the apparatus, which articulates with the coracoid bone, andlies interior to the clavicle. D. Scapula. E. Acromion Scapulae.64 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYThe naturalist will not be surprized, on findingan extraordinary intricacy in the shoulder apparatusof the ornithorynchus paradoxes, sincethe whole frame and organs of this animal imply,that it is intermediate between mammalia andbirds ; and it is placed in the list of edentata.We introduce it here, as another instance of thechanges which the bones of the shoulder undergowith every new office, and in correspondencewith the motions, of the extremity ; whether it beto support the weight in running, or to give freedomto the arm, or to provide for flying, or forperforming equally the act of creeping and ofswimming.Unprofitable as the enquiry may seem, there isno other way by which the geologist can distinguishthe genera of those oviparous reptiles, which hefinds imbedded in the secondary strata, than bystudying the minute processes and varying charactersof these bones, in the different classes ofanimals. In the ichthyosaurus, and plesiosaurus,the inhabitants of a former world, and now extinct,we perceive a considerable deviation fromthe perfection of the bones of the arm and hand,compared with the frog and tortoise : but if strengthis the object, there is a greater degree of perfectionin the bones of the shoulder. The explanationof this is, that the ribs and sterno-costalarches, constituting the thorax, are more perfect,than in the chelonian and batrachian orders;OF THE BONES OF THE SHOULDER. 65and the bones of the shoulder are therefore external,and resemble those of the crocodile ; yet theribs are so weak as to be incapable of sustainingthe powerful action of the anterior extremities ;accordingly, the bones, which by a kind oflicence we continue to call clavicle, omoplateor scapula, and coracoid, though strangely deviatingfrom the original form and connections,constitute a texture of considerable strength,which perfects the anterior part of the trunk,and gives attachment and lodgment to the powerfulmuscles of the paddle.But in giving their attention to this subject, itdoes not appear that naturalists have hit uponthe right explanation of the peculiar structure,and curious varieties of these bones. Why isthe apparatus of respiration so totally changedin these classes of animals? They are coldblooded animals ; they require to respire lessfrequently than other creatures, and they remainlong under the water. I conceive that thepeculiarity in their mode of respiration correspondswith this property. Hence their vesicularlungs, their mode of swallowing the air,instead of inhaling it; and hence, especially,their power of compressing the body andexpelling the air ; it is this, I imagine, whichenables them to go under the water and crawlupon the bottom ; without this, that is to say,had they possessed the lungs of warm blooded()(> COMPARATIVE ANATOMYanimals, which are compressible only in aslight degree, their capacity of remaining underwaterwould have left them struggling againsttheir buoyancy, like a man or any of themammalia when diving. The girdle of bonesof the shoulder is constituted with a certainregard to the peculiar action of respiration, andto the pliancy of the body, in order that thevesicular lungs may be compressed, and thespecific weight diminished. The facility whichthe absence of ribs gives, in the batrachianorder, and the extreme weakness and pliancyof these bones in the syrians, for admitting thecompression of the lungs extended through theabdomen, must be, as I apprehend, peculiaritiesadapted to the same end.OF THE HUMERUS.The demonstration of this bone need notbe so dry a matter of detail as the anatomistmakes it. We may see in it that curious relationof parts which has been so successfullyemployed by Paley to prove design, and fromwhich the genius of Baron Cuvier has broughtout some of the finest examples of inductivereasoning.In looking to the head of this bone in thehuman skeleton, (see the fig. page 43,) weobserve the great hemispherical surface forOF THE HUMERUS. 67articulation with the glenoid cavity of thescapula, and we see that the two tubercles, nearthe joint, are depressed, and do not interferewith the revolving of the humerus, by strikingagainst the scapula.Such appearances aloneare sufficient to show thatall the motions of the armare free. To give assuranceof this, suppose that thegeologist has picked up thisbone in interesting circumstances.To what animaldoes it belong? The circularform of the articulatingsurface, and the very slight projection of thetubercles, evince a latitude and extent of motion.Now, freedom of motion in the shoulder, impliesfreedom also in the extremity or paw, androtation of the bones of the wrist. Accordingly,we direct the eye to that part of this humeruswhich gives origin to the muscles for turningthe wrist, (the Supinator muscles), and in theprominence and length of the ridge or crestwhich is on the lower and outer side of the bone,we have proof of the free motion of the paw.Therefore, on finding the humerus thus characterized,we conclude, that it belonged to ananimal with sharp moveable claws ; that, in allprobability, it is the remains of a bear.68 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYBut, suppose that the bone found has a differentcharacter: That the tubercles project,so as to limit the motion to one direction, andthat the articulating surface is less regularlyconvex. On inspecting the lower extremity ofsuch a bone, we shall perceive provisions for adeeper and more secure hinge joint at the elbow;and neither in the form of the articulating surface,(which is here called trochlea), nor in thespine on the outside, above noticed, will there besigns of the rotation of one bone of the fore-armon the other. We have, therefore, got the boneof an herbivorous quadruped, either with a solidor with a cloven foot.In the bat and mole we have, perhaps, the bestexamples of the moulding of the bones of the extremity,to correspond with the condition of theOF THE MOLE. 69animal . The mole is an animal fitted to plough itsway underground. In the bat, the same systemof bones is adapted to form a wing, to raise theanimal in the atmosphere ; and with a provisionto cling to the wall, not to bear upon. We recognizein both, every bone of the upper extremity,but how very differently formed andjoined ! In the mole, the sternum or breastbone,and the clavicle are remarkably large :the scapula assumes the form of a high lever :the humerus is thick and short, and has suchspines for the attachment of muscles, as indicategreat power. The spines, which give originto the muscles of rotation, project in an extraordinarymanner; and the hand is large, flat,and so turned, that it may shove the earth asidelike a ploughshare.*The snout may vary in its internal structure with new offices.Naturalists say that there is a new " element" in the pig'snose. It has, in fact, two bones which admit of motion, whilstthey give more strength. Moles have those bones also, as theyCOMPARATIVE ANATOMYThere can be no greater contrast to these bonesthan is presented in the skeleton of the bat. Inthat animal the bones are light and delicate ; andwhilst they are all marvellously extended, thephalanges of the fingers are elongated, so ashardly to be recognized, obviously for the purposeof sustaining a membraneous web, and to formawing.plough the earth with their snouts. We have noticed the mannerin which they use their strong hands ; we should add that theirhead is a wedge, to which their hands are assisting, in throwingaside the earth. The conformation of the head in shape andstrength of bones, and the new adjustment of a muscle, which iscutaneous in other animals (the Platina Modes) to the motionsof the head, are among the most curious changes of common partsto new offices.OF THE BAT. 71Contemplating this extraordinary applicationof the bones of the extremity, and comparingthem with those in the wing of a bird, we mightsay, that this is an awkward attempt a failure.But before giving expression to such an opinion,we must understand the objects required in thisconstruction. It is not a wing intended merely forflight, but one which, while it raises the animal,is capable of receiving a new sensation, or sensationsin that exquisite degree, so as almost toconstitute a new sense. On the fine web of thebat's wing, nerves are distributed, which enable itto avoid objects in its flight, during the obscurityof night, when both eyes and ears fail.Could the wing of a bird, covered with feathers,do this ? Here then we have another exampleof the necessity of taking every circumstanceinto consideration before we presume to criticisethe ways of nature. It is a lesson of humility.*In the next page we have a sketch of the armbones of the Ant-eater, f to shew once more thecorrespondence in the whole extremity. We observethese extraordinary spines of the humerusBesides the adaptation of the bat for flight, through a newadjustment of the bones of the arm, this animal has cells underits skin ; but I know not ho\v far I am authorized to say that theyare analogous to the air-cells of birds, or that they are for thepurpose of making the bat specifically lighter. They extend overthe breast, and under the axillae in some bats; and they arefilled by an orifice which communicates with the pharynx,t Tamandua, from South America.Ant-eater.marking the power of themuscles which are attachedto it ; for, as I have said before,whether we examinethe human body, or the comparativeforms of the bones,the distinctness of the spinesand processes declares thestrength of the muscles. Itis particularly pleasing tonotice here the correspondencebetween the humerusand the other bones, thescapula large and with adouble spine, and with greatprocesses: the ulna projectingat the olecranon, andthe radius freely rotating :but above all, in the developmentof one grand metacarpalbone, which givesattachment to a strong claw,we see a very distinct provision for scratchingand turning aside the ant-hill. The whole isan example of the relation of the particularparts of the skeleton to one another ; and were itour business, it would be easy to shew, that asthere is a correspondence among the bones of thearm, so is there a more universal relation betweenthose of the whole skeleton. As the structure ofthe bones declares the provision of the extremitySTRUCTURE OF BIRDS. 73for digging into the ant-hills, so we shall not bedisappointed in our expectation of finding a projectingmuzzle unarmed with teeth, and a longtongue provided with a glutinous secretion, tolick up the emmet which are disturbed by theanimal's scratching.In the skeleton of the cape-mole, we may see,from the projecting acromion scapulae, and aremarkable process of the humerus, that there isa provision for the rotation of the arm, whichimplies burrowing. But the apparatus seems byno means so perfect as in the mole, implyingthat it digs in a softer soil than that animal,whilst the possession of gnawing teeth indicatesthat it lives on roots.In BIRDS there is altogether a new conditionof parts, as there is a new element to contendwith. The very peculiar form and structureof their skeleton may be thus accounted for.First, it is necessary that birds, as they arebuoyed in the air, be specifically lighter. Secondly,the circumference of their thorax mustbe extended, and the motions of their ribslimited, that the muscles of the wings may havesufficient space and firmness for their attachment.Both these objects are attained by a modificationof the apparatus of breathing. The lungs arehighly vascular and spongy, but they are notdistended with air. The air is drawn throughtheir substance into the large cavity common tothe chest and abdomen ; and whilst the great74 STRUCTURE OF BIRDS.office of decarbonization of the blood is securelyperformed, advantage is taken to let the air intoall the cavities, even into those of the bones.From what was said in the introductorychapter, of the weight of the body being anecessary concomitant of muscular strength, wesee why birds, by reason of their lightness, aswell as by the conformation of their skeleton,walk badly. And, on the other hand, in observinghow this lightness is adapted for flight, it isremarkable how small an addition to their bodywill prevent them rising on the wing. If thegriffon-vulture be frightened after his repast, hemust disgorge, before he flies ; and the condor, inthe same circumstances, is taken by the Indians,like a quadruped, by throwing the lasso over it.*As every one must have observed, the breastboneof birds extends the whole length ofthe body; and owing to this extension, a lesserdegree of motion suffices to respiration. So thata greater surface, necessary for the lodgementand attachment of the muscles of the wings, isobtained, whilst that surface is less disturbedby the action of breathing, and is more steady.It is interesting to notice the relations of great functions inthe animal economy. Birds are Oviparous, because they nevercould have risen on the wing had they been viviparous ; if the fullstomach of a carnivorous bird retard its flight, we perceive thatit could not have carried its young. The light body, the quill-feathers,the bill, and the laying of eggs, are all necessarily connected.STRUCTURE OF BIRDS.Another peculiarity of the skeleton of the bird isthe consolidation of the vertebrae of the back ; aproof, if any were now necessary, that the wholesystem of bones conforms to that of the extremities,the firmer texture of the bones of the trunk,being a part of the provision for the attachmentof the muscles of the wings.*The vertebrae of the back being fixed in birds,and the pelvis reaching high, there is no motionin the body ; indeed, if there were, it would beinterrupted by the sternum. We cannot butadmire, therefore, the composition of the neckThe ostrich and cassowary, which are rather runners thanfliers, have the spine loose.76 STRUCTURE ADAPTEDand head, and how the extension of the vertebrae,and the length and pliability of the neck, whilstthey give to the bill the office of a hand, becomea substitution for the loss of motion in the body,by balancing the whole, as in standing, running,or flying. Is it not curious to observe how thewhole skeleton is adapted to this one object, thepower of the wings.Whilst the ostrich has no keel in its breastbone,birds of passage are, on dissection, recognisableby the depth of this ridge of the sternum.The reason is that the angle, formed by this processand the body of the bone, affords lodgementfor the pectoral muscle, the powerful muscle ofthe wing. In this sketch of the dissection of theswallow, there is a curious resemblance to thehuman arm, and we cannot fail to observe, thatthe pectoral muscle constitutes the greater partof the bulk of the body.* And here we seethecorrespondence between the strength of thismuscle and the rate of flying of the swallow,which is a mile in a minute, for ten hours everyday,or six hundred miles a day.f If it be truethat birds, when migrating, require a wind thatblows against them, it implies an extraordinaryCorelli makes the pectoral muscles of a bird, exceed in weightall the other muscles taken together ; whilst the pectoral musclesof man, are but a seventieth part of the whole mass of the muscles.f Mr. White says truly, that the swift lives on the wing ; it eats,drinks, and collects materials for its nest in flying, and neverrests but during darkness.FOR FLYING. 77power, as well as continuance of muscular exertion.We see how Nature completes her work, whenthe intention is that the animal shall rise buoyantand powerful in the air : the whole texture of theframe is altered and made light, in a mannerconsistent with strength. We see also how themechanism of the anterior extremity is changed,and the muscles of the trunk differently directed.But we are tempted to examine those means,which we would almost say are more awkwardlysuited for their purpose, where the system ofbones and muscles, peculiar to the quadruped,is preserved, while a power of launching intothe air is also given. We have already noticedthe structure of the bat as adapted to flight ; butthere are other animals which enjoy this functionin a lesser degree. For example, the flyingsquirrel (Petronius Columella), being chased to theend of the bough, spreads out its mantle from oneextremity to the other, and drops in the air ; butwith such a resistance from its extended skinand its tail, that it can direct its flight obliquelydownwards, and even turn in the air. But tothis end, there is no necessity for any adaptationof the anterior extremity. Among reptiles thereis a provision of the same kind, in the Dracofibrinous ; which is capable of creeping to aheight and dropping safely to the ground, underthe protection of a sort of parachute, formed by78 ANATOMYits extended skin. This is not an inapt illustration,for although the phalanges of the fingersare not here used to extend the web, the ribs,which are unnecessary for breathing, are prolongedlike the whale-bone of an umbrella, andon them the skin is expanded.But this brings us to a very curious subjectivecondition of those Saurian reptiles, the remainsof which are found only in a fossil state,in what are termed the ancient strata of theJura. The Pterodactyle of Cuvier is an animalwhich seems to confound all our notions ofsystem. Its mouth was like the long bill of abird, and its flexible neck corresponded; butit had teeth in its jaws like those of a crocodile.It had the bones of the anterior extremityprolonged, and fashioned somewhat like thosein the wing of a bird ; but it could not have hadfeathers, as it had not a proper bill. We see nocreature having feathers without a bill to dressand prim them. Nor did this extremity resemblethe structure in that of a bat : instead of thephalanges being equally prolonged, the secondonly was extended to an extraordinary length,whilst the third, fourth, and fifth remained withthe length and articulation of a quadruped, andwith sharp nails, corresponding with the pointedteeth. The extended metacarpal bone reacheddouble the whole length of the animal, and theconjecture is, that upon it was extended a memorTHE FORE-ARM. 79brave, resembling that of the Draco fibrinous.In the imperfect specimens which we have, wecannot discover in the height of the pelvis, thestrength of the vertebrae of the back, or theexpansion of the sternum, a provision for theattachment of muscles commensurate with theextent of the supposed wing. The humerus,and the bones, which we presume are the scapulaand coracoid, bear some correspondence tothe extent of the wing ; but the extraordinarycircumstance of all, is the size and strength of thebones of the jaw and vertebrae of the neck, comparedwith the smallness of the body, and theextreme delicacy of the ribs ; which make italtogether, the thing the most incomprehensiblein nature.OF THE RADIUS AND ULNA.The easy motion of the hand, we might imagineto be in the hand itself; but, on the contrary,the movements which appear to belong to it, aredivided among all the bones of the extremity.*In this sketch, the upper bone of the fore-arm is the radius,and in revolving on the lower bone, the ulna, it carries the handwith it.80 ANATOMYThe head of the humerus is rotatory on thescapula, as when making the guards in fencing ;but the easier and finer rolling of the wrist isaccomplished by the motion of the radius on theulna.The ulna has a hooked process, the olecranon,which catches round the lower end of the humerusor arm bone, (this articulating portion is calledtrochlea), and forms with it a hinge joint. Theradius, again, has a small, neat, round head,which is bound to the ulna by ligaments, as aspindle is held in the bush. This bone turns onits axis, and, as it turns, carries the hand withit, because the hand is strictly attached to itslower head alone. This rolling, is what istermed pronation and supination.Such a motion would be useless, and a sourceof weakness in an animal that had a solid hoof.Accordingly, in the horse, these bones are unitedtogether and consolidated in the position ofpronation.It is interesting to find that by studying theprocesses of the bones, than which nothing, atfirst sight, appears more inconsequent, we arelearning the characters of a language which shallenable us to read monuments of the highest interest; the records of the creation, which givean account of the revolutions of the earth itself.If a geologist should find the nearer head ofthe radius, and see in the extremity of it a smoothOF THE WRIST AND HAND. 81depression, where it bears against the humerus,and observe the polished circle that turns on thecavity of the ulna, he would say, This animalhad a paw it had a motion at the wrist, whichimplies claws. Claws may belong to two speciesof animals: the feline, which is possessed ofsharp carnivorous teeth, or to animals withoutteeth. If he should find the lower extremity ofthis same bone, and observe on it spines andgrooves for the distinct tendons which disperseto the phalanges, he would conclude that theremust have been moveable claws that it belongedto a carnivorous animal; and he would seekfor canine teeth of corresponding size.OF THE WRIST AND HAND.In the human hand, the bones of the wrist(carpus) are eight in number ; and they are soclosely connected that they form a sort of ball,which moves on the end of the radius. Beyondthese, and towards the fingers are the metacarpalbones, which diverge at their further extremities,and give support to the bones of the fingers.The thumb has no metacarpal bone, and isdirectly articulated with the carpus or wrist.There are thus in the hand twenty-nine bones,from the mechanism of which, result strength,mobility, and elasticity.82 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYLovers of system (I do not use the term disparagingly)delight to trace the gradual substractionof the bones of the hand. Thus, lookingto the hand of man, they see the thumb fullyformed in the simia they find it exceedinglysmall ; in one of them, the spider-monkey, ithas disappeared, and the four fingers are sufficient,with hardly the rudiments of a thumb.In some of the tardigrade animals, as we haveseen, in page 26, there are only three metacarpalbones with their fingers. In the horse, the cannonbone may be shewn to consist of two metacarpalbones. Indeed, we might go further andinstance the wing of the bird. To me, thisappears to be losing the sense, in the love ofsystem. There is no regular gradation, but avariety, most curiously adapting, as I haveoften to repeat, the same system of parts toevery necessary purpose.In a comparative view of these bones, we areled more particularly to notice the foot of thehorse ; it is universally admitted to be of beautifuldesign, and calculated for strength andelasticity, and especially provided against concussion.The bones of the fore-leg of the horse becomefirmer as we trace them downwards. The twobones corresponding with those of the fore-arm,are braced together and consolidated ; and themotion at the elbow joint is limited to flexion andOF THE WRIST AND HAND. 83extension. The carpus, forming what by a sort oflicence is called the knee, is also new modelled ;but the metacarpal bones and phalanges of thetoes are totally changed, and can hardly berecognized. When we look in front, instead ofthe four metacarpal bones, we see one strongbone, the cannon bone, and posterior to this, wefind two lesser bones, called splint bones. Theheads of these lesser bones enter into the knee-joint;but at their lower ends they diminishgradually, and they are held by an elastic ligamentousattachment to the sides of the cannonbone.I have some hesitation in admitting the correctnessof the opinion of veterinary surgeonson this curious piece of mechanism. Theyimagine that these moveable splint bones, byplaying up and down, as the foot is alternatelyraised and pressed to the ground, bestow elasticityand prevent concussion. The fact certainlyis, that by over action this part becomesinflamed, and the extremities are preternaturallyjoined by bone to the greater metacarpal orcannon bone ; and that this, which is called asplint, is a cause of lameness.I suspect, rather, that in the perfect state ofthe joint, these lesser metacarpal bones act as aspring to throw out the foot, when it is raisedand the knee-joint bent. If we admit that it isthe quickness in the extension of this joint on84 ACTION OF THE SPLINT BONESwhich the rate of motion must principally depend,it will not escape observation, that in thebent position of the knee, the extensor tendonshave very little power, owing to their runningso near the centre of motion in the joint; andthat, in fact, they require some additional meansto aid the extension of the leg.Suppose that the head of the lesser metacarpalbone A enters into the composition of the joint,it does not appear that by its yielding, when thefoot is upon the ground, the bones of the carpuscan descend, as long as they are sustainedby the greater metacarpal or cannon bone.I do not, therefore, conceive that this bone canIN THE HORSE'S LEG. 85add to the elasticity of the foot. But when weperceive that the head of the splint bone isbehind the centre of motion in the joint, it isobvious that it must be more pressed upon, inthe bent condition of the joint when the foot iselevated, and that then, the bone must descend.If it be depressed when the foot is raised, andhave a power of recoiling (which it certainly has),it must aid in throwing out the leg into thestraight position and assist the extensor muscles.Further, we can readily believe that when theelasticity of these splint bones is lost, byossification uniting them firmly to the cannonbone, the want of such a piece of mechanism,essential to the quick extension of the foot, willmake the horse apt to come down.In looking to this sketch and comparing itwith that of the hand on page 79, we see that inthe horse's leg the five bones of the first digitalphalanx are consolidated into the large pasternbone; those of the second phalanx, into thelesser pastern or coronet ; and those of the lastphalanx, into the coffin bone.OF THE HORSE'S FOOT. But the foot itselfdeserves our attention. The horse, a nativeof extensive plains and steppes, is perfect in hisstructure, as adapted to these, his natural pasturegrounds. When brought, however, into subjection,and running on our hard roads, his feetsuffer from concussion. The value of the horse,86 OF THE HORSE'S FOOT.so often impaired by lameness of the foot, hasmade that part an object of great interest ; andI have it from the excellent professor of veterinarysurgery to say, that he has never demonstratedthe anatomy of the horse's foot withoutfinding something new to admire.The weight and power of the animal requirethat he should have a foot in which strengthand elasticity are combined. The elasticity isessentially necessary to prevent percussion instriking the ground ; and it is attained here,through the united effect of the oblique positionof the bones of the leg and foot theyielding nature of the suspending ligament, andthe expansibility of the crust or hoof. So muchdepends on the position of the pastern bones andcoffin bone, that judging by the length of theseand their obliquity, it is possible to say whethera horse goes easily, without mounting it. Whenthe hoof is raised, it is smaller in its diameter,and the sole is concave ; but when it bears onthe ground it expands, the sole descends so asto become flatter ; and this expansion of thehoof laterally, is necessary to the play of thewhole structure of the foot. Hence it happensthat if the shoe be nailed in such a manner asto prevent the hoof expanding, the whole interiorcontrivance for mobility and elasticity is lost.The foot, in trotting, comes down solid, itconsequently suffers percussion ; and from theOF THE HORSE'S FOOT. 87injury, it becomes inflamed and hot. From thisinflammation is generated a variety of diseases,which at length destroy all the beautiful provisionof the horse's foot for free and elasticmotion.This subject is of such general interest, that Imay venture on a little more detail. The elasticor suspending ligament spoken of above, passesdown from the back of the cannon bone, alongall the bones, to the lowest, the coffin bone; ityields, and allows these bones to bend. Behindthe ligament the great tendons run, and themost prolonged of these, that of the perforansmuscle, is principally inserted into the coffinbone, having at the same time other attachments.Under the bones and tendon, at the soleof the foot, there is a soft elastic cushion ; thiscushion rests on the proper horny frog, thatprominence of a triangular shape which is seenin the hollow of the sole. The soft elasticmatter being pressed down, shifts a little backwards,so that it expands the heels, at thesame time that it bears on the frog, and pressesout the lateral part of the crust. We perceivethat there is a necessity for the bottom of thehoof being hollow or concave first, to preventthe delicate apparatus of the foot from beingbruised, and, secondly, that elasticity may beobtained by its descent. We see that theexpansion of the hoof, and the descent of the88 FOOT OF RUMINANTS.sole are necessary to the play of the internalapparatus of the foot.That there is a relation between the internalstructure and the covering, whether it be the nail,or crust, or hoof, we can hardly doubt : and anunexpected proof of this offers itself in the horse.There are some very rare instances of a horsehaving digital extremities. According to Suetonius,there was such an animal in the stablesof Caesar; another was in the possession ofLeo X. ; and Geoffrey St. Hilaire, in additionto those, says, that he has seen a horse withthree toes on the fore-foot, and four on thehind-foot.* These instances of deviation in thenatural structure of the bones were accompaniedwith a corresponding change in the coveringsthe toes had nails, not hoofs.By these examples, it is made to appear stillmore distinctly that there is a relation betweenthe internal configuration of the toes and theircoverings that when there are five toes completein their bones, they are provided with perfectnails when two toes represent the whole,as in the cleft foot of the ruminant, there areappropriate horny coverings and that when thebones are joined to form the pastern bones andcoffin bone, there is a hoof or crust, as in thehorse, couagga, zebra, and ass.Such a horse was not long since exhibited in Town, and atNewmarket.FOOT OF RUMINANTS.In ruminants there is a cannon bone, butthe foot is split into two parts, and this mustadd to its spring or elasticity. I am inclinedto think that there is still another intention inthis form ; it prevents the foot sinking in softground, and permits it to be more easily withdrawn.We may observe how much more easilythe cow withdraws her foot from the yieldingmargin of a river, than the horse. The roundand concave form of the horse's foot is attendedwith a vacuum or suction, as it is withdrawn ;while the split and conical shaped hoof expandsin sinking, and is easily extricated.In the chamois and other species of the deerthere is an additional toe. A sort of lesserThe left hand figure represents the foot of the antelope ; theright, that of the rein-deer.90 CONTRAST OF THEcannon bone, with its two pasterns, supportsthis toe, and is joined by ligament to the largercannon bone, so that it must have great elasticity.As a division of the flexor tendon runsinto it, it must increase the spring when theanimal rises from its crouching position. Wesee, in these sketches, that the lesser metacarpalbone, which, in the horse, entered into the jointof the " knee," is here brought down to increasethe elasticity, or to expand the foot.The two lateral toes of the hog are short, anddo not touch the ground, yet they must serve tosustain the animal when the foot sinks. In therein-deer these bones are strong and deep, andthe toe, by projecting backwards, extends thefoot horizontally thus giving the animal abroader base to stand on, and adapting it tothe snows of Lapland, on the principle of thesnow-shoe. The systematic naturalist will callthese changes in the size, number, and place ofthe metacarpal bones " gradations ;" I see inthem only new proofs of the same system ofbones being applicable to every circumstance, orcondition of animals, and furnishing us withother instances of adaptation.I have explained why I think that the bonesof the elephant's leg stand so perpendicularlyover each other ; there is a peculiarity also in thebones of the foot. In the foot of the living animalwe see only a round pliant mass, which, whenELEPHANT AND CAMEL. 91he stands, resembles the base of a pillar, or thelower part of the trunk of a stately tree. Butwhen we examine the bones of the foot, we findthis broad base to consist of the carpus, metacarpus,and phalanges of the toes ; and thesebones have a very different use from what we havehitherto noticed. They are not connected with amoveable radius, and have no individual motion,as in the carnivorous animal they merely serveto expand the foot, the base of the column, andto give it a certain elasticity.In the sketch (page 58) I have placed thebones of the foot of the camel in contrastwith those of the elephant. The camel's foothaving no such disproportioned weight to bearas in the elephant, lightness of motion is securedby the oblique position of its bones, as well as bythe direction of the bones of the shoulder, whichwe have formerly noticed. In the soft texture ofthe camel's foot there is much to admire; foralthough the bottom be flat, like the sole of ashoe, yet there is between it and the bones andtendons a cushion, so soft and elastic that theanimal treads with great lightness and security.The resemblance of the foot of the ostrich to thatof the camel has not escaped naturalists.We are now treating of the last bones of thetoes ; and let us see what may be done, by thestudy of one of these bones, to the boding forthof the whole animal. I allude to the dissertations92 MECHANISM OFof the President Jefferson and Baron Cuvier onthe Megalonix. But we must preface this partof our subject by some remarks on the formof the claws of the lion.The canine tribe are carnivorous, like thefeline, and both have the last bones of their toesarmed with a nail or claw. But their habits andtheir means of obtaining food are different. Thefirst combine a keen sense of smelling with apower of continued speed ; they run down theirprey. The feline order have their superiority inthe fineness of their sight, accompanied witha patience, watchfulness, and stealthy movement; they spring upon their prey, and neverlong pursue it. They attain their object in a fewbounds, and, failing, sulkily resume their watch.When we look to the claws, we see a correspondencewith those habits. The claws of thedog and wolf are coarse and strong, and bearthe pressure and friction incident to a long chase.They are calculated to sustain and protect thefoot. But the tiger leaps on his prey, andfastens his sharp and crooked claws in the flesh.These claws being curved and sharp, we mustadmire the mechanism by which they are preserved.The last bone, that which supports theclaw, is placed lateral to the penultimate bone,and is so articulated with it, that an elastic ligament(A) draws it back and raises the sharp extremityof the claw upwards. The nearer extremityTHE LION'S CLAW. 93of the furthest bone presses the ground in theordinary running of the animal,* whilst theclaw is thus retracted into a sheath. But whenThe pads in the bottom of the lion's foot cover these bones,or rather, we should say, protect them ; they are soft cushions,which add to the elasticity of the foot, and must, in some degree,defend the animal in alighting from its bound. I could not comprehendhow the powerful flexor muscles did not unsheathed the clawswhen the lion made its spring, and how they produced this effectwhen there was an excitement to seize and hold the prey I madethis dissection to detect the cause. The last bone of the toe isplaced in a manner so peculiar in relation to the penultimate, beingdrawn back by the elastic ligament (A) beyond the centre ofmotion of the joint, that the flexor tendon (B) acting upon it,forces the nearer end, and the cushion of the toe to the ground.But when a more general excitement takes place in the musclescalled interossei, and the extensor, D, E, the relative position ofthe two last bones is altered ; so that the action of the flexor tendoncan now draw forward the last bone thus unsheathing and uncoveringthe claw, and preparing it to hold or to tear.94 PRESIDENT JEFFERSON AND CUVIERthe tiger makes his spring, the claws are encasedby the action of the flexor tendons ; and they areso sharp and strong in the Bengal tiger, andhis arm is so powerful, that they have beenknown to fracture a man's skull by a touch,in the act of leaping over him.I have alluded to the observation of PresidentJefferson on the Megalonix. Having found abone, which, by its articulating surface andgeneral form, he recognised to be one of thebones of the phalanx of an animal of great size,he thought he could discover that it had carrieda claw ; and from this circumstance, he naturallyenough concluded (according to the adageex undue leone) that it must have belongedto a carnivorous animal. He next set aboutcalculating the length of this claw, and estimatingthe size of the animal. He satisfiedhimself that in this bone, a relic of the ancientworld, he had obtained a proof of the existence,during these old times, of a lion of the height ofthe largest ox, and an opponent fit to cope withthe mastodon. But when this bone came underthe scrutiny of Baron Cuvier, his perfect knownTHE MEGALOMX. 95ledge of anatomy enabled him to draw a differentconclusion.He first observed that there was a spine in themiddle of the articulating surface of the lastbone ; which in this respect was unlike the formof the same bone in the feline tribe. He foundno provision in this specimen of an extinct animal,for the lateral attachment of the bone,which we have just noticed to be necessary forits retraction. Then observing what portion ofa circle this bone formed, he prolonged the line,and showed that the claw belonging to it musthave been of such great length, that it could neverhave been retracted to the effect of guarding anacute and sharp point. The point, therefore, couldnot have been raised vertically, so as to have permittedthe animal to put the foot to the groundwithout blunting the instrument ! Pursuing sucha comparison, he rejected the idea of the bonebelonging to the feline tribe at all. His attentionwas directed to another order, the paresseux orsloths, which have great toes and long nails(p. 26). Then* nails are folded up in a differentfashion ; they just enable the animal to walk ;but slowly and awkwardly, something in thesame manner as if we were to fold our fingerson the palm of the hand, and bear upon ourknuckles. On instituting a more just comparisonbetween these bones of the ancientanimal, and the corresponding bones of the96 FOOT OF THE Quadrant.paresseux, he has satisfied us, that the lion ofthe American President was an animal whichscratched the ground and fed on roots.One experiences something like relief to findthat there never was such an enormous carnivorousanimal as this, denominated megalonix.These finger-bones, or bones of the claws,exhibit a very remarkable correspondence withthe habits and general forms of animals. Besideswhat we have seen in the lion, or tiger, in thedog, and wolf, in the bear and ant-eater, thereis a variety, where we should least expect it, inthe animals that live in woods, and climb thebranches of trees. The squirrel, with claws setboth ways, runs with equal facility up and downthe bole, and nestles in the angles of thebranches. The monkey leaps and swings himselffrom branch to branch, and springing, partswith his hold by the hinder extremities beforehe reaches with the anterior extremities ; heleaps the intervening space, and catches withsingular precision. But the sloths do not grasp ;their fingers are like hooks, and their strengthis in their arms. They do not hold, but hangto the branch. They never let go with oneset of hooks, until they have caught with theother, and thus they use both hind and forefeet,whilst their bodies are pendant. Here,once more, we see the form of the extremity,the concentration of strength, and the habitFOOT OF THE QU ADR I MAN A. 97of animals, conforming not merely to their haunts-in the forest, but to their mode of moving andliving among the branches ; all active, but in adifferent manner.There have been of late deposited in ourMuseum in the College of Surgeons, the bones ofan animal of great size ; and the examination ofthese gives us an opportunity of applying theprinciples and the mode of investigation followedby our great authority in this part of science.These remains consist of part of the head,spine, tail, pelvis, and the bones of one hinderextremity, and the scapula. Estimating theanimal at seven feet in height, it scarcelyconveys an adequate idea of its size ; for thethigh-bone is three times the diameter of that ofthe large elephant which is in the same collection,and the pelvis is twice the breadth of that ofthe same animal. Forming our opinion on theseprinciples to which we have had repeated occasionto refer in this essay, and judging by thestrength and prominence of the processes of thesebones, the animal must have possessed greatmuscular power ; and directed by the same circumstancesstill, we can form an idea of the mannerin which that muscular power was employed.On comparing these bones with the drawingsof the skeleton of the enormous animal preservedin the Royal Museum of Madrid, it is seen atonce that this new acquisition is part of theH98 MEGATHERIUM.remains of the great animal of Paraguay, the Megatheriumof Cuvier. Every observation whichwe are enabled to make on the extreme bones ofthe foot, on the scapula, and on the teeth, confirmsthe idea entertained by Cuvier, that it wasa vegetable feeder; and that its great strengthwas employed in flinging up the soil and diggingfor roots. Its strength seems to have been concentratedto its paws, corresponding with theprovisions there for enormous nails or claws.I have heard it surmised that this animal mayhave sat upon its hinder extremities, and pulleddown the branches of trees to feed upon. It isonly its great size that can countenance suchan idea. We have not the humerus, which byits processes would have declared the classificationand activity of its muscles : but we canestimate the height, breadth, and strength of theanimal by the pelvis and enormous bones of theposterior extremity; while by the scapula andclavicle we can form a conception of the extentof motion of the anterior extremity, and thegreat power that it possessed. In short, by theosseous and muscular systems we perceive thatthe strength was not so much in the body, certaintynot in the jaws, but was directed rather tothe extremities ; and that it was given neither forrapidity of motion nor defence, but for digging.How little was it to be expected that analliance between anatomy, the most despisedAMPHIBIA.part of it, and mineralogy, was to give riseto a new science ; making a part of naturalhistory which had been pursued in mere idleness,vaguely, and somewhat fancifully, to behenceforth studied philosophically, and by inductivereasoning. It is both interesting andinstructive to find the relations thus establishedbetween departments of knowledge apparentlyso remote.In the true Amphibia, as the phoca andwalrus, we have the feet contracted, and almostenveloped in the skin, and the fingers webbedand converted into tins.We have sketched here, the bones of theBONES IN THE CETACEA.indorse, or walrus, and they are remarkably complete,if we consider the appearance of the feetin the living animal. The bones are hereaccommodated to an instrument for swimming ;for these animals live in the water, and come tolandonly to suckle their young, or to bask inthe sun ; and they are the most unwieldy and helpless,out of the water, of all animals which breathe.In the Cetacea, we have mammalia withouthind feet. The scapula is large, the humerusvery short, and the bones of the fore-arm andhand flattened and confined in membranes whichconvert them into a fin. They live in the water,but must rise to breathe.I need not say that in the dolphin we recog-CC2*^^rise the bones of the anterior extremity, only alittle further removed from the forms which weIN THE ICHTHYOSAURUS.have hitherto been contemplating. The sealand morse raise themselves out of the waterand lie on the rocks ; the different species ofthe dolphin continue always in the water; theextremity is now a fin or an oar, and those whohave seen the porpoise or the pollock in astormy sea, must acknowledge how completethe apparatus is, through which they enjoy theirelement.The last examples I select, shall be from theancient world.*The figure to the left is the anterior extremity of the Plesiosaurus; to the right, that of the Ichthyosaurus. In these paddleswe see the intermediate changes from the foot of land animals to102 BONES OF THE ICHTHYOSAURUS.These figures are taken from specimens in theCollege of Surgeons, of fossil animals of singularstructure, between the crocodile and the fish.They are in a calcareous rock, and the skeletonsare entire, but crushed, and a good deal disfigured.Here are the extremities or paddlesconsisting of a multitude of bones articulated ;and among these we still discover the humerus,radius and ulna, and bones of the carpus andfingers. No fault is to be found with the constructionof these instruments ; they are suitedto their offices, and no bone is superfluous, ormisplaced, or imperfect. The ichthyosaurus andplesiosaurus (the animals which offer these specimens)inhabited the sea ; the remains are foundlow in the lias deposit ; great changes have beenwrought on the land and on the deep since theyexisted ; and the race of animals, the structureof whose extremities we have been engagedin examining, were not then in being. Whenwe discover the same series of bones in thethe fin of the fish. The walrus, dolphin, turtle, plesiosaurus,ichthyosaurus where we no longer find the phalanges or attemptto count the bones. They become irregular polygons or trapezoidsless like the phalanges than the radii of the fins of a fish. Infishes the anterior extremity is recognised in the thoracic fin ; andwe may even discover the prototypes of the scapula and the bonesof the arm. I know not what the naturalist, who likes to notethe gradual decrease of the elementary parts, makes of thesehundred bones of the paddle or of the fin ; where there is anincrease of the number, whilst, relatively speaking, there is adefect of form and motion, of the parts.PECULIARITIES IN THE HAND. 103animals of the old world, we admit the existenceof the same system ; and .we must necessarilyacknowledge the progressive development ofthat system, through a period of time incalculablyremote ; even if, instead of our daysand years, referable to history, each day wereas a thousand years, or we were to make ourestimate by the records of the revolutions whichhave left their traces on the globe itself.I have now given, I hope, sufficient examplesof the changes in the bones of the anterior extremity,which suit them to every possible varietyof use. After a little attention to the form of thehuman hand, I shall take up another division ofmy subject.The motions of the fingers do not merelyresult from the action of the large muscleswhich lie on the fore-arm these are for themore powerful actions ; but in the palm of thehand, and between the metacarpal bones, thereare small muscles ( Litmbricales and Interossei),which perform the finer motions, expanding thefingers and moving them in every direction, withgreat quickness and delicacy. These are theorgans which give the hand the power of spinning,weaving, engraving ; and as they producethe quick motions of the musician's fingers, theyare called by the anatomist Jidicinales. Attentionto our most common actions will shew us,104 PECULIARITIES IN THE HAND.how the division into fingers, by combiningmotion with the sense of touch, adapts the handto grasp, to feel, and to compare. We shallpresently see how well the points of the fingersare provided for feeling : as the joints and numerousmuscles of the hand are adapted for various,distinct, or separate motions.In this sketch we have the bones of the paw ofthe adult Chimpanzee, from Borneo ; and theremarkable peculiarity is the smallness of thethumb ; it extends no further than to the root ofthe fingers. On the length, strength, free lateralmotion, and perfect mobility of the thumb,depends the power of the human hand.* Thethumb is called pollex, because of its strength ;and that strength is necessary to the power of thehand, being equal to that of all the fingers.Without the fleshy ball of the thumb, the powerof the fingers would avail nothing ; and accordinglythe large ball, formed by the muscles of theThe monkey has no separate flexor longus of the thumb.Vice. d'Azyr.PECULIARITIES ITS THE HAND. 105thumb, is the distinguishing character of thehuman hand, and especially of that of an expertworkman.*In a French book, intended to teach youngpeople philosophy, the pupil asks why thefingers are not of equal length? The form ofthe argument reminds us of the difficulty ofputting natural questions the fault of books ofdialogue. However, the master makes thescholar grasp a ball of ivory, to shew him thatthe points of the fingers are then equal ! Itwould have been better had he closed the fingersupon the palm, and then have asked whetheror not they corresponded. This difference inthe length of the fingers serves a thousand purposes,adapting the hand and fingers, as inholding a rod, a switch, a sword, a hammer, apen, or pencil, engraving tool, &c., in all which,a secure hold and freedom of motion are admirablycombined. Nothing is more remarkable,as forming a part of the prospective design toprepare an instrument fitted for the varioususes of the human hand, than the manner inwhich the delicate and moving apparatus ofthe palm and fingers is guarded. The powerwith which the hand grasps, as when a sailorlays hold to raise his body in the rigging, wouldbe too great for the texture of mere tendons,nerves, and vessels ; they would be crushed, were" Manus paiva, major adjutrix" Albinus.106 PECULIARITIES IN THE HAND.not every part that bears the pressure, defendedwith a cushion of fat, as elastic as that whichwe have described in the foot of the horseand the camel. To add to this purely passivedefence, there is a muscle which runs acrossthe palm and more especially supports thecushion on its inner edge. It is this musclewhich, raising the edge of the palm, adapts itto lave water, forming the cup of Diogenes.In conclusion, what says Ray, " Some animalshave horns, some have hoofs, some teeth,some talons, some claws, some spurs and"beaks: man hath none of all these, but isweak and feeble, and sent unarmed into theworld Why, a hand, with reason to use it,supplies the use of all these."CHAPTER IV ,,OF THE MUSCLES.THE muscle of the body is that fleshy part, withwhich every one is familiar. It consists of fibreswhich lie parallel to each other. This fibrous,or filamentous part, has a living endowment, apower of contraction and relaxation, termedirritability. A single muscle is formed of somemillions of these fibres combined together, havingthe same point of attachment or origin, and concentratingin a rope or tendon, which is fixed toa moveable part, called its insertion. We maydemonstrate upwards of fifty muscles of the armand hand, all of which must consent to thesimplest action ; but this gives an imperfectview of the extent of the relation of parts which isnecessary to every act of volition. We are mostsensible of this combination in the muscles, wheninflammation has seized any of the great joints ofthe body ; for even when in bed, every motion ofan extremity gives pain, through the necessity ofa corresponding movement in the trunk. Whenwe stand, we cannot raise or extend the arm108 OF THE MUSCLES OFwithout a new position of the body, and a poisingof it, through the action of a hundred muscles.ON THE ACTION OF THE MUSCLES OF THE ARM.We shall consider this subject under twoheads ; in the first, we shall give examples of theliving property of the muscles ; and then of themechanical contrivances, in their form and application.In all that regards the muscles, we seethemost bountiful supply of power commensurateto the object, but never any thing in theleast degree superabundant. If the limb is to bemoved by bringing a muscle, or a set of musclesinto action, the power is not given in that excesswhich would enable them to overcome their opponents; but the property of action is withdrawnfrom the opponents ; they become relaxed, andthe muscles, which are in a state of contraction,perform their office with comparative ease. Astationary condition of the limb results from abalanced but regulated action of all the muscles ;which condition may be called their tone. If, inan experiment, a weight be attached to the tendonof an extensor muscle, it will draw out thatmuscle to a certain degree, until its tone or permanentstate resists the weight : but if the flexormuscle be now excited, this being the naturalopponent of the extensor, the weight will fall, bythe relaxation of the extensor. So that the motionTHE ARM AND HAND. 109of a limb implies an active state or a change inboth classes of muscles, the one to contract, theother to relax; and the will influences bothclasses. Were it not so regulated, instead ofthe natural, easy, and elegant motions of theframe, the attempt at action would exhibit thebody convulsed, or, as the physicians term it,in clonic spasms. The similitude of the twosawyers, mentioned by Paley, gives but an imperfectidea of the adjustment of the two classesof muscles. When two men are sawing a log ofwood, they pull alternately, and when the one ispulling, the other resigns all exertion. But thisis not the condition of the muscles the relaxingmuscle has not given up all effort, like a looserope, but is controlled in its yielding, with as finea sense or adjustment, as is the action of thecontracting muscles. Nothing appears to usmore simple than raising the arm, or pointingwith the finger ; yet in that single act, not onlyare innumerable muscles put into activity, but asmany are thrown out of action, and the conditionof these classes is totally opposite to each other,under the same act of volition.By such considerations, we are prepared toadmire the faculty which shall combine a hundredmuscles so as to produce a change of postureor action of the body ; and we now perceivethat the power taken from one class of our muscles,may be considered as if it were bestowed on the1 10 OF THE MUSCLES OFother; so that the property of life, which wecall the irritability, or action of a muscle, is uponthe whole, less exhausted than would be the caseon any other supposition.As to the second head, our demonstration is ofan easier kind. We have said that naturebestows abundantly, but not superfluously; atruth evinced in the arrangement of the muscles.All the muscles of the limbs have their fibresrunning in an oblique direction, thus, A. beingthe tendinous origin of a muscle, and B. thetendinous insertion, the fleshy fibres run obliquelybetween these two tendons.The fibre acting thus obliquely loses power, butgains the property of pulling what is attached toits further extremity through a greater space,while it contracts. This mechanical arrangementis intelligible on the law, that velocity ofmotion through space, is equal to power orweight. Here in the muscle, there is a resignationof power to obtain velocity of motion.The same effect is produced by the mannerin which the tendons of the muscles run over thejoints. They would act more powerfully, if theywent in a straight line to the Joes or tips of theTHE ARM AND HAND. Illfingers : but by being laced down in sheaths,they move the toes and fingers with a velocityproportioned to their loss of power. Let us seehow far this corresponds with other mechanicalcontrivances. A certain power of wind or waterbeing obtained, the machinery is moved ; but itis desired to give a blow, with a velocity fargreater than the motion of the water or theturning of the wheels. For this purpose a flywheelis put on, the spokes of which may beconsidered as long levers. The wheel movesvery slowly, at first, but being once in motion,each impulse accelerates it with more and morefacility ; at length, it acquires a rapidity, and acentrifugal force which nothing can equal in itseffects, but the explosion of gunpowder. Themechanist not having calculated the power ofaccelerated motion in a heavy wheel, has seenhis machinery split and burst up, and the wallsof the house blown out as by the bursting of abomb-shell. A body at rest receives an impulsefrom another, which puts it into motionit receives a second blow ; now, this second blowhas much greater effect than the first for thepower of the first was exhausted in changing thebody from a state of rest to that of motion butbeing in motion when it receives the secondblow, the whole power is bestowed on the accelerationof its motion ; and so on, by the third andfourth blows, until the body moves with a112 OF THE MUSCLES OFvelocity, equal to that of the body from whichthe impulse is originally given. The slightblow given to a boy's hoop is sufficient to keepit running; and just so the fly-wheel of amachine is kept in rapid action by a successionof impulses, each of which would hardly put itin motion. If we attempt to stop the wheel, itwill give a blow in which a hundred lesser impulsesare combined and multiplied.There is, in the machinery of the animalbody, in a lesser degree, the same interchangeof velocity and force. When a man strikeswith a hammer, the muscle near the shoulder,*c., acts upon the humerus, B , in raising the extendedlever of the arm and hammer, with everyA. The scapula, or shoulder blade; B. the humerus, or arm-bone; c. the deltoid muscle of the shoulder, arising from theshoulder-blade and clavicle, and inserted into the arm-bone; D.a muscle which draws the arm down, as in striking with asword or hammer.THE ARM AND HAND. 1 13possible disadvantage ; seeing that it is insertedor attached so near the centre of motion in theshoulder joint.But the loss of power is restored in anotherform. What the muscle D. loses by the modeof its insertion, is made up in the velocity communicatedto the hammer ; for in descendingthrough a large space, it accumulates velocity,and velocity is equal to force. The advantageof the rapid descent of a heavy body is, that asmart blow is given, and an effect produced Whichthe combined power of all the muscles, withoutthis mechanical distribution of force, could notaccomplish. This is, in truth, similar to theoperation of the fly wheel, by which the gradualmotion of an engine is accumulated in a point oftime, and a blow is struck capable of crushingor of stamping a piece of gold or silver. Inwhat respect does the mechanism of the armdiffer from the engine with which the printerthrows off his sheet? Here is a lever with aheavy ball at the end ; in proportion to its weight,i114 MECHANICAL PROPERTIESit is difficult to be put in motion. The printer,therefore, takes hold of the lever near the ball,at A. Were he to continue pulling at that partof the lever, he would give to the ball no morevelocity than that of his hand ; but having putthe ball into motion, he slips his hand down thelever to B. He could not have moved the weight,had he applied his hand here at first ; but it beingnow in motion, the whole strength of his arm isgiven to the lever at B., whilst the velocity of thegreat weight at the further end is accelerated.Thus the weight and the velocity being combined,the impulse given to the screw is muchgreater than if he had continued to pull upon thefurther end of the lever at A.If we now turn our eye to the diagram (page112), we shall understand that the muscle c.raises the long lever, of the arm at a disadvantage,or very slowly ; but the arm beingmoved, that motion is rapidly increased by eachsuccessive impulse from the muscle ; and, ofcourse, the velocity of the further extremity ismore rapid than at the insertion of the tendon.Again, if we consider the action of the muscleD. in pulling down the arm, as in giving a backstrokewith the sword, we have the combinationof two powers, weight and muscular effort.When the hammer descends, the rapidity isincreased by the mere effect of gravity ; butwhen the action of the muscle is conjoined, theOF THE MUSCLES OF THE ARM. 115two forces, progressively increasing, greatlyaugment the velocity of the descent.The same interchange of power for velocity,which takes place in the arm, adapts a man'shand and fingers to a thousand arts, requiringquick or lively motions. The fingers of a lady,playing on the pianoforte, or the .compositorwith his types, are instances of the advantagegained by this sacrifice of force for velocity ofmovement. The spring of the foot and toe isbestowed in the same manner, and gives elasticityand rapidity in running, dancing, and leaping.After the many illustrations from mechanicswhich we have offered, the muscular power itselfmust be a subject of surprise and admiration.Gravity, the running of water, the expansion andcondensation of steam, the production of gases, thespring or elasticity of material, or all these combined,could not have answered the varied officesperformed by this one property of life possessedby the muscles. The irritable and contractilefibre, matter which, chemically considered, doesnot differ from the fibrine of the blood, beingendowed with this property of contraction, andadapted with " mechanical ingenuity," fulfils athousand distinct purposes, in volition, breathing,speaking, in digestion, assimilation, circulation; and in all these it is modified to thewants and condition of every class of animals.From what the reader already understands of116 COMPARATIVE ANATOMYthe conformity which subsists among all theparts of an animal body, he will readily comprehendthat there is a perfect relation betweenthe bones and the muscles : that as the boneschange, and exhibit a variety in their size,relative position, and articulations, so there isan adaptation of the muscles. We sometimesfind them separated into smaller muscles, andsometimes consolidated into more powerfulmasses.The demonstration to the anatomical studentof the muscles of the human hand and arm, becomesthe test of his master's perfection as ateacher. Nothing is more uninteresting, tedious,and difficult to attend to, than the demonstrationof the muscles of the arm, when they are takensuccessively, as they present themselves ; butwhen they are taught with lucid arrangement,according to the motions performed by them, itis positively agreeable to find how much interestmay be given to the subject.It would be foreign to the object of this workto introduce such demonstrations here.Yet it is very remarkable that the muscles ofthe arm and hand should resemble so closely themuscles of the fore extremity of the lion, forexample. I have added a sketch of the musclesof the lion's fore-leg and paw ; in which we seethat the shape bears a great resemblance to theOF THE MUSCLES OF THE ARM. 117fore-arm of man. The flexors, extensor, proctors,and senators are, in the brute, exactlyin the same place, and bear all the relationswhich the student of anatomy is taught to CIRCULATION OF THE BLOODserve with so much interest in the human arm.This example is sufficient to show how accuratelythe comparative anatomy of the muscles conformsto that of the bones ; and that in proportionas the bones of the extremity resemble inshape and power of motion those of the humanarm, so do the muscles another proof of thegreat extent of the system of relations establishedin the animal system.There is one circumstance more which shouldnot be omitted in the comparative anatomy ofthese muscles, as it exhibits another instance ofconformity in their structure, to the offices whichthey have to perform. We have just stated thatthe power of contraction is a vital property.The continued action of a muscle, therefore,exhausts the vitality ; and to support that action,when it is inordinate, there must be a morethan usual provision for the supply of thisliving power, viz : a means of increasing orperpetuating the circulation of the blood, whichis the source of all vital power.In the lemur tardigradus it has been observedthat the axillary and femoral arteries, the greatarteries of the anterior and posterior extremities,have this peculiarity that the trunk issub-divided into a number of equal-sizedcylinders, which again unite to form a singletrunk previous to the distribution of its branchesTHROUGH THE MUSCLES. 119to the muscles.* It has been argued thatthis peculiarity, as it produces a retardation ofthe blood, is adapted to long continued actionin the muscles. I believe it to be a provisionfor long continued action ; because the animalswhich possess it, are not more remarkable forthe slowness of their progression than for thetenacity of their hold. The extremities arelong and the muscles powerful, either to sustainthe animal by grasping the branches of trees, orfor digging; but surely the strength of themuscles cannot be produced by retardation ofthe circulation, on the principle, universallyadmitted, that the expenditure of arterial bloodis in proportion to the vital force employed.Were the arteries of the living body like rigidtubes, and the laws of the circulation the sameas those of hydraulics, such might be theconclusion. But it is impossible to supposethat the circulation of the blood could be performedaccording to the laws which govern theflow of water in dead tubes. The artery isdilatable, it contracts with a vital force; boththe disability and the contractility of arteriesare subject to the influences of the living principle.When, therefore, the artery of a limb isdivided into four or five vessels, the result is aThere is some doubt as to the reunion of the vessels.120 SUPERIORITY OF THEgreater capacity of dilatation, a greater powerof contraction ; and these being vital operations,are subject to be influenced and adjusted accordingto the necessity for the increase ordiminution of the circulation.If such a peculiarity in the form of the vesselsin the extremities of these animals, retards theblood, it can only be during repose ; for, on excitement,so far from retarding, it must bestowremarkable power of acceleration. I conclude,therefore, that this variety of distribution in thearteries is a provision for occasional great activityin the muscles of the limb, and for forcing theblood into contact with the fibres, notwithstandingtheir continued action and rigidity.We have seen in the preceding chapter thatthe same organ, which moves at one time asslowly as the hand of a watch, at another moveswith extreme rapidity: consequently, we cannotadmit the inference that the tortuous andsub-divided artery is a provision for languidmotions,In speaking of the arteries which go to thehand, it may be expected that we should touchon a subject, which has been formerly a gooddeal discussed, whether the properties of theright hand, in comparison with those of the left,depend on the course of the arteries to it. It isRIGHT HAND OVER THE LEFT. 121affirmed that the trunk of the artery going to theright arm, passes off from the heart so as toadmit the blood directly and more forcibly intothe small vessels of the arm. This is assigninga cause which is unequal to the effect, and presenting,altogether, too confined a view of thesubject : it is a participation in the common errorof seeking in the mechanism the cause of phenomenawhich have a deeper source.For the conveniences of life, and to make usprompt and dexterous, it is pretty evident thatthere ought to be no hesitation which hand is tobe used, or which foot is to be put forward ; noris there, in fact, any such indecision. Is thistaught, or have we this readiness given to us bynature ? It must be observed, at the same time,that there is a distinction in the whole right sideof the body, and, that the left side is not only theweaker, in regard to muscular strength, but alsoin its vital or constitutional properties. The developmentof the organs of action and motionis greatest upon the right side, as may at anytimebe ascertained by measurement, or thetestimony of the tailor or shoemaker ; certainly,this superiority may be said to result from themore frequent exertion of the right hand ; but thepeculiarity extends to the constitution also ; anddisease attacks the left extremities more frequentlythan the right. In opera dancers, we122 THE RIGHT SIDEmay see that the most difficult feats are performedby the right foot. But their preparatoryexercises better evince the natural weakness ofthe left limb, since these performers are madeto give double practice to it, in order to avoidawkwardness in the public exhibition; for ifthese exercises be neglected, an ungraceful preferencewill be given to the right side. In walkingbehind a person, it is very seldom that wesee an equalized motion of the body ; and if welook to the left foot, we shall find that the tread isnot so firm upon it, that the toe is not so muchturned out as in the right, and that a greaterpush is made with it. From the peculiar form ofwoman, and the elasticity of her step resultingmore from the motion of the ankle than of thehaunches, the defect of the left foot when itexists, is more apparent in her gait. No boyhops upon his left foot, unless he be left handed.The horseman puts the left foot in the stirrupand springs from the right. We think we mayconclude, that every thing being adapted in theconveniences of life to the right hand, as forexample the direction of the worm of the screwor of the cutting end of the auger, is not arbitrary,but is related to a natural endowment of the body.He who is left handed is most sensible to the advantagesof this adaptation, from the opening ofthe parlour door to the opening of a pen-knife.COMPARED WITH THE LEFT. 123On the whole, the preference of the right handis not the effect of habit, but is a natural provision,and is bestowed for a very obvious purpose: and the property does not depend on thepeculiar distribution of the arteries of the armbut the preference is given to the right foot, aswell as to the right hand.CHAPTER V.THE SUBSTITUTION OF OTHER ORGANS FOR THEHANDAFTER having examined the manner in whichone instrument, the hand, is modified andadapted to a variety of purposes in differentanimals, there remains only this mode of eluci-dationthat we contrast it with its imperfectsubstitutes in other creatures. I might, indeed,have shewn in the insect tribes the most curiousexamples of instruments for similar purposeswith the hand and fingers of man ; but I haveintentionally confined this inquiry to the higherclasses of animals.The habits of some fishes require that theyshould cling firmly to the rocks or to whateverpresents to them. Their locomotive powers areperfect ; but how are they to become stationaryin the tide or the stream ? I have often thoughtit wonderful that the salmon or the trout, for example,should keep its place, night and day,in the rapid current. In the sea, there are somefishes especially provided with means of clingingto the rocks. The lump-fish, cyclopterus lupus,SUBSTITUTES FOR THE HAND. 125fastens itself by an apparatus which is on thelower part of its body. The sucking fish, remark,has a similar provision on its back. It attachesitself to the surface of the shark and to whateveris afloat ; and, of course, to the bottoms of ships.The ancients believed it capable of stopping aship under sail, and Pliny, therefore, called itremora. We must admire the means by whichthese fishes retain their proper position in thewater, without clinging by their fins or teeth,and while they are free for such efforts as enablethem* to seize their food. The apparatus bywhich they attach themselves resembles a boy'ssucker: the organ being pressed against thesurface to which the creature is to be fixed, thecentre is drawn by muscles in the same mannerthat the sucker is drawn with the cord, andthus a vacuum is made.In the cuttle-fish we see a modification of thisIn the Mollusca and Zoophytes we find many instances ofthe animal holding on against the force of tide or current. TheActiniae fix themselves to rocks and shells ; and some, as the seacarnation, hang suspended from the lower surface of projectingrocks, resembling the calyx of a flower. By the elongation oftheir tentacula, they expand and blow out like a flower ; but insteadof petals, these are prehensile instruments by which they drawwhatever food floats near them into their stomachs. The Byssusof the muscle is a set of filaments which retains the shell atanchor and prevents it drifting or rolling with the tide. Thesefilaments are the secretion of a gland, and whilst they are fixed tothe rock, the gland retains the hold at their other ends. The shellof the oyster is itself cemented to the rock.126 SUBSTITUTES FOR THE HAND.apparatus : the suckers are on the extremitiesof their processes or arms, and become instrumentsof prehension and of locomotion. Theyare capable of turning in all directions, either tofix the animal or to drag it from place to place.In the Indian Seas, these creatures become trulyterrific from the length of their arms, which extendto eight or nine fathoms, and from the firmnesswith which they cling.Dr. Shaw tells us, that on throwing a fish ofthe species cyclopterus lupus into a pail ofwater, it fixed itself so firmly to the bottom, thatby taking hold of the tail, he lifted up the pail,although it contained some gallons of water.There is another fish, which from its namewe should expect to perform strange antics ; it iscalled harlequin angler.* Its appearance isgrotesque and singular; the pectoral fins re-Lophius Historic, from a Greek word that has reference tothe process which floats from the head, like a streamer or pennant.SUBSTITUTES FOR THE HAND. 127semble short arms, and are palmated at theirtips.* M. Renal, in his history of fishes,affirms that he knew an individual of thisspecies ; and the expression is not so incorrect,since he saw it for three days out of the water,walking about the house in the manner of a dog.The circumstance of its walking out of the waterhas some interest, as showing relations betweenorgans which are apparently the least connected.The fact of this fish living out of the water isdoubted ; but the form of its branchial organsinclines me to believe it ; and its habits requiresuch a provision. In this genus, the operculumdoes not open to let the respired water pass offfreely behind, as in most fishes ; but the wateris discharged by a small aperture which, in Mr.Owen's opinion, is capable of being closed by asphincter. The cavities in which the branchiaelie are large, and this is, indeed, partly thereason of the monstrous head of this fish. Thus,it has not only its fins converted into feet, but itsgills into pouches, capable of containing water,and of permitting the function of the branchiaeto proceed when the water is retired ; that is,when it lies in mud, or shallow pools ; for insuch situations does the lophius find its food,where it angles for it in a very curious manner.But there are other fishes that move out of theThese fins have two bones in them like the radius and ulna ;but Cuvier says, that they are more strictly bones of the carpus.128 SUBSTITUTES FOR THE HAND.water on dry land, and even ascend trees, withoutbeing carried there by floods. The percy sanders,by means of the spines of its gill-covers, and thespinous rays of its fins, climbs trees ; so that Dr.Shaw calls it the climbing fish.*All creatures which have their skins protected,whether by feathers, or shells, or scales, have anexquisite touch in then* mouth, or in the appendageswhich hang from it. Fishes havecirri which hang from their mouth, and theseare equivalent to the palpa and tentacula ofinsects and Crustacea. The fishing lines of thelophius piscatorius are examples of these processes: and Pliny relates that this frog-likefish, hiding in the mud, leaves the extremities ofthese filaments visible ; which, from their resemblanceto worms, entice the smaller fishes,and they become the prey of their concealedenemy. It is surprising how varied the meansare by which fishes obtain their food. Thechcetodon (bandouliere a bee) squirts water atflies as they pass and brings them down. Thescicenajaculatrix, according to Pallas, has a similarpower ; and the spans instigator catchesaquatic 'insects by the sudden projection of itssnout. It is affirmed by some naturalists thatThe spines of the Echinus are moveable ; they assist in progression.They are directed towards an advancing enemy ! Althoughthese spines may be effectual for their purpose, they are thelowest or least perfect substitutes for the extremities.SUBSTITUTES FOR THE HAND.the rays of the dorsal and anal fins, as in thecordonnier of Martinique, zeus ciliary, le blewCuv., are employed to grapple or coilround the stems of plants and sustain the fish.The several offices attributed to these processesin fishes imply that they possess sensibility, ifnot muscular power.By anatomical investigation and experiment,I, some years ago, discovered that the sensibilityof all the head and of its various appendagesresulted from one nerve only of the ten whichare enumerated as arising from the brain, andare distributed within and around the head ;and, pursuing the subject by the aid of comparativeanatomy, I found that a nerve correspondingto this, which is the fifth nerve in man,130 SUBSTITUTES FOR THE HAND.served a similar purpose in all the lower animals.In creatures which are covered with feathers orscales, or protected by shell, this nerve becomesalmost the sole organ of sensibility. Itis the dew elopement of this nerve which givessensibility to the cirri, which hang aboutthe mouths of fishes, and to the palpa of theCrustacea and insects. It is the same nervewhich supplies the tongue, and is the organ ofits exquisite sensibility to touch, as well as oftaste. In some animals, especially in the reptiles,the tongue, by its length and mobility,becomes a substitute for these external appendages.We might have noticed before, that thetongue is an organ of prehension as well as oftouch. With it the ox gathers in the herbage ;and in the giraffe, it is rather curious to observethat as the whole frame of the animal is calculatedto raise the head to a great height, so is thetongue capable of projecting beyond the mouthto an extraordinary extent, to wrap round andpull down the extreme branches of trees. Thewhiskers of the feline quadrupeds possess a finesensibility through branches of the fifth nerve,which enter their roots. Birds have a high degreeof sensibility to touch in their mouths. Inducks, and all that quaffer with their bills underwater,the sense is very fine, and we find, on dissection,that a branch of the fifth nerve, remarkablydeveloped, is distributed on the upper man-substitutesFOR THE HAND. 131bible. Animals feel in the whole of their externalsurface ; and we may say that serpents, bycoiling themselves round a body, have the organ oftouch all over them. Still the fifth pair of nervesin the head, or the nerve analogous to it, is themain instrument of touch in the greater numberof animals where extremities are wanting. Thereare organs varying in their conformation, sometimesdelicate palpa, sometimes horny rods, andthese are often possessed of muscularity as wellas sensibility ; but to all, the sense of touch isbestowed through a nerve corresponding withthe fifth pair, the nerve of the tongue and lips,and of the muscles of the jaws in man.But we may repeat, that, necessary as theseappendages and this sensibility are to the existenceof these animals, their imperfectionsserve, by contrast, to show how happily the differentproperties are combined in the hand ; inwhich we perceive the sensibilities to changesof temperature, to touch, and to motion, unitedwith a facility in the joints of unfolding andmoving in every possible degree and direction,without abruptness or angularity, and in amanner inimitable by any artifice of joints andlevers.13-2CHAPTER VI.THE ARGUMENT PURSUED FROM THE COMPARATIVEANATOMY.So far as we have hitherto proceeded, by examiningobjects in comparative anatomy which fromtheir magnitude can not be misunderstood, wehave been led to conclude that, independentlyof the system of parts marvellously combined toform the individual animal, there is another,more comprehensive system, which embracesall animals ; and which exhibits a certain uniformityin the functions of life, however differentin form or bulk the creatures may be, or to whatevercondition of the globe they may have beenadapted. We have seen no accidental deviationor deformity, but that every change has beenfor a purpose, and every part has had its justrelation. We have witnessed all the varietiesmoulded to such a perfect accommodation, andthe alterations produced by such minute degrees,that all notion of external and accidental agencymust be rejected.We might carry our demonstration downwardthrough the lower classes of animals; for example,COMPARATIVE ANATOMY PURSUED. 133we might trace the feet of insects from their mostperfect or complex state, till they disappear ;or, observing the changes in another direction,we might follow out the same parts from thesmallest beginning to the most perfect conditionof the member, where we see the thigh, leg, andtarsus of the fly. We might distinguish themat first as the fine cirri, like minute bristles,which, on the bodies of worms take slight holdof the surface over which they creep. In thesea mouse, (aphrodite) we might notice thesebristles standing out from distinct mammillaryprocesses, which are furnished with appropriatemuscles. Then in the myriapodes, the first orderof insects, we might see the same " many feet,"and each foot having a distinct articulation.From that, we might pass to the feet of thoseinsects, where there is a thigh, leg, and foot, withthe most perfect system of flexors, extensor, andadductor muscles, possessing, in fine, all that wemost admire in the human anatomy. Nay, it ismore curious to observe how the feet of the trueinsects are again changed or modified ; takingnew offices, the anterior feet becoming feelers,organs of prehension, or hands. When, with suchan object, we view the delicate and curiouslyadapted instruments of insects, we must perceivethat it would be easy to trace almost every partthrough a succession of modifications. Amongthe vertebrata, we have seen the hand become a134 THEORY OFwing or a fin ; so might we trace the wings ofinsects. If we begin with a fly, which has twodelicate and perfect wings incased and protected,we find that the covers are raised to admit theexpansion of the wings. In another, the casebecomes a wing ; and the fly is characterized byfour wings. Proceed to examine a third example,and we shall discover that this anteriorwing is larger and more perfect than the posterior:the fourth specimen has lost the posteriorwings, and has only two perfect ones ; andif we continue the examination, the next specimenwill present an insect deprived of wings altogether.These are not freaks of nature, but newforms of the body ; new appendages requiredfor a different poising of the fly in its flight.They are adaptations in that regular serieswhich we have observed to obtain in the largeranimals, and where the intention can not bemistaken. A very natural question will forceitself upon us, how are those varieties to be explained?The curious adaptation of a member to differentoffices and to different conditions of theanimal has led to a very extraordinary opinionin the present day, that all animals consist ofthe same elements. It would be just to say thatthey consist of the same chemical elements, andthat they attract and assimilate matter by theperformance of the same vital functions, throughELEMENTAL PARTS. 135every species of animals, however different informand structure. But by the elements whichare now mentioned, the authors of this newtheory mean certain pieces which enter intothe structure of the body, and which they illustrateby the analogy of the building materials ofa house. If these materials, they say, are exhaustedin the ornamental parts of the porticoand vestibule, there must be a proportionate limitationof the apartments for the family !This new theory has been brought forwardwith the highest pretensions ; the authors of ithave called upon us to mark the moment of itsconception as the commencement of a new aera !They speak of the " elective affinities of organs,"*' the balancing of organs," " a new principle ofconnection," and a " new theory of analysis."The hypothesis essentially is this, that when apart, which belongs to one animal, is missed inanother, we are to seek for it in some neighbouringorgan : and on such grounds they affirm,that this surpasses all former systems as a meansof discovery. Now, the perfection or aggrandizementof any one organ of an animal is notattended with the curtailment or proportionaldeficiency of any other. Like ourselves, perhaps,the supporters of this theory dwell toomuch upon the bones ; but even in them, weshall show that the system is untenable. In themeantime, we may ask, do additional parts THEORY OFnetted with the stomach, making it highly complex,as in ruminating animals, shorten the intestinalcanal, or make its form simpler ? On thecontrary, is not a complex stomach necessarilyconnected with a long and complicated intestine?Does a complex intestinal canal throughout allits course, render imperfect the solid viscerawhich are in juxtaposition to it ? Is there anydefect in them, because the organs of digestionare perfect, or complicated ? Does the complexheart imply a more simple, or a more perfectcondition of the lungs? In short, as animalsrise in the scale of existence, do we not find thatthe systems of digestion, circulation, respiration,and sensation bear ever a proportional increase ?Is there any instance of an improvement in oneorgan thrusting another out of its place, ordiminishing its volume ?Now, as to the osseous system, were we tofollow these theorists into the very stronghold oftheir position, the bones of the skull, where thereal intricacy of the parts allows them somescope for their ingenuity, we might show howuntenable the principle is which they assume.But we must confine ourselves to our own subject.In the higher orders of the vertebrata, we findthat the bones of the shoulder perform a doubleoffice ; that they have an important share in theact of respiration, whilst they are perfect as aELEMENTAL PARTS. 137foundation for the extremity. Now, let us takean instance where the mode of respiration of theanimal is inconsistent with what we may termthe original mechanism of the bones of theshoulder. In the batrachian order, the ribs arewanting : where then are we to look for them ?Shall we follow a system which informs us thatwhen a bone is wanting in the cavity of the ear,we are to seek for it in the jaw ; and which, yet,shall leave us in the contemplation of this classof animals deficient in thirty-two ribs, withoutpointing out where they are to be found, or howtheir elements are built up in other structures ?If, on the contrary, we take the principle thatparts are formed or withdrawn, with a neverfailing relation to the function which is to beperformed, we see that no sooner are the corn-pagesof the chest removed, and the shoulderthus deprived of support, than the bones to whichthe extremity is fixed are expanded and varied,both in form and articulation, so as to fulfil theirmain object of giving security and motion to thearm.With respect to the instance which we haveaccidentally noticed regarding the mechanismof the jaw in birds, and which is brought forwardso vauntingly as a proof of the excellence of thetheory, it does, indeed, prove the reverse of whatis assumed. The only effect of this hypothesisis to make us lose sight of the principle which138 THEORY OFought to direct us in the observation of suchcurious structures, as well as of the conclusionsto which an unblessed mind would come. Thematter to be explained is simply this : thechain of bones in the ear, which is so curiouslyadapted in the mammalia to convey the vibrationsof the membrane of the tympanum to thenerve of hearing, is not found in the organ ofhearing in birds ; but there is substituted a mechanismentirely different. They choose to saythat the incus, one of the bones of the chain, iswanting in the bird. Where shall we find it?they ask. Here it is in the apparatus of thejaw or mandible ; in that bone which is calledos quadratum. I believe that the slight andaccidental resemblance which this bone (B.) inthe bird has to the incus, is the real origin of thisfancy. Let us follow a juster mode of reasoning,and see how this hypothesis obscures the beautyof the subject. The first step of the investigationought to be to inquire into the fact, if therebe any imperfection in the hearing of birds. Thatis easily answered the hearing of birds is mostacute; the slightest noise alarms; and thenightingale, or other bird of song, in a summerevening, will answer to the note of his rival whenhe is out of our hearing. We have next to observethe imperfection in the organ the want ofan external ear ; which, were it present, wouldbe at variance with all that we have most toadmire in the shape of the bird and the directionELEMENTAL PARTS. 139of the feathers, as conducing to its rapid passagethrough the air. With this obvious defect of theexternal ear, can we admit that the internal earis also imperfect, notwithstanding the very re-jnarkable acuteness of hearing, which we knowto result from this internal structure, and fromit alone ? Now we do, in fact, find a differentstructure in the ear of birds ; but, yet nothing iswanting. The columella is a shaft of bone ofexquisite delicacy, which is extended from theoutward membrane of the ear to the labyrinthor proper seat of the nerve of hearing. It occupiesthe place and office of the chain of fourbones which belong to the ear of mammalia.We have no authority, however, for affirmingthat the incus is here wanting more than anyother bone of the chain ; and if it be said thatthe os quadratus is the missing incus, whyshould not we find in the oviparous reptiles,where there is a columella in the ear, an osquadratus in the jaw ?From this mode of inquiry, we find that thesense of hearing is enjoyed in an exquisite degreein birds : that the organ of the sense isnot imperfect, but is adapted to a new construction,and a varied apparatus suited to the conditionof the bird : and that there is no accidentaldislocation or substitution of somethingless perfect than what we find in other classes ofanimals.If we now look to the structure of the mandibleJ40 THEORY OFof the bird, we shall find as curious, though asomewhat grosser example of mechanical relation.The bill of the bird, in some degree, pertainsto our subject, as it is the organ of prehensionand of touch. It is withal a fly traphence, its motions must be rapid : and the velocityis increased by the most obvious means imaginable,that is, by giving motion to bothmandibles, instead of to one. When a dog snaps,he throws back his head, and thereby raises theupper jaw at the same time that the lower jaw isdropped ; but these are slow and clumsy motions,pertaining to the muscles of the neck as well asof the jaws, and the poor hound makes manyattempts, before he catches the fly that teazeshim. But a swallow or fly-catcher makes nosecond effort, so admirably suited is the apparatusof prehension to the liveliness of the eye andthe instinct. The adaptation of the instrumentconsists in this, that the muscles which open theBlower mandible, by the same effort, open theupper one : A. is a process of the lower mandible,ELEMENTAL PARTS. 141projecting much behind the centre of motion,and the muscle which is attached to it opens thebill ; but at the same time, the lower mandiblepresses upon the bone B., the os quadratus:now, there is attached to this bone, projectingforwards, with its anterior extremity fixed againstthe upper mandible, a shaft or process of bonec. ; and this receives the pressure of the osquadratus, when the muscle acts ; so that beingthrust forwards, like a bolt, it opens the uppermandible, which moves upon the skull at D.Here, then, is a piece of mechanism as distinctas the lock of a gun, which is for the purpose,as we have said, of giving rapidity to the motionsof the bill. Is it nearer the truth to consider thisas a new apparatus, suiting the necessities of thecreature, or an accidental result of the introductionof a bone, which in its proper office hasnothing to do with the jaw?But we have wandered somewhat from oursubject. We have taken the bones of theshoulder, or those of the extremity which arenearest to the trunk ; we may pursue the inquiryby noticing those which are most remote from it.In the bones of the hand, we have seen that thesame system Was variously modified so as to beadapted to every possible change in office. Butas it is insisted that the number of parts continuethe same, what can we say to the bones ofthe paddle in the saurian and chelonian tribes,142 THEORY OF THEwhich, as in the ichthyosaurus for example, consistof sixty or seventy polygons bones ; whilstin the horse there are only fifteen bones ; and inman,twenty-seven. Yet, with all those bones inthe paddle, there is still the full complement inthe part that corresponds with the arm. If thesystem fail us in such an obvious instance asthis, with what confidence can we prosecute theintricate bones of the spine and head under itsguidance ?Seeking assistance from the works of distinguishednaturalists, we do not always find thatdisposition of mind prevail, which we should beapt to suppose a necessary result of their peculiarstudies. We do not discover that combination ofgenius with sound sense, which distinguishedCuvier, and the great men of science. It is,above all, surprising with what perverse ingenuitymen seek to obscure the conception of a DivineAuthor, an intelligent, designing, and benevolentBeing rather clinging to the greatest absurdities,or interposing the cold and inanimate influenceof the mere elements, in a manner to extinguishall feeling of dependance in our minds,and all emotions of gratitude.Some will maintain that all the varietieswhich we see, are the result of a change of circumstancesinfluencing the original animal ; orthat new organs have been produced by a desireand consequent effort of the animal to stretchSURROUNDING INFLUENCE. 143and mould itself that, as the leaves of a plantexpand to light, or turn to the sun, or as theroots shoot to the appropriate soil, so do theexterior organs of animals grow and adapt themselves.We shall presently find that an opinionhas prevailed that the organization of animalsdetermines their propensities ; but the philosophers,of whom we are now speaking, imaginethe contrary, that under the influence of newcircumstances, organs have accommodated themselves,and assumed their particular forms.It must be here remarked that there are noinstances of the production of new organs by theunion of individuals belonging to different species.Nor is there any foundation in observation forthe opinion that a new species may be formedby the union of individuals of different families.But it is contended, that, although the species ofanimals have not changed in the last 5000 years,we do not know what might have been the effectof the revolution before that time ; that is, previousto the present condition of the world. But,on subjects of this nature, we must argue fromwhat we know, and from what we see.We do perceive surprising changes in the conformationof animals; some of them are veryfamiliar to us ; but all show a foreknowledge anda prospective plan, an alteration graduallytaking place in preparation for the condition,never consequent upon it. It will be sufficient144 THEORY OF THEfor our purpose, if we take the highest and thelowest examples. Man has two conditions ofexistence in the body. Hardly two creaturescan be less alike than an infant and a man.The whole foetal state is a preparation for birth.My readers would not thank me, were I to showhow necessary all the proportions and forms ofthe infant are to his being born alive, and yetnothing is so easy to demonstrate. Every onemay see that from the moment of birth there isa new impulse given to the growth, so as finallyto adapt the proportions of the body to thestate of perfect manhood. Few, however, areaware that the foetus has a life adapted to itscondition, and that if the confinement of thewomb were protracted beyond the appointedtime, it must die ! from no defect of nourishment,but simply, because the time is come for achange in its whole economy !Now, during all the long period of gestation,the organs are forming ; the lungs are perfectedbefore the admission of air new tubes are constructedbefore the flood-gates, which are toadmit the blood, are opened. But there arefiner, and more curious, provisions than these.If we take any of the grand organs, as the heart,or the brain, and examine it through all itsgradations of change in the embryo state, weshall recognize it simple, at first, and graduallydeveloping, and assuming the peculiarities whichVRounding INFLUENCE. 145finally distinguish it. So that it is affirmed, andnot without the support of a most curious seriesof observations, that the human brain, in itsearlier stage, resembles that of a fish : as it isdeveloped, it resembles more the cerebral massof the reptile ; in its increase, it is like that of abird, and slowly, and only after birth, does itassume the proper form and consistence of thehuman encephalon. But in all these changesto which man is subject, we nowhere see theinfluence of the elements, or any other causethan that it has been so predestined. And if,passing over the thousand instances which mightbe gathered from the intermediate parts of thechain of animal existence, we take the lowestlink, and look to the metamorphosis of insects,the conclusion will be the same.For example, if we examine the larva of awinged insect, we shall see the provisions for itsmotion over the ground, in that condition, alladmirably supplied in the arrangement of itsmuscles, and the distribution of its nervoussystem. But if, anticipating its metamorphosis,we dissect the same larva immediately beforethe change, we shall find a new apparatus inprogress towards perfection ; the muscles of itsmany feet are seen decaying; the nerves toeach muscle are wasting; a new arrangementof muscles, with new points of attachment, directedto the wings instead of the .feet, is nowL146 THESE THEORIES INCORRECT.visible ; and a new distribution of nerves is distinctlyto be traced, accommodated to the partswhich are now to be put in motion. Here is nobudding and stretching forth under the influenceof the surrounding elements ; but a changeoperated on all the economy, and prospective,that is, in reference to a condition which thecreature has not yet attained.These facts countenance the conclusion drawnfrom the comparative anatomy of the hand andarm that with each new instrument, visible externally,there are a thousand internal relationsestablished: a mechanical contrivance in thebones and joints, which alters every part ofthe skeleton : an arrangement of muscles, injust correspondence : a texture of nervous filaments,which is laid intermediate between theinstrument and the very centre of life andmotion ; and, finally, as we shall discover fromwhat follows, new sources of activity must becreated in relation to the new organ, otherwisethe part will hang a useless appendage.It must now be apparent that nothing less thanthe Power, which originally created, is equal tothe effecting of those changes on animals, whichare to adapt them to their conditions : that theirorganization is predetermined, and not consequenton the condition of the earth or the surroundingelements. Neither can a property inthe animal itself account for the changes whichTHESE THEORIES INCORRECT.take place in the individual, any more than for thevarieties which take place in the species. Everythingdeclares the species to have its origin inadistinct creation, not in a gradual variationfrom some original type ; and any other hypothesisthan that of a new creation of animalssuited to the successive changes in the inorganicmatter of the globe the condition of the water,atmosphere, and temperature brings with itonly an accumulation of difficulties.CHAPTER VII.OF SENSIBILITY AND TOUCH.WE find every organ of sense, with the exceptionof that of touch, more perfect in brutesthan in man. In the eagle and the hawk, in thegazelle and in the feline tribe, the perfection ofthe eye is admirable ; in the dog, wolf, hyaena,as well as in birds of prey, the sense of smellingis inconceivably acute ; and if we should havesome hesitation in assigning a more exquisitesense of taste to brutes, we cannot doubt thesuperiority of that of hearing in the inferioranimals. But in the sense of touch, seated inthe hand, man claims the superiority ; and it isof consequence to our conclusion that we shouldobserve why it is so.It has been said that, accompanying the exerciseof touch, there is a desire of obtaining knowledge; in other words, a determination of the willtowards the organ of the sense. Chat says,it is active whilst the other senses are passive.This opinion implies that there is something tobe understood something deeper than what ishere expressed. We shall arrive at the truth byconsidering that in the use of the hand there is aOF SENSIBILITY AND TOUCH. 149double sense exercised ; we must not only feel thecontact of the object, but we must be sensible tothe muscular effort which is made to reach it, orto grasp it in the fingers. It is in the exerciseof this latter power that there is really an effortmade ; there is no more direction of the will towardsthe nerve of touch, than towards any othersensible nerve. But, before entering on the considerationof the sensibility and action whichbelong to the fingers, we must attend to the commonsensibility of the surface.Besides that the common sensibility belongs tothe hand, and that some inquiry into it is necessaryto the completion of our subject, I pursueit the more willingly, because there is no otherwhich affords more surprising proofs of designand of benevolence in the Author of our being.However obvious the proofs may be which aredrawn from the mechanism of the body, theyare not to be compared, in this respect, to thosewhich are derived from the living endowmentsof the frame.I have used the term common sensibility inconformitywith the language of authors and withcustomary parlance; but the expressions, thecommon nerves," and the " common sensibility,"in a philosophical inquiry, are inadmissible.Indeed, these terms have been the causeof much of the obscurity which has hung overthe subject of the nervous system, and of our150 OF SENSIBILITY AND TOUCH.blindness to the benevolent adaptation of theendowments of that system to the condition ofanimal existence. Thus, it has been supposedthat some nerves are more coarsely provided forsensation, and that others are of a finer quality,adapted to more delicate impressions. It is assumedthat the nerve of the eye is finer than thenerve of the finger without considering that theretina is insensible to that quality of matter ofwhich we readily acquire the knowledge throughtouch. Nerves are, indeed, appropriated topeculiar senses, and to the bestowing of distinctfunctions, but delicacy of texture has nothing todowith this. The nerve of touch in the skin isinsensible to light or to sound, not because it hasacoarser or more common texture : The beautyand perfection of the system is, that the nerveis made susceptible to its peculiar impressiononly. The nerve of the skin is alone capable ofgiving the sense of contact, as the nerve of visionis confined to its own office. If this appropriationresulted merely from a more delicate texture : ifthe retina were sensible to the matter of lightonly from possessing a finer sensibility than thenerve of touch, it would be a source of torment ;whereas it is most beneficently provided that itshall not be sensible to pain, nor be capable ofconveying any impressions to the mind, but thosewhich operate according to its proper function,producing light and colour.OF SENSIBILITY AND TOUCH. 151The pain which we experience in the eye, andthe irritation from dust, are owing to a distinctnerve from that of vision, and are consequent onthe susceptibility of the surface to a differentkind of impression ; of which more presently.We should keep in mind the interesting fact,that when surgeons perform the operation ofcouching, the point of the needle, in passingthrough the outer coat of the eye, gives a sensationof pricking, which is an exercise of thenerve of touch ; but when the point passesthrough the retina, which is the expanded nerveof vision and forms the internal coat of the eye,the sensation that is produced is as of a spark offire. The nerve of vision is as insensible to touchas the nerve of touch is to light.*The extreme sensibility of the skin to theslightest injury conveys to every one the notionthat the pain must be the more severe thedeeper the wound. This is not the fact, norwould it accord with the beneficent designwhich shines out every where. The sensibilityThe views of the nervous system, which are shortly givenin the text, guided me in my original experiments madetwenty two years ago. They have been attributed to foreignphysiologists. The ignorance of what has been done in England,may be, for strangers, an excuse for maintaining these opinionsas their own ; but the authors at home, who should have knownwhat has been taught in this country, are inexcusable when theycountenance these assumptions.152 SENSIBILITY OF THE SURFACEof the skin serves not only to give the senseof touch, but it is a guard upon the deeperparts; and as they cannot be reached exceptthrough the skin, and we must suffer pain,therefore, before they are injured, it would besuperfluous to bestow sensibility upon thesedeeper parts. If the internal parts which actin the motions of the body had possessed asimilar degree and kind of sensibility with theskin, so far from serving any useful purpose,this sensibility would have been a source ofinconvenience and continual pain in the commonexercise of the frame.The reason why surgeons more than physicianshave advanced the study of physiology,may be, that they become practically acquaintedwith the phenomena on which thescience is founded. The surgeon who has toperform an operation by incision, when he hascut through the skin, informs his patient thatthe greatest pain is over. If, in the advancedstage of the operation, he has to extend the incisionof the skin, it is very properly consideredas a great awkwardness ; and this not only becauseit proves that he has miscalculated whatwas necessary to the correct performance ofhis operation, but because the patient, bearingcourageously the deeper incisions, cannot sustainthe renewed cutting of the skin, withoutgiving token of severe pain.COMPARED WITH THE DEEPER PARTS. 153The fact of the exquisite sensibility of thesurface, in comparison with the deeper parts,being thus ascertained by daily experience, wecannot mistake the intention : that the skin ismade a safeguard to the delicate textures whichare contained within, by forcing us to avoidinjuries : and it does afford us a more effectualdefence than if our bodies were covered with thehide of the rhinoceros.The fuller the consideration which we giveto this subject, the more convincing are theproofs that the painful sensibility of the skinis a benevolent provision, making us alive tothose injuries, which, but for this quality ofthe nervous system, would bruise and destroythe internal and vital parts. In pursuing theinquiry, we learn with much interest that whenthe bones, joints, and all the membranes andligaments which cover them, are exposed theymay be cut, pricked, or even burned, withoutthe patient or the animal, suffering the slightestpain. These facts must appear to be conclusive ;for who, witnessing these instances of insensibility,would not conclude that the parts weredevoid of sensation. But when we take the true,philosophical, and I may say the religious viewof the subject, and consider that pain is notan evil, but given for benevolent purposes andfor some important object, we should be unwillingto terminate the investigation here.154 SENSIBILITY OF THE SURFACEIn the first place, we must perceive that if asensibility similar to that of the skin had beengiven to these internal parts, it must have remainedunexercised. Had they been made sensibleto pricking and burning, they would havepossessed a quality which would never havebeen useful, since no such injuries can reachthem ; or never without warning being receivedthrough the sensibility of the skin.But, further, if we find that sensibility to painis a benevolent provision, and is bestowed forthe purpose of warning us to avoid such violenceas would affect the functions or uses of theparts, we may yet inquire whether any injurycan reach these internal parts without the sensibilityof the skin being excited. Now, of thisthere can be no doubt, for they are subject tosprain, and rupture, and shocks, without theskin being implicated in the accident. If wehave been correct in our inference, there shouldbe a provision to guide us in the safe exercise ofthe limbs ; and notwithstanding what has beenapparently demonstrated of the insensibility ofthese internal parts, they must possess an appropriatesensibility, or it would imply an imperfection.With these reflections, we recur to experimentand we find that the parts, whichare insensible to pricking, cutting, and burning,COMPARED WITH THE DEEPER PARTS. 155are actually sensible to concussion, to stretching,or laceration.How consistent, then, and beautiful is thedistribution of this quality of life ! The sensibilityto pain varies with the function of thepart. The skin is endowed with sensibilityto every possible injurious impression whichmay be made upon it. But had this kind anddegree of sensibility been made universal, weshould have been racked with pain in thecommon motions of the body : the mere weightof one part on another, or the motion of thejoint, would have been attended with that degreeof suffering which we experience in using orwalking with an inflamed limb.But on the other hand, had the deeper partspossessed no sensibility, we should have hadno guide in our exertions. They have a sensibilitylimited to the kind of injury which itis possible may reach them, and which teachesus what we can do with impunity. If we leapfrom too great a height, or carry too great aburthen, or attempt to interrupt a body whoseimpetus is too great for us, we are warned ofthe danger as effectually by this internal sensibility,as we are of the approach of a sharppoint or a hot iron to the skin.Returning to the consideration of the sensibilityof the skin, in order more fully to com-156 PAIN THE SAFEGUARD OF THE BODY.pretend the benevolent effect of it, or in otherwords, its necessity to our very existence, Imay be excused for stating the argument to thereader as I have delivered it in my lecturesto the College of Surgeons.Without meaning to impute to you inattentionor restlessness, I may request you to observehow every one occasionally changes hisposition and shifts the pressure of the weightof his body ; were you constrained to retainone position during the whole hour, youwould rise stiff and lame. The sensibilityof the skin is here guiding you to that, whichif neglected, would be followed even by thedeath of the part. When a patient has beenreceived into the hospital with paralysis ofthe lower part of the body, we must giveespecial directions to the nurse and attendantsthat the position of his limbs shouldbe changed at short intervals, that pillowsshould be placed under his loins and hams,and that they should be often shifted. If thisbeneglected, you know the consequence tobe inflammation of the parts that press uponthe bed ; from which come local irritation, thenfever and mortification and death.Thus you perceive that the natural sensibilityof the skin, without disturbing yourtrain of thought, induces you to shift the bodyso as to permit the free circulation of theSENSIBILITY TO HEAT. 157blood in the minute vessels ; and that whenthis sensibility is wanting, the utmost attentionof friends and the watchfulness of thenurse are but a poor substitute for this protectionwhich nature is continually affording.If you suffer thus lying on a soft bed, whendeprived of the sensibility of the skin, howcould you 'encounter without it the rubs andimpulses incident to an active life ? You mustnow acknowledge that the sensibility of theskin is as much a protection to the framegenerally, as the sensibility of the eyelids is tothe eyes, and gives you a motive for gratitudewhich probably you never thought of."The sensibility of the hand to heat, is a differentendowment from that of touch. This sensibilityto the varieties of temperature is seatedin the skin, and is, consequently, limited to theexterior surface of the body. The internal partsof the body being of a uniform temperature, itwould have been, in them, a quality altogethersuperfluous. But as we are surrounded by a temperaturecontinually varying, and are subject todestruction by its extremes, and as we must suitour exertions or our contrivances so as to sustainlife against these vicissitudes, our possessionof this peculiar sensibility on the surface affordsanother proof of there having been a foreknowledgeof our condition. We might, indeed, takeour former example in evidence of what must158 SENSIBILITY TO HEAT.befal through the want of this sensibilitythe paralytic is brought to us severely burned,or with his extremities mortified through cold.A man having lost the sense of heat in his righthand, but retaining the muscular power, liftedthe cover of a pan which had fallen into thefire and deliberately replaced it, not beingconscious that it was burning hot ; the effect,however, was the death and destruction of theskin of the palm and fingers. In this manthere was a continual sensation of coldness inthe affected arm, which actual cold appliedto the extremity did not aggravate nor heatin any degree assuage.* Sensibility to heatis a safeguard in as much as it is capable ofbecoming a painful sensation, whilst it is anever-failing excitement to activity and a continualsource of enjoyment.And here we may remark an adaptation ofthe living property very different from thephysical influence. Heat is uniform in itseffect on matter ; but the sensation varies as itis given or abstracted from the living body.Cold and heat are distinct sensations ; and thisis so far important that without such contrastwe should not continue to enjoy the sense. Forin the nervous system it holds universally thatThere are certain morbid conditions of sensation when coldbodies feel intensely hot. Dr. Abercrombie's Inquiry into theIntellectual powers.SENSIBILITY OF THE EYE. 159variety or contrast is necessary to sensation,the finest organ of sense losing its property bythe continuance of the same impression. It isby a comparison of cold and heat that we enjoyeither condition.To contrast still more strongly the sensibilityof the surface with the property of internal parts,to shew how very different sensibility is, inreality, from what is suggested by first experience,and how admirably it is varied and accommodatedto the functions, we shall add oneother fact. The brain is insensible that part ofthe brain, which if disturbed or diseased, takesaway consciousness, is as insensible as theleather of our shoe! That the brain may betouched, or a portion of it cut off, without interruptingthe patient in the sentence that he isuttering, is a surprising circumstance ! Fromthis fact Physiologists formerly inferred that thesurgeon had not reached the more importantorgan of the brain. But that opinion arose fromthe notion prevailing that a nerve must necessarilybe sensible. Whereas, when we considerthat the different parts of the nervous systemhave totally distinct endowments, and that thereare nerves, as I have elsewhere shewn, insensibleto touch and incapable of giving pain, thoughexquisitely alive to their proper office, we haveno just reason to conclude that the brain shouldbe sensible, or exhibit the property of a nerve of160 SENSIBILITY OF THE EYE.the skin. Reason on it as we may, the fact isso ; the brain, through which every impressionmust be conveyed before it is perceived, is itselfinsensible. This informs us that sensibility isnot a necessary attendant on the delicate textureof a living part, but that it must have anappropriate organ, and that it is an especialprovision.*To satisfy my reader on this interesting subject,I shall take the contrast of two organs, oneexternal and exposed, and the other internal andcarefully excluded from injury.The eye, consisting of its proper nerve ofvision and its transparent humours and coats, isan organ of exquisite delicacy not only is itexposed to all the injuries to which the generalsurface of the body is liable, but to be inflamedand rendered opaque by particles getting into itwhich are so light that they float in the atmosphere,and to the contact of which the commonskin is quite insensible. The mechanical, andmore obvious contrivance for the protection ofthis organ, is a ready motion of the eyelids andthe shedding of tears ; which coming, as it were,from a little fountain, play over the surface ofthe eye, and wash away whatever is offensive.But to the action of this little hydraulic andmechanical apparatus there is required an ex-seethe Sensibility of the Retina, Appendix.SENSIBILITY OF THE EYE. 161quite sensibility to direct it not that kind ofsensibility which enables the eye to receive theimpressions of light but a property more resemblingthe tenderness of the skin, yet happilyadapted, by its fineness, to the condition of theorgan.A nerve, possessed of a quality totally differentfrom that of the optic nerve, extends over all theexterior surfaces of the eye, and gives to thosesurfaces their delicate sensibility. Now it sometimeshappens that this nerve is injured and itsfunction lost; the consequences of which arevery curious, smoke and offensive particles,which are afloat in the atmosphere, rest uponthe eye : flies and dust lodge under the eyelids,without producing sensation, and without excitingeither the hydraulic or the mechanicalapparatus to act for the purpose of expellingthem. But although they do not give pain,they nevertheless stimulate the surfaces so as toproduce inflammation, and that causes opacityin the fine transparent membranes of the eye ;and the organ is lost, although the propernerve of vision remains entire. I have seenmany instances of the eye being thus destroyedfor want of sensibility to touch,* and it has beencurious to remark that when the hand was wavedThey are stated at length in my papers in the PhilosophicalTransactions, and in the Appendix of my work on the NervousSystem.162 SENSIBILITY OF THE EYE.or a feather brought near the eye, the personwinked ; yet he did not shut his eye on rubbingthe finger across the eyeball, or when blood wasremoved by the lancet from the inflamed vessels.In those cases, when vision gave notice ofdanger to the organ, the patient winked to avoidit, but when the point touched the eye or eyelids,the sense of touch gave no alarm, and wasfollowed by no action for the protection of theorgan.I shall present another instance of the peculiarnature of the sensibility which protects theeye. The Oculist has observed that by thetouch of a thing as light as a feather, the musclesof the eye will be thrown into uncontrollableactions and spasms : but if the point of thefinger be pressed somewhat rudely between theeyelids, and directly on the eye itself, he can bysuch means hold the eye steady for his intendedoperation, producing hardly any sensation, certainlyno pain !This is one of the little secrets of the art ;the Oculist turns out the eyelids, and fingersthe eye, in a manner which appears, at once,rude and masterly : and still the wonder growsthat he can do such things with so much dexterityas to inflict no pain, when by daily experiencewe know that even a grain of sand in the eyewill torture us. The explanation is this : the eyeand eyelids are possessed of a sensibility whichSENSIBILITY OF THE HEART. 163is so adjusted as to excite the action of its protectingparts against such small particles asmight lodge and inflame its fine membranes.But the apparatus is not capable of protectingthe surface of the eye against the intrusion of astick or a stone ; from such injuries it could notbe defended by a delicate sensibility and involuntaryaction, but only by the effort of thewill.In these details we have new proofs of theminute relation which is established betweenthe species of sensibility in an organ and the endto be attained through it. It will not be deniedthat but for the pain to which the eye is exposed,we should quickly lose the enjoyment of thesense of vision altogether. But we were aboutto institute a comparison of the eye with theheart.The observation of the admirable Harvey, thediscoverer of the circulation of the blood, is tothis effect. A noble youth of the family ofMontgomery, from a fall and consequent abscesson the side of the chest, had the interior marvellouslyexposed, so that after his cure, on hisreturn from his travels, the heart and lungswere still visible and could be handled ; whichwhen it was communicated to Charles I., he expresseda desire that Harvey should be permittedto see the youth and examine his heart.When," says Harvey, " I had paid my. re-164 SENSIBILITY OF THE HEART.sects to this young nobleman, and conveyedto him the king's request, he made no concealment,but exposed the left side of hisbreast, when I saw a cavity into which I couldintroduce my fingers and thumb ; astonishedwith the novelty, again and again I exploredthe wound, and first marvelling at the extraordinarynature of the cure, I set about theexamination of the heart. Taking it in onehand, and placing the finger of the other onthe pulse of the wrist, I satisfied myself that itwas indeed the heart which I grasped. I thenbrought him to the king that he might beholdand touch so extraordinary a thing, and thathe might perceive, as I did, that unless whenwe touched the outer skin, or when he saw ourfingers in the cavity, this young noblemanknew not that we touched the heart !" Otherobservations confirm this great authority, andthe heart is declared insensible. And yet theopinions of mankind must not be lightly condemned.Not only does every emotion of themind affect the heart, but every change in thecondition of the body is attended with a correspondingchange in the heart: motion duringhealth the influence of disease every passingthought will influence it. Here is the distinctionmanifested. The sensibility of the surface of theeye is for a purpose, and so is the sensibility ofthe heart. Whilst that of the eye guards itSENSIBILITIES OF EXTERNAL PARTS, ETC. 165against injury from without, the heart, insensibleto touch, is yet alive to every variation inthe circulation, subject to change from everyalteration of posture or of exertion, and is in sympathyof the strictest kind with the constitutionalpowers.When we consider these facts, we can nolonger doubt that the sensibilities of the livingframe are appropriate endowments ; not qualitiesnecessarily arising from life ; still less the consequencesof delicacy of texture. Nor can we,I should hope, longer doubt that they are suitedto the condition, and especially to the degree ofexposure of each part, and for its protection. Weperceive that the sensibilities vary in an extraordinarymanner as they are given to external orto internal parts, as they belong to one apparatusof action or to another, and they are everadapted to excite some salutary or necessaryaction. We perceive no instance of pain beingbestowed as a source of suffering or punishmentpurely, or without finding it overbalanced bygreat and essential advantages without, in short,being forced to admit that no happier contrivancecould be found for the protection of the part. Itis provided that the more an organ is exposed,and in proportion to its delicacy of organizationthe more exquisitely contrived is the apparatusfor its protection, and the more peremptorythe call for the activity of that mechanism. The166 PLEASURABLE SENSATIONS COULD NOTmotive to action admits of no thought and nohesitation, and the action is more instantaneousthan the quickest suggestion or impulse of thewill.We are speaking of the natural functions ofthe body. It requires a deeper consideration,and is indeed foreign to my subject to speak ofthe pains which result from disease, or to reconcilethose who suffer in an extraordinary degreeto the dispensations of Providence. But as awitness I may speak. It is my daily duty tovisit certain wards of the hospital, where thereis no patient admitted but with that complaintwhich most fills the imagination with the idea ofinsufferable pain and certain death. Yet thesewards are not the least remarkable for the composureand cheerfulness of their inmates. Theindividual who suffers has a mysterious counterbalanceto that condition, which to us who lookupon her, appears to be attended with no alleviatingcircumstance.It affords an instance of the boldness withwhich philosophers have questioned the waysof Providence, that they have asked why werenot all our actions performed at the suggestionof pleasure ? why should we be subject to painat all ? In answer to this I should say, in thefirst place, that consistently with our condition,our sensations and pleasures, there must bevariety in the impressions; such contrast andHAVE BEEN THE MOTIVES TO ACTION. 167variety are common to every organ of sense;and the continuance of an impression on anyoneorgan, occasions it to fade. If the eyecontinue to look steadfastly upon one object, theimage is soon lost if we continue to look onone colour, we become insensible to that colour,and opposite colours to each other are necessaryfor a perfect impression. So have we seenthat in the sensibilities of the skin variations arenecessary to continued sensation.It is difficult to say what these philosopherswould define as pleasure : but whatever exerciseof the senses it should be, unless we are to supposean entire change of our nature, its oppositeis also implied. Nay, further, in this fancifulcondition of existence, did anything ofour present nature prevail, emotions purely ofpleasure would lead to indolence, relaxation, andindifference. To what end should there be anapparatus to protect the eye, since pleasurecould never move us to its exercise? Couldthe windpipe and the interior of the lungs beprotected by a pleasurable sensation attendedwith the slow determination of the will insteadof the rapid and powerful influence which theexquisite sensibility of the throat has upon theact of respiration, or those forcible yet regulatedexertions, which nothing but the instinctive apprehensionof death could excite ?To suppose that we could be moved by the108 PAIN NECESSARY TO EXISTENCE.solicitations of pleasure and have no experienceof pain, would be to place us where injurieswould meet us at every step and in every motion,and whether felt or not, would be destructive tolife. To suppose that we are to move and actwithout experience of resistance and of pain, isto suppose not only that man's nature ischanged, but the whole of exterior nature alsothere must be nothing to bruise the body orhurt the eye, nothing noxious to be drawn inwith the breath : in short, it is to imagine altogetheranother state of existence, and the philosopherwould be mortified were we to put thisinterpretation on his meaning. Pain is thenecessary contrast to pleasure : it ushers usinto existence or consciousness : it alone iscapable of exciting the organs into activity:it is the companion and the guardian of humanlife.CHAPTER VIII.OF THE SENSES GENERALLY, INTRODUCTORY TOTHE SENSE OF TOUCH.ALTHOUGH we are most familiar with the sensibilityof the skin, and believe that we perfectlyunderstand the nature of the impressionsupon it and the mode of their conveyance to thesensorium, yet there is a difficulty in comprehendingthe operations of all the organs of thesenses a difficulty not removed by the apparentsimplicity of that of touch.There was a time when the enquirer was satisfiedon finding that in the ear there was a littledrum and a bone to play upon it, with an accompanyingnerve. This was deemed a sufficientexplanation of the organ of hearing. It wasthought equally satisfactory if in experimentingupon the eye, the image was seen painted at thebottom of it on the surface of the nerve. Butalthough the impression be thus traced to theextremity of the nerve, still we comprehendnothing of the nature of that impression, or ofthe manner in which it is transmitted to the170 NATURE OF THE IMPRESSION.sensorium. To the most minute examination,the nerves, in all their course, and where theyare expanded into the external organs of sense,seem the same in substance and in structure.The disturbance of the extremity of the nerve,the vibrations upon it, or the images paintedupon its surface, cannot be transmitted to thebrain according to any physical laws that weareacquainted with. The impression on thenerve can have no resemblance to the ideassuggested in the mind. All that we can say is,that the agitations of the nerves of the outwardsenses are the signals, which the Author ofnature has made the means of correspondencewith the realities. There is no more resemblancebetween the impressions on the sensesand the ideas excited by them, than there isbetween the sound and the conception raisedin the mind of that man who, looking out ona dark and stormy sea, hears the report ofcannon, which conveys to him the idea ofdespair and shipwreck or between the impressionof light on the eye, arid the idea ofhim who, having been long in terror of nationalconvulsion, sees afar off a column of flame,which is the signal of actual revolt.By such illustrations, however, we rathershow the mind's independence of the organ ofsense, and how a tumult of ideas will be excitedby an impression on the retina, which, notwith-ORIGIN OF IDEAS. 171standing, may be no more intense than thatproduced by a burning taper. They are instancesof excited imagination. But even the determinedrelations which are established in acommon act of perception between the sensationand the idea in the mind, have no moreactual resemblance. How the consent, whichis so precise and constant, is established, canneither be explained by anatomy nor by physiologynor by any mode of physical inquirywhatever.From this law of our nature, that certain ideasoriginate in the mind in consequence of theoperation of corresponding nerves, it followsthat one organ of sense can never become thesubstitute for another, so as to excite in themind the same idea.When an individual is deprived of the organsof sight, no power of attention, or continuedeffort of the will, or exercise of the other senses,can make him enjoy the class of sensations whichis lost. The sense of touch may be increasedin an exquisite degree ; but were it true, as hasbeen asserted, that individuals can discovercolours by the touch, it could only be by feelinga change upon the surface of the stuff and notby any perception of the colour. It has beenmy painful duty to attend on persons who havepretended blindness and that they could seewith their fingers. But I have ever found that172 ORIGIN OF IDEAS.by a deviation from truth in the first instance,they have been entangled in a tissue of deceit ;and have at last been forced into admissionswhich demonstrated their folly and weak inventions.I have had pity for such patientswhen they have been the subjects of nervousdisorders which have produced extraordinarysensibility in their organs such as a power ofhearing much beyond our common experience ;for it has attracted high interest and admiration,and has gradually led them to pretendto powers greater than they actually possessed.In such cases it is difficult to distinguish thesymptoms of disease, from the pretended giftswhich are boasted of.Experiment proves, what is suggested byAnatomy, that not only the organs are appropriatedto particular classes of sensations, butthat the nerves, intermediate between the brainand the outward organs, are respectively capableof receiving no other sensations but such as areadapted to their particular organs.Every impression on the nerve of the eye, orof the ear, or on the nerve of smelling, or oftaste, excites only ideas of vision, of hearing,of smelling, or of tasting ; not solely becausethe extremities of these nerves, individually,are suited to external impressions, but becausethe nerves are, through their wholecourse and wherever they are irritated, capableMORBID SENSATIONS. 173of exciting in the mind the idea to which theyare appropriate, and no other. A blow, animpulse quite unlike that for which the organsof the senses are provided, will excite them allin their several ways ; the eyes will flash fire,while there is noise in the ears. An officerreceived a musket-ball which went through thebones of his face in describing his sensations,he said that he felt as if there had been a flashof lightning, accompanied with a sound like theshutting of the door of St. Paul's.On this circumstance, of every nerve beingappropriated to its function, depend the falsesensations which accompany the morbid irritationof them from internal causes, when there isin reality nothing presented externally ; suchas flashes of light, ringing of the ears, andbitter taste or offensive smells. These sensationsare caused, through the excitement of therespective nerves of sense, by derangement ofsome internal organ, and most frequently of thestomach.But my chief object is to show that the mostperfect proof of power and of design, is to befound in this, that the perceptions or ideasarising in the mind, are in correspondence withthe qualities of external matter ; and that,although the manner in which the object presentedto the outward sense and the idea of itare connected, must ever be beyond our com-170 OF TOUCH.observe the correspondence of the mind (througha series of organic parts) with the external world,or with the condition and qualities of matter :than which nothing can convey a more sublimeidea of Power, and of the system or unity oforganic and inorganic creations.Returning to the consideration of the sensibilityof the skin and the sense of touch, thisproperty is as distinct an endowment as thatwhich belongs to the eye. It is neither inferiornor more common. It is not consequent uponthe mere exposure of the delicate surface of theanimal body. It is a distinct sense, the organof which is seated in the skin ; and it is necessarythat this organ of sense should be extendedwidely over the surface of the body. Yet thenerves are as appropriate and distinct as if theywere gathered into one trunk, such as we findthem to be in the organs of vision and hearing.Although the portion of nervous matter onwhich the sensation and perception of touchdepend, be necessarily extended in its sentientextremities over the whole exterior surface ofthe body, it is very much concentrated towardsthe brain : and it is there appropriated, in thesame manner as the nerves of vision and ofhearing, to its peculiar function of raising correspondingperceptions in the mind.Perhaps this will be better understood fromthe fact that a certain large portion of theOF TOUCH. 177skin may be the seat of excruciating pain, andyet the surface, which to the patient's perceptionis the seat of that pain, will be altogetherinsensible to cutting, burning, or any mode ofdestruction ! "I have no feeling in all the sideof my face, and it is dead ; yet surely it cannotbe dead, since there is a constant prickingpain in it." Such were the words of a youngwoman whose disease was at the root of thenerve of sensibility near the brain.* The diseasedestroyed the function of this nerve of the head,as to its property of conveying sensation fromthe exterior; and substituted that morbid impressionon the trunk which was referred to thetactile extremities.If we use the term common sensibility, wecan do so only in reference to touch, as it isthe sense that is most necessary to animal existence,and as it is enjoyed by all animalsfrom the lowest to the highest in the chain ofexistence.Whilst this sense is distinct from the others,it is the most important of all ; since through italone some animals possess the consciousness ofexistence ; and to those that enjoy many organsof sense, that of touch, as we shall presentlyshow, is necessary to the full development ofthe powers of all the other organs.See Papers by the author in the Philosophical Transactions.N170 OF TOUCH.observe the correspondence of the mind (througha series of organic parts) with the external world,or with the condition and qualities of matter :than which nothing can convey a more sublimeidea of Power, and of the system or unity oforganic and inorganic creations.Returning to the consideration of the sensibilityof the skin and the sense of touch, thisproperty is as distinct an endowment as thatwhich belongs to the eye. It is neither inferiornor more common. It is not consequent uponthe mere exposure of the delicate surface of theanimal body. It is a distinct sense, the organof which is seated in the skin ; and it is necessarythat this organ of sense should be extendedwidely over the surface of the body. Yet thenerves are as appropriate and distinct as if theywere gathered into one trunk, such as we findthem to be in the organs of vision and hearing.Although the portion of nervous matter onwhich the sensation and perception of touchdepend, be necessarily extended in its sentientextremities over the w r hole exterior surface ofthe body, it is very much concentrated towardsthe brain : and it is there appropriated, in thesame manner as the nerves of vision and ofhearing, to its peculiar function of raising correspondingperceptions in the mind.Perhaps this will be better understood fromthe fact that a certain large portion of theOF TOUCH. 177skin may be the seat of excruciating pain, andyet the surface, which to the patient's perceptionis the seat of that pain, will be altogetherinsensible to cutting, burning, or any mode ofdestruction ! " I have no feeling in all the sideof my face, and it is dead ; yet surely it cannotbe dead, since there is a constant prickingpain in it." Such were the words of a youngwoman whose disease was at the root of thenerve of sensibility near the brain.* The diseasedestroyed the function of this nerve of the head,as to its property of conveying sensation fromthe exterior; and substituted that morbid impressionon the trunk which was referred to thetactile extremities.If we use the term common sensibility, wecan do so only in reference to touch, as it isthe sense that is most necessary to animal existence,and as it is enjoyed by all animalsfrom the lowest to the highest in the chain ofexistence.Whilst this sense is distinct from the others,it is the most important of all ; since through italone some animals possess the consciousness ofexistence ; and to those that enjoy many organsof sense, that of touch, as we shall presentlyshow, is necessary to the full development ofthe powers of all the other organs.See Papers by the author in the Philosophical Transactions.NOF THE ORGAN OF TOUCH.Touch is that peculiar sensibility which givesthe consciousness of the resistance of externalmatter, and makes us acquainted with the hardness,smoothness, roughness, size, and form ofbodies. It enables us to distinguish what isexternal from what belongs to us ; and while itinforms us of the geometrical qualities of bodies,we must refer to this sense also our judgmentof distance, of motion, of number, and oftime.Presuming that the sense of touch is exercisedby means of a complex apparatus by a combinationof the consciousness of the action of the muscleswith the sensibility of the proper nerves oftouch, we shall, in the first place, examine inwhat respect the organization resembles that ofthe other senses.We have said before that, on the most minuteexamination of the extremity of a nerve, noappropriate structure can be detected ; and thatthe nerves expanded on the organs of senseappear every where the same, soft, pulpy, preparedfor impression, and so distributed that theimpression shall reach them. What is termed thestructure of the organ of sense, is that apparatusby which the external impression is conveyedinwards, and by which its force is concentratedORGAN OF TOUCH. 179on the extremity of the nerve. The mechanismby which those external organs are suited totheir offices, is highly interesting ; it serves toshew (in a way that is level to our comprehension,as most resembling things of human contrivance)the design with which the fabric is constructed.Thus, the eye is so seated and soformed as to embrace the greatest possible fieldof vision. We can understand the happy effectsof the convexity of the transparent cornea, theinfluence of three humours of various densitiesacting like an achromatic telescope; we canadmire the precision with which the rays oflight are concentrated on the retina, and thebeautiful provision for enlarging or diminishingthe pencil of light, in proportion to its intensity :but all this explains nothing, in respect to theperception that is excited in the mind by theimpulse on the extremity of the nerve.In like manner, in the complex apparatus ofthe ear, we see how this organ is formed withreference to a double course of impressions, asthey come through the solids or through thebody, and as they come through the atmosphere.We comprehend how the undulations and vibrationsof the air are collected and concentrated ;how they are directed, through the intricatepassages of the bone, to a fluid in which thenerve of hearing is suspended ; and we see how,at last, that nerve is moved. But we can com-180 ORGAN OF TOUCH.pretend nothing more from the study of the externalorgan of hearing.The illustration is equally clear in referenceto the organ of smelling, or of taste. There isnothing in the nerve itself, either of the nose orof the tongue, which can explain why it is susceptibleof the particular impression. For thesereasons, we are prepared to expect very littlecomplexity in the organ of touch, and to believethat the peculiarity of the sense consists more inthe property bestowed on the nerve, than inthe mechanical adaptation of the exterior organ.OF THE CUTICLE.The cuticle or epidermis covers the true skin,excludes the air, limits the perspiration, and insome degree regulates the heat of the body.It is a dead or insensible covering ; it guardsfrom contact the true vascular surface of theskin ; and in this manner, it often prevents thecommunication of infection. We are most familiarwith it as that scarf skin which scales offafter fevers, or by the use of the flesh-brush, orby the friction of the clothes ; for it is continuallyseparating in thin scales, whilst it is as regularlyformed anew by the vascular surface below. Thecondition of this covering is intimately connectedwith the organ of touch. The habit of consideringthings as produced accidentally, hasORGAN OF TOUCH. 181induced some anatomists to believe that thecuticle is formed by the hardening of the trueskin. The fact, however, that the cuticle is perfectin the new-born infant, and that even thenit is thickest on the hands and feet, shouldhave shewn that, like every thing in the animalstructure, it participates in the great design.The cuticle is the organ of touch in thisrespect, that it is the medium through which theexternal impression is conveyed to the nerves oftouch ; and the manner in which this is accomplishedis not without interest. The extremitiesof the fingers exhibit all the provisions for theexercise of this sense. The nails give support tothe fingers ; they are formed broad and shieldlike,*in order to sustain the elastic cushionwhich forms their extremity; and the fulnessand elasticity of the ends of the fingers adaptthem admirably for touch. But on a nearerinspection, we see a more particular provision inthe points of the fingers. Wherever the sense offeeling is most exquisite, there are minute spiralridges of cuticle. These ridges have, correspondingwith them, depressed lines on the innersurface of the cuticle ; and these again givelodgement to a soft pulpy matter, in which liethe extremities of the sentient nerves. Therethe nerves are sufficiently protected, while theyUnguis scutiformis.182 ORGAN OF TOUCH.are exposed to impressions through the elasticcuticle, and thus give the sense of touch. Theorganization is simple, yet it is in strict analogywith the other organs of sense.Every one must have observed a tendency inthe cuticle to become thickened and stronger bypressure and friction. If the pressure be partialand severe, the action of the true skin is toomuch excited, fluid is thrown out, and thecuticle is raised in a blister. If it be stillpartial, but more gradually applied, a corn isformed. If, however, the general surface of thepalms or soles be exposed to pressure, thecuticle thickens, until it becomes a defence likea glove or a shoe. Now, what is most to beadmired in this thickening of the cuticle is,that the sense of touch is not lost, or indeeddiminished, certainly not at all in proportionto the protection afforded by the thickenedskin.The thickened cuticle partakes of the structureof the hoofs of animals : and we shall nowattend to the nature of the hoof, as the best possibleillustration of the manner in which the sensibilityof the skin is in a due degree preservedwhilst the surface is guarded.The human nail is a continuation of thecuticle, and the hoof of an animal belongs to thesame class of parts. In observing the mannerin which the nerves enter the hoof, we have, inORGAN OF TOUCH. 183fact, a magnified view of that which exists, butis only more minute and delicate, in the fingers.We may take the horse's foot as the example.When the crust or hoof, which is insensible, isseparated from the living part, we see smallvilli hanging from the vascular surface, andwhich have been withdrawn from the crust;looking to the inside of the crust, we perceivethe pores from which these villi have beenpulled. These processes of the living surfaceare not merely extremities of nerves ; they consistof the nerves and the necessary accompanimentof membrane and blood vessels, on avery minute scale. For it must be rememberedthat nerves can perform no function unless suppliedwith blood, all qualities of life being supportedthrough the circulating blood. Thesenerves, so prolonged into the hoof, receive thevibrations of that body. By this means the horseis sensible to the motion and pressure of its foot,or to its percussion against the ground; andwithout this provision, there would be a certainimperfection in the limb.In a former part of this treatise I have shewnby what curious mechanism the horse's foot ismade yielding and elastic, for the purpose ofbearing the percussion against the ground. Butinmade roads, and with the imperfections ofshoeing, the pressure and concussion are toosevere and too incessant ; so that the protecting184 ORGAN OF TOUCH.sensibility of the foot is converted into a sourceof pain from the inflammation which arises, andthe horse is thus " foundered." There is aremedy for this condition in dividing the nerve ;the consequence of which operation is, that thehorse, instead of moving with timid steps, putsout his feet freely, and the lameness is cured. If,however, we were to receive the statement thusbarely, the fact would militate against our conclusionthat mechanical provision and sensibilitygo together, being equally necessary to the perfectionof the instrument. We must take intoconsideration this leading fact, that pressureagainst the sole and crust is. necessary to theplay of the foot and to its perfection. Whenthis part becomes inflamed, the animal does notput its foot freely down, nor does it bear itsweight upon the hoof so as to bring all the partsinto action ; hence contraction is produced, themost common defect of the horse's hoof. Whenthe animal is relieved from pain by the divisionof the nerve, it uses the foot freely, and userestores all the natural actions of this fine pieceof mechanism. It is obvious, however, that thereis a certain defect ; the horse has lost his naturalprotection, and must now be indebted to the careof his rider. It has not only lost the pain whichshould guard against over exertion, but thefeeling of the ground, which is necessary to hisbeing perfectly safe as a roadster.ORGAN OF TOUCH. 185The teeth are provided with sensibility muchin the same manner as the hoof of the horse is ;for although the bone and enamel have nosensibility, yet a branch of a sensible nerve (thefifth) enters into the cavity of every tooth, andthe vibration being communicated through thetooth to the nerve, the smallest grain is feltbetween the teeth.But, to return to the human hand; in thefingers and palm of a man who uses the fore-hammer,the cuticle is thickened in a remarkablemanner ; the lines, however, become deeper, andthe villi longer ; which, joined to the aptitude ofthe cuticle to convey the impression to those includednerves, leaves him in possession of thesense of touch in a very high degree.In the foot of the ostrich we may have a magnifiedview of the thickened cuticle and thelengthened nerves. This outer skin almostequals in thickness the hoof of the solidungula,and when it is separated from the sensible sole,the villi, or papillae, having in them the sensiblenerves, are withdrawn, leaving correspondingforamina or pores in the sole. We perceivethat if the object had been merely to coverand protect the foot, it would have been sufficientto have invested it with a succession ofsolid and dead layers of cuticle. This wouldhave been the case had the cuticle been merelythickened by pressure, and had there been no186 ORGAN <)F TOUCH.design to make a provision adapted in allrespects to the habits of the bird.Such, then, is the structure of the organ oftouch : obvious in the extremities of the fingers ;magnified in the foot of the horse or of theostrich ; and existing even in the delicate skin ofthe lips.I have casually noticed that increased vascularityis always an accompaniment of nerves,and necessary to the sensibility of a part.In the museum of the College of Surgeons wesee that Mr. Hunter had taken the pains todemonstrate this, by the injection of the blood-vesselsof a slug. Although fluid was injectedfrom its heart, the blush from the vermilion extendsover its foot ; the foot, in these gasteropoda,being the whole lower flat surface on which theanimal creeps. This surface is also the organ oftouch, by which it feels and directs its motions.It is on the same principle, if we may comparesuch things, that we explain the rosy tippedfingers and the ruby lips, which imply fine sensibilitycombined with high vascularity.Having described the relation of the cuticleto the nerves of touch, we may take notice ofanother quality, in its roughness, and of the advantagesaccruing from this. In the first place,as to the subserviency of this quality to feeling,we must be sensible that in touching a finelypolished surface the organ is but imperfectly ex-organOF TOUCH. 187excised, as compared with its condition when wetouch or grasp a rough and irregular body. Hadthe cuticle been finely polished on its surface, itwould have been but ill suited to touch : but,on the contrary, it has a very peculiar roughnesswhich adapts it to feeling! A provision forfriction, as opposed to smoothness, is a necessaryquality of some parts of the skin. The roughnessof the cuticle has the advantage of givingus a firmer grasp, and a steadier footing. Nothingis so little apt to slip as the thickenedcuticle of the hand or foot. In the hoofs ofanimals, as might be expected, this structure isfurther developed. The chamois or goat stepssecurely on the ledges of rocks and at greatheights, where it would seem impossible to cling.On the pads or cushions of the cat, the cuticleis rough and granular ; and in the foot of thesquirrel, indeed of all animals which climb,those pads covered with the peculiar textureof the cuticle, give security in descending, astheir claws enable them to climb.In concluding this section, we perceive thatthe organ of touch consists of nerves appropriatedto receive the impressions of bodies capable ofaffording resistance. Fine filaments of thosenerves, wrapt up in delicate membrane with theiraccompanying arteries and veins, project fromthe true skin into corresponding grooves or foraminaof the cuticle. They are not absolutely in188 ORGAN OF TOUCH.contact with the cuticle, but are surrounded witha semi-fluid matter. By this fluid and by thecuticle they are protected, at the same time thatthey are sensible to the pressure made on thesurface, and to cutting, pricking, and heat.*But this capacity, we repeat, is not owing,strictly speaking, to any thing in the structureof the organ, but to the appropriation of thenerve to this class of sensations.It is a curious confirmation of the fact, that the cutaneousnerve is adapted to receive impressions from the varieties of temperature,that when disease takes place in the centre of the trunkof a nerve, or when the nerve is surrounded with diseased parts, thesensation of burning accompanies the pain ; and the patient refersthis to the part of the skin to which the extreme branch of thenerve is distributed. By a burning sensation in the sole of thefoot, 1 have been directed to the disease seated in the centre ofthe thigh.CHAPTER IX.OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE.Of the Sensibility of the Infant to Impressions,and the gradual improvement of the Sense ofTouch.A NOTION prevails that the young of animals aredirected by instinct, but that there is an exceptionin regard to the human offspring: that inthe child we have to trace the gradual dawn andprogressive improvement of reason. This is notquite true ; we doubt whether the body wouldever be exercised under the influence of reasonalone, and if it were not first directed by sensibilitieswhich are innate or instinctive.The sensibilities and the motions of the lipsand tongue are perfect from the beginning ; andthe dread of falling is shewn in the young infantlong before it can have had experience ofviolence of any kind.The hand, which is to become the instrumentfor perfecting the other senses and developingthe endowments of the mind itself, is in theinfant absolutely powerless. Pain is poetically190 OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE.described as that power into whose " iron grasp"we are consigned, to be introduced to a materialworld ; now, although the infant is capable of anexpression of pain, which cannot be misunderstoodand is the same which accompanies allpainful impressions during the whole life, yetit is unconscious of the part of the body whichsuffers. We have again recourse to the surgeon'sexperience. There occur certain congenitalimperfections which require an operationat this early stage of life ; but the infantmakes no direct effort with its hand to repel theinstrument, or to disturb the dressing, as it willat a period somewhat later.The lips and tongue are first exercised ; thenext motion is to put the hand to the mouth,in order to suck it: and no sooner are thefingers capable of grasping, than whatever theyhold is carried to the mouth. So that the sensibilityto touch in the lips and tongue, and theirmotions, are the first inlets to knowledge ; andthe use of the hand is a later acquirement.The knowledge of external bodies as distinguishedfrom ourselves, cannot be acquired untilthe organs of touch in the hand have becomefamiliar with our own limbs ; we cannot be supposedcapable of exploring any thing by themotion of the hand, or of judging of the form ortangible qualities of an object pressed againstthe skin, before we have a knowledge of ourOF THE MUSCULAR SENSE. 191own body as distinguished from things externalto us.The first office of the hand, then, is to exercisethe sensibility of the mouth : and the infantascertainly questions the reality of things bythat test, as the dog does by its acute sense ofsmelling. In the infant, the sense of the lipsand tongue is resigned only in favour of thesense of vision, when that sense has improvedand offers a greater gratification, and a bettermeans of judging of the qualities of bodies.The hand very slowly acquires the sense oftouch, and many ineffectual efforts are seen inthe arms and fingers of the child before thedirection of objects or their distance is ascertained.Gradually the length of the arm, andthe extent of its motions become the measure ofdistance, of form, of relation, and perhaps oftime.Next in importance to the sensibility of themouth, we may contemplate that sense which isearly exhibited in the infant, the terror offalling. The nurse will tell us that the infantlies composed while she carries it in her arms upstairs; but that it is agitated in carrying it down.If an infant be laid upon the arms and dandledup and down, its body and limbs will be at rest,whilst it is raised ; but they will struggle andmake an effort as it descends. There is herethe indication of a sense, an innate feeling of192 OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE.danger, the influence of which we may perceivewhen the child first attempts to stand or run.When the child is set upon its feet, and thenurse's arms form a hoop around it withouttouching it, it slowly learns to balance itself andstand; but under a considerable apprehension.Presently, it will stand at such a distance fromthe nurse's knee, that if it should lose its balance,it can throw itself for protection into her lap. Inthese its first attempts to use its muscular frame,it is directed by an apprehension which cannotas yet be attributed to experience. By degreesit acquires the knowledge of the measure of itsarm, the relative distance to which it can reach,and the power of its muscles. Children, therefore,are cowardly by instinct : they show an apprehensionof falling; and we may graduallytrace the efforts which they make, under theguidance of this sensibility, to perfect the muscularsense. In the mean time, we perceive howinstinct and reason are combined in early infancy: how necessary the first is to existence :how it is subservient to reason : and how it yieldsto the progress of reason, until it becomes so obscuredthat we can hardly discern its influence.When treating of the senses, and showing howone organ profits by the exercise of the other,and how each is indebted to that of touch, I wasled to observe that the sensibility of the skin isthe most dependant of all on the exercise ofOF THE MUSCULAR SENSE. 193another quality. Without a sense of muscularaction or a consciousness of the degree of effortmade, the proper sense of touch could hardly beaninlet to knowledge at all. I am now to showthat the motion of the hand and fingers, and thesense or consciousness of their action, must becombined with the sense of touch, properly socalled, before we can ascribe to it the influencewhich it possesses over the other organs.In my general course of lectures on anatomy,I ventured on this explanation from the commencement; much doubting, however, the correctnessof my reasoning, from seeing that thegreat authorities on this subject made no accountof the knowledge derived from the motions ofour own frame. I called this consciousness ofmuscular exertion a sixth sense ; considering itas essential to the exercise of the sense of touch.I can now refer, in confirmation of this view, tothe works of philosophers who have been educatedto medicine ; and to whom the necessity ofthe combination of the two faculties had suggesteditself as it had to me.* Those distinctionswere connected with my enquiries into thefunctions of the nervous system, and in somemeasure directed themeSee Dr. Brown's Lectures on Moral Philosophy.f It was this conviction that we are sensible of the action ofthe muscles, which led me to the investigation of their nerves;first, by anatomy, and then by experiment. I was finally enabledO194 OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE.The Abbe Nollet, after extolling the sense oftouch as superior to all the other senses, and asdeserving to be considered the genus under whichthe others should be included as subordinatespecies, makes this remark " Besides, it hasthis advantage over them, to be at the sametime both active and passive : for it not onlyputs it in our power to judge of what makes animpression upon us, but likewise of whatresists our impulsions." The mistake here liesto show that the muscles had two classes of nerves that on excitingone of these, the muscle contracted : that on exciting theother, no action took place. The nerve which had no powerwas found to be a nerve of sensation : and thus, it was provedthat there is a nervous circle connecting the muscles with thebrain : that one nerve is not capable of transmitting what iscalled the nervous spirits, in two different directions at one instantof time ; but that for the regulation of the muscles, there is anerve of sensibility to convey the nervous influence from themuscles towards the sensorium, as well as a nerve of action forconveying the mandate of the will to the muscles. In their distributionthrough the body, the nerves which possess these twodistinct powers are wrapped up, or, as it were, woven together inthe same sheath ; and they present to the eye the appearance ofone nerve. It was only by examining the nerves at their roots,that is, where they arise from different tracts of the brain andspinal marrow, and before they have coalesced, that I succeededin demonstrating their distinct functions. In the face, the nerveof motion passes by a circuitous course, apart from the nerve ofsensation, to be distributed in the muscles; and therefore thedistinct characters of these nerves were more easily proved byexperiment than in any other part of the body. See the PhilosophicalTransactions on the " Nervous Circle which connects theVoluntary Muscles with the Brain," and the " Nervous System."to. Hangman.OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE. 195in giving to the nerves of touch a propertywhich must belong to the actions of muscles.So it is affirmed by physiologists, as I havealready had occasion to state, that the sense oftouch differs from the other senses by this circumstancethat an effort is propagated towardsit, as well as a sensation received from it. Thisconfusion obviously arises from considering themuscular agency, which is directed by the willduring the exercise of touch, as belonging to thenerve of touch properly. We proceed to showhow the sense of motion and that of touch arenecessarily combined.When a blind man, or a man with his eyesshut, stands upright, neither leaning upon, nortouching aught; by what means is it that hemaintains the erect position ? The symmetry ofhis body is not the cause ; the statue of the finestproportion must be soldered to its pedestal, orthe wind will cast it down. How is it, then,that a man sustains the perpendicular posture,or inclines in due degree towards the winds thatblow upon him? It is obvious that he has asense by which he knows the inclination of hisbody, and that he has a ready aptitude to adjustit, and to correct any deviation from the perpendicular.What sense then is this ? for he touchesnothing, and sees nothing ; there is no organ ofsense hitherto observed which can serve him,or in any degree aid him. Is it not that sense19(5 OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE.which is exhibited so early in the infant, in thefear of falling ? Is it not the full developmentof that property which was early shown in thestruggle of the infant while it yet lay in thenurse's arms ? It can only be by the adjustmentof muscles that the limbs are stiffened, the bodyfirmly balanced and kept erect. There is noother source of knowledge, but a sense of thedegree of exertion in his muscular frame, bywhich a man can know the position of his bodyand limbs, while he has no point of vision todirect his efforts, or the contact of any externalbody. In truth, we stand by so tine an exerciseof this power, and the muscles are, from habit,directed with so much precision and with aneffort so slight, that we do not know how westand. But if we attempt to walk on a narrowledge, or stand in a situation where we are indanger of falling, or rest on one foot, we becomethen subject to apprehension : the actions of themuscles are, as it were, magnified and demonstrativeof the degree in which they are excited.We are sensible of the position of our limbs ;we know that the arms hang by the sides ; orthat they are raised and held out ; although wetouch nothing and see nothing. It must be aproperty internal to the frame by which weknow this position of the members of our body :and what can this be but a consciousness ofthe degree of action and the adjustment of theOF THE MUSCULAR SENSE. 197muscles? At one time, I entertained a doubtwhether this proceeded from a knowledge of thecondition of the muscles or from a consciousnessof the degree of effort which was directed tothem in volition. It was with a view to elucidatethis, that I made the observations which terminatedin the discovery that every muscle had twonerves one for sensation, and one to conveythe mandate of the will and direct its action. Ihad reasoned in this manner we awake with aknowledge of the position of our limbs : thiscannot be from a recollection of the action whichplaced them where they are ; it must, therefore,be a consciousness of their present condition.When a person in these circumstances moves, hehas a determined object ; and he must be consciousof a previous condition before he can desirea change or direct a movement.After a limb has been removed by the surgeon,the person still feels pain, and heat, andcold in it. Urging a patient to move \vho haslost his limb, I have seen him catch at the limbto guard it, forgetful that it was removed ; andlong after his loss, he experiences a sensation notonly as if the limb remained, but as if it wereplaced or hanging in a particular position orposture. I have asked a patient " Where doyou feel your arm now?" and he has said, " I feelit as if it lay across my breast," or that it islying by my side." It seems also to change198 OF THE MUSCULAR SENSEWith the change of posture of the body. Theseare additional proofs of a muscular sense : thatthere is an internal sensibility correspondingwith the changing condition of the muscles ; andthat as the sensations of an organ of senseremain after the destruction of the outwardorgan, so here a deceptions sensibility to thecondition of the muscles, as well as to the conditionof the skin, is felt after the removal of thelimb.By such arguments I have been in the habitof showing that we possess a muscular sense,and that without it we could have no guidance ofthe frame. We could not command our musclesin standing, far less in walking, leaping, orrunning, had we not a perception of the conditionof the muscles previous to the exerciseof the will. And as for the hand, it is not morethe freedom of its action W 7 which constitutes itsperfection, than the knowledge which we haveof these motions, and our consequent ability todirect it with the utmost precision.The necessity for the combination of twodistinct properties of the nervous system in thesense of touch becomes more obvious if weexamine their operation in another but analogousorgan ; for example, in the palpa ortentacula of the lower animals. These animalsuse those instruments to grope their way : andIN THE LOWER ANIMALS. 199they consist of a rigid tube containing a pulpymatter, in which there is a branch of a nerve thatpossesses in an exquisite degree the sense oftouch. Now when this instrument touches abody and the vibration runs along the pulp of thenerve, the animal can be sensible only of anobstruction : but W 7 here is that obstruction, andhow is the creature's progress to be directed toavoid it ? We must acknowledge that the instrumentmoves about and feels on all sides, and thatit is the action of the muscles moving this projectinginstrument, and the sense of their activity,which convey the knowledge of the place ordirection of the obstructing body. It appears,therefore, that even in the very lowest creaturesthe sense of touch implies the comparison of twodistinct senses.That insects have the most exquisite organsof sense must be allowed : but we do not reflecton the extraordinary accuracy with which theymeasure distance ; which is an adaptation of themuscular exertion to the sense of vision. Thespider which I have already alluded to in aformer chapter the aranea scenic, when aboutto leap, elevates itself upon its fore legs, andlifting its head, seems to survey the spot beforeit jumps. When this insect spies a small gnator fly upon the wall, it creeps very gently towardsit, with short steps, till it comes within a proper200 OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE.distance, and then it springs suddenly like atiger. It will jump two feet to seize upon abee.*We have a more curious instance of theprecision of eye and the adaptation of muscularaction in the chcetodon rostratus.-\ Thisfish inhabits the Indian rivers, and lives onthe smaller aquatic flies. When it observesa fly alighted on a twig or flying near (for itcan shoot them on the wing) it darts a drop ofwater with so steady an aim as to bring the flydown into the water, when it falls an easy prey.These fishes are kept in large vases for amusement,and if a fly be presented on the end of atwig, they will shoot at it with surprising accuracy.In its natural state it will hit a fly at thedistance of from three to six feet. The zeus in-sidiator\ has also the power of forming its mouthinto a tube and squirting at flies so as to en-kirby.f Chcetodon, a genus of the Acanthopterygii.t Belonging to another genus of the same Order.OF THE MUSCULAR SENSE. 201cumber their wings and bring them to the surfaceof the water. Whether led to admire the wonderfulpower of instinct in these inferior creatures,or the property acquired by our own eye,we must acknowledge a compound operation.*The impression of odours on the nerve ofsmelling is exactly what some would have us tobelieve the effect of light is on the nerve ofvision ; and yet, that impression on the nerve ofvision is sufficient, in their opinion, to inform usof all that we know through the eye. Now ofthe direction and distance from which odourscome, we are quite ignorant, until by turningthe head and directing the nostrils, and movingthis way and that, we make comparison, anddiscover on which side the smell is strongeston the sense. We can judge of the directionof sounds without turning the head, becausethe strength of vibration is unequal on the twosides of the head, and a comparison is madeof the two impressions. But when a person isdeaf of one ear the operation is difficult ; he isoften mistaken as to the direction of sounds,and he has more necessity to turn the head andto compare the position of the tube of the earwith the strength of the impressions. Accord -In these instances a difficulty will readily occur to thereader ; how does the fish judge of position, since the rays oflight are refracted at the surface of the water ? Does instinctenable it to do this, or is it by experience ?202 THE LOSS OF SENSIBILITY ANDingle, in mixed company, where there aremany speakers, he appears positively deaf, fromthe impossibility of distinguishing minutely thedirection of sounds.The last proof of the necessity of the combinationof the muscular sense with the sense ofcontact will be conclusive. The following is notasolitary instance :A mother while nursing her infant was seizedwith a paralysis, attended by the loss of poweron one side of her body and the loss of sensibilityon the other side. The surprising, and,indeed, the alarming circumstance here was,that she could hold her child to her bosom withthe arm which possessed muscular power, butonly as long as she looked to the infant. If surroundingobjects withdrew her attention from thestate of her arm, the flexor muscles graduallyrelaxed and the child was in danger of falling.The details of the case do not belong to ourpresent enquiry ; but we see here, first, thatthere are two properties in the arm : which isshown by the loss of the one and the continuanceof the other; secondly, that these propertiesexist through different conditions of the nervoussystem ; and, thirdly, we perceive how ineffectualto the exercise of the limbs is the continuanceof the muscular power, without the sensibilitywhich should accompany and direct it.The property in the hand of ascertaining theTHE MUSCULAR POWER REMAINING. 203distance, the size, the weight, the form, thehardness and softness, the roughness or smoothnessof objects results from the combined perceptionthrough the sensibility of the properorgan of touch and the motion of the arm, hand,and fingers. But the motion of the fingers isespecially necessary to the sense of touch ; theybend, extend, or expand, moving in all directionslike palpa, with the advantage of embracingthe object, and feeling it on all itssurfaces ; sensible to its solidity and to its resistancewhen grasped ; moving round it andgliding over its surface, and, therefore, feelingevery asperity.THE PLEASURES ARISING FROM THE MUSCULARSENSE.The exercise of the muscular frame is thesource of much of the knowledge which isusually supposed to be obtained through theorgans of sense ; and to this source, also, wemust trace some of our chief enjoyments. Wemay, indeed, affirm that it is benevolently providedthat vigorous circulation, and, therefore,the healthful condition both of the mind and thebody shall result from muscular exertion andthe alternation of activity and repose.204 PLEASURES ARISINGThe pleasure which arises from the activity ofthe body is also attended by gratification fromthe exercise of a species of power as in meredexterity, successful pursuit in the field, or theaccomplishment of some work of art. Thisactivity is followed by weariness and a desire forrest,and although unattended with any describablepleasure or local sensation, there is diffusedthrough every part of the frame, after fatigueand whilst the active powers are sinking intorepose, a feeling almost voluptuous. To thissucceeds the impatience of rest, and thus we areurged to the alternations which are necessary tohealth, and invited on from stage to stage of ourexistence.We owe other enjoyments to the muscularsense. It would appear that in modern timeswe know comparatively little of the pleasuresarising from motion. The Greeks, and eventhe Romans, studied elegance of attitude andmovement. Their apparel admitted of it, andtheir exercises and games must have led to it.Their dances were not the result of mere exuberanceof spirits and activity ; they studiedharmony in the motion of the body and limbs,and majesty of gait. Their dances consistedmore of the unfolding of the arms than of theplay of the feet, " Their arms sublime thatfloated on the air." The Pyrrhic dances wereelegant movements, joined to the attitudes ofFROM THE MUSCULAR SENSE. 205combat, and performed in correct coincidencewith the expression of the music. The spectatorsin their theatres must have had verydifferent associations from ours, to account forthe national enthusiasm arising from music andtheir rage excited by a mere error in the time.This reminds us that the divisions in musicin some degree belong to the muscular sense.A man will put down his staff in regulated time,and the sound of his steps will fall into a measure,in his common walk. A boy strikingthe railing in mere wantonness, will do it witha regular succession of blows. This dispositionof the muscular frame to put itself into motionwith an accordance to time is the source ofmuch that is pleasing in music, and aids theeffect of melody. There is thus established theclosest connection between the enjoyments ofthe sense of hearing and the exercise of themuscular sense.*To learn how much the enjoyment of the sense of vision belongsto motion, see the " Additional Illustrations," at the end ofthe volume.CHAPTER X.THE HAND NOT THE SOURCE OF INGENUITY ORCONTRIVANCE, NOR CONSEQUENTLY OF MAN'SSUPERIORITY.SEEING the perfection of the hand, we canhardly be surprised that some philosophersshould have entertained the opinion with Anaxagoras,that the superiority of man is owing tohis hand. We have seen that the system ofbones, muscles, and nerves of this extremity isSOURCE OF SUPERIORITY. 207suited to every form and condition of vertebratedanimals ; and we must confess that it is in thehuman hand that we have the consummation ofall perfection as an instrument. This, we perceive,consists in its power, which is a combinationof strength with variety and extent ofmotion ; we see it in the forms, relations, andsensibility of the fingers and thumb ; in the provisionsfor holding, pulling, spinning, weaving,and constructing ; properties which may be foundin other animals, but which are combined toform this more perfect instrument.In these provisions the instrument correspondswith the superior mental capacities, the handbeing capable of executing whatever man's ingenuitysuggests. Nevertheless, the possessionof the ready instrument is not the cause of thesuperiority of man, nor is its aptness the measureof his attainments. So that we rather say withGalen that man had hands given to him becausehe was the wisest creature, than ascribehis superiority and knowledge to the use of hishands.*This question has arisen from observing theIta quidem sapientissimum animation est homo : ita auteinet manus sunt organa sapientia animals convenient. Non enimquia manus habuit praeterea est sapientissimum, ut Anaxagorasdicebat : sed quia sapientissimum erat, propter hoc manus habuit,ut rectissime censure Aristotle. Non enim manus ipse hominesartes docuerunt, sed ratio. Manus autem ipse sunt artium organa :sicut lyra, music, et forceps, fabric.208 THE HAND NOT THEperfect correspondence between the propensitiesof animals and their forms and outward organization.When we see a heron standing by thewater side, still as a grey stone, and hardlydistinguishable from it, we may ascribe thishabit to the acquired use of its feet, constructedfor wading, and to its long bill and flexibleneck ; for the neck and bill are as much suitedto its wants as the lister is to the fisherman.But there is nothing in the configuration of theblack-bear particularly adapted to catch fish ;yet he will sit on his hinder extremities by theside of a stream, in the morning or evening, likea practised fisher ; there he will watch, so motionlessas to deceive the eye of the Indian, whomistakes him for the burnt trunk of a tree ;and with his fore paw he will seize a fish withincredible celerity. The exterior organ is not,in this instance, the cause of the habit or of thepropensity ; and if we see the animal in possessionof the instinct without the appropriateorgan, we can the more readily believe that, inother examples, the habit exists with the instrument,although not through it.The canine teeth are not given without thecarnivorous appetite, nor is the necessity of livingby carnage joined to a timid disposition ; butboldness and fierceness, as well as cunning,belong to the animal with retractile claws andSOURCE OF INGENUITY. 209sharp teeth, and which prey on living animals.*On the other hand, the timid vegetable feederhas not his propensities produced by the erectears and prominent eyes : though his dispositioncorresponds with them in his suspiciousness andtimidity. The boldness of the bison or buffalomay be as great as that of the lion ; but theimpulse is different there is a direction givento him by instinct to strike with his horns : andhe will so push whether he has horns or not.The young calf will butt against you before hehas horns," says Galen : and the Scotch songhas it " the putting cow is ay a toddy," that is,the humble cow (inertia), although wantinghorns, is always the most mischievous. Whenthat noble animal, the Brahmin bull, of theZoological Gardens, first put his hoof on thesod and smelt the fresh grass after his voyage,placid and easily managed before, he becameexcited, plunged, and struck his horns into theearth, and ploughed up the ground on alternatesides, with a very remarkable precision. Thiswas his dangerous play ; just as the dog, in hisgambols, worries and fights : or the cat, thoughpleased, puts out its claws. It would, indeed,be strange, where all else is perfect, if theIn some of the quadrant, the canine teeth are as long andsharp as those of the tiger but they are in them only instrumentsof defence, and have no relation to the appetite, or mode ofdigestion, or internal organization.P210 INSTINCT OF THEinstinctive character or disposition of the animalwere at variance with its arms or instruments.But the idea may still be entertained that theaccidental use of the organ may conduce to itsmore frequent exercise and to the production ofa corresponding disposition. Such an hypothesiswould not explain the facts. The late SirJoseph Banks, in his evening conversations,told us that he had seen, what many perhapshave seen, a chicken catch at a fly whilst theshell stuck to its tail. Sir Humphrey Davyrelates that a friend of his having discoveredunder the burning sand of Ceylon, the eggs ofthe alligator, he had the curiosity to break oneof them; when a young alligator came forth,perfect in its motions and in its passions ; foralthough hatched under the influence of the sunbeamsin the burning sand, it made towards thewater, its proper element : when hindered, itassumed a threatening aspect and bit the stickpresented to it. As propensities to certain motionsare implanted in animals, to which theirexternal organs are subservient, so are passionsgiven as the means of defence or of obtainingfood. But this has been well said seventeenhundred years ago. " Take," says Galen, " threeeggs, one of an eagle, another of a goose, anda third of a viper ; and place them favourablyfor hatching. When the shells are broken,the eaglet and the gosling will attempt to fly ;YOUNG ANIMAL. 21 1while the young of the viper will coil and twistalong the ground. If the experiment be protractedto a later period, the eagle will soar tothe highest regions of the air, the goose betakeitself to the marshy pool, and the viper will buryitself in the ground."When we direct the enquiry to the comparisonof man's faculties with his outward organization,the subject has increased interest. With thepossession of an instrument like the hand theremust be a great part of the organization, whichstrictly belongs to it, concealed. The hand isnot a thing appended, or put on, like an additionalmovement in a watch; but a thousandintricate relations must be established throughoutthe body in connection with it such asnerves of motion and nerves of sensation : andthere must be an original part of the compositionof the brain, which shall have relation to thesenew parts, before they can be put in activity,But even with all this superadded organizationthe hand would lie inactive, unless there werecreated a propensity to put it into operation.I have been asked by men of the first educationand talents whether any thing really deficienthad been discovered in the organs of theorang-outang to prevent him from speaking!The reader will give me leave to place this mattercorrectly before him. In speaking, there isfirst required a certain force of expired air, or an212 THE SUBJECT ILLUSTRATEDaction of the muscles of respiration ; in thesecond place, the vocal chords in the top of thewind-pipe must be drawn into accordance bytheir muscles, else no vibration will take place,and no sound issue ; thirdly, the open passagesof the throat must be expanded, contracted, orextended by their numerous muscles, in correspondencewith the condition of the vocal chordsor glottis ; and these must all sympathise beforeeven a simple sound is produced. But to articulatethat sound, so that it may become a part ofa conventional language, there must be addedan action of the pharynx, of the palate, of thetongue and lips. The exquisite organizationfor all this is not visible in the organs of thevoice, as they are called : it is to be found in thenerves which combine all these various partsin one simultaneous act. The meshes of thespider's web, or the cordage of a man-of-war,are few and simple compared with the concealedfilaments of nerves which move these parts ;and if but one be wanting, or its tone oraction disturbed in the slightest degree, everybodyknows how a man will stand with hismouth open, twisting his tongue and lips in vainattempts to utter a word.It will now appear that there must be distinctlines of association suited to the organs of voicedifferent to combine them in the bark of adog, in the neighing of a horse, or in the shrillBY THE ORGANS OF SPEECH. 21.3whistle of the ape. That there are wide distinctionsin the structure of the different classes ofanimals is most certain ; but independently ofthose which are apparent, there are secret andminute varieties in the associating cords. Theape, therefore, does not articulate First, becausethe organs are not perfect to this end. Secondly,because the nerves do not associate these organsin that variety of action which is necessary tospeech. And, lastly, were all the exterior apparatusperfect, there is no impulse to that actof speaking.Now I hope it appears, from this enumerationof parts, that the main difference lies in theinternal faculty or propensity. As soon as achild can distinguish and admire, then are itsfeatures in action ; its voice begins to be modifiedinto a variety of sounds ; these are takenup and repeated by the nurse, and already asort of convention is established between them.We cannot, therefore, doubt that a propensity iscreated in correspondence with the outwardorgans, and without which they would be uselessappendages. The aptness of the instrument orexternal organ will undoubtedly improve thefaculty just as we find that giving freedom tothe expression of passion adds force to theemotion in the mind.One cannot but reflect here on that grandrevolution which took place when language, till214 THE INGENUITY OF THE HANDthen limited to its proper organ, had its representationin the work of the hand. Now that aman of mean estate can have a library of moreintrinsic value than that of Cicero, when thesentiments of past ages are as familiar as thoseof the present, and the knowledge of differentempires is transmitted and common to all, wecannot expect to have our sages followed, as ofold, by their five thousand scholars. Nationswill not now record their acts by building pyramids,nor consecrate temples and raise statues,once the only means of perpetuating great deedsor extraordinary virtues. It is in vain that ourartists complain that patronage is withheld : forthe ingenuity of the hand has at length subduedthe arts of design printing has made all otherrecords barbarous, and great men build forthemselves a " livelong monument."Buffon has attempted to convey to us themode in which knowledge may have been acquiredby watching (in fancy) the newly awakenedsenses in the first created Man : but, forthat which is consistent and splendid in ourgreat poet who makes him raise his wonderingeyes to Heaven and spring up by quick instinctivemotion as " thitherward endeavouring,"he substitutes a bad combination of philosophywith eloquence.HAS MADE A REVOLUTION IN ARTS. 215To place the subject more distinctly beforeus," says Buffon, " the first created man shallspeak for himself;" and the sentence which heis made to utter is to the effect, " that heremembers the moment of his creation thattime, so full of joy and trouble, when he firstlooked round on the verdant lawns and crystalfountains, and saw the vault of Heaven overhis head ;" and he proceeds to declare, " thathe knew not what he was or whence he came,and believed that all he saw was part of himself."He is thus represented to be consciousof objects, which even to see implies experience,and to enjoy, supposes a thousand agreeableassociations already formed: but from thisblissful state he is awakened by striking hishead against a palm tree, which he had not yetlearned could hurt him !Men are diffident of their first notions, andconceive that philosophy must lead to somethingvery different from what they have been earlytaught: hence the absurdity of this combinationof philosophy and poetry. Later writers haveargued that we have no right to suppose thatthere has been, at any time, an interruption tothe course of nature. What they term theuniformity of nature, is the prevalence of thesame laws which are now in operation. If, saythey, it happened that on the arrival of a colonyin a new country, fruits were produced spon-216 CHANGES IN THE GLOBEtaneously around them, and flowers sprung upunder their feet, then, we might suppose thatour first parents were placed in a scene of beautyand profusion suited to their helpless conditionand unlike what we see now in the course ofnature.It is not very wise to entertain the subject atall, but if it is to be argued, this is startingaltogether wide of the question. We do notdesire to know how a tribe migrating westwardcould find sustenance, but in what state mancould be created to live without a deviation fromwhat is called the course of nature.If man had been formed helpless as an infant,he must have perished ; and if mature in body,he must have been created with faculties suitedto his condition. A human being, pure fromthe Maker's hands, with desires and passionsimplanted in him, adapted to his state, andwith a suitable theatre of existence, impliessomething very near what we have been earlytaught to believe.In every change which the globe has undergone,we see an established relation between theanimal created, and the elements around it It isidle to suppose this a matter of chance. Eitherthe structure and functions of the animal musthave been formed to correspond with the conditionof the elements, or the elements must havebeen controlled to minister to the necessities ofAM) SUCCESSIVE EPOCHS. 217the animal ; and if the most careful investigationlead us to this conclusion, in contemplating allthe inferior gradations of animal existence,what is it that makes us so unwilling to admitsuch an influence in the last grand work ofcreation ?We cannot resist those proofs of a beginning,or of design prevailing everywhere, or of a FirstCause. When we are bold enough to extendour enquiries into the great revolutions whichhave taken place, whether in the condition ofthe earth or in the structure of the animalswhich have inhabited it, our notions of theuniformity of the course of nature must suffersome modification. Changes must, at certainepochs, have been wrought, and new beingsbrought into existence, different from the orderof things previously existing, or now existing:and such interference is not contrary to thegreat scheme of creation. It is not contrary tothat scheme, but only to our present state.For the most wise and benevolent purposes, aconviction is implanted in our nature that weshould rely on the course of events, as permanentand necessary. We belong to a certainepoch; and it is when our ambitious thoughtscarry us beyond our natural condition, that wefeel how much our faculties are constrained, andour conceptions, as well as our language, imperfect.We must either abandon these speculateCHANGES IN THE GLOBEtons altogether, or cease to argue purely fromour present situation.It has been made manifest that man and theanimals inhabiting the earth have been createdwith reference to the magnitude of the globeitself; that their living endowments bear a relationto their state of existence and to theelements around them. We have learnt thatthe system of animal bodies is simple anduniversal, notwithstanding the amazing diversityof forms that meet the eye and that thissystem not only embraces all living creatures,but that it has been in operation at periods ofgreat antiquity, before the last revolution of theearth's surface had been accomplished.The most obvious appearances and the laboursof the geologist give us reason to believe that theearth has not always been in the state in whichit is now presented to us. Every substancewhich we see is compound ; we nowhere obtainthe elements of things : the most solid materialsof the globe are formed of compounded andreunited parts. Changes have been wrought onthe general surface, and the proofs of thesechanges are as distinct as the furrows on a fieldare indicative that the plough has passed overit. The deeper parts of the crust of theearth and the animal remains imbedded, alsoAND SUCCESSIVE EPOCHS. 219give proofs of revolutions : and that in the courseof these revolutions there have been long periodsor epochs. In short, progressive changes, fromthe lowest to the highest state of existence, oforganization and of enjoyment, point to thegreat truth that there was a beginning.When the geologist sees a succession ofstratified rocks the lowest simple, or perhapschemical ; the strata above these, compound ; andsuccessively others more conglomerated, or moredistinctly composed of the fragments of theformer it is not easy to contradict the hypothesisof an eternal succession of causes. Butthere is nothing like this in the animal body,the material is the same in all, the generaldesign too is the same : but each family, asit is created, is submitted to such new andfundamental arrangements in its constructionas implies the presence of the hand of theCreator.There is nothing in the inspection of the speciesof animals, which countenances the notionof a return of the world to any former condition.When we acknowledge that animals have beencreated in succession and with an increasingcomplexity of parts, we are not to be understoodas admitting that there is. here proof of a growingmaturity of power, or an increasing effort in theCreator; and for this very plain reason, which-we have stated, that the bestowing of life or the220 COMPARISON OF SOME PARTS OF THEunion of the vital principle with the materialbody, is the manifestation of a power superior tothat displayed in the formation of an organ orthe combination of many organs, or constructionof the most complex mechanism. It is not,therefore, a greater power that we see in operation,but a power manifesting itself in theperfect and successive adaptation of one thingto another of vitality and organization to inorganicmatter.In contemplating the chain of animal creation,we observe that even now, there are parts of theearth's surface which are marshy, and insalubrious,and that these are the places inhabitedby amphibious and web-footed animals, suchas are suited to the oozy margins of swamps,lakes, or estuaries. It is most interesting tofind that when the remains of animals of similarconstruction, are found in the solid rocks, thegeologist discovers by other signs that at theperiod of the formation of these rocks, the surfacewas flat, and that it produced such plantsas imply a similar state of the earth to theseswampy and unhealthy regions, vWe mark changes in the earth Is surface, andobserve, at the same time, corresponding changesin the animal creation. We remark varieties inthe outward form, size, and general condition ofanimals, and corresponding varieties in theinternal organization, until we find men ere-earthWITH A FORMER CONDITION. 221acted of undoubted preeminence over all, andplaced suitably in a bounteous condition of theearth.Most certainly the original crust of the earthhas been fractured and burst up, so as to exposeits contents ; that they might be resolved andwashed away, by the vicissitudes of heat, cold,and rain. Mountains and valleys have beenformed ; the changes of temperature in theatmosphere have ensured continual motion andhealthful circulation : the plains have been madesalubrious, and the damps which hung on thelow grounds have gathered on the mountains inclouds, so that refreshing showers have broughtdown the soil to fertilize the plain ; thus at oncehave been supplied the means for man's existence,with objects suited to excite his ingenuity,and to reward it, and fitted to developed all thevarious properties both of his body and of hismind.There is extreme grandeur in the thought ofan anticipating or prospective intelligence : inreflecting that what was finally accomplished inman,was begun in times incalculably remote,and antecedent to the great revolutions whichthe earth's surface has undergone. Nor arethese conclusions too vast to be drawn from theexamination of a part so small as the bones ofthe hand ; since we have shown that the samesystem of parts which constitutes the perfection222 CONCLUSION.of that instrument adapted to our condition, hadits type in the members of those vast animalswhich inhabited the bays, and inland lakes of aformer world. If we seek to discover the relationsof things, how sublime is the relation establishedbetween that state of the earth's surface,which has resulted from a long succession ofrevolutions, and the final condition of its inhabitantsas created in accordance with thechange.Nothing is more surprising to our measure oftime, than the slowness with which the designsof Providence have been fulfilled. But as faras we can penetrate by the light of naturalknowledge, the condition of the earth, and withit of man's destinies, have hitherto been accomplishedin great epochs.We have been engaged in comparing thestructure, organs, and capacity of man and ofanimals we have traced a relation but we havealso observed a broad line of separation : manalone capable of reason, affection, gratitude, andreligion : sensible to the progress of time r consciousof the decay of his strength and faculties,of the loss of friends, and the approach of death.One who was the idol of his day has recordedhis feelings in nearly these words," We areaswell as those can be who have nothing furtherCONCLUSION. 2*23to hope or fear in this world. We go in andout, but without the sentiments that can createattachment to any spot. We are in a stateof quiet, but it is the tranquillity of the grave,in which all that could make life interestingto us is laid." If in such a state there were norefuge for the mind, then were there somethingwanting in the scheme of nature : an imperfectionin man's condition at variance with thebenevolence which is manifested in all otherparts of animated nature.ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS.ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS.THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF THE SOLID StructureOF THE ANIMAL BODY CONSIDERED. K>(I YIELD to the suggestion of friends in furtherpursuing the subject of the solid textures of theanimal frame, with the proofs of design whichare exhibited in its mechanical provisions.It has been shown in the first chapter thatsolidity and gravity are qualities necessary toevery inhabitant of the earth : the first to protectit ; the second, that the animal may stand,and possess that resistance, which shall makethe muscles available for action.The first material to be taken notice of, whichbestows this necessary firmness on the animaltextures, is the cellular substance. This consistsof delicate membranes, which form cells ; thesecells communicate with each other, and thetissue thus composed enters every where intothe structure of the animal frame. It constitutesthe principal part of the medusa, whichfloats like a bubble on the water ; and it isfound in every texture of the human body.It forms the most delicate coats of the eye,228 ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONSand gives toughness and firmness to the skin.It is twisted into ligaments, and knits thestrongest bones : it is the medium betweenbone, muscle, and blood-vessel : it produces acertain firmness and union of the various componentparts of the body while it admits of theireasy motion. Without it, we should be rigid,notwithstanding the proper organs for motion ;and the cavities could not be distended or contracted,nor could the vessels pulsate.But this cellular texture is not sufficient on alloccasions, either for giving strength or protection: nor does it serve to sustain the weight,unless the animal live suspended in water, orcreep upon the ground. We see, therefore, thenecessity for some harder and more resistingmaterial being added, if the weight is to rest onpoints or extremities ; or if the muscular activityis to be concentrated.Nature has other means of supplying thefulcrum and lever, besides the bones, or trueskeleton, which we have been examining in thefirst part of this volume : and perhaps we shallfind that there may be a system of solid partssuperior to what we have been studying in thevertebrata.The larvae of proper insects and the annelideshave no exterior members for walking or flying :but to enable them to creep, they must havepoints of resistance, or their muscles would beOF THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES. 229useless. Their skins suffice ; they are hardenedby a deposit within them for this purpose; butif this skin were not further provided, it wouldbe rigid and unyielding, and be no substitutefor bone. These hardened integuments are,therefore, divided into rings ; to these themuscles are attached ; and as the cellular membranebetween the rings is pliant, these anne-hidescan creep and turn in every direction.Without further argument, we perceive howthe skin, by having a hard matter depositedin it, is adapted to all the purposes of theskeleton. It is worthy of notice that someanimals, still lower in the scale, the tubipores,sertularia, cellular, &c., exhibit something likea skeleton. They are contained within a strongcase from which they can extend themselves :whilst the corals and madrepores, on the otherhand, have a central axis of hard material, thesoft animal substance being, in a manner, seatedupon it. But these substitutes for the skeletonare, like shell, foreign to the living animal ;although in office they may resemble bone insustaining the softer substance and giving form.In the proper insect I should say that there isa nearer approach to a skeleton, did it notappear that the apparatus is more perfect thanin some of the animals which have a true skeleton.The resisting material is here depositedexternally, and is converted to every purpose230 ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONSwhich we have seen attained by means of theskeleton. Distinct members are formed, with thepower of walking, leaping, flying, holding, spinning,and weaving. The hardened integuments,thus articulated and performing the office ofbones, have, like them, spines and processes:with this difference, that their aspect is towardsthe centre, instead of prop acting exteriorly. Werewe to compare the system of " resisting parts"in man and in the insect, we should be forced toacknowledge the mechanical provisions to besuperior in the lower animal ! The first advantageof the skeleton (as we may be permitted tocall the system of hard parts in the insect) beingexternal and lifeless, is, that it is capable ofhaving greater hardness and strength bestowedupon it, according to the necessities of the animal,than can be bestowed upon bone : true bonebeing internal and growing with the animal, ispenetrated with blood vessels ; and thereforemust be porous and soft. The next advantageis mechanical. The hard material is strong toresist fracture, and to bear the action of musclesin proportion to its distance from the centre :for the muscles in the insect, instead of surroundingthe bones, as in the higher animals,are contained within the shell, and the shell is,consequently, so much the further thrown offfrom the axis.When considering the larger vertebral THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES. 231male, we had reason to say that there is acorrespondence between the resistance of thebones and the power of the muscles, and wemay indulge the same reflection here. As theintegument covering the insect is much harderthan bone, so are the muscles stronger, comparedwith the muscles of the vertebrata. From thetime of Socrates, comparisons have been madebetween the strength of the horse and of theinsect ; to the obvious superiority of the latter.As goodly a volume has been written on themuscles of a caterpillar as has ever been dedicatedto the human apology. A very minuteanatomical description has been made of thecaterpillar which feeds upon the willow; andhere we see that the annular construction of thehard integument determines the plan of thewhole anatomy : the arrangement of the muscles,and the distribution of the nerves. Each ringhas its three sets of muscles ; direct, oblique,traversing and interweaving, but yet distinctand symmetrical ; and all as capable of beingminutely described as those of the human bodyhave been by Albinus.* Corresponding withthese muscles, the system of nerves is delicatelylaid down. In short, we allow ourselves to bemisled in supposing that animals, either ofThe work referred to is by Linnet, who reckons four thousandand sixty one muscles in this caterpillar. He was, I think,a lawyer, with little to do.232 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THEminute size or low in the scale of arrangement,exhibit any neglect or imperfection. Even ifthey were more simple in structure, the admirationshould be the greater: since they have allthe functions in full operation which are necessaryto life.We may perceive that a certain substancecalculated to sustain the more strictly livingpart, and to give strength, may be tracedthrough all living bodies. In the vegetable it isthe woody fibre ; and there, sometimes, as if tomark the analogy, we may find silicious earthdeposited instead of the phosphate and carbonateof lime of the animal structure. In thelower animals we find membranes capable ofsecreting a solid material, and although in someinstances the substance is like leather or cartilage,it is in general earthy, and for the most part,carbonate of lime. But when elasticity is necessary,as well as general resistance, cartilage isemployed, which is a highly compressible andelastic substance. Thus, in fishes, there is alarge proportion of cartilage in their bones, andfrom this greater quantity, some have beencalled cartilaginous in distinction to the osseousor true fishes. The cartilaginous and elasticskeleton is brought into use in an unexpectedmanner : when the salmon or trout leaps fromthe water, the muscles bend the elastic spine,which recoils in aid of the muscles of the oppo-MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF BONE. 233site class : and thus these two forces combine togive a powerful stroke with the tail on thewater.MECHANICAL PROPERTIES IN BONE OR IN THETRUE SKELETON.These considerations lead us the more readilyto understand the composition of bone : whichis a combination of three parts having differentproperties, membrane, phosphate of lime, andcartilage. By these it is enabled to resiststretching, compression, and portion. If bonehad a superabundance of the earthy parts, itwould break like a piece of porcelain ; and if itdid not possess toughness and some degree ofelasticity, it would not enable a man to pull andpush and twist.Looking to the dense bone, we should hardlysuppose that it was elastic ; but if ivory be possessedof elasticity, it cannot be denied to bone.Now if a billiard ball be put upon a marble slabwhich has been painted, a very small spot willmark where the contact has been ; but if we letthe ball drop upon the marble from a height, weshall find the spot much larger, and that theelasticity of the ivory has permitted the ball toyield and momentarily to assume an oblatespheroidal form.When a new principle is admitted into a234 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THEcomplex fabric, the utmost ingenuity can hardlyanticipate all the results. Elasticity is extensivelyemployed in the machinery of the animalbody ; and to show how finely it must be apportioned,we shall take the instance of a bridgebuilt with iron instead of stone, and having acertain swing and elasticity. It lately happenedthat a bridge of this kind fell in very curiouscircumstances, by the marching of a body ofsoldiers over it. Now the bridge was calculatedto sustain a greater weight than this body ofmen : and had they walked tumultuously overit, it would have withstood the pressure: butthe soldiers marching to time, accumulated amotion, aided by the elasticity of the material,which broke it down. This leads us to form aconception of the necessity of the fine adjustmentof the material in the animal fabric ; notmerely to enable it to sustain the incumbentweight, or transverse or oblique impulses, but towithstand the frequent, and regularly repeatedforces to which it may be subject in the variousactions of the body. It gives interest to thisfact, that there is hardly a bone but what has aconstitution of its own, adjusted to its place anduse : the heel bone, the shin bone, the vertebrae,and the bones of the head, differ in mechanicalconstruction. But the consideration of theseadaptations in the constitution of the bonesmakes some general remarks necessary.MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF BONE. 235Perfect security against accidents in the animalbody, and in man especially, is not consistentwith the scheme of nature. Without theprecautions and the continued calls to exertion,for safety, which danger and the uncertainty oflife produce, many of the faculties of the mindwould remain unexercised ; and whence elsewould come courage, resolution, and all themanly virtues ? Take away the influence of theuncertain duration of life, and we must supposealso a change in the whole moral constitution ofman. Whether we consider the bones as formedto protect the part, as in the skull : or to belevers to which the muscles are attached, as inthe limbs : or in both capacities, as in the textureof the chest : while they are perfectly adaptedto their function, they are yet subject to derangementsfrom accident. The mechanical adaptationswhich we have to observe are perfectlysufficient to their ends, and afford safety in thenatural exercises of the body. To these exercisesthere is an intuitive impulse, ordered witha relation to the frame of the body ; whilst, onthe other hand, we are deterred from the excessiveor dangerous use of the limbs by the admonitionsof pain. Without such considerations,the reader would fall into the mistake thatweakness and liability to fracture implied imperfectionin the frame of the body : whereas adeeper contemplation of the subject will ILLUSTRATIONS OF THEvince him of the incomparable perfection both ofthe plan and of the execution. The body isintended to be subject to derangement andaccident, and to become, in the course of life,more and more fragile, until by some failure inthe frame-work or vital actions, life terminates.The bones of the extremities are called hollowcylinders. Now, after we have convinced ourselvesof the necessity of this formation, we findthese bones, upon a more particular examination,extremely varied in their shapes: and we are,at last, prone to believe that there is much ofchance or irregularity in their shapes ; but sucha conception is quite inconsistent with a correctknowledge of the skeleton. As this notion, however,is Tery commonly entertained and leads tofurther mistakes, we shall take pains to show,first, why the bones are hollow ; and, in thesecond place, why they vary in their shape, soas to appear to the superficial observer irregular.The reasoning that applies to the hollow cylindricalbone serves equally to explain many othernatural forms, as that of a quill, a reed, or astraw. The last example reminds us of the unfortunateman who was drawn from his cellbefore the Inquisition, and accused of havingdenied that there was a God ; when picking upa straw that had stuck to his garments, he said,If there were nothing else in nature to teachme the existence of a Deity, this straw wouldMECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF BONE. 237be sufficient." It hardly requires demonstrationto prove that, with a given mass of materialto make a pillar or column, the hollow cylinderwill be the form of strength. The experimentsof Du Camel on the strength of beams afford usthe best illustration how the material should bearranged to resist transverse fracture. When abeam rests on its extremities, bearing a weightupon its centre, it admits of being divided intothree portions ; for these three parts are in adifferent condition with regard to the weight.The lower part resists fracture by its toughness :the upper part, by its density and resistance tocompression : but there is a portion between thesewhich is not acted upon at all ; which might betakenaway without any considerable weakeningof the beam : and which might be added to theupper or the lower part with great advantage.It can readily be understood how a tougher substanceadded to the lower part would strengthenthe beam : we see it in the skin which is laidalong the back part of the Indian's bow ; or inthe leather of a carriage spring : but the followingis a beautiful experiment to demonstrate thatquality in the timber which resists, at the upperportion of the beam. If a portion amounting tonearly a third part of the beam be cut away and aharder piece of wood be nicely let into the space,the strength will be encreased ; because the hardnessof this piece of wood resists compression.238 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THEThis experiment I like the better because itexplains a very interesting peculiarity in the differentdensities of the several parts or sides of thebones. In reading anatomical books, we are ledto the supposition that the various forms of thebones result from the pressure of the muscles.This is a mistake. Were we to consider this thetrue explanation, it would not only be admittingan imperfection, but we should expect to find,if the bones yielded in any degree to the forceof the muscles, that they would yield more andmore, and be ultimately destroyed. There isnothing more admirable in the living frame thanthe relation established between the muscularpower and the capacity of passive resistance inthe bones. The deviations from the cylindricalforms are not irregularities ; and if we take thatbone which deviates the furthest from the cylindricalshape, the tibia, or shin bone, we shallhave demonstration of the relation between theshape of the bone and the force which it has tosustain.If we consider the direction of the force inwalking, running, or leaping, and in all thepowerful exertions where the weight of the bodyis thrown forwards on the ball of the great toe,it must appear that the pressure against thisbone is chiefly on the anterior part : and thereis no doubt that if the tibia were a perfectcylinder, it would be subject to fracture evenMECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF BONE. '23$with the mere force of the body itself thrownupon it. But if, as we have stated, the columnis stronger in proportion as the material isdistant from the centre, we readily perceive howan anterior spine, or ridge, should be thrownout : and if we attend to the internal structure ofthat spine, we shall find that it is much denserand stronger than the rest of the bone. Wecannot here deem either the form or the densityof this ridge, a thing of accident; since it soperfectly corresponds with the experiment ofDu Camel which we have described, where thedense piece of wood being let into the piece oftimber, it was found to be a means of resistingtransverse fracture. If we proceed with theknowledge of these facts to the examination ofthe different bones of the skeleton, we shall findthat every where the form has a strict relationeither to the motion to be performed, or thestrain to which the bone is liable.In comparing the true bones with the coveringsof the insects, we observed the necessity forthe porous structure of the former. If it benecessary that the bone shall be very dense, itwill no longer be possessed of the power ofre-union or reproduction when it breaks : it willnot re-unite upon being fractured, and if exposed,it will die. Here, then, is an obvious imperfection.The bones of animals cannot, in thismanner, be made capable of sustaining great240 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THEweight, without losing a property which is necessaryto their existence that of restoration ontheir being injured. And even were the materialvery much condensed, it does not appearthat the phosphate of lime, united as it is withthe animal matter, is capable of sustaining anygreat weight ; this accordingly limits the sizeof animals. It may, perhaps, countenance thebelief that animals bear a relation in their sizeand duration of life, to the powers and life ofman, that the larger animals have existed in aformer condition of the world. We allude onlyto such animals as have extremities : for withrespect to the whale, its huge bulk lies outsupported on the water. The iguanadon, discoveredby Mr. Mantel, is estimated to havebeen seventy feet in length, and to have had extremities.But the thigh and leg did not exceedeight feet in length, while the foot extended tosix feet ; a proportion, altogether, which impliesthat the extremities assisted the animal to crawl,rather than that they were capable of bearing itsweight, as the extremities of the mammalia.However, we find that in the larger terrestrialanimals, the material of the bones is dense, andthat their cavities are filled up : the diameters ofthose of the extremities, with their spines andprocesses being remarkably large. Nothing canbe conceived more clumsy than the bones of themegatherium : so that it really appears thatMECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF BONE. '241nature has exhausted her resources with respectto this material ; and that living and vascularbone could not be moulded into a form to sustainthe bulk and weight of an animal much superiorto the elephant, mastodon, and megatherium.*With regard to the articulation of the bones,we cannot mistake the reason of the surfacesof contact being enlarged. In machinery it isfound that, if the pressure be the same, the extensionof the surfaces in contact does not increasethe friction. If, for example, a stone orapiece of timber, of the shape of a book or abrick, should be laid upon a flat surface, it wouldThe subject may be illustrated in this manner: " A softstone projecting from a wall, may make a stile strong enoughto bear a person's weight; but if it were necessary to double thelength of the stile, the thickness must be more than doubled,or a freestone substituted ; and were it necessary to make thisfreestone project twice as far from the wall, even if doubledin thickness, it would not be strong enough to bear a proportionedincrease of weight : granite must be placed in its stead ;and even the granite would not be capable of sustaining fourtimes the weight which the soft stone bore in the first instance.In the same way the stones which form an arch, of a large span,must be of the hardest granite, or their own weight would crushthem. The same principle is applicable to the bones of animals.The material of bone is too soft to admit an indefinite increase ofweight ; and it is another illustration of what was before stated,' that there is a relation established through all nature : that thevery animals which move upon the surface of the earth are proportionedto its magnitude, and the gravitation to its centre."Animal Mechanics.242 OF ELASTIC PARTS.be drawn across it with equal facility, whetherit rested upon its edge or upon its side. Thefriction of the bones which enter into the kneejoint is not increased by their greater diameter :while great advantages are gained; the ligamentswhich knit these bones give more strengththan they otherwise would, and the tendonswhich run over them, being removed to a distancefrom the centre, have more power.THE MUSCULAR AND ELASTIC FORCES.The muscular power is contrasted with theelastic, as possessing a living property of motion.We acquiesce in the distinction, sincethe muscular fibre ceases to have irritabilityor power in death, while elasticity continuesin the dead part. But yet there is a propertyof elasticity in the living body whichcannot be retained after death. To illustratethis we shall take the instance of the catgutstring of a harp. Suppose that the string isscrewed tight, so as to vibrate in a given time,and to sound the note correctly ; if that string bestruck rudely, it is put out of tune ; that is, it isstretched and somewhat relaxed, and no longervibrates in time. This does not take place inthe living fibre : for here there is a property ofOF ELASTIC PARTS. 243restoration. If we see the tuner screwing upthe harp string, and with difficulty, and afterrepeated attempts, bringing it to its due tension,trying it with the tuning fork, and with hisutmost acquired skill restoring it to its formerelasticity, we have a demonstration of how muchlife is performing in the fibres of the animalframe, after every effort or exertion ; and themore powerful the mechanical parts of the bodyare, the more carefully is the proper tensionof the tendons, ligaments, and heart-cords preserved.Or we may take the example of asteel spring. A piece of steel, heated to awhite heat, and plunged into cold water, acquirescertain properties ; and if heated again to500 of Fahrenheit, it is very elastic ; possessingwhat is called a " spring temper," so that it willrecoil and vibrate. But if this spring be bent inadegree too much, it will lose part of its elasticity.Should the parts of the living body, onthe other hand, be thus used, they have a powerof restoration which the steel has not.If a piece of fine mechanism be made perfectby the workman, it may be laid by and preserved: but it is very different with the animalbody. The mechanical properties of the livingframe, like the endowments of the mind, mustnot lie idle, or they will suffer deterioration. If,by some misfortune, a limb be put out of use,OF ELASTIC PARTS.not only is the power of the muscles rapidly diminished,which every one will acknowledge, butthe property of resistance is destroyed; andbones, and tendons, and ligaments quicklydegenerate.*This subject is illustrated in the Essay on Animal Mechanics,Part II.A COMPARISON OF THE EYE WITH THE HAND.IF we are in search of an object which shallexcite the highest interest, and at the same timeafford proofs of design in the most delicate of allthe organs of the body, we naturally turn to theeye : and this organ suits our present purposethe better, that we have to show how much ofthe sense of vision depends on the hand, andhow strict the analogy is between the twoorgans.From the time of Sir Henry Wotton to thelatest writer on light, the eye has been a subjectof admiration and eulogy. But I have ventured,on a former occasion,* to say, that this admirationis misplaced, while it is given to the ball ofthe eye and the optic nerve exclusively; sincethe high endowments of this organ belong to theexercise of the whole eye, to its exterior apparatus,as much as to its humours and the propernerve of vision. It is to the muscular apparatus,and to the conclusions which we are enabled todraw from the consciousness of muscular effort,See Philosophical Transactions.246 COMPARISON OF THE EYEthat we owe that sense by which we becomefamiliar with the form, magnitude, and relationsof objects. One might as well imagine that heunderstood the effect and uses of a theodolite, onestimating the optical powers of the glasses,without looking to the quadrant, level, or plumb-line,as suppose that he had learnt the wholepowers of the eye by confining his study to thenaked ball.We must begin our observations by a minuteattention to the structure and sensibility of theretina. The retina is the internal coat of theeye; it consists of a delicate, pulpy, nervousmatter, which is contained between two membranesof extreme fineness, and these membranesboth support it and give to its surfaces amathematical correctness. The matter of thenerve, as well as these supporting membranes, areperfectly transparent, during life ; and on the axisof the eye, there is a small portion which remainstransparent, when the rest of the membrane becomesopaque, and which has been mistaken foraforamen,* or hole in the retina. It is surprising,that with all the industry which hasbeen employed to demonstrate the structure ofthe eye, it is only in the present day that a mostessential part of the retina has been discoveredthe membrane of Mr. Jacob. From observingIt is this part which is called the foramen of Stammering.WITH THE HAND. 247the phenomena of vision, and especially the extrememinuteness of the image cast upon theretina, I had conceived that the whole nerve wasnot the seat of vision, but only one or other ofits surfaces. This could not be well illustrateduntil the exterior membrane of the retina wasdemonstrated. But now we see that this membrane,when floated in water and under a magnifyingglass, is of extreme tenuity, and itssmooth surface is well calculated to correspondwith the exterior surface of that layer of nervousmatter which is the seat of the sense.The term retina would imply that the nerveconstitutes a net work : and the expressions ofsome of our first modern authorities would induceus to believe that they view it in this light, ascorresponding with their hypothesis. But thereis no fibrous texture in the matter of the nerve ;although, when the retina is floated and tornwith the point of a needle, the innermost of themembranes which support the nerve, the tunicavasculosa retina, presents something of this appearance.Vision is not excited by light unless the rayspenetrate through the transparent retina andreach the exterior surface from within.It is well known, that if we press upon theeye-ball with a key or the end of a pencil-case,zones of light are excited. The perception ofthat light is, as if the rays came iii a direction248 COMPARISON OF THE EYEopposite to the pressure. We may say that, inthis case, the effect of the pressure is assimilatedto that of light ; and as light can strike the partof the nerve which is pressed, only by coming inan opposite direction, the zones of light producedby the mechanical impulse appear in the usualdirection of rays impinging upon this part : andconsequently, they give the impression of theirsource being in the opposite quarter. Let uscontrast this phenomenon with the following experiment.Close the eyelids, and cover themwith a piece of black cloth or paper which has asmall hole in it ; and place this hole, not oppositeto the pupil, but to the white of the eye :direct a beam of light upon the hole ; a personwill see this light in its true direction. Whyshould there be in these two cases a differencein the apparent place from which the light isderived? were it not that the rays of lightdirected upon the eye ball, after striking uponthe retina, pierce through it and through thehumours of the eye, and impinge upon the retinaon the opposite side. This explains why thelight excited in the eye shall appear to comefrom different quarters : but it does not explainwhy there should not be a double impressionwhy the beam of light should not influence theretina while penetrating it in the first instance,that is in passing through it from without inwards,as well as when it has penetrated theWITH THE HAND k 249humours and strikes upon the opposite part ofthe retina from within outwards.Another fact, which has surprised philosophers,is the insensibility of the optic nerveitself to light. If it be so contrived that thestrongest beam of light shall fall upon the endof the nerve at the bottom of the eye, where itbegins to expand into the delicate retina, nosensation of light will be produced. This oughtnot to surprise us, if I am correct in my statementthat the gross matter of the nerve is not theorgan of vision, but the exterior surface of itonly. In the extremity of the optic nerve thereis, of course, no posterior surface ; and, indeed,nothing can better prove the distinct office of thenerve as contrasted with the expanded retina,than this circumstance, that when the strongestray of light strikes into the nerve itself, the impressionis not received. It seems to imply, thatthe capacity of receiving the impression, and ofconveying it to the sensorium are two distinctfunctions.Is not this opinion more consistent with thephenomena than what is expressed by one of ourfirst philosophers, that the nerve, at its extremitytowards the eye, forms what has beencalled the punctum caecum, and is insensible,because it is not yet divided into those almostinfinitely minute fibres which are fine enough tobe thrown into tremors by the rays of light.250 COMPARISON OF THE EYEIndependently of this punctum caecum, wehave to observe that the whole surface of theretina is not equally sensible to light. There isa small spot, opposite to the pupil and in theaxis of the eye, which is more peculiarly sensibleto visual impressions. An attempt hasbeen made to ascertain the diameter of this spot ;and it is said, that a ray at an angle of fivedegrees from the optic axis, strikes exterior tothis sensible part. But we shall, on the contrary,see reason to conclude, that the sensiblespot is not limited to an exact circle, that it isnot regularly defined, and that the sensibility,in fact, is increasing to the very centre.Some have denied the existence of this extremesensibility in the centre of the retina,attributing the distinctness of the vision to thecircumstance of the light being made to convergethrough the influence of the humours,more correctly to this point. I shall, therefore,show how impossible vision would be, were itnot that the sensibility of the retina increasesgradually from its utmost circumference to thepoint which forms the axis of the eye.We see objects by reflected light, at the veryinstant that direct light enters the eye. As theimpression by the direct light is many timesstronger than the reflected rays from the object,the vision of the object would be destroyed bythe contrast, were there not this admirable pro-withTHE HAND. 251vision in the retina, that the direct light shallfall upon a part less sensible, the reflected lightupon a part more sensible. If, in full day, andin the open field, the eye be directed southward,the rays from the sun enter the eye at the timethat we are looking to certain objects. It isperfectly clear, that if the sun's rays struck a partof the retina as sensible as the spot in the centreor axis, it would extinguish all secondary impressions: the glare would be painfully powerful,as when we look directly to the sun. If amomentary glance to the sun produce a sensationso acute that we see nothing for sometimeafter, would not the same happen were theretina equally sensible in all its surface? Asimilar thing takes place in a chamber lightedwith candles ; we do not see the person immediatelyon the other side of the candle : for therethe direct light interferes with the reflectedlight, effacing the slighter impression of thelatter.We perceive, therefore, that if the retinawere equally sensible over all its surface wecould not see. Let us, then, observe how wedo actually see, and how the organ is exercised.There is a continual desire of exercisingthe sensible spot, the proper seat of vision.When an impression is made upon the retina,in that unsatisfactory degree, which is theeffect of its striking any part but the centre,252 COMPARISON OF THE EYEthere is an effort made to direct the axis towardsit, or, in other words, to receive the rays from itupon the more sensible centre. It is this sensibility,therefore, conjoined with the action of themuscles of the eye-ball, which produce the constantsearching motion of the eye ; so that, ineffect, from the lesser sensibility of the retinagenerally, arises the necessity for this exerciseof the organ ; and to this may be attributed thehigh perfections of it.This faculty of searching for the object isslowly acquired in the child : and, in truth, themotions of the eye are made perfect, like those ofthe hand by slow degrees. In both organs thereis a compound operation : the impression onthe nerve of sense is accompanied with an effortof the will, to accommodate the muscular actionto it. It is no contradiction to this, that thefaculty of vision is made perfect in the young ofsome animals from the beginning ; no more thanthe instinct of the duck, when it runs to thewater the moment that the shell is broken, contradictsthe fact that the child learns to standand walk after a thousand repeated efforts.Let us now see how essential this searchingmotion of the eye is to vision. On coming intoa room, we see the whole side of it at once themirror, the pictures, the cornice, the chairs ;but we are deceived : being unconscious of themotions of the eye, and that each object isWITH The HAND.rapidly, but successively, presented to it. It iseasy to show, that if the eye were steady, visionwould be quickly lost: that all these objects,which are distinct and brilliant, are so from themotion of the eye : that they would disappear ifit w r ere otherwise. For example, let us fix theeye on one point, a thing difficult to do, owing tothe very disposition to motion in the eye : butby repeated attempts we may at length acquirethe power of fixing the eye to a point ; and whenwe have done so, we shall find, that the wholescene becomes more and more obscure, andfinally vanishes. Let us fix the eye on thecorner of the frame of the principal picture inthe room. At first, every thing around it is distinct; in a very little time, however, the impressionbecomes weaker, objects appear dim, andthen the eye has an almost incontrollable desireto wander ; if this be resisted, the impressionsof the figures in the picture first fade : for atime, we see the gilded frame : but this also becomesdim. When we have thus far ascertainedthe fact, we change the direction of the eye, butever so little, and at once the whole scene isagain perfect before us.These phenomena are consequent upon theretina being subject to exhaustion. When acoloured ray of light impinges continuously onthe same part of the retina, it becomes lesssensible to it, but more sensible to a ray of the*2-34 COMPARISON OF THE EYEopposite colour. When the eye is fixed upon apoint, the lights, shades, and colours of objectscontinuing to strike upon the same relative partsof the retina, the nerve is exhausted : but whenthe eye shifts, there is a new exercise of thenerve : the part of the retina that was opposedto the lights, is now opposed to the shades, andwhat was opposed to the different colours is nowopposed to other colours, and the variationin the exciting cause produces a renewed sensation.From this it appears, how essential theincessant searching motion of the eye is to thecontinued exercise of the organ.Before dismissing this subject, we may giveanother instance. If we are looking upon anextensive prospect, and have the eye caught byan object at a distance, or when, in expectationof a friend, we see a figure advancing on thedistant road, and we endeavour to scrutinize theobject, fixing the eye intently upon it, it disappears; in our disappointment we rub the eyes,cast them about, look again, and once more wesee the object. The reason of this is very obvious: the retina is exhausted, but becomes recruitedby looking on the other objects of differentshades and colours. The sportsman onthe moor or the hill side, feels this a hundredtimes when he marks down his covey, fixinghis eye and travelling towards the spot.Here we may interrupt our inquiry to observeWITH THE HAND. 255how inconsistent these phenomena are with thefavourite hypothesis that light produces visionby exciting vibration in the fibres of the nerve.By all the laws of motion from which this hypothesisis borrowed, we know that if a body besetin motion, it is easily kept in motion ; andthat if a cord vibrate, that vibration will be keptup by a motion in the same time. It appearsto me natural to suppose, that if these fibres ofthe nerve (which, be it remembered, are alsoimaginary) were moved like the cords of amusical instrument, they would be most easilycontinued in motion by undulations in the sametime : that if the red ray oscillated or vibratedin a certain proportion of time, it would keepthe fibres of the nerve in action more easily, thanagreen ray, which vibrates in a different time.If the colour of a ray depended upon the peculiarundulation or vibration, it appears that beforethe green ray could produce a motion correspondingwith itself, it must encounter acertain opposition, in interrupting the motionalready begun.*" Although any kind of impulse or motions regulated by anylaw may be transferred from molecule to molecule in an elasticmedium, yet in the theory of light it is supposed that only suchprimary impulses, as recur according to regular periodical laws,at equal intervals of time and repeated many times in succession,can affect our organs with the sensation of light. To put inmotion the molecules of the nerves of our retina with sufficient*2O(> COMPARISON OF THE EyeReverting to the sensible spot in the retina, itdoes not appear that we are authorised interming it a spot. The same law governs visionwhen we look to a fine point of a needle, orto an object in an extensive landscape. Welook to the point of a pen, and we can restthe attention on the point upon the one sideof the slit, to the exclusion of the other, justas we can select and intently survey a house oratree. If the sensible spot were regularlyefficacy, it is necessary that the almost infinitely minute impulseof the adjacent ethereal molecules should be often and regularlyrepeated, so as to multiply and concentrate their effect. Thus, asagreat pendulum may be set in swing by a very minute force,often applied at intervals exactly equal to its time of oscillation,or as one elastic body can be set in vibration, by the vibration ofanother at a distance propagated through the air, if in exactunison, even so we may conceive the gross fibres of the nerves ofthe retina to be thrown into motion by the continual repetition ofthe ethereal pulses : and such only will be thus agitated, as fromtheir size, shape, or elasticity, are susceptible of vibrating intimesexactly equal to those at which the impulses are repeated.Thus it is easy to conceive how the limits of visible colour maybeestablished : for if there be no nervous fibres in unison withvibrations more or less frequent than certain limits, such vibrations,though they reach the retina, will produce no sensation.Thus, too, a single impulse, or an irregularly repeated one, producesno light. And thus also may the vibrations excited in theretina continue a sensible time after the exciting cause hasceased, prolonging the sensation of light (especially if a vividone) for an instant in the eye in the manner described." SirW. Herschel, Art. Light. Enc. Met.Now it does appear to me that this reasoning is inconsistentwith the phenomena above noticed.WITH THE HAND. '257defined, it must be very small: and were it,indeed, so defined, we should be sensible of it ;which we are not. The laV, therefore, seems tobe, at all times, that the nearer to the centre ofthe eye, the greater the sensibility to impression; and this holds whether we are lookingabroad in the country, or are microscopicallyintent upon objects of great minuteness.When men deny the fine muscular adaptationof the eye to the sensation on the retina, how dothey account for the obvious fact that the eyeballdoes move in such just degrees ? how is theone eye adjusted to the other with such marvellousprecision ? and how do the eyes move togetherin pursuit of an object, never failing toaccompany it correctly, be it the flight of a bird,or the course of a tennis-ball, or even of abomb-shell ? Is it not an irresistible conclusionthat if we so follow an object, adjusting themuscles of the eye so as to present the axis ofvision successively to it, as it changes place, wemust be sensible of these motions ? for how canwe direct the muscles unless we be sensible totheir action ? The question then comes, to bewhether being sensible to the condition of themuscles, and being capable of directing themwith this extraordinary minuteness, this actionof the muscles does not enter into our computationof the place of an object ? But is not thisexactly the same question recurring as when wes258 COMPARISON OF THE EYEasked whether we can direct the hand withoutknowing where the hand is? Must there notbe a feeling or knowledge of the position of thehand, before we can give it direction to anobject? And must we not have a conception ofthe relation of the muscles and of the positionof the axis of the eye, before we can alter itsdirection to fix it upon a new object?It surprises me to find ingenious men refusingtheir assent to the opinion, that the operation ofthe muscles of the eye is necessary to perfectvision, when the gradual acquisition of thepower may be seen in observing the awakeningsense in the infant. When a bright objectis withdrawn from the infant's eye, there isa blank expression in the features ; and anexcitement when the object is again presented.For a time, the shifting of the object is notattended with the searching action of the eye :but, by and bye, the eye follows it and looksaround for it, when it is lost. In this gradualacquisition of power in the eye, there is an exactparallel to the acquisition of motion in the hand ;and in both instances, we seek to join the experienceobtained by means of the muscularmotion with the impression on the proper nerveof sense.Some maintain that our idea of the position ofan object is implanted in the mind and independentof experience. We must acknowledgeTHE HAND. 259the possibility of this, had it been so provided.We see the young of some creatures with theirvision thus perfect at the moment of their birth.But in these animals, every corresponding facultyis, in the same manner, perfect from thebeginning : the dropped foal, or the lamb, risesand follows its mother. We must no more comparethe helpless human offspring with theyoung of these animals than with a fly, theexistence of which is limited to an hour atnoon, which breaking from its confinement,knows its mate and deposits its eggs on theappropriate tree the willow or the thorn, anddies. But this is foreign to our enquiry ; sinceit is obvious that the human eye has no suchoriginal power of vision bestowed upon it, andthat it is acquired, as the exercise of the othersenses, and the faculties of the mind itself are,by repeated efforts, or experience.If it be admitted that the ideas which wereceive through the eye come by experience,we must allow that the mind must be exercisedin the act of comparison, before we can have aconception of any thing being exterior to theeye, or of an object being placed in a particulardirection. Authors make the mattercomplex by conceiving a picture to be drawnat the bottom of the eye, and presenting tousthe mind contemplating this inverted picture,and comparing the parts of it. But this leaves260 COMPARISON OF THE EYEthe subject without any explanation at all, anddoes not show how it is that the mind looks intothis camera. The question will be, at least,more simple, if we consider the vision of a point ;and ask ourselves how we know the directionin which that point comes to the eye. Supposeit is a star in the heavens, or a beacon, seen bythe mariner ; must he not, in order to ascertainthe position of the star, find out some other objectof comparison, some other star, which shall discloseto him the constellation to which the onethat he is examining belongs : or to ascertainthe position of the beacon, must he not look tohis compass and card, and so trace the directionof the lighthouse in relation to them ? This is,in fact, the process that is followed in everythingwhich we see. A single point is directlyin the axis of the eye, but we cannot judge ofits position, without turning to some other point,and feeling sensible of the traversing of the eyeballand the angle to which the eye is moved :or if we do not see another point to compare thefirst with, we must judge of its place by meansof a comparison with the motion of the eyeitself. We are sensible that the eye is directedto the right or to the left ; and we compare thevisible impression on the nerve with the motion,its direction, and its extent.We find even mathematicians affirming thatwe judge of the direction of an object by theWITH THE HAND. 261ray that falls upon the retina. But the raywhich is here spoken of strikes a mere point ofthe retina : this point can have no direction ; theobliquity of the incidence of the ray can informus of nothing : rays of all degrees of obliquityare converging to form that point. And do notthe same mathematicians give us, in the firstlessons of their science, as the definition of aline, that which is drawn through two pointsat the least ? Where are the two points here toindicate the direction of the line, since thecornea, or the humours of the eye,* are notsensible to the passage of the ray ? Or is thisan error which has crept in from inaccurateconceptions of the anatomy ? Has the idea thatthe direction of the ray can afford this knowledge,arisen from the notion that the ray passesthrough the thick and turbid matter of theretina? I would ask for what reason is thefinder" attached to the great telescope? is itnot because the larger instrument, from magnifyingone object in a high degree, cannot bedirected in the heavens, the observer seeingnothing but that one object? Accordingly toremedy this, there is mounted on the greatertelescope a smaller one, exactly parallel, oflesser power, but commanding a greater field ;this finder, the astronomer directs to the con-seea paper by Mr. Alexander Shaw, who has explainedthis subject very happily. Journal of the Royal Institution, 1832.262 COMPARISON OF THE EYErelation and moves from star to star, untilthat which he desires to examine is in thecentre of the field : and by this means headjusts the larger telescope to his object. Isthis not a correct illustration of the operationof the eye ? is the eye not imperfectly exercisedwhen it sees but one point on the other hand,is it not in the full performance of its functionwhen it moves from one object to the other,judges of the degree and the direction of thatmotion, and thus enables us, by comparison, toform our judgment ?It has been stated by a most ingenious philosopherof our own time, that the forms and relationsof objects are known to us by the unassistedoperation of the eye-ball itself by thetransmission of the rays through the humours ofthe eye, and by their effect upon the retina ;and he has also affirmed that we should knowthe position of objects even if the muscles of theeye were paralytic. But I hope that it has beenunderstood, when I give so much importance tothe motions of the eye, that I do not neglect themovements of the body, and, more especially, themotions of the hand : that, in truth, the measureof objects which we take through the eye, is incorrespondence with the experience which wehave had through the motions of the whole frame,and that, without such experience, we shouldhave no knowledge of matter, or of position, orWITH THE HAND. 203of distance, or of form. Were the eye fixed inthe head, or paralytic, we should lose a greatpart of the exercise of the organ, as well as allthe appliances which are necessary for its protection: but we should still be capable of comparingthe visual impression with the experienceof the body. As long as we know the righthand from the left, or must raise our head tosee what is above us, or stoop to see a man'sfoot, there can be no want of materials to formacomparison between the impression on thenerve of sight and the experience of the body.Against this view of the compound operationof the eye, the matter is thus argued: if aman receive the impression of a luminous bodyupon his eye so that the spectrum shall remainwhen the eye-lids are shut, and if he be seatedupon a stool that turns round, and he be whirledround by the hand of a friend, without his owneffort, the motion of the spectrum will correspondwith his own. No doubt it will : becausehe is conscious of being turned round : a mancannot sit upon a stool that is turning withoutan effort to keep his place, without a consciousnessof being turned round ; and feeling, at thesame time, that the impression is still before hiseye, he will see the spectrum before him, and inthat aspect to which he has been revolved.Were I not conscious that I am right, I shouldfeel it necessary to make an apology for differedCOMPARISON OF THE Eyeingfrom eminent men on this matter; but Iconceive the explanation of this discrepancy tobe, that we are very much influenced by themanner in which we approach to the examinationof such a subject. A man lost in admirationof the properties of light, and of the effect ofthe humours of the eye as an optical instrument,may be blinded to those inferences, whichto me seem so undeniable, accustomed as Ihave been to compare the properties of the eyewith the living endowments of the frame. Wheninstead of looking upon the eye as a merecamera or show box, with the picture invertedon the bottom, we determine the value of muscularactivity ; mark the sensation attending thebalancing of the body; that fine property whichwe possess of adjusting the muscular frame toits various inclinations ; how it is acquired inthe child ; how it is lost in the paralytic anddrunkard ; how motion and sensation are combinedin the hand ; how, in this way, the handguides the finest instruments : when we considerhow the eye and the hand correspond ; how themotions of the eye, combining with the impressionon the retina, become the means of measuringand estimating the place, form and distanceof objects the sign in the eye of what is knownto the hand : finally, when, by attention to themotions of the eye, we are aware of their extrememinuteness, and how we are sensible to themWITH THE HAND. 265in the finest degree the conviction irresistiblyfollows, that without the power of directing theeye, (a motion holding relation to the action ofthe whole body) our finest organ of sense, whichso largely contributes to the development of thepowers of the mind, would lie unexercised.THE MOTION OF THE EYE CONSIDERED IN REGARDTO THE EFFECT OF SHADE AND COLOUR IN APICTURE.A QUESTION naturally arises whether it be possible,from this part of philosophy, to suggestsome principles for the amateur and painter.The ideas and language of the amateur, when heattempts to establish rules for the disposition ofcolours or shades in a picture, are certainly veryvague.We have to remark, in the first place, that thecolours of nature, and those of objects when representedin a painting, differ in most essentialcircumstances. Bodies of various colours, whenplaced together, have their colours reflected fromthe one to the other ; and so they are sent to theeye. This is one mode in which the hues ofnature are harmonized ; but the colours upon theflat surface of the canvass cannot be thus reflectedand mingled. The next difference resultsfrom the atmosphere, through which the rays266 COMPARISON OF THE EYEfrom distant objects proceed to the eye arid aresoftened ; the canvass being near the eye, theeffect which the atmosphere produces on coloursamounts to nothing in the picture. The thirdmode in which colours are affected, is commonto natural objects and to paintings, and is connectedwith the law of vision which we havebeen considering, and to which we must nowrevert.When we make experiments by looking uponcoloured spots, the effect on the sensibility of theretina is remarkable ; and as this does not occurincidentally, but takes place, more or less, wheneverwe exercise the eye, it must have its influencewhen we look to works of art. Thefamiliar fact which we have to carry with us intothis inquiry, is, that if we throw a silver coinupon a dark table, and fix the eye upon thecentre of it, when we remove the coin there is,for a moment, a white spot in its place, whichpresently becomes deep black. If we put a redwafer upon a sheet of paper, and look upon it, andcontinue to keep the eye fixed on the same point,upon removing the wafer, the spot where it layon the white paper will appear green. If welook upon a green wafer in the same manner andremove it, the spot will be red ; if upon blue orindigo, the paper will appear yellow. Thesephenomena are to be explained by consideringthat the nerve is exhausted by the continuanceWITH THE HAND. 267of the impression, and becomes more apt to receivesensation from an opposite colour. All thecolours of the prism come into the eye from thesurface of the paper when the wafer has been removed; but if the nerve 'has been exhausted bythe incidence of the red rays upon it, it will beinsensible to these red rays when they are thusreflected from the paper ; the effect of the raysof an opposite kind will be increased, and consequentlythe spot will be no longer white, butof the prevailing green colour.Let us see how the loss of sensibility producesan effect in engraving, where there is no colour,and only light and shade.Is it possible that a high tower, in a cloudlesssky, can be less illuminated at the top than at thebottom ? Yet if we turn to a book of engravings,where an old steeple or tower is representedstanding up against the clear sky, we shall findthat all the higher part is dark, and that the effectis picturesque and pleasing. Now this is perfectlycorrect, for although the highest part of thetower be in the brightest illumination, it is notseen so it never appears so to the eye. Thereason is, that when we look to the steeple, agreat part of the retina is opposed to the light ofthe sky ; and on shifting the eye to look at theparticular parts of the steeple, the reflected lightfrom that object falls upon the retina, where it isexhausted by the direct light of the sky. If weCOMPARISON OF THE EYElook to the top of the tower, and then drop theeye to some of the lower architectural ornaments,the effect infallibly is that the upper half of thetower is dark. For example, if looking to thepoint A we drop the eye to B : the tower from Ato B is seen by that part of the retina which wasopposed to the clear sky from A to C ; and it isdark not by contrast, as it would be thoughtlesslysaid, but by the nerve being somewhat exhaustedof its sensibility. This, then, is the first effectwe shall remark as arising from the searchingmotion of the eye.The refreshing colours of the natural landscapeare at no time so pleasing as when reading ona journey, we turn the eye from the book to thefields and woods ; the shadows are then deeperWITH THE HAND. 269the greens more soothing, and the wholecolours are softened. Reynolds observed to SirGeorge Beaumont that the pictures of Rubensappeared different to him, and less brilliant, onhis second visit to the continent ; and the reasonof the difference he discovered to be that, on thefirst visit, he had taken notes, and on the secondhe did not. The alleged reason is quite equalto the effect ; but I cannot help imagining thatthere is some incorrectness in the use of the termbrilliant, unless warmth and depth of colouring ismeant, for when the eye turns from the whitepaper to the painting, the reds and yellows mustnecessarily be deeper. If we look out from thewindow, and then turn towards a picture, thewhole effect is gone the reflected rays from thepicture are too feeble to produce their impression; and if we look upon a sheet of paper, andthen upon a picture, the tone will be deeper, andthe warm tints stronger, but the lights and shadesless distinct. If we place an oil painting, withoutthe frame, upon a large sheet of paper, or againsta white plastered wall, it is offensively yellow.Here the eye alternately, though insensibly,moving from the white paper or wall to thepainting, which is of a deep tone, the brownsand yellows are unnaturally strong. We see thenecessity or the effect of the gilt frame for sucha picture : it does not merely cut off surroundingobjects, but it prepares the eye for the colours of270 COMPARISON OF THE EYEthe painting it allows, if I may so express it,the painter to use his art more boldly, and toexaggerate the colours of nature.Painters proceed by experiment. If they arepainting a portrait, they may represent thefeatures by contrasts of lights and shadows withvery little colour ; but such a portrait is neverpopular. If they are to represent the featureswithout much contrast of light and shade, theymust raise the features by contrasts of colours,and the carnations are necessarily exaggerated; but all this is softened down by throwinga piece of drapery into the picture, thecolours of which so prepare the eye that, nowlooking on the features, that will appear natural,which, but for this art, would have represented aninflamed countenance. The common resource ofthe painter is to throw in a crimson curtain, orto introduce some flower or piece of dress, thatshall lead the eye, by a succession of tints, or,more accurately speaking, shall prepare the eyeto receive the otherwise exaggerated colours ofthe portrait. The eye cast on the red curtain,and then falling on the countenance, sees it as ifcoloured only with the modesty of nature.Those who hang pictures, do not place an historicalpicture, painted after the manner of theBolognese school with distinct and abrupt coloureddraperies, by the side of a landscape ; forthe colours of a landscape, to be at all consonantWITH THE HAND. 271with nature, are weak and reduced to a low tone,by representing that effect, which we observed,of the intervention of the atmosphere. Thecolours, therefore, would be destroyed by toopowerful a contrast. There is a difficulty ofdeciding what should be the colour of the wallsof a gallery, because the pictures are, for themost part, painted on different principles ; butgenerally speaking, the dark subdued red ormorose colour brings out the colours of paintings; in other words, if we look on a wall of thiscolour, and then turn to the picture, the prevailinggreen and yellow tints will appear brighter.The word "contrast" is used without a definition,or without the actual comprehension ofwhat it means. Now the effect of colours, onbeing placed together, is produced through themotion of the eye, combined with this law of thesensibility of the retina, which we have been advertingto. When we imagine that we are comparingcolours, we are really experiencing theeffect of the nerve being exhausted, by dwellingon one colour, and made more susceptible ofthe opposite colour. In coloured drapery, forexample, there is such a mixture of all coloursreflected from it, although one prevails, that theimpression may be greatly modified by what theeye has previously experienced. If the colouringof the flesh be, as the painter terms it, too"warm," it may be made "cold" by rendering272 COMPARISON OF THE EYEthe eye insensible to the red and yellow rays,and more than usually susceptible of the blueand purple rays. Every coloured ray from theflesh is transmitted to the eye ; but if the eyehas moved to it from a yellow or crimsondrapery, then the rays of that kind will be, forthe moment, lost to the vision, and the colour ofthe flesh will appear less warm, in consequenceof the prevalence of the opposite rays of colour.It ought to be unsatisfactory to the philosophicalstudent to make use of a term withoutknowing its full meaning. There has been a greatdeal said about contrast and harmony in painting,as resulting from certain colours placed togetherthe idea being that we see these colours at thesame time whereas, the effect, of which we areall sensible, results from alternately looking at theone and at the other. The subject might be pleasantlypursued, but I mean only to vindicate theimportance of the motions of the eye to our enjoyment,whether of the colours of art or of nature.There is another subject of some interest, namely,the effect produced upon the retina when theeye is intently fixed upon an object, and is notpermitted to wander from point to point. Thistouches the chiaroscuro of painting ; which isnot merely the managing of the lights andshadows, but the preserving of the parts of ascene subordinate to the principal object. Thereis something unpleasant and imperfect, even toWITH THE HAND. 273the least experienced eye, in a picture in whichevery thing is made out the drapery of everyfigure, the carving or ornament of every objectminutely represented ; for these things werenever so seen in nature. The true picture,on the other hand, is effective, and felt to benatural, when the eye is at once led to dwell onthat principal group, or principal figure, withwhich it is the artist's intention to occupy theimagination. By fine mastery of his art, and byinsensible degrees, the painter keeps down theparts which are removed from the centre ; andthus he represents the scene as when we lookintently upon an object seeing that which isnear the axis of the eye distinctly the otherobjects, as it were, retreating or rising out lessand less distinctly, in proportion as they recedefrom the centre. In the one instance, the artistpaints a panorama, where we turn round andhave presented before the eye the several divisionsof the circle, in each of which the objects areequally distinct ; in the other, he paints a picturerepresenting things, not as when the eye wandersfrom the one part to the other, but where it isfixed with higher interest upon some central object,while the others fall off subordinately.Looking to our main argument, the proofs ofbeneficence in the capacities of the livingframe, we revert naturally to the pleasures receivedthrough this double property of the eye274 COMPARISON OF THE EYE, ETC.motion and sensibility ; and whilst we perceivethat the varieties of light and shade are necessaryto vision, we find that the coloured rays arealso, by variety, suited to the higher exercise ofthis sense. They do not all equally illuminateobjects, nor are they all equally agreeable to theeye. The yellow, pale green, or Isabella colours,illuminate in the highest degree, and are themost agreeable to the sense ; and we cannot butobserve, on looking out on the face of nature,that they are the prevailing colours.* The redray illuminates the least, but it irritates themost ; and it is this variety in the influence ofthese rays upon the nerve that continues itsexercise, and adds so much to our enjoyment.We have pleasure from the succession and contrastof colours, independently of that highergratification which the mind enjoys through theinfluence of association.The astronomer selects a glass for his telescope, which refractsthe pale yellow light in the greatest proportion, because itilluminates in the highest degree and irritates the least.ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS TO THE CONCLUDINGCHAPTER.I HAVE sometimes thought it possible, that agreatly extended survey of nature may humbletoo much our conceptions of ourselves ; and thatthis requires to be corrected by the study ofthings more minute, and in which we are moredirectly concerned : by dwelling on the perfectionof the frame of the animal body and themarvellous endowments of the living properties.When we have formed some estimate of theimmensity of the heavenly bodies, we are struckwith admiration in following the successiveadvancement made in the science : an improvementin the curves of the glasses of thetelescope, a new mode of polishing the reflectingsurfaces, a change in the chemical compositionof the glasses, or a more perfect adjustmentof their dispersive powers is followed bythe discovery of circle beyond circle of worldsinterminably.We fan the imagination and labour to comprehendthe immensity of the creation, and fallback with the impression of the littleness of allthat belongs to us : our lives seem but a point of276 ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONStime, compared with the astronomical and geologicalperiods, and we ourselves as atoms, drivenabout, amidst unceasing changes of the materialworld.But it has been shown, that whether we takethe animal body as a single machine, or embracein the survey the successive creation of animals,conforming always to the improving condition ofthe earth, there is nothing like chance or irregularityin the composition of the system. Inproportion indeed as we comprehend the principlesof mechanics, or of hydraulics, as applicableto the animal machinery, we shall besatisfied of the perfection of the design : and ifanything appear disjointed or thrown in bychance, let the student mark that for contemplationand experiment, and most certainly whenit comes to be understood, other parts willreceive the illumination, and the whole designstand more fully disclosed.The extension of knowledge has not necessarilythe effect of raising the mind to more consolatorycontemplations. We may quote theancient philosopher in contrast with the modern.The former having nothing in his mind to drawhim from observing the just relations of humanbeings to the world ; but on the contrary, seeingevery thing suited to man or subordinate, thinksof him " as a little God harboured in a humanebody." But when by science, and the aid ofTO THE CONCLUDING CHAPTER. 277instruments, or " the ingenuity of the hand,"vision is extended to things too remote perhaps,or too minute, to fall within our natural sphere ;when instead of the extended plane, and visiblehorizon of the stable earth, it is thought of as aball rolling through space, amidst myriads besides,greater than it : the expression is excusable thatthe earth with man upon it does not seemmuch other than an ant-hill, where some antscarry corn, and some carry their young, andsome go empty, and all to and fro, a little heapof dust."We may consider man, before the lights ofmodern philosophy had their influence on histhoughts, as in a state more natural ; in as much,as he yielded unresisting to those sentimentswhich directly flow from the objects and phenomenaaround him. But when that periodof society arrived, in which man made naturalphenomena the subjects of experiment or of philosophicalenquiry, then was there some dangerof a change of opinion, not always beneficial tohis state of mind. This danger does not touch thephilosopher so much as the scholar. He who hasstrength of mind and ingenuity enough to makeinvestigations into nature, will not be satisfiedwith the discovery of secondary cau es hismind will be enlarged, and the subjects ofhis thoughts and aspirations become moreelevated. But it is otherwise with those not278 ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONSthemselves habituated to investigation, and wholearn at second-hand, the result of those enquiries.If such a one sees the fire of heavenbrought down into a phial, and the materialscompounded, to produce an explosion louderthan the thunder, and ten times more destructive,the storm will no longer speak a language tohim. Those influences which are natural andjust, and beneficently provided, and have servedto developed the sentiments of millions beforehim, are dismissed as things vulgar and to bedespised. Yet with all the pride of newly acquiredknowledge, his conceptions embarrass, ifthey do not mislead him ; in short, he has nothad that intellectual discipline, which shouldprecede and accompany the acquisition of knowledge.But a man, possessed of genius of the highestorder, may lose the just estimate of himself,from another cause. The sublime nature of hisstudies may consign him to depressing thoughts.He may forget the very attributes of his mind,which have privileged these high contemplations,and the ingenuity of the hand, which has soextended the sphere of his observation.The remedy, to such a mind, is in the studieswhich we are enforcing. The heavenly bodies,in their motions through space, are held in theirorbits by the continuance of a power, not morewonderful nor more deserving of admiration,TO THE CONCLUDING CHAPTER. 279than that, by which a globule of blood is suspendedin the mass of fluids : or by which,in due season, it is attracted and resolved : thanthat, by which a molecule entering into the compositionof the body, is driven through a circleof revolutions, and made to undergo differentstates of aggregation ; becoming sometime, apart of a fluid, sometime, an ingredient of asolid : and finally cast out again, from the influenceof the living forces.Our argument in the early part of the volume,has shown man, by the power of the hand (as theready instrument of the mind) accommodated toevery condition through which his destinies promiseto be accomplished. We first see the handministering to his necessities, and sustaining thelife of the individual : a second stage of hisprogress, we see" it adapted to the wants of society,when man becomes a labourer and an artificer. Inastate still more advanced, science is brought inaid of mechanical ingenuity. The elements whichseemed adverse to the progress of society, becomethe means conducing to it. The seas, which atfirst set limits to nations, and grouped mankindinto families, are now the means by which theyare associated. Philosophical chemistry has subjectedthe elements to man's use; and all tendto the final accomplishment of the great objects280 ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONSto which every thing, from the beginning, haspointed: the multiplication and distribution ofmankind, and the enlargement of the sources ofhis comfort and enjoyment the relief from tooincessant toil, and the consequent improvementof the higher faculties of his nature. Instincthas directed animals, until they are spreadto the utmost verge of their destined placesof abode. Man too is borne onwards ; andalthough, on consulting his reason, much isdark and doubtful, yet does his genius operateto fulfil the same design, enlarging the sphere oflife and enjoyment.Whilst we have before us the course of humanadvancement, as in a map, we are recalled to anarrower, and yet a more important consideration: for what to us avail all these proofs ofdivine power of harmony in nature of designthe predestined accommodation of the earth,and the creation of man's frame and faculties, ifwe are stopped here ? If we perceive no moredirect relation between the individual and theCreator ? But we are not so precluded from advancement: on the contrary, reasons accumulateat every step, for a higher estimate of the livingsoul, and give us assurance that its condition isthe final object and end of all this machinery,and of these successive revolutions.To this, must be referred the weakness of theTO THE CONCLUDING CHAPTER. 281frame, and its liability to injury, the helplessnessof infancy, the infirmities of age, the pains,diseases, distresses, and afflictions of life for bysuch means is man to be disciplined his facultiesand virtues unfolded, and his affectionsdrawn to a spiritual Protector.THECLASSIFICATION OF ANIMALS,IN EXPLANATION OF THE TERMS INCIDENTALLY USED IN THEVOLUME.THE ANIMAL KINGDOM is arranged in four Divisions:Division I. Vertebral Animals : so called from their possessinga vertebral column or spine.Division II. Molluscous Animals : such as shell-fish, whichare of a soft structure, and without a skeleton. Etym. mollis,soft.Division III. Articulated Animals : like the worm orinsect : they are without a skeleton, but their skins or coveringsare divided and jointed. Etym. Articulus, dim. a joint.Division IV. Zoophytes : animals believed to be composedvery nearly of a homogeneous pulp, which is moveable andsensible, and resembles the form of a plant. Etym. foot,soon, a living creature ; tyvrov, peyton, a plant.DIVISION I.The division of vertebral animals is composed of four Classes :viz., 1. Mammalia, animals which suckle their young. Etym.mamma, a teat. 2. Aves. Etym. avis, a bird. 3. Reptilia,animals that crawl. Etym. from a part of the word rep, tocreep. 4. Pisces. Etym. piscis, a fish.The first Class Mammalia, is divided into Orders, which aresubdivided into Genera, and these are further divided into Species.We present the principal Orders with familiar examples.Banana, man. Etym. bis, double; manus, hand.284 APPENDIX.Quadrant. Etym. quatuor, four ; manus, hand. Monkeys,makis or lemurs (Etym. lemures, ghosts). Theloris tardigradus (turdus, slow ; grantor, to walk) is aspecies of lemur.Neuroptera. Etym. x ft p> ckeir, the hand-nrepov, pteron, awing. The Bats.Insectivora. Etym. insecta, insects ; vero, to eat. Hedgehog;shrew; mole.Plantigrade. Etym. planta, the sole of the foot ; grantor, towalk. Bear; racoon.Digitigrade. Etym. digitus, the toe, or finger ; grantor, towalk. Lion; wolf; dog; weasel.Amphibia. Etym. apex, amphi, both ; fitog, bios, life.Walrus; seal.Marsupialia. Etym. marsupium, a pouch. Kangaroo ; opossum.Rodentia. Etym. rode, to gnaw. Squirrel ; beaver ; rat ;hare.Edentata. Etym. lentulus, toothless : animals without thefront teeth. Ai ; una ; armadillo ; ant-eater ; tamandua ;megatherium (p.f.ya, mega, great ; Stptov, thereon, a wildbeast); megalonyx (/zeyag, meas, great; owl, onyx, aclaw); ornithorhynchus(op'i0oe, ornithos, of a bird ; /jvvxoe,rhynchos, a beak.)Pachydermata. Etym. Traxys,pachys, thick ; cep/xa, derma,skin. Rhinoceros ; elephant ; mammoth ; mastodon (yuaoroc,masts, a nipple ; oc wr, don, a tooth) ; tapir ; horse ;couagga.Ruminant. Etym. rumination, chewing the cud. Camel;giraffe ; deer ; goat ; cow ; sheep.Cetacea. Etym. cetus, a whale. Dolphin ; whale ; dugong.SECOND CLASS. Aves, or Birds.Activities. Etym. accipiter, a hawk. Vulture ; eagle ; owl.Passers. Etym. passer, a sparrow. Lark; thrush; swallow;crow; wren.Scansores. Etym. scanty, to climb. Parrot ; wood-pecker ;toucan.APPENDIX. 285Galling. Etym. galling, a hen. Peacock; pheasant; pigeon.Grallae. Etym. galls, stilts. Ostrich ; stork ; ibis ; flamingo.Palisades. Etym. palma, the palm of the hand; pes, foot.Swan ; pelican ; gull.THIRD CLASS. Reptiles.Chelonia. Etym-%t\vg, chelys, a tortoise. Tortoise ; turtle.Sauria. Etym. yavpa, saura, a lizard. Crocodile ; alligator ;chameleon ; dragon ; pterodoctyle (impov, pteron, a wing ;SaKTvXog, dactylus, a finger); ichthyosaurus (ix^vc,ichthys, a fish ; yavpa, saura, a lizard) ; plesiosaurus(Tr\ffiov,plesion, near to ; travpa, saura, a reptile) ; mega-lazarus(peyaXr), regale, great ; travpa, saura, a reptile) ;iguanadon.Ophidia. Etym. o0ic, ophir, a serpent. Boa ; viper.Brachia. Etym. j3a.Tpa.-xoQ, batrachos, a frog. Frog;salamander ; proteus.FOURTH CLASS. Fishes.Chondropterygii. Etym. xovdpoe, chondros, gristle ; Trrtpv^,pteryx, the ray of a fin. Ray ; sturgeon ; shark ; lamprey ;ammocete (et^ioe, amos, sand; KTJT-OC, cetos, a fish.)Plectognathi, Etym. TrXtKw, pleco, to join ; yvafloe, pathos,the jaw. Sun-fish ; trunk-fish.Lophobranchi. Etym. Xo^oc, lophos, a loop; j3pay%ia,branchia, the gills. Pipe-fish ; pegasus.Melacopterygii. Etym. /zaXaKoe, melos, soft; Trrepvi;,pteryx, the ray of a fin. Salmon ; trout ; cod ; herring ;remora.Acanthopterygii. Etym. aKarda, calantha, a thorn; Trrtpu^,pteryx, the ray of a fin. Perch ; sword-fish ; mackarel ;lophius piscatorius (Xo^ia, sophia, a pennant; pictor, afisher); chaetodon rostratus (xtrjj, chcete, hair; o<W,don, a tooth; rostratus, beaked); zeus ciliary (cilium,an eye-lash.)286 APPENDIX.DIVISION II.MOLLUSCOUS ANIMALS.1st Class. Cephalopoda. Etym. KE<j>a\r), cephalic, the head ;Rosa, poda, the feet. Animals which have their organs of motionarranged round their head.This Class includes Sepia, or Cuttle-fish. Argonauts (Apyw,the ship Argo, yavrjc> nantes, a sailor). Nautilus,(vavrijc, nantes, a sailor). Ammonite, an extinct Cepha-lopode which inhabited a shell resembling that of theNautilus ; coiled like the horns of a ram or of the statuesof Jupiter Ammon ; whence the name. Belemnites: alsoextinct : the shell is long, straight, and conical (fie\tp.vov,belemnon, a dart). Nummulites : likewise extinct. Wholechains of rocks are formed of its shells. The pyramids ofEgypt are built of these rocks, (nummus, a coin).2nd Class. Pteropoda. Etym. Trrepov, pteron, a wing ; nota,soda, feet; having fins or processes resembling wings on eachside of the mouth.The Clio Borealis, which abounds in the North Seas, and isthe principal food of the whale.3rd Class. Gasteropoda. Etym. yenmjp, gaster, the stomach; TTotia, soda, the feet. Animals which move by means of afleshy apparatus placed under the belly.The snail ; slug ; limpet.4th Class. Acephala. Etym. a, a, without ; KeQaXri,cephalic, the head. Molluscous animals without a head.The oyster ; muscle.5th Class. Brachiopoda. Etym. flpa-%u>v, fraction, thearm ; iroda, soda, the feet. Animals which move by means ofprocesses like arms.Lingula; terebratula.6th Class. Cirrhopoda. Etym. cirrus, a lock or tuft of hair ;Rosa, soda, the feet.Balance ; barnacle ; anathema, (anas, a duck, hero, to bringforth).APPENDIX. '287DIVISION III.Articulate.1st Class. Annelides, or Vermes. Etym. Angelus, a littlering ; vermis, a worm.Leech ; sea-mouse ; earth-worm ; sand worm ; tubicolae, (tubes,a tube, colo, to inhabit) ; worms which cover themselvesby means of a slimy secretion that exudes fromtheir surfaces, with a case of small shells and pebbles, likethe caddis-worm, or with sand and mud.2nd Class. Crustacea. Animals which have a shelly crust,covering their bodies.The crabs ; shrimps ; lobsters.3rd. Class. Arachnida. Etym. apa^^e, arachne, aspider.Spiders; aranea scenic, or attica; the leaping spider; thescorpion spider ; the mite.4th Class. Insecta. They are divided into insects which arewithout wings and those which have them : and these are furthersubdivided according to the peculiarities of the wings.Altera (a, a, without ; Trrepov, pteron, a wing). Centipede(having a hundred feet) ; louse ; flea.Cleopatra (KO\EOQ, coles, a sheath or scabbard, Trrepov,a wing), insects which have their wings protected by a cover,as the beetle, corn-weevil. Orthoptera (opdoe, orthos,straight, irrepov}, as the locust, grass-hopper. Hemiptera(rifiKTv, hemisu, half, Trrepoj/), insects which have one halfof their wings thick and coriaceous, and the other membranous; such as a bug, tick, fire-fly. Neuroptera (vevpov,neuron, a nerve, Trrepov), dragon-fly ; ant-lion; ephemera.Hymenoptera (vfj.f, hymen, a membrane, Trrepov), thebee; wasp ; ant. Lepidoptera (Xerrtc, lewis, a scale, Trrepov),moth; butter-fly. Hemiptera (pure, ripis, a fan, Trrtpoy),xenos ; stops. Litera (Sis, dis, double-n-Tepov), house-fly; gnat.288 APPENDIX.DIVISION IV.ZOOPHYTES.Echinodermata (Etym. i^ivoq, echinus, a hedgehog; hppa,derma, the skin), the star-fish; sea urchin. Entozoi(throe, entos, within; aw, zao, to live), tsenia hydatia.Acalephce (cu-aX?/^, acalephe, a nettle), medusa; polypi(containing much sap) ; sea-anemone ; hydra ; tubipora(inhabiting tubes); sertularia; cellular; frustra; coralline,sponge. Infusoria (found in infusions or stagnant water),monas ; vibrio ; proteus.THE END.C. WHITTINOHAM, Took COURT, CHANCERY LANE.