THERATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BYJEREMY BENTHAM,LONDON:PUBLISHED BY ROBERT Heard, -WELLINGTON STREET, STRAND. f^O sMDCCCXXX.<>/ -LONDON :PRINTED BY C. AND W. REYNELL,Broad Street, Golden Square.ADVERTISEMENT.THE following account is given by M. Dumontof his labours, with respect to the two volumespublished by him at Paris in 1811, under the titleof Theorie des Peines et des Recompenses. Of thiswork, three editions have been printed in France,and one in England.When I published in Paris in 1802 Les Traitesde Legislation Civile et Penal, in three volumes, Iannounced other works of the same kind, which Ihad, in the same manner, extracted from the manuscriptsof Mr Bentham, but which were not thenready for the press.Success has encouraged my labours : threethousand copies were distributed more rapidlythan I had dared to hope would be the case withthe first work of a foreign author, but little knownupon the continent. I have reason also to thinkADVERTISEMENT.that all recent as this work is, it has not beenwithout its influence, since it has been frequentlyquoted in many official compositions relating tocivil or criminal codes.But circumstances which prevented these newvolumes from entering upon the same course ofcirculation as the preceding have sometimes cooledmy zeal, and I should willingly have resigned thetask I had imposed upon myself, if the authorwould have undertaken it himself. Unhappily,he is as little disposed so to do as ever, and if theseworks do not appear in the French dress which Ihave given them, it is most probable that they willremain shut up in his cabinet."They have lain there thirty years : the manuscriptsfrom which I have extracted La Theorie desPeines, were written in 1775. Those which havesupplied me with La Theorie des Recompenses, arealittle later : they were not thrown aside as useless,but laid aside as rough hewn materials, whichmight at a future day be polished, and form partof a general system of legislation or as studieswhich the author had made for his own use.These manuscripts, though much more voluminousthan the work I have presented to thepublic, are very incomplete. They offered to meoften different essays upon the same subject, ofwhich it was necessary to take the substance andunite them into one. In some chapters I hadADVERTISEMENT. 5nothing but marginal notes to direct me. For thefourth book of La Theories Peines, I was obligedto collect and prepare a variety of fragments.The discussion upon the punishment of death wasunfinished. At one time, the author intended totreat of this subject anew, but this intention hasnot been carried into effect. He had preparednothing upon transportation nothing upon Penitentiaries.The idea of the Adoption was asyet unformed. I have derived the foundations ofthese two important chapters from a work of MrBentham s, since published (Letters to LordPelham, &c. &c.) I have taken all that suited mygeneral method of treating the subject, by separatingit from all controversy.After these explanations, it will not be matterof surprise, if the facts and allusions do not alwaysaccord with the date of the original manuscripts.I have freely used the rights of an Editor accordingto the nature of the text and the occasion, Ihave translated, commented, abridged, or supplied,but it need hardly be repeated, after what wassaid in the preliminary discourse to the formerpublication, that this co-operation on my part hashad reference to the details only, and ought notto diminish the confidence of the readers ; it is notmy work that I present to them, it is, as faithfullyas the nature of things will permit, the work ofMr Bentham.G ADVERTISEMENT.It has been said, that these additions, thesechanges, should bear some distinctive mark ; butthough this species of fidelity is desirable, it isimpossible. It is only necessary to imagine whatis the labour of finishing a first sketch, of completingunfinished and reviewed manuscripts,sometimes consisting of fragments and simplenotes, in order to comprehend, that it required acontinued freedom, a species of imperceptible infusion,if I may so speak, which it is scarcely possiblefor the individual himself to remember. Thisis, however, of no importance. It may be believedthat the author has not found his ideas disfiguredor falsified, since he has continued to entrust mewith his papers.I must however declare, that he has altogetherrefused to share my labour, and that he will not,in any manner, be responsible for it. As he hasnever been satisfied with a first attempt, and hasnever published anything which he has not writtenat least twice over, he has foreseen that the revisionof so old an essay, would lead him too farawayfrom, and be incompatible with, his presentengagements. In this manner he has justified hisrefusal ; but he has authorised me to add, thatany change which he might make, would bear onlyupon the form; as respects the principles, hisopinions have not changed : on the contrary, timeand reflection have given them additional strength.ADVERTISEMENT. 7"That Mr Bentham, who is too particular abouthis productions, should not deem these worthy ofthe public notice, will not astonish those who knowall that he requires of himself, and the ideas whichhe has formed for himself of a complete work.A perfect book would be that which shouldrender useless all which had been written in timepast, or that could be written in future time, uponthe same subject. With respect to the secondcondition, it is not possible to decide when it isaccomplished, without pretending to measure thepower of the human mind ; with respect to thefirst, we can more easily decide by a comparisonwith the works which have gone before.This comparison has supported me against ajust distrust of my own powers. After the authorhad refused me all assistance, and had expressedhis doubts upon the merit of his own work, Iwas led to reverse and reconsider the most celebratedworks upon this subject, and even thosewhich had been less distinguished, and then Icould hesitate no longer.I was tempted, at one time, to collect everythingdispersed through L Esprit des Lois upon thesubject of Rewards and Punishments. This collectionwould have been contained in ten or a dozenpages. By thus collecting the whole together, itwould have been possible to judge of the correctnessof that expression of D Lambert, so often8 ADVERTISEMENT.repeated in France, that Montesquieu had said all,that he had abridged all, because he had seen all.Among a multitude of vague and undefinedthoughts upon these subjects, of which someare erroneous, there are certainly some which arejudicious and profound, as in everything we possessof this illustrious writer. But he has not developedthe Rationale of Rewards and Punishments,indeed, this was not his design, and nothing wouldbe more unjust than to criticise him for not havingdone what he did not intend to perform.Beccaria has done more : he first examinedthe efficacy of punishments, by considering theireffect upon the human heart ; by calculating theforce of the motives by which individuals areimpelled to the commission of crimes ; and ofthose opposite motives which the law ought topresent. This species of analytical merit was,however, less the cause of his great success, thanthe courage with which he attacked establishederrors, and that eloquent humanity which spreadsso lively an interest over his work ; but after this,I scruple not to say, that he is destitute of method,that he is not directed by any general principle, thathe only glances at the most important questions,that he carefully shuns all practical discussions inwhich it would have been evident, that he wasunacquainted with the science of Jurisprudence.He announces two distinct objects : crimes andADVERTISEMENT.punishments; he adds to these, occasionally,Procedure ; and these three vast subjects withdifficulty furnish out matter for one littlevolume.After Montesquieu and Beccaria, we mayleave in peace a whole library of books, more orless valuable, but which are not distinguished byany great character of originality ; not but thatwe should find in them correct and judicious views,interesting facts, valuable criticisms upon laws,many of which no longer exist, and to the disappearanceof which these works have contributed.I intend not here to enter in detail either upontheir criticism or eulogium. It is enough for meto observe, that none have laid down the Rationaleof Rewards and Punishments, or could beemployed as a general guide.In the volumes formerly published, the Rationaleof Punishment was only sketched out ageneral map only was given of the department ofCriminal Law, of which this work exhibits thetopography."To prevent frequent reference, and to renderthis work complete in itself, I have borrowed somechapters from the preceding work, making considerableadditions to them, and giving them adifferent form."At the risk, however, of inspiring my readerswith a prejudice unfavourable to my work, I must10 ADVERTISEMENT.acknowledge that its object, how important soeverit may be in relation to its consequences, is anythingbut interesting in its nature. I have beensensible of this during the progress of my labour,and I have not completed it without having oftento conquer myself. A philosophical interest alonemust suffice ; the descriptions of punishments,and the examination of punishments, which followeach other without cessation in a didactic order, donot allow of a variety of style, do not present anypictures upon which the imagination can reposewith pleasure.Felice distant haec ornaments libellous,Non est conveniens lucius ille color.Happily, the subject of Rewards, by itsnovelty, and by the ideas of virtues, talents, andservices, which it causes to pass in review, willconduct the readers by more agreeable routes.The Tartarus and Elysium of legislation, so tospeak, are here disclosed ; but in entering into thisTartarus, it is only to lighten its torments, andwe are careful not to engrave upon its portal theterrible inscription of the poet,Fascinate speranza, voi ch estate. "ADVERTISEMENT. 11In preparing the Rationale of Punishment* forits appearance before the English public, theEditor has taken the second volume, publishedby M. Dumont, as the ground-work of his labours,but having availed himself, wherever he could,of the original manuscripts, his will in manyinstances not be found a literal translation ofM. Dumont s work.EDITOR.The Rationale of Reward was published in 1825.]0 ADVERTISEMENT.acknowledge that its object, how important soeverit may be in relation to its consequences, is anythingout interesting in its nature. I have beensensible of this during the progress of my labour,and I have not completed it without having oftento conquer myself. A philosophical interest alonemust suffice ; the descriptions of punishments,and the examination of punishments, which followeach other without cessation in a didactic order, donot allow of a variety of style, do not present anypictures upon which the imagination can reposewith pleasure.Felice distant haec ornaments libellous,Non est conveniens lucius ille color.Happily, the subject of Rewards, by itsnovelty, and by the ideas of virtues, talents, andservices, which it causes to pass in review, willconduct the readers by more agreeable routes.The Tartarus and Elysium of legislation, so tospeak, are here disclosed ; but in entering into thisTartarus, it is only to lighten its torments, andwe are careful not to engrave upon its portal theterrible inscription of the poet,Fascinate spcranza, voi ch estate. "ADVERTISEMENT. 11In preparing the Rationale of Punishment* forits appearance before the English public, theEditor has taken the second volume, publishedby M. Dumont, as the ground-work of his labours,but having availed himself, wherever he could,of the original manuscripts, his will in manyinstances not be found a literal translation ofM. Dumont s work.EDITOR.The Rationale of Reward was published in 1825.CONTENTS.BOOK I.GENERAL PRINCIPLES.PageCHAP. 1. Definitions and Distinctions . . V> 12. Classification . . f 173. Of the Ends of Punishment . , , . 194. Cases unmeet for Punishment ^ . 235. Expence of Punishment . . . .276. Measure of Punishment ->., 327. Of the Properties to be given to a lot ofPunishment . . . . 428. Of Analogy between Crimes and Punishments 569. Of Retaliation . . 6410. Of Popularity . . . . .69BOOK II.OF CORPORAL PUNISHMENTS.CHAP. 1. Simple Afflictive Punishments . ; . . 762. Complex Afflictive Punishments . . 863. Of Restrictive Punishments Territorial Confinement4. Imprisonment . <**5. Imprisonment Fees ^ .6. Imprisonment examined7. General Scheme of Imprisonment . .XIV CONTENTS.PageCHAP. 8. Of other Species of Territorial ConfinementQuasi Imprisonment Relegation Banishment. . .1369. Of Simply Restrictive Punishment . .14910. Of Active Laborious Punishments . . 15511. Capital Punishment . . pigg12. Capital Punishment examined 177BOOK III.OF PRIVATIVE PUNISHMENTS, OR FORFEITURES.CHAP. 1. Privative Punishments analyzed . . 1982. Of Punishments belonging to the MoralSanction . . 2053. Forfeiture of Reputation . 2224. Of Pecuniary Forfeiture . 2525. Forfeiture of Condition . 2606. Forfeiture of the Protection of the Law 275BOOK IV.OF MIS-SEATED PUNISHMENT.Of the Proper Seat of Punishment . . 277SECT. I. Naturally extravasating Punishment Rulesconcerning . 2822. Punishment apparently, but not really mis-seated. . 2863. Mis-seated Punishment varieties of . . 2874. Vicarious Punishment . 0395. Transitive Punishment . . 2936. Disadvantages of this mode of Punishment . 3007. Collective Punishment 302CONTENTS. XVPageCHAP. 8. Random Punishment . . . 3079. Of the Causes of the frequency of Mis-seatedPunishment . 322BOOK V.OF COMPLEX PUNISHMENTS.CHAP. 1. Inconveniences of Complex Punishments . 3252. Of Transportation . . . 3273. Adoption Penitentiary . . . 3514. Felony . . . .3695. Preemunire . . . 3956. Outlawry . . -. 3977. Excommunication . . . 403BOOK VI.MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS.CHAP. 1. Choice of Punishments Latitude to beallowed to the Judges . . .4112. Of Subsidiary Punishments . . 4143. Of Surety for good Conduct . . . 4214. Defeazance of Punishment . 425RATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BOOK I.GENERAL PRINCIPLES.CHAPTER I.DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.To afford a clear apprehension of the subject ofthe following work, which subject is Punishment,it is necessary that what punishment is, and whatpunishment is trot, should be clearly understood.For this purpose it will be proper to distinguish itfrom those objects with which it is in danger ofbeing confounded, and also to point out the differentshapes which it may assume.Punishment, whatever shape it may assume, isan evil. The matter of evil, therefore, is the sort ofmatter here in question : the matter of evil inalmost all the shapes of which it is susceptible.In considering this matter, two objects, constantaccompaniments one to the other, will require tobe distinguished; viz. 1. The act by which theevil is considered as being produced ; and, 2. What2 B.I. Chi. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.is considered as being the result of that same act,the evil itself which is thus produced.The English language affords but one singleworded appellative in common use for designatingboth these objects ; viz. Punishment.*Punishment may be defined an evil resultingto an individual from the direct intention of another,on account of some act that appears to havebeen done, or omitted. The propriety of this definitionwill appear, and its use be manifested, bytaking it to pieces, and examining its several constituentparts.Punishment then is an evil that is, a physicalevil ; either a pain, or a loss of pleasure, or else ofthat situation or condition of the party affected,which is the immediate cause of such pain or lossof pleasure. It is an evil resulting from the directintention of another. It is not punishment, if itbe obliquely intentional on the part of the personfrom whose agency it results, but an evil of someIn the French, there exists for the designation of the actone name, viz. punition acte de punition ; and for the designationof the evil, the result or produce of that act, another name,viz. peine.But though exempt from the ambiguity by which, as above,the English language is deteriorated, the French labours underanother. By the word peine, the result is indeed secured againstbeing confounded with the act that caused it. But, on the otherhand, the use of this word is not confined to the case in whichthe object designated by it is the result of an act emanatingfrom the will of a sentient being ; it is at least as frequently employedto designate the object itself, without regard to the causeby which it has been produced.Besides being too broad in one direction, the import of it istoo narrow in another. It is synonymous to, and not more thancoextensive with, douleur : it fails of including that modificationof evil which is of the purely negative cast, consisting of theabsence, certain or more or less probable, of this or that modificationof pleasure.B.I. C1I.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. 3other nature, but which, however, is not in allcases distinguished by a specific name.It is an evil resulting to a person from the directintention of another, on account of some act thathas been done or omitted. An evil resulting to anindividual, although it be from the direct intentionof another, if it be not on account of some act thathas been done or omitted, is not a punishment.If, out of wantonness, for the sake of sport, or outof ill-will, resulting from an antipathy you entertainagainst a man s person, without having anyparticular act of his to ground it upon, you do hima mischief, the evil produced in this case is whatnobody would understand to come under the nameof punishment.But so it be on account of some act that hasbeen done, it matters not by whom the act wasdone. The most common case is for the act tohave been done by the same person by whom theevil is suffered. But the evil may light upon adifferent person, and still bear the name of punishment.In such case it may be styled punishmentin alienam personam, in contradistinction to themore common case in which it may be styledpunishment in propriam personam. Whether the actbe ultimately or only mediately intentional, it mayconsistently enough with common usage bear thename of punishment. Though according as it wasin the one or the other way that the intention happenedto regard it, the act will assume a differentname, as we shall have occasion to mention presently.It must be on account of some act that at leastappears to have been done ; but whether such anact as appears to have been done, or any act,actually was done, is not material.By the denomination thus given to the act, by4 B.I.CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.the word punishment, taken by itself, no limitationis put to the description of the person of the agent ;but on the occasion of the present work, this personis all along considered as a person invested for thispurpose with the authority of the state ; a legislatorappointing the species of evil to be inflicted in aspecies of case ; or a judge appointing the individuallot of evil to be inflicted in this or that individualcase.Vengeance, antipathy, amendment, disablement,determent, self-defence, self-preservation, safecustody, restraint, compulsion, torture, compensationin the sense in which it means a particularmode of satisfaction for injury or damage burthenin any such phrase as that of imposition of a burthen,and taxation: by all these several wordsideas are presented which will require in eachinstance to be compared, and, in most instances,to be distinguished from the ideas presented bythe word punishment.Take whatever portion of the matter of evil isupon the carpet, whether the term punishmentshall or shall not with propriety be applied, dependsupon the position in which the actual resultstands with reference to the time in which thewill or intention of the agent acts.Intentional or unintentional : if intentional,directly or indirectly, or, to use another word,collaterally intentional ; if directly, ultimately, orbut mediately intentional ; such are the modificationswhich the matter of evil may be consideredas receiving, when considered in the character ofan object to which the will or intention turnsitself.In some cases, the man in power, or someperson or persons, having, as he supposes, receivedat the hands of some person or other,B.I. CII.I. DEFINITION S AND DISTINCTIONS. 5evil in some shape or other, the object which hehas in view, in the infliction of the evil in question,is an enjoyment of a certain kind, which hederives, or expects to derive, from the contemplationof the evil thus sustained. In this case, theact in question is termed an act of vengeance.So far as this, and this alone, is his object, thisevil thus produced is not only directly but ultimatelyintentional.Whether in the character of a sole object, aresult of this nature be a fit object for the man inpower to propose to himself, is indeed a very importantquestion, but one which has no placehere : punishment, by being misapplied, is notthe less punishment.Laying out of the above case the supposedantecedent evil, you have no longer an act of vengeance,but an act performed for the mere gratificationof antipathy. But by the suppositionhaving for its author or agent the legislator or theJudge, it is still not the less an act of punishment.Of the cases in which the act productive of theevil, intentionally produced by the hand of power,is termed an act of punishment, the most commonclass is that which is composed of those in which,on the part of the agent, the evil thus produced is,though intentional, and even directly intentional,yet not ultimately, but only mediately intentional.In this case the ultimately intentional objectthe object in relation to which the act of punishmentis intended to minister in the character ofa means to an end may be either an act of thenegative or the positive * cast.Note. To him who would understand what he hears orwhat he says, positive and negative are adjuncts; the use ofwhich is not more necessary in electricity and galvanism thanin law, and especially in penal law.C B.I. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.When the act to which the punishment is annexedis of the positive cast, the ultimately intentionalobject aimed at by the act of punishmentis of the opposite cast : and so when the offenceis negative, the result, the production of which isaimed at by the punishment, is positive.If the offence be of the positive cast, then comethe following string of appellatives, expressive ofthe results, the production of which is in differentways aimed at : viz. 1 . Amendment or reformation: 2. Disablement: 3. Determent: 4. Self-defence: 5. Self-preservation : 6. Safe custody :and 7. Restraint.If the offence be of the negative cast, then comesanother string of appellatives, expressive, as above,of the results aimed at: viz. 1. Compulsion orconstraint: 2. Torture: 3. Compensation, in thesense in which it is equivalent to satisfaction, renderedin consideration of injury resulting from anoffence, or in consideration of damage producedwithout intentional injury: 4. Taxation.Whether the result aimed at be of the negativeor positive cast, the terms, coercion, obligation,burthen, or the phrase imposition of a burthen, arecompetent to the designation of it.Amendment, or reformation, and disablement, arewords expressive of the result aimed at, in so faras the conduct of the supposed delinquent isconcerned. In the case of amendment or reformation,the obnoxious act is regarded as being: ofo osuch a nature, that by a single instance of itsbeing committed, such a degree of disorder in themoral constitution is indicated, as requires a generalchange to remove it, and bring the patient toa state of ordinary purity.Few if any offences of the negative class beingto be found which exhibit any such degree ofWei. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. 7malignity, the use of the terms amendment andreformation is nearly confined to the case whenthe obnoxious act, the prevention of which is theultimate end of the punishment, is of the positivekind.Disablement is a term for which, with referenceto an act of the negative kind, a place is hardly tobe found. Doing nothing is a sort of offence towhich every man is so competent, that all endeavourson the part of Government to disable a manfrom committing it may be set at defiance.Determent is a result equally applicable to thecase either of a positive or negative offence. It ismoreover equally applicable to the situation of thealready punished delinquent, and that of otherpersons at large ; nor does it involve, on the partof the punished delinquent, the supposition of anysuch general disorder as is implied by the wordsamendment or reformation.When the ultimately intentional result is amendmentor reformation, it is by the impression madeby the action of the evil on the will of the offenderthat, in so far as it is produced, the result is consideredas being produced. In this case the act ofpunishment is also termed an act of correction.When the ultimately intentional result is disablement,it is by depriving the offender of thepower of committing obnoxious acts of the likedescription, that, in so far as it is produced, theresult is considered as being produced. In thiscase, the course taken to produce the result mayeither be such the nature of which is to produceit only for a time, as is done by temporary imprisonment,confinement, or deportation ; or for ever,as would in some cases be done by mutilation.In so far as by the act of punishment exercisedon the delinquent, other persons at large are consB.I. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONSordered as deterred from the commission of acts ofthe like obnoxious description, and the act ofpunishment is in consequence considered as enduedwith the quality of determent. It is by theimpression made on the will of those persons, animpression made in this case not by the act itself,but by the idea of it, accompanied with the eventualexpectation of a similar evil, as about to beeventually produced in their own instances, thatthe ultimately intentional result is considered asproduced : and in this case it is also said to beproduced by the example, or by the force of example.Between self-defence and punishment, the relationis of this sort, viz. that to the same actwhich ministers to the one of those purposes, itmay happen to minister to the other. This coincidencemay have place in either of two ways : anact which has self-defence for its direct object andresult, may have punishment for its collateralresult ; or an act which has punishment for itsdirect object and result, may have self-defencefor its collateral result.In repelling a personal assault, it may happento an individual, intentionally or unintentionally,to inflict on the assailant, a suffering by anyamount greater than that of any which, by theassault, was inflicted on himself: if unintentionally,self-defence was not only the sole ultimatelyintentional, but the sole intentional result : butthe suffering of the assailant, though not the collaterallyintentional, was not in effect less trulythe collateral result.On the other hand, in inflicting punishment ona delinquent, it may happen to the man in authorityto be exercising on his own behalf an act ofself-defence: in regard to all offences, such asB.I. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. 9rebellion and treason, which have for their object ortheir effect the subversion of the government, orthe weakening of its powers. But it is only inreference to such offences that an act of punishmentcan, with reference to the constituted authorities,be with propriety called an act of self-defence.But if in lieu of the constituted authorities, themembers of the community at large be consideredas the persons by whom the punishment is inflicted; then is all punishment an act of self-defence,in relation to the particular species of evilwith which the offence thus punished is pregnant :an act tending to defend the community againstoffences of the sort in question, with their attendantevils, viz. by means of reformation, disablement,and determent, one or more of them asabove.In the signification of the word self-defence, it isimplied that the evil against which the party isendeavouring to guard himself has for its cause anact done by some sentient being, with the intentionof producing that same evil.The word self-preservation, is alike applicablewhatsoever be the source or quarter from whichthe evil is considered as about to come. In so far,therefore, as the act of punishment is with proprietycapable of being termed an act of self-defence,it is, with the same propriety, capable ofbeing termed an act of self-preservation.Between safe custody and punishment, therelation is of this sort : To one and the sameoperation or factitious state of things it mayhappen to be productive of both of these effects.But in the instance of the same individual, it isonly to a limited degree that there can be a10 B.I. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.sufficient reason for making provision for both atthe same time.To a considerable extent imprisonment withpropriety may be, and everywhere is applied,under the name and to the purpose of punishment.In this case, safe custody is in part the same thingwith the intended punishment itself; in part aconcomitant necessary to the existence and continuanceof whatsoever inflictions it may bedeemed proper to add to those which are inseparablefrom the safe custody itself.But in another case, imprisonment, or aninfliction of the same name at least as thatwhich is employed as above, for the purpose ofpunishment, is to a great extent administeredultimately for the purpose of eventual forth-congress,and mediately for the purpose ofsafe custody, though no such thing as punishmentis, or at least ought to be, intended, because noground for punishment has as yet been, and perhapsnever may be, established.Between restraint and punishment the relationis of this sort. In some shape or other, restraintis the directly intentional result of every prohibitivelaw. The evil, whatever it be thatconstitutes an inseparable accompaniment of thestate thus denominated, is a collaterally intentionalresult of that same law. The evil of therestraint may be very moderate, but still by everygeneral prohibitive law; evil in some shape orother, in some quantity or other, must come.At the same time, restraint is, in a great varietyof shapes, capable of being employed in thecharacter of a punishment. As a punishment,restraint is not incapable of being employed for thepurpose of securing submission to restraint. But13.1. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. 11in this case, the coincidence is but verbal, andarises from the generality of the word restraint.In the character of a punishment we cannot employthe restraint collaterally resulting from thenegative act, the production of which is the objectof the prohibition in the character of the eventualpunishment, to secure obedience to that sameprohibitive law. To prevent a man from stealing,a law threatening to prevent him from stealing,would be but an indifferent resource. To secure,by means of eventual punishment, restraint inthis shape, you must employ restraint in someother shape ; for example, the restraint attached toimprisonment.Between compulsion and punishment, the relationis of this sort. In the case of compulsion,as in the case of restraint, the act in question isthe act which is regarded as the efficient cause ofthe evil, the prevention of which is the ultimateobject of the act of punishment. What restraintis in the case when the act in question is of thepositive cast, compulsion is in the case when theact is of the negative cast.Between torture and punishment, the relation isof this sort. The term torture is employed, andperhaps with nearly equal frequency, in twodifferent senses. In its most extended sense it isemployed to designate pain, especially pain ofbody, when considered as being intense in itsdegree, and this without reference to the cause bywhich it is produced.In its more restricted sense, being that in which itis most apt to be employed, when considered as theresult of law, it is employed to signify pain of bodyin its degree intense as above, employed in duecourse of law, or, at any rate, by the landor power,in the character of an instrument of compulsion.12 B.I. Ctl.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.But the account given of it when employed inthis sense wants much, as yet, of being complete.The compulsion, or constraint, may be producedby the mere apprehension of the punishmentwhich is denounced.By this circumstance, torture stands distinguishednot only from compulsion itself, but fromany lot of punishment considered as applied to thepurpose of compulsion in the ordinary mode.The notion of torture is not included in apunishment attached to an act of disobedience, ofwhich no remission is allowed ; but suppose thesame lot of pain attached to the same offence,with power to remit any part of it, in case of andimmediately upon-compliance with the requisitionof the law; and here the punishment comes underthe notion and denomination of torture.Between compensation, or satisfaction and punishment,the relation is of this sort : in all cases,if compensation be the end in view, so far as concernspecuniary compensation, by whatsoever isdone for the purpose of compensation, the effect ofpecuniary punishment is produced likewise. Moresuffering, however, will in general be produced bywhat is taken for the purpose of compensation thanif the same amount were taken for the purpose ofpunishment ; it will be accompanied by the regretproduced by the idea of the advantage not onlyreaped by an adversary, but reaped at one own sexpense.On the other hand, by the contemplation of thesuffering inflicted by punishment on the delinquents,good in the shape of compensation, or sayvindictive satisfaction, is administered to the partyinjured.Between taxation and punishment of the pecu-B.I. CII.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. 13nary kind, for it is only in this form that they canbe compared, the relation is of this sort; they bothconsist in the application of compulsion to theextracting out of the pocket in question a certainsum ; the difference between them consists in theend in view. In the case of taxation, the objectis the obtainment of a certain sum ; in the case ofpunishment, the object is the prevention of theobnoxious act, to the commission of which theobligation of paying the money is attached in thecharacter of a punishment. In the case of taxation,the wish of the legislator is, that the moneymay be paid ; and, consequently, if it be to theperformance of a certain act that the obligation ofpaying the money is annexed, his wish is that theact may be performed.As in the two cases the result intended is opposite,the actual results are accordingly incompatible,in so far as either result is obtained, the otheris missed. Whether the effect of any given lawshall be taxation, or effectual prohibition, dependsin the instance of each individual upon the value,which, in the case in question, he is called uponto pay, compared with the value in his estimationof the advantage which stands annexed to the exerciseof the act ; if the advantage appear thegreater, he pays the money and exercises the act ;if the value of the money to be eventually paidappear the greater, he obeys the prohibitory law,and abstains from the performance of the act.When the face assumed by any law is that of aprohibition, if the penalty be nothing but pecuniaryand the amount is fixed, while the profits ofthe offence are variable, the probability is that inmany instances the penalty even if levied, whichcould not be without detection, prosecution, andconviction, would but operate as a taxed licence.14 B.I. CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.This circumstance is so obvious, that one wouldhave thought it could not have been overlooked ;had it, however, been observed with any tolerablesteadiness in England, the law of that countrywould wear a face widely different from thatwhich it wears at present.In relation to all these several results or concomitants*of punishment, one observation useful toThe distinctions between these several objects maybe illustratedby an example.In 1769, a jury gave a verdict of 4,OOOZ. damages against theEarl of Halifax, for the wrongful imprisonment of John Wilkes,Esq. on suspicion of being the author of a state libel. It maybeinquired, what sort of act did the jury perform, when bygiving this verdict they appointed the sum in question to be paidby the one person to the other ?It was intended to be an act of punishment. If any jurymanbeing angry with Lord Halifax also intended to produce pain inhim, on account of the pleasure he took in thinking of thatpain ; in the case of such juryman it was an act of vengeance-beingdone, however, on account of an act that had beendone, viz. the imprisonment of Mr Wilkes, it was not an act ofantipathy.If any juryman did it with a view of deterring Lord Halifaxor any one who might occupy that nobleman s place in futurefrom doing acts of the like kind, and of preventing the mischiefapprehended from such acts, it was in him an act for amendmentand determent. It could not, however, operate for thepurpose of disablement, the paying of a sum of money, havingtendency to disable Lord Halifax, or those holding the sameonce, from imprisoning others who might become the objects oftheir dislike.It was not an act of immediate self-defence, for self-defenceimplies attack, that is, implies that there is some person who isactually using his endeavours to do mischief to the party defendinghimself. If, however, any juryman thinking himself in dangerof suffering in the like, or any other manner from Lord Hand persons liable to act as he did, joined in the verdict withthe view of preserving himself from such suffering, to wit bvmeans of the restraint which the fear of similar punishmentnight be expected to impose on Lord Halifax and such otherpersons, on the part of such juryman it was an act of self-preservation.B.I. CII.T. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS. 15be borne in mind, that it may operate as a preservativeagainst much error, is that it is but in veryfew, if any of these instances, that from the nameby which the object is here designated, any truejudgment can be formed on any such question aswhether and how far the object is a fit object ofpursuit or aim in the character of an end.Take any one of them for example, if takenby itself that object be of the nature of good, yetin the first place, that good may be in any degreeminute ; in the next place, to the quantity of evilwith which it may happen to it to be followed,there are no limits : and thus it is that false mustbe that proposition, which without leaving roomfor exceptions, should pronounce the attainmentof that object to be universally an end fit to beaimed at, whether through the intervention ofpunishment, or any other means ; and conversely.Of the distinctions here pointed out betweenpunishment and the several objects that are of kinto it, five distinguishable practical uses may bemade.1 . They may serve as a memento to the legislator,to see on every occasion that for the severalobjects which may have place and present aThe payment of the fine imposed could contribute nothing tothe purposes of safe custody or physical restraint, neither was itan act of compulsion, for it was not designed as a means of compellinghim to do anything.It was not an act of torture ; the penalty, if paid, was paidinstantaneously; the act of paying ceasing of itself, and notbeing capable of being protracted so as to be made to cease onlyat a future given instant.If any juryman did it with the view of making Mr Wilkesamends for the pain he had suffered by the supposed injury inquestion, in such juryman it was an act of compensation ; andif the juryman who intended to make compensation to MrWilkes also thought that it was right to tax Lord Halifax to theamount of the compensation proper to be given to Mr Wilkes,it was an act of taxation.16 B.I.CH.I. DEFINITIONS AND DISTINCTIONS.demand for legislative provision ; due and adequateprovision is accordingly made.2. To preserve him from the delusion whichwould have place, wheresoever it happens that byone and the same lot o evil, due and adequateprovision may be made for two or more of thesepurposes, if by the difference of their respectivedenominations, he were led to give birth to twoor more lots of evil for the purpose of effecting thegood, for the effectuation of which one of themwould suffice.3. That in each instance, in comparing the endhe has in view with the means which he proposesto employ for the attainment of it, the view hetakes of such proposed means may be sufficientlyclear, correct, and complete, to enable him to formacorrect judgment of the mode and degree inwhich they promise to be conducive to the attainmentof the end.4. That he may be upon his guard against thatsort of rhetorical artifice which operates by substitutingfor the proper name of the object or resultin question, according to the purpose in view, thename of some other object or result, the name ofwhich is either more or less popular than the properone.5. That while in pursuit of any one of theseobjects, in the character of an end, he employssuch means as to his conception appear conduciveto that end, he may be correctly and completelyaware of any tendency which such arrangementsmay have to be conducive or obstructive, withreference to any other of these same ends.CHAPTER II.CLASSIFICATION.IN a former work it has been shewn* thatoffences against individuals may be ranged underfour principal heads ; offences against the person,property, reputation, and condition. The same divisionmay be applied to punishments ; an individualcan only be punished by affecting his person, hisproperty, his reputation, or his condition.The circumstance which renders these twoclassifications similar is this punishments andoffences are both evils caused by the free agencyof man. In as many points as we are liable to beinjured by the hand of an offender, in so manypoints is the offender himself exposed to the swordof justice. The difference between punishmentsand offences is not then in their nature, which is,or may be, the same ; but in the legality of theone, and the illegality of the other, offences areprohibited, punishments are instituted by thelaws./ .Their effects also are diametrically opposite.An offence produces an evil both of the firstand second order ; -\ it causes suffering in an indiato Principles of Morals and Legislation, vol. ii,page 63.t See Principles of Morals and Legislation, ch. 12, vol. i,page 254, Of the Consequences of a Mischievous Act.The mischief of an offence may frequently be distinguished, asit were, into two shares or parcels ; the one containing whatmay be called the primary ; the other what may be called thesecondary. That share may be termed primary which is sustainedby an assignable individual, or a multitude of assignableindividuals. That share may be termed secondary, which, takingC18 U.I. CIl.lI. CLASSIFICATION.vidual which he was unable to avoid, and itspreads an alarm more or less general. A punishmentproduces an evil of theirs order, and a goodof the second order. It inflicts suffering upon anindividual who has incurred it voluntarily, and inits secondary effects it produces only good, it intimidatesthe ill-disposed, it re-assures the innocent,and becomes the safeguard of society.Those punishments which immediately affectthe person in its active or passive powers, constitutethe class of corporal punishments, / they maybedivided into the following different kinds.1. Simply afflictive punishments,2. Complexly afflictive punishments.3. Restrictive punishments.4. Active or laborious punishments.5. Capital punishments.Punishments which affect property, reputation,or condition, possess this quality in common, theydeprive the individual of some advantage which hebefore enjoyed ; such are privative punishments,losses, and forfeitures. The punishments of thisclass are very various, they extend to every possiblekind of possession.Hence we perceive that all punishments maybereduced to two classes.1. Corporal punishments.2. Privative punishments, or punishments byloss or forfeiture.its origin from the former, extends itself rather over the wholecommunity, or over some other multitude of unassignable individuals."For the full development of this subject, reference may bemade to the chapter indicated.CHAPTER III.OF THE ENDS OF PUNISHMENT.WHEN any act has been committed which isfollowed, or threatens to be followed, by sucheffects as a provident legislator would be anxiousto prevent, two wishes naturally and immediatelysuggest themselves to his mind : first, to obviatethe danger of the like mischief in future : secondly,to compensate the mischief that has already beendone.The mischief likely to ensue from acts of thelike kind may arise from either of two sources,either the conduct of the party himself who hasbeen the author of the mischief already done, orthe conduct of such other persons as may haveadequate motives and sufficient opportunities to dothe like.Hence the prevention of offences divides itselfinto two branches : Particular prevention, whichapplies to the delinquent himself; and generalprevention, which is applicable to all the membersof the community without exception.Pain and pleasure are the great springs ofhuman action. When a man perceives or supposespain to be the consequence of an act, he isacted upon in such a manner as tends, with acertain force, to withdraw him, as it were, fromthe commission of that act. If the apparent magnitude,or rather value * of that pain be greaterI say value, in order to include the circumstances of intensity,proximity, certainty, and duration ; which magnitude, properlyspeaking, does not. This may serve to obviate theobjections made by Locke (book II, ch. 21) against the proposition,that man is determined by the greater apparent good.20 B.I. CII.III. OF THE ENDS OF PUNISHMENT.than the apparent magnitude or value of the pleasureor good he expects to be the consequence ofthe act, he will be absolutely prevented from performingit. The mischief which would haveensued from the act, if performed, will also bythat means be prevented.With respect to a given individual, the recurrenceof an offence may be provided against inthree ways:1. By taking from him the physical power ofoffending.2. By taking away the desire of offending.3. By making him afraid of offending.In the first case, the individual can no morecommit the offence ; in the second, he no longerdesires to commit it ; in the third, he may stillwish to commit it, but he no longer dares to do it.In the first case, there is a physical incapacity ;in the second, a moral reformation ; in the third,there is intimidation or terror of the law.General prevention is effected by the denunciationof punishment, and by its application, which,according to the common expression, serves for anexample. The punishment suffered by the offenderpresents to every one an example of what he himselfwill have to suffer if he is guilty of the sameoffence.General prevention ought to be the chief end ofpunishment, as it is its real justification. If wecould consider an offence which has been committedas an isolated fact, the like of which wouldnever recur, punishment would be useless. Itwould be only adding one evil to another. Butwhen we consider that an unpunished crime leavesthe path of crime open not only to the same delinquent,but also to all those who may have thesame motives and opportunities for entering uponB.I. CH.III. OF THE ENDS OF PUNISHMENT. 21it, we perceive that the punishment inflicted onthe individual becomes a source of security toall. That punishment, which, considered initself, appeared base and repugnant to all generoussentiments, is elevated to the first rank ofbenefits, when it is regarded not as an act ofwrath or of vengeance against a guilty or unfortunateindividual who has given way to mischievousinclinations, but as an indispensable sacrifice tothe common safety.With respect to any particular delinquent, wehave seen that punishment has three objects,incapacitation, reformation, and intimidation. Ifthe crime he has committed is of a kind calculatedto inspire great alarm, as manifesting a very mischievousdisposition, it becomes necessary to takefrom him the power of committing it again. Butif the crime, being less dangerous, only justifies atransient punishment, and it is possible for thedelinquent to return to society, it is proper thatthe punishment should possess qualities calculatedto reform or to intimidate him.After having provided for the prevention offuture crimes, reparation still remains to bemade, as far as possible, for those which arepassed, by bestowing a compensation on the partyinjured ; that is to say, bestowing a good equal tothe evil suffered.This compensation, founded upon reasons whichhave been elsewhere developed,* does not at firstview appear to belong to the subject of punishments,because it concerns another individual thanthe delinquent. But these two ends have a realconnexion. There are punishments which havethe double effect of affording compensation to theTraites, &c. torn, ii, p. 310.22 B.I. CH.IIJ. OF THE ENDS OF PUNISHMENT.party injured, and of inflicting a proportionatesuffering on the delinquent ; so that these twoends may be effected by a single operation. Thisis, in certain cases, the peculiar advantage ofpecuniary punishments.CHAPTER IV.CASES UNMEET FOR PUNISHMENT.ALL punishment being in itself evil, upon theprinciple of utility, if it ought at all to be admitted,it ought only to be admitted in as far asit promises to exclude some greater evil.It is plain, therefore, that in the followingcases punishment ought not to be inflicted :1. Where it is groundless: 2. Where it must beinefficacious ; because it cannot act so as to preventthe mischief: 3. Where it is unprofitable ortoo expensive: 4. Where it is needless; becausethe mischief may be prevented or cease of itselfwithout it.I. Cases in which punishment is groundless.1. Where there has never been any mischief,as in the case of consent : Such consent, providedit be free and fairly given, being the best proofthat can be obtained, that at least no immediatemischief upon the whole has been done to theparty who gives it.2. Where the mischief is outweighed by the productionof a benefit of greater value, as in precautionsagainst instant calamity, and the exercise ofdomestic, judicial, military, and supreme powers.II. Cases in which punishment must be inefficacious.These are, 1 . Where the penal provision is notestablished until after the act is done. Such arethe cases of an ex post facto law, and of a sentencebeyond the law. 2. Where the penal provision,24 JJ.I. C.IV. CASES UNMEET FOR PUNISHMENT.though established, is not conveyed to the notice ofthe person on whom it is intended to operate,as from want of due promulgation. 3. Wherethe penal provision, though it were conveyed tothe individual s notice, could produce no effect withrespect to preventing his engaging in the act prohibited: as in the cases of extreme infancy, insanity,and intoxication. 4. Where the penal provision,though present to the party s notice, doesnot produce its effect, because he knows not theact he is about to engage in is of the number ofthose to which the penal provision relates.5. Where, though the penal clause might exert afull and prevailing influence were it to act alone,yet by the predominant influence of some oppositecause upon the will, such as physical danger orthreatened mischief, it must necessarily be ineffectual.6. Where, though the penal clause mayexert a full and prevailing influence over the willof the party, yet his physical faculties (owing tothe predominant influence of some physical cause)are not in a condition to follow the determinationof his will : insomuch that the act is absolutelyinvoluntary, as through compulsion or restraint.III. Cases where punishment is unprofitable.If the evil of the punishment exceed the evil ofthe offence, the punishment will be unprofitable,the legislator will have produced more sufferingthan he has prevented. He will have purchasedexemption from one evil at the expense of agreater.The evil resulting from punishment dividesitself into four branches : 1. The evil of coercionor restraint, or the pain which it gives a man notto be able to do the act, whatever it be, which,by the apprehension of the punishment, he isB.I. C.I V. CASES UNMEET FOR PUNISHMENT. 25deterred from doing. 2. The evil of apprehension,or the pain which a man, who has exposed himselfto punishment, feels at the thoughts of undergoingit. 3. The evils of sufferance, or the painwhich a man feels, in virtue of the punishmentitself, from the time when he begins to undergo it.4. The pain of sympathy, and the other derivativeevils resulting to the persons who are in connectionwith those who suffer from the preceding causes.IV. Cases where punishment is needless.A punishment is needless, where the purpose ofputting an end to the practice may be attained aseffectually at a cheaper rate, by instruction, forinstance, as well as by terror ; by informing theunderstanding, as well as by exercising an immediateinfluence on the will. This seems to be thecase with respect to all those offences which consistin the disseminating pernicious principles inmatters of duty, of whatever kind the duty may be,whether political, moral, or religious. And this,whether such principles be disseminated under,or even without a sincere persuasion of their beingbeneficial. I say even without; for though, in sucha case, it is not instruction that can prevent theindividual from endeavouring to inculcate hisprinciples, yet it may prevent others from adoptingthem : without which, the endeavours to inculcatethem will do no harm. In such a case, the sovereignwill commonly have little occasion to takean active part : if it be the interest of one individualto inculcate opinions that are pernicious, it willsurely be the interest of other individuals to exposethem. But if the sovereign must needs take a partin the controversy, the pen is the proper weaponwherewith to combat error, and not the sword.On the other hand, as to the evil of the offence,26 B. Ic. IV. CASES UNMEET Foot PUNISHMENT.this will, of course, be greater or less accordingto the nature of each offence. The proportionbetween the one evil and the other will thereforebe different in the case of each particular offence.The cases, therefore, where punishment is unprofitableon this ground, can by no other means bediscovered, than by an examination of each particularoffence.These considerations ought at all times to bepresent to the mind of the legislator, whenever heestablishes any punishment. It is from them thathe will derive his principal reasons for generalannuities, on account of the multitude of delinquents: for the preservation of a delinquent,whose talents could not be replaced, or whosepunishment would excite the public displeasure,or the displeasure of foreign powers.CHAPTER V.EXPENSE OF PUNISHMENT.Expense of Punishment. This expression, whichhas not yet been introduced into common use, mayat first sight be accused of singularity and pedantry.It has however been chosen upon reflection as theonly one which conveys the desired idea, withoutconveying at the same time an anticipated judgmentof approbation or disapprobation. The painproduced by punishments, is as it were a capitalhazarded in expectation of profit. This profit isthe prevention of crimes. In this operation everythingought to be taken into the calculation ofprofit and loss ; and when we estimate the profit,we must subtract the loss ; from which it evidentlyresults that the diminution of the expense, or theincrease of the profit, equally tend to the productionof a favourable balance.The term expense once admitted naturally introducesthat of economy or frugality. The mildnessor the rigour of punishments is commonly spokenof : these terms include a prejudice in the one caseof favour, in the other of disfavour, which preventsimpartiality in their examination. But to say thata punishment is economic, is to use the languageof reason and calculation.We should say then that a punishment is economic,when the desired effect is produced by theemployment of the least possible suffering. Weshould say that is too expensive, when it producesmore evil than good; or when it is possible toobtain the same good by means of a less punishment.28 B.I. CH. V. EXPENSE OF PUNISHMENT.In this place distinction should be made betweenthe real and the apparent value of a punishment.By the real value, I mean that which it wouldbe found to have by one who, like the legislator,is in a condition accurately to trace and coolly toestimate it through all its parts, exempt from thedelusions which are seen to govern the uninformedand unthinking part of mankind ; knowing, beforehand,upon general principles, what the delinquentwill know afterwards by particular experience.By the apparent value of a punishment, I meanthat which it appears to a delinquent to have atany time previous to that in which he comes toexperience it ; or to a person under temptation tobecome a delinquent previous to the time atwhich, were he to become so, he would exoe-hence it.The real value of the punishment constitutesthe expense. The apparent value influences theconduct of individuals. It is the real punishmentthat is the expense the apparent punishment thatgives the profit.The profit of punishments has reference to theinterests of two parties the public, and the partyinjured. The expense of the punishment adds tothis number a third interest, that of the delinquent.It ought not to be forgotten, although it has beentoo frequently forgotten, that the delinquent is amember of the community, as well as any otherindividuals well as the party injured himself ;and that there is just as much reason for consultinghis interest as that of any other. His welfareis proportionably the welfare of the communityhis suffering the suffering of the community. Itmay be right that the interest of the delinquentshould in part be sacrificed to that of the rest ofB. I.CH.V. EXPENSE OF PUNISHMENT. 29the community ; but it never can be right that itshould be totally disregarded. It may be prudentto hazard a great punishment for the chance ofobtaining a great good : it would be absurd tohazard the same punishment where the chance ismuch weaker, and the advantage much less. Suchare the principles which direct men in their privatespeculations. Why should they not guide thelegislator ?Ought any real punishments to be inflicted ?Most certainly. Why ? For the sake of producingthe appearance of it. Upon the principle of utility,except as to so much as is necessary for reformationand compensation, for this reason, and for noother whatever. Every particle of real punishmentthat is produced more than what is necessaryfor the production of the requisite quantity ofapparent punishment, is just so much misery runto waste. Hence the real punishment ought tobe as small, and the apparent punishment as greatas possible. If hanging a man in effigy, wouldproduce the same salutary impression of terrorupon the minds of the people, it would be folly orcruelty ever to hang a man in person. *At the Cape of Good Hope, the Dutch made use of a stratagemwhich could only succeed among Hottentots. One oftheir officers having killed an individual of this inoffensive tribe,the whole nation took up the matter and became furious andimplacable. It was necessary to make an example to pacifythem. The delinquent was therefore brought before them inirons, as a malefactor: he was tried with great form, and wascondemned to swallow a goblet of ignited brandy. The manplayed his part ; he feigned himself dead, and fell motionless.His friends covered him with a cloak, and bore him away. TheHottentots declared themselves satisfied. " The worst we shouldhave done with the man," said they, " would have been to throwhim into the fire ; but the Dutch have done better they haveput the fire into the man." Lloyd s Evening Post, for Augustor September 1776.30 B.I. CH.V. EXPENSE OF Punishment.If delinquents were constantly punished fortheir offences, and nobody else knew of it, it isevident that, excepting the inconsiderable benefitwhich might result in the way of disablement, orreformation, there would be a great deal of mischiefdone, and not the least particle of good.The real punishment would be as great as ever,and the apparent would be nothing. The punishmentwould befal every offender as an unforeseenevil. It would never have been present to hismind to deter him from the commission of crime.It would serve as an example to no one.Delinquents may happen to know nothing of thepunishment provided for them in either of twocases. 1. When it is inflicted without havingbeen previously made known. 2. When, thoughpromulgated, it has not been made known to theindividual. The latter of these cases may be thecase where the punishment is appointed by statuteor as it is called, written law. The former musthappen in all new cases where the punishment isappointed in the way of common or unwritten law.The punishment appointed by the law may bepresented to the mind in two ways: 1. By itslegal denunciation and description: 2. By itspublic execution, when it is inflicted with suitablenotoriety.The notion entertained of a punishment oughtto be exact, or, as the logicians would say, adequate; that is, it should present to the mind notonly a part, but the whole of the sufferings itincludes. The denunciation of a punishment oughttherefore to include all the items of which it iscomposed, since that which is not known cannotoperate as a motive.Hence we may deduce three important maxims:B. I.CH.V. EXPENSE OF Pl Moment. 311 . That a punishment that is more easily learnt,is better than one that is less easily learnt./2. That a punishment that is more easily remembered,is better than one that is less easily remembered.3. That a punishment that appears of greatermagnitude in comparison of what it really is, isbetter than one that appears of less magnitude. **CHAPTER VI.MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT.AdmitRegula, peccatis quae pcenas irroget aquas.Ne scotia dignum, horrible severe flagello.Hon. L. 1. Sat. iii.ESTABLISH a proportion between crimes andpunishments has been said by Montesquieu,Beccaria, and many others. The maxim is, withoutdoubt, a good one, but whilst it is thus confinedto general terms, it must be confessed it ismore oracular than instructive. Nothing has beenaccomplished till wherein this proportion consistshas been explained, and the rules have been laiddown by which it may be determined that a certainmeasure of punishment ought to be applied to acertain crime.Punishments may be too small or too great ;and there are reasons for not making them toosmall, as well as not making them too great. Theterms minimum and maximum may serve to markthe two extremes of this question, which requireequal attention.With a view of marking out the limits of punishmenton the side of the first of these extremes, wemay lay it down as a rule :1. That the value of the punishment must notbe less in any case than what is sufficient to outweighthat of the profit of the offence.By the profit of the crime, must be understoodnot only pecuniary profit, but every advantage,real or apparent, which has operated as a motiveto the commission of the crime.B.I.CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT. 33The profit of the crime is the force which urgesa man to delinquency the pain of the punishmentis the force employed to restrain him from it. Ifthe first of these forces be the greater, the crimewill be committed ;* if the second, the crime willnot be committed. If then a man, having reapedthe profit of a crime, and undergone the punishment,finds the former more than equivalent to thelatter, he will go on offending for ever ; there isnothing to restrain him. If those, also, who beholdhim, reckon that the balance of gain is in favourof the delinquent, the punishment will be uselessfor the purposes of example.The Anglo-saxon laws, which fixed a price uponthe lives of men ; 200 shillings for the murder ofa peasant, six times as much for that of a nobleman,and thirty-six times as much for that of theking, evidently transgressed against this rule. Inagreat number of cases, the punishment wouldappear nothing, compared with the profit of thecrime.The same error is committed whenever a punishmentis established which reaches only to acertain fixed point, which the advantage of thecrime may surpass.Authors of celebrity have been found desirousof establishing a rule precisely the reverse, theyhave said that the greatness of temptation is areason for lessening the punishment ; because itlessens the fault ; because the more powerful theseduction, the less reason is there for concludingthat the offender is depraved. Those, therefore,who are overcome, in this case, naturally inspireus with commiseration. )*That is to say, committed by those who are only restrainedby the laws, and not by any other tutelary motives, such as benevolence,religion, or honour.f One is astonished that a writer of such consummate geniusD34 B.I. CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT.This may all be very true, and yet afford noreason for departing from the rule. That it mayprove effectual, the punishment must be moredreaded than the profit of the crime desired.Besides, an inefficacious punishment is doublymischievous ; mischievous to the public, since itpermits the crime to be committed, mischievousto the delinquent, since the punishment inflictedupon him is just so much misery in waste. Whatshould we say to the surgeon, who, that he mightsave his patient a small degree of pain, shouldonly half cure him ? What should we think of hishumanity, if he should add to his disease the tormentof a useless operation ?It is, therefore, desirable that punishmentshould correspond to every degree of temptation ;at the same time, the power of mitigation might bereserved in those cases where the nature of thetemptation itself indicates the absence of confirmeddepravity, or the possession of benevolenceas might be the case should a father commit atheft that he might supply his starving family withbread.*as Adam Smith should have fallen into this mistake ; speakingof smuggling, he says : " The law, contrary to all the ordinaryprinciples of justice, first creates the temptation, and thenpunishes those who yield to it ; and it commonly enhances thepunishment, too, in proportion to the very circumstance whichought certainly to alleviate it the temptation to commit the .crime." Wealth of Nations, b. 5, ch. ii.It is easy to estimate the profit of a crime in cases of rapacity,but how are we to ascertain it in those of malice andenmity?The profit may be estimated by the nature of the mischiefthat the offender has done to his adversary. Has his conductbeen more offensive than painful ? The profit is the degree ofhumiliation that he believes his adversary to have undergone.Has he mutilated or wounded him? The profit is the degree ofsuffering he has inflicted.In this, in his own opinion, consists the profit of his offence :B.l.CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT. 35Rule II. The greater the mischief of the offence,the greater is the expense it may be worth while to beat,in the way of punishment.This rule is so obvious in itself, that to say anythingin proof of it would be needless ; but howfew are the instances in which it has been observed.It is not long since that women werecondemned to be burnt alive for uttering badmoney. The punishment of death is still lavishedon a multitude of offences of the least mischievousdescription. The punishment of burning is stillin use in many countries for offences which mightsafely be left to the restraint of the moral sanction.If it can be worth while to be at the expense of soterrible a punishment as that of burning alive, itought to be reserved for murder or incendiarism.It will be said, perhaps, that the intention oflegislators has always been to follow this rule, butthat their opinions, as well as those of the people,have fluctuated respecting the relative magnitudeand nature of crimes. At one period, witchcraftwas regarded as the most mischievous offence.Sorcerers, who sold their souls to the devil, wereobjects of abhorrence. A heretic, the enemy ofthe Almighty, drew down divine wrath upon awhole kingdom. To steal property consecratedto divine uses was an offence of a more malignantnature than ordinary theft, the crime beingdirected against the Divinity. A false estimatebeing made of these crimes, an undue measureof punishment was applied to them.Rule III. When two offences come in competition.if then he is punished in an analogous manner, he is struck inthe most sensible part, which has, so to speak, been pointed outbyhimself; for it is not possible but that the mischief which hehas chosen as the instrument of his vengeance, must appearhurtful to himself.36 B.I. CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT.the punishment for the greater offence must be sufficientto induce a man to prefer the less.Two offences may be said to be in competition,when it is in the power of an individual to commitboth. When thieves break into a house, they mayexecute their purpose in different manners ; bysimply stealing, by theft accompanied with bodilyinjury, or murder, or incendiarism. If the punishmentis the same for simple theft, as for theft andmurder, you give the thieves a motive for committingmurder, because this crime adds to thefacility of committing the former, and the chanceof impunity when it is committed.The great inconvenience resulting from theinfliction of great punishments for small offences,is, that the power of increasing them in proportionto the magnitude of the offence is thereby lost.*Rule IV. The punishment should be adjusted insuch manner to each particular offence, that forevery part of the mischief there may be a motive torestrain the offender from giving birth to it.Thus, for example, in adjusting the punishmentfor stealing a sum of money, let the magnitudeof the punishment be determined by the amountof the sum stolen. If for stealing ten shillings anoffender is punished no more than for stealing five ;the stealing of the remaining five of those ten shil-Montesquieu, after having recommended this rule of proportion,adds, " Quand il n y a point de difference dans lapeine, il faut en mettre, dans 1 esperance de la grace ; en Angleterre,on n assassine point (il adroit du dire peu), parce que lesvoleurs peuvent emperor d etre transported dans les colonies, nonpas les assassines." Esprit des Lois. lib. 6, ch. xvi.This expectation of favour, no doubt, contributes to the effectof which he speaks, but why should this manifest imperfectionin the laws remain, that it may be corrected by an arbitrary actof the sovereign ? If an uncertain advantage produces this measureof good, a certain advantage would operate more surely.B.I. CII.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT. 37lings is an offence for which there is no punishmentat all.The last object is, whatever mischief is guardedagainst, to guard against it at as cheap a rate aspossible ; therefore,Rule V. The punishment ought in no case to bemore than what is necessary to bring it into conformitywith the rules here given.Rule VI. That the quantity of punishment actuallyinflicted on each individual offender, may correspondto the quantity intended for similar offenders in general,the several circumstances influencing sensibilityought always to be taken into the account.The same nominal punishment is not, for differentindividuals, the same real punishment. Letthe punishment in question be a fine : the sumthat would not be felt by a rich man, would beruin to a poor one. The same ignominious punishmentthat would fix an indelible stigma upon aman of a certain rank, would not affect a man of alower rank. The same imprisonment that wouldbe ruin to a man of business, death to an old man,and destruction of reputation to a woman, wouldbe as nothing, or next to nothing, to persons placedin other circumstances.The law may, by anticipation, provide that suchor such a degree of mitigation shall be made in theamount of the punishment, in consideration ofsuch or such circumstances influencing the sensibilityof the patient such as age, sex, rank, &c.But in these cases considerable latitude must beleft to the Judge.*Of the above rules of proportion, the four firstmay serve to mark out the limits on the minimumSee Introduction to Morals and Legislation, circumstancesinfluencing sensibility.38 B.I.CH.VJ. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT.side ; the limits below which a punishment oughtnot to be diminished ; the fifth will mark out thelimits on the maximum side, the limits abovewhich it ought not to be increased.The minimum of punishment is more clearlymarked than its maximum. What is too little ismore clearly observed than what is too much.What is not sufficient is easily seen, but it is notpossible so exactly to distinguish an excess. Anapproximation only can be attained. The irregularitiesin the force of temptations, compel thelegislator to increase his punishments till they arenot merely sufficient to restrain the ordinary desiresof men ; but also the violence of their desires whenunusually excited.The greatest danger lies in an error on theminimum side, because in this case the punishmentis inefficacious ; but this error is least likelyto occur, a slight degree of attention sufficing forits escape ; and when it does exist, it is at thesame time clear and manifest, and easy to beremedied. An error on the maximum side, on thecontrary, is that to which legislators and men ingeneral are naturally inclined antipathy, or awant of compassion for individuals who arerepresented as dangerous and vile, pushes themonward to an undue severity. It is on this side,therefore, that we should take the most precautions,as on this side there has been shewn thegreatest disposition to err.By way of supplement and explanation to thefirst rule, and to make sure of giving to the punishmentthe superiority over the offence, the threefollowing rules may be laid down.Rule. VII. That the value of the punishment mayoutweigh the profit of the offence, it must be increasedB.I. CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT. 39in point of magnitude, in proportion as it falls short inpoint of certainty.Rule VIII. Punishment must be further increasedin point of magnitude, in proportion as it falls shortin point of proximity.The profit of a crime is commonly more certainthan its punishment, or what amounts to the samething, appears so to the offender. It is generallymore immediate, the temptation to offend is present; the punishment is at a distance. Hencethere are two circumstances which weaken theeffect of punishment, its uncertainty and its distance.Suppose the profit of a crime equal to 10/.sterling, suppose the chance of punishment as oneto two. It is clear that if the punishment, supposingthat it were to take place, is not more than10/. sterling, its effect upon a man s mind whilst itcontinues uncertain, is not equal to a certain lossof 10/. sterling: it is only equal to a certain lossof 5/. sterling. That it may be rendered equal tothe profit of the crime, it must be raised to sunlessmen are hurried on by outrageous passion,they do not engage in the career of crimewithout the hope of impunity. If a punishmentwere to consist only in taking from an offenderthe fruit of his crime, and this punishment wereinfallible, there would be no more such crimescommitted ; for what man would be so insensateas to take the trouble of committing a crime withthe certainty of not enjoying its fruits, and theshame of having attempted it ? But as there arealways some chances of escape, it is necessaryto increase the value of the punishment, to counterbalancethese chances of impunity.It is therefore true, that the more the certaintyof punishment can be augmented, the more it maybediminished in amount. This is one advantage40 B.I. CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT.resulting from simplicity of legislation, and excellenceof legal procedure.For the same reason, it is necessary that thepunishment should be as near, in point of time, tothe crime as possible ; because its impressionupon the minds of men is weakened by distance;and because this distance adds to the uncertaintyof its infliction, by affording fresh chances ofescape.Rule IX-when the act is conclusively indicativeof a habit, such an increase must be given to thepunishment as may enable it to outweigh the profit,not only of the individual offence, but of such otherlike offences as are likely to have been committed withimpunity by the same offender.Severe as this conjectural calculation may appear,it is absolutely necessary in some cases. Ofthis kind are fraudulent crimes ; using falseweights or measures, and issuing base coin. Ifthe coiner was only punished according to thevalue of the single crime of which he is convicted,his fraudulent practice would, upon the whole,be a lucrative one. Punishment would thereforebe inefficacious if it did not bear a proportionto the total gain which may be supposed to havebeen derived, not from one particular act, but froma train of actions of the same kind.There may be a few other circumstances orconsiderations which may influence, in some smalldegree, the demand for punishment ; but as thepropriety of these is either not so demonstrable, ornot so constant, or the application of them not sodeterminate, as that of the foregoing, it may bedoubted whether they are worth putting on a levelwith the others.Rule X. When a punishment, which in point ofquality is particularly well calculated to answer itsintention, cannot exist in less than a certain quantity,B.I. CH.VI. MEASURE OF PUNISHMENT. 41it may sometimes be of use, for the sake of employingit, to stretch a little beyond that quantity which, onother accounts, would be strictly necessary.Rule XI. In particular, this may be the casewhere the punishment proposed is of such a nature asto be particularly well calculated to answer the purposeof a moral lesson.Rule XII. In adjusting the quantum nf punishment,the circumstances by which all punishment mayberendered unprofitable ought to be attended to.And lastly, as too great a nicety in establishingproportions between punishment and crime wouldtend to defeat its own object, by rendering thewhole matter too complex ; we may add :Rule XIII. Among provisions designed to perfectthe proportion between punishments and offences, ifany occur which by their own particular good effectswould not make up for the harm they would do byadding to the intricacy of the Code, they should beomitted.The observation of rules of proportion betweencrimes and punishments has been objected to as useless,because they seem to suppose, that a spirit ofcalculation has place among the passions of men,who, it is said, never calculate. But dogmatic asthis proposition is, it is altogether false. In mattersof importance every one calculates. Eachindividual calculates with more or less correctness,according to the degrees of his information, andthe power of the motives which actuate him, butall calculate. It would be hard to say that amadman does not calculate. Happily, the passionof cupidity, which on account of its power, itsconstancy, and its extent, is most formidable tosociety ; is the passion which is most given tocalculation. This, therefore, will be more successfullycombated, the more carefully the lawturns the balance of profit against it.CHAPTER VII.OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVEN TO A LOTOF PUNISHMENT.IT has been shewn what rules ought to be observedin adjusting the proportion between punishmentand offences. The properties to be given toa lot of punishment in every instance will of coursebe such as it stands in need of, in order to becapable of being applied in conformity to thoserules : the quality will be regulated by the quantity.I. Variability.The first quality desirable in a lot of punishmentis variability ; that it be susceptible of degreesboth of intensity and duration.An invariable punishment cannot be made tocorrespond to the different degrees of the scale ofpunishment : it will be liable to err either by excessor defect : in the first case it would be tooexpensive, in the second inefficacious.Acute corporeal punishments are extremelyvariable in respect of intensity, but not of duration.Penal labour is variable in both respects, innearly equal degrees.Chronic punishments, such as banishment andimprisonment, may be easily divided as to theirduration : they may also be varied as to their intensity.A prison may be more or less severe.Banishment may be directed to a genial or ungenialclime.II. Equability.A second property, intimately connected with13. I. CH. VII. OF THE PROPERTIES, ETC. 43the former, may be stiled equability. It will availbut little that a mode of punishment (proper in allother respects) has been established by the legislature,and that capable of being screwed up or letdown to any degree that can be required, if, afterall, whatever degree of it be pitched upon, thatsame degree shall be liable, according to circumstances,to produce a very heavy degree of pain,or a very slight one, or even none at all. Anequable punishment is free from this irregularity :an unequable one is liable to it.Banishment is unequal. It may either provea punishment or not, according to the temper, theage, the rank, or the fortune of the individuals.This is also the case with pecuniary or quasi pecuniarypunishment, when it respects some particularspecies of property which the offender may ormay not possess. By the English law there areseveral offences which are punished by a total forfeitureof moveables, not extending to immoveables.In some cases this is the principal punishmentin others, even the only one. The consequenceis, that if a man s fortune happen toconsist in moveables, he is ruined ; if in immoveables,he suffers nothing.In the absence of other punishment, it may beproper to admit an unequal punishment. Thechance of punishing some delinquents is preferableto universal impunity.One mode of obviating the evil of inequalityconsists in the providing of two different species ofpunishment, not to be used together, but that theone may be substituted for and supply the defectsof the other : for example, corporeal may be substitutedfor pecuniary punishment, when the povertyof the individual prevents the application ofthe latter.44 B. I. C. VII. OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVENAn uncertain punishment is unequal. Completecertainty supposes complete equability ; thatis to say, that the same punishment shall producein every case the same degree of suffering. Suchaccuracy is however evidently unattainable, thecircumstances and sensibility of individuals beingso variable and so unequal. All that can beaccomplished is to avoid striking and manifestinequality. In the preparation of a penal code, itought constantly to be kept in view, that accordingto circumstances, of condition, fortune, age,sex, &c. the same nominal is not the same realpunishment. A fixed fine is always an unequalpunishment ; and the same remark is applicableto corporeal punishments. Whipping is not thesame punishment when applied to all ages andranks of persons. In China, indeed, every one issubmitted to the bamboo, from the water-carrierto the mandarin ; but this only proves, that amongthe Chinese the sentiments of honour are unknown.III. Commcnsurability .Punishments are commensurable when the penaleffects of each can be measured, and a distinctconception formed, of how much the suffering producedby the one falls short of or exceeds thatproduced by another. Suppose a man placed inasituation to choose between several crimes, hecan obtain a sum of money by theft, by murder,or by arson : the law ought to give him a motiveto abstain from the greatest crime ; he will havethat motive, if he see that the greatest crime drawsafter it the greatest punishment : he ought, thereforeto be able to compare these punishmentsamong themselves, and measure their differentdegrees.If the same punishment of death is denouncedB.I. CH. VII. TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT. 45for these three crimes, there is nothing to compare ;the individual is left free to choose that crimewhich appears most easy of execution, and leastliable to be detected.Punishments may be made commensurable intwo ways : 1. By adding to a certain punishmentanother quantity of the same kind ; for example,to five years of imprisonment for a certain crime,two more years for a certain aggravation : 2. Byadding a punishment of a different kind, for example,to five years of imprisonment for a certaincrime, a mark of disgrace for a certain aggravation.IV. Characteristicalness.Punishment can act as a preventative only whenthe idea of it, and of its connection with the crime,is present to the mind. Now, to be present, itmust be remembered, and to be remembered itmust have been learnt. But of all punishmentsthat can be imagined, there are none of which theconnection with the offence is either so easilylearnt, or so efficaciously remembered, as thoseof which the idea is already in part associated withsome part of the offence, which is the case whenthe one and the other have some circumstancethat belongs to them in common.The law of retaliation is admirable in this respect.An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.The most imperfect intelligence can connect theseideas. This rule of retaliation is however rarelypracticable ; it is too unequal and too expensive ;recourse must therefore be had to other sources ofanalogy. We shall therefore recur to this subjectin the next chapter.V. Exemplar city.A mode of punishment is exemplary in propertyB.I. C. VII. OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVENtion to its apparent, not to its real magnitude. Itis the apparent punishment that does all the servicein the way of example. A real punishment,which should produce no visible effects, mightserve to intimidate or reform the offender subjectedto it, but its use, as an example to the public,would be lost.The object of the legislator ought therefore tobe, so far as it may be safely practicable, to selectsuch modes of punishment, as, at the expense ofthe least real, shall produce the greatest apparentsuffering ; and to accompany each particular modeof punishment with such solemnities as may be bestcalculated to further this object.In this point of view, the auto-cafes would furnishmost useful models for acts of justice. Whatis a public execution ? It is a solemn tragedywhich the legislator presents before an assembledpeople, a tragedy truly important, truly pathetic,by the sad reality of its catastrophe, and the grandeurof its object. The preparation for it theplace of exhibition and the attendant circumstances,cannot be too carefully selected, as uponthese the principal effect depends. The tribunal,the scaffold, the dresses of the officers of justice,the religious service, the procession, every kind ofaccompaniment, ought to bear a grave and melancholycharacter. The executioners might be veiledin black, that the terror of the scene might beheightened, and these useful servants of the statescreened from the hatred of the people.Care must however be taken lest punishmentbecome unpopular and odious through a false appearanceof rigour.VI. Frugality.If any mode of punishment is more apt thananother to produce superfluous and needless pain.B. I.CH.VII. TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT. 47it may be styled frugal ; if less, it may bestyled frugal. The perfection of frugality in amode of punishment is where not only no superfluouspain is produced on the part of the personpunished, but even that same operation by whichhe is subjected to pain, is made to answer the purposeof producing pleasure on the part of someother person.Pecuniary punishments possess this quality inan eminent degree ; nearly all the evil felt by theparty paying, turns to the advantage of him whoreceives.There are some punishments, which, with referenceto the public expense, are particularlyfrugal : for example, mutilations, applied tooffences of frequent occurrence, such as smuggling.When an individual is rendered unable towork, he must be supported by the state, or rendereddependant upon public charity, and thusfixed as a burthen upon the most benevolent.If the statement of Financier is correct, therewere constantly in the state prisons of Naplesmore than forty thousand idle prisoners. Whatan immense loss of productive power ! The largestmanufacturing town in England scarcely employsa greater number of workmen.By the military laws of most countries, desertersare still condemned to death. It costs little toshoot a man ; but everything which he might bemade to produce, is lost ; and to supply his placea productive labourer must be converted into anunproductive one.VII. Subserviency to Reformation.All punishment has a certain tendency to deterfrom the commission of offences ; but if the delinquent,after he has been punished, is only deterred48 B.I. C. VII. OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVENby fear from the repetition of his offence, he isnot reformed. Reformation implies a change ofcharacter and moral dispositions.Hence those punishments which are calculatedto weaken the seductive, and to strengthen thepreserving motives, have an advantage over allothers with respect to those offences to which theycan be applied.There are other punishments which have anopposite tendency, and which serve to renderthose who undergo them still more vicious. Punishmentswhich are considered infamous, areextremely dangerous in this respect, particularlywhen applied to slight offences and juvenileoffenders. Diligenter enim visit, cui aliquid integraseverest. Nemo dignitary permit parch. Impunegenus estjam non habere pcentB locum. *Of this nature also, in a high degree, is thepunishment of imprisonment, when care is nottaken to prevent the indiscriminate association ofprisoners ; but the juvenile and the hoary delinquentsare allowed to meet and to live together.Such prisons, instead of places for reform, areschools of crime.VIII. Efficacy with respect to Disablement.A punishment which takes away the power ofrepeating the crime, must be very desirable, if nottoo costly. Imprisonment, whilst it continues,has this effect in a great measure. Mutilationsometimes reduces the power of committing crimesalmost to nothing, and death destroys it altogether.It will, however, be perceived, that whilst a man isdisabled from doing mischief, he is also in greatmeasure disabled from doing good to himself orothers.Seneca. de Clem. chap. xxii.B.I. C. VII. TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT. 49In some extraordinary cases the power of doingmischief can only be destroyed by death : as,for example, the case of civil war, when the mereexistence of the head of a party is sufficient tokeep alive the hopes and exertions of his partizans.In such a case, however, the guilt of the parties isoften problematic, and the punishment of deathsavours more of vengeance than of law.There are however cases in which the ability todomischief may be taken away with great economyof suffering. Has the offence consisted inan abuse of power, in an unfaithful discharge ofduty, it is sufficient to depose the delinquent, toremove him from the employment, the administration,the guardianship, the trust, he has abused.This remedy may equally be employed in domesticand political government.IX. Subserviency to Compensation.A further property desirable in a lot of punishmentis, that it may be convertible to profit.When a crime is committed, and afterwardspunished, there has existed two lots of evil theevil of the offence, and the evil of the punishment.Whenever then the evil of the offence falls upon aspecific person, if the punishment yield a profit,let the profit arising from it be given to that person.The evil of the offence will be removed, andthere will then only exist one lot of evil insteadof two. When there is no specific party injured,as when the mischief of the crime consists in alarmor danger, there will be no specific injury to becompensated ; still, if the punishment yield aprofit, there is a clear balance of good gained.This property is possessed in a more eminentdegree by pecuniary than by any other mode ofpunishment.50 B.I. C.VII. OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVENX. Popularity.In the rear of all these properties may be introducedthat of popularity a very fleeting and indeterminatekind of property, which may belong toa lot of punishment one moment, and be lost by itthe next. This property, in strictness of speech,ought rather to be called absence of unpopularity ;for it cannot be expected, in regard to such amatter as punishment, that any species or lot of itshould be positively acceptable and grateful to thepeople ; it is sufficient, for the most part, if theyhave no decided aversion to the thoughts of it.The use of inserting this property in the catalogueis, that it may serve as a memento to thelegislator not to introduce, without a cogent necessity,any mode or lot of punishment towards whichany violent aversion is entertained by the body ofthe people, since it would be productive of uselesssuffering suffering borne not by the guilty, butthe innocent ; and among the innocent by the mostamiable, by those whose sensibility would beshocked, whose opinions would be outraged, bythe punishment which would appear to themviolent and tyrannical. The effect of such injudiciousconduct on the part of a legislator wouldbe to turn the tide of popular opinion against himself:he would lose the assistance which individualsvoluntarily lend to the execution of the lawswhich they approve : the people would not be hisallies but his enemies. Some would favour theescape of the delinquent ; the injured would hesitateto prosecute, and witnesses to bear testimonyagainst him. By degrees a stigma would attachto those who assisted in the execution of the laws.Public dissatisfaction would not always stop here ;it would sometimes break out into open resistanceto the officers of justice and the execution of suchB.I. CH.VII. TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT. 51laws. Successful resistance would be considereda victory, and the unpunished delinquent wouldrejoice over the weakness of the laws disgraced byhis triumph.The unpopularity of particular punishmentsalmost always depends upon their improper selection.The more completely the penal code shallbecome conformed to the rules here laid down,the more completely will it merit the enlightenedapprobation of the wise, and the sentimentalapproval of the multitude.XI. Simplicity of Description.A mode of punishment ought also to be assimple as possible in its description ; it ought tobe entirely intelligible ; and that not only to theenlightened, but to the most unenlightened andignorant.It will not always be proper, however, to confinepunishments to those of a simple description ;there are many offences in which it will be properthat the punishment should be composed of manyparts, as of pecuniary fine, corporal suffering,and imprisonment. The rule of simplicity mustgive way to superior considerations. It has beenplaced here that it may not be lost sight of.The more complex punishment is, the greaterreason is there to fear that it will not be presentas a whole to the mind of an individual in the timeof temptation ; of its different parts he may neverhave known some he may have forgotten others.All the parts will be found in the real punishment,but they have not been perceived in the apparent.The name of a punishment is-an importantobject. Enigmatical names spread a cloud overthe mass of punishments which the mind cannotdissipate. The English laws are frequently defectB.I. C.VII. OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVENlive in this respect. A capital felony includes differentlots of punishment, the greater part unknown,and consequently inefficacious. A felony with of clergy, is equally obscure : the threateningof the law does not convey any distinct idea to themind ; the first idea which the term would offerto an uninstructed person, would be that it hadsome reference to a reward. A prtemunire is notmore intelligible ; even those who understand theLatin word are far from comprehending the natureof the punishment which it denounces.Riddles of this kind resemble those of thesphinx those are punished who do not decipherthem.XII. Sensibility.Sensibility is the last of all the propertiesthat seem to be requisite in a lot of punishment.The general presumption is, that when punishmentis applied, punishment .is needful : that itought to be applied, and therefore cannot be remitted.But in very particular, and those verydeplorable cases, it may by accident happen otherwise.Punishment may have been inflicted uponan individual whose innocence is afterwards discovered.The punishment which he has sufferedcannot, it is true, be remitted, but he may be freedfrom as much of it as is yet to come. There ishowever little chance of there being any yet tocome, unless it be so much as consists of chronicalpunishment ; such as imprisonment, banishment,penal labour, and the like. So much as consistsin acute punishment, where the penal process itselfis over presently, however permanent the punishmentmay be in its effects, may be considered asirremissible. This IB the case, for example, withwhipping, branding, mutilation, and capital .VII. TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT. 53ment. The most perfectly irremissible of any iscapital punishment. In all other cases means ofcompensation may be found for the sufferings ofthe unfortunate victim, but not in this.The foregoing catalogue of properties desirablein a lot of punishment, is far from unnecessary.On every occasion, before a right judgment can beformed, it is necessary to form an abstract idea ofall the properties the object ought to possess.Unless this is done, every expression of approbationor disapprobation can arise only from a confusedfeeling of sympathy or antipathy. We nowpossess clear and distinct reasons for determiningour choice of punishments. It remains only toobserve in what proportion a particular punishmentpossesses these different qualities.If a conclusion is drawn from one of these qualitiesalone, it may be subject to error ; attentionought to be paid not to one quality alone, but tothe whole together.There is no one lot of punishment which unitesall these desirable qualities ; but, according tothe nature of the offences, one set of qualities aremore important than another.For great crimes, it is desirable that punishmentsshould be exemplary and analogous. Forlesser crimes, the punishments should be inflictedwith a greater attention to their frugality, and theirtendency to moral reformation. As to crimesagainst property, those punishments which areconvertible to profit are to be preferred, since theymay be rendered subservient to compensation forthe party injured.Note by DUMONT.I subjoin to this chapter an example of the progressive marchof thought, and of the utility of these enumerations to which54 B.I. C.VII. OF THE PROPERTIES TO BE GIVENevery new observation may be referred, so that nothing maybelost.I have sought out from the works of Montesquieu all thequalities which he appears to have regarded as necessary in alot of punishment. I have found only four, and these are eitherexpressed by indefinite terms or periphrasis.1. He says, that Punishments should be drawn from the natureof the crimes; and he appears to mean, that they should becharacteristic.2. That they should be moderate, an expression which is indeterminate,and does not yield any point of comparison.3. That they should be proportional to the crime. This proportionhas reference, however, rather to the quantity of thepunishment than to its quality. He has neither explained inwhat it consists, nor given any rule respecting it.4. That they should be modest.Beccaria has mentionedjbwr qualities :1. He requires that punishments should be analogous to thecrimes; but he does not enter into any detail upon this analogy.2. That they should be public; and he means by that exemplary.3. That they be gentle ; an improper and insignificant term,whilst his observations upon the danger of excess in punishmentare very judicious.4. That they should be proportional ; but he gives no rule forthis proposition.He requires, besides this, that they should be certain, prompt,and inevitable; but these circumstances depend upon the formsof procedure in the application of punishment, and not upon itsqualities.In his commentary upon Beccaria, Voltaire often recurs to theidea of rendering punishments profitable. " A dead man isgood for nothing."One of the heroes of humanity, the good and amiable Howard,had continually in view the amendment of delinquents.Confining our attention to those who are considered as oraclesin this branch of science, we cannot but observe that betweenthese scattered ideas, and vague conceptions, which have notyet received a name, and a regular catalogue in which thesequalities are distinctly presented to us, with names and definitions,there is a wide interval. By thus placing them underone point of view, another advantage is gained their true worthand comparative importance is determined. Montesquieu wasdazzled by the merit of analogy in a punishment, and has attributedto it wonderful effects which it does not possess. Espritdes Lois, xii. 4.B.I. C. VII. TO A LOT OF PUNISHMENT. 65These considerations appear to afford a sufficient answer tothe objection often raised against the methodic forms employedby Mr. Bentham. I refer to his divisions, tables, and classifications,which have been called his logical apparatus. All this, ithas been said, is only the scaffold, which ought to be taken downwhen the building is erected. But why deprive his readers ofthe instruments which the author has employed ? Why hidefrom them his analytical labours and process of invention ?These tables form a machine for thought, organum cogitation.The author discloses his secret; he associates his readers withhim in his labour ; he gives them the clue which has guidedhim in his researches, and enables them to verify his results.The singularity is this the extent of the service diminishes itsvalue.I am sensible that by employing these logical methods as asecret, by not exhibiting, so to speak, the skeleton, the muscles,the nerves, much would be gained in elegance and interest.By using the method of analysis, everything is announcedbeforehand there is nothing unexpected ; the whole is clear;and there are no points of surprise no flashes of genius to dazzlefor a moment, and then leave you in darkness. It requirescourage to follow up so severe a method, but it is the only methodwhich can completely satisfy the mind.CHAPTER Veil.OF ANALOGY BETWEEN CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS.ANALOGY is that relation, connexion, or tyebetween two objects, whereby the one being presentto the mind, the idea of the other is naturallyexcited.Likeness is one source of analogy, contrastanother.* That a punishment may be analogousto an offence, it is necessary that the crime shouldbe attended with some striking characteristic circumstances,capable of being transferred upon thepunishment.These characteristic circumstances will be differentin different crimes. In some cases theymay arise from the instrument whereby the mischiefhas been done ; in others, from the object towhich the mischief is done ; in others, from themeans employed to prevent detection.The examples which follow are only intendedclearly to explain this idea of analogy. I shallpoint out the analogy between certain crimes andcertain punishments, without absolutely recommendingthe employment of those punishments inall cases. It is not a sufficient reason for theadoption of a punishment that it is analogous ;other considerations ought to be always regarded.Thus from the idea of a giant, the mind passes on to everythingthat is great. The Lilliputians called Tulliver the Man-mountain.Or, from the idea of a giant the mind may pass tothat of a dwarf.B.I. CH.VIII. OF ANALOGY, ETC. 57SECTION I. FIRST SOURCE OF ANALOGY.The same Instrument used in the Crime as in thePunishment.Incendiarism, inundation, poisoning in thesecrimes the instrument employed is the first circumstancewhich strikes the mind. In theirpunishment, the same instrument may be employed.With respect to incendiarism, we may observe,that this crime should be considered as limited tothose cases in which some individual has perishedby fire : if no life has been lost, nor any personalinjury been suffered, the offence ought to betreated as an ordinary waste ; whether an articleof property has been destroyed by fire, or anyother agent, does not make any difference. Theamount of the damage ought to be the measure ofthe crime. Does a man set fire to a solitary anduninhabited house; this would be an act of destruction,and ought not to be ranked under thedefinition of incendiarism.*If the punishment of fire had been reserved forincendiaries, the law would have had in its favourboth reason and analogy ; but in the legislation ofbarbarous times, it has been generally employedthroughout Europe, for the crimes of magic andheresy ; the first, an offence purely imaginary, thesecond, a simple difference of religious opinion,perfectly innocent, often useful, and with respectto which, the only effect of punishment is toproduce insincerity.Fire may be employed as an instrument ofThe employment of this means of destruction ought, however,to be considered an aggravation, if there has been anydanger of the tire communicating to contiguous objects.58 B.I. CH.VIII. OF ANALOGY BETWEENpunishment, without occasioning death. Thispunishment is variable in its nature through all thedegrees of severity of which there can be anyneed. It would be necessary carefully to determinein the text of the law, the part of the bodywhich ought to be exposed to the action of thefire ; the intensity of the fire ; the time duringwhich it is to be applied, and the paraphernalia tobe employed to increase the terror of the punishment.In order to render the description morestriking, a print might be annexed in which theoperation should be represented.Inundation is an offence less common thanincendiarism, in some countries it is altogetherunexampled, it can only be perpetrated in counttries that are intersected by water, confined byartificial banks. It is susceptible of every degreeof aggravation from the highest to the lowest. Ifthe offence consist merely in inundation, in effectit amounts only to a simple destruction of property.It is by the destruction of life that this crime israised to that degree of atrocity which requiressevere punishment.A most evident analogy points out the means ofpunishment, that is, the drowning of the criminal,with such accompanying circumstances as willadd to the terror of the punishment. In a penalcode, which should not admit the punishment ofdeath, the offender might be drowned and thenrestored to life. This might be made a part ofthe punishment.It may be asked, ought poison to be employedas a means of punishment for a poisoner ?In some respects there is no punishment moresuitable. Poisoning is distinguished from othermurders, by the secrecy with which it may be perpetrated,and the cool determination which itB.I.CH.VIII. CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS. 59supposes. Of these two circumstances, the firstincreases the force of temptation and the evil of thecrime ; the second, proves that the criminal, attentiveto his own interest, is capable of seriousreflection upon the nature of the punishment. Theidea of perishing by the same kind of death whichhe prepares, is the more frightful for him. Inevery step of his preparations his imagination willrepresent to him his own lot. In this point of viewthe analogy would produce its full effect.There are, however, many difficulties ; poisonsare uncertain in their operation. It would be necessarytherefore to fix a time after which thepunishment should be abridged by strangulation.If the effect of the poison should be to producesleep, the punishment may not be sufficientlyexemplary. If it produce convulsions and distortions,it may prove hateful.If the poison administered by the criminal hasnot proved fatal, he may be made to take an antidotebefore the penal poison has produced death.The dose and the time may be fixed by the Judges,according to the report of skilful physicians.The horror attached to this crime would mostprobably render this punishment popular. And ifthere is one country in which this crime is morecommon than others, it is there that this punishment,which possesses so striking an analogy withthe crime, would be most suitable.SEC. II. SECOND SOURCE OF ANALOGY.For a Corporal Injury a similar Corporal Injury.An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth," Incrimes producing irreparable bodily injuries, thepart of the body injured will afford the characteristiccircumstance. The analogy will consist inGO B.I. CH.VIII. OF ANALOGY BETWEEN.making the offender suffer an evil similar to thatwhich he has maliciously and wilfully inflicted.It will, however, be necessary to provide fortwo cases that in which the offender does notpossess the member of which he has deprived theparty he has attacked, and that in which the lossof the member would be more or less prejudicial tohim than to the party injured.If the injury has been of an ignominious nature,without permanent mischief Similar ignominymay be employed in the punishment, when therank of the party and other circumstances permit.SEC. 111. THIRD SOURCE OF ANALOGY.Punishment of the Offending Member.In crimes of deceit, the tongue and the hand arethe usual instruments. An exact analogy in thepunishment may be drawn from this circumstance.In punishing the crime of forgery, the hand ofthe offender may be transfixed by an iron instrumentfashioned like a pen, and in this conditionhe may be exhibited to the public previously toundergoing the punishment of imprisonment.In the utterance of calumny, and the disseminationof false reports, the tongue is the instrumentemployed. The offender might in the same mannerbe publicly exposed with his tongue pierced.These punishments may be made more formidablein appearance than in reality, by dividing theinstruments in two parts, so that the part whichshould pierce the offending member, need not bethicker than a pin, whilst the other part of theinstrument may be much thicker, and appear topenetrate with all its thickness.Punishments of this kind may appear ridiculous,but the ridicule which attaches to them enhancesB. I.CH.VIIF. CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS. 61their merit. This ridicule will be directed againstthe cheat, whom it will render more despicable,whilst it will increase the respect due to uprightdealing.SEC. IV. FOURTH SOURCE OF ANALOGY.Imposition of Disguise assumed.Some offences are characterized by the assumptionof a disguise to facilitate their commission :a mask, or crape over the face, has commonly beenused. This circumstance constitutes an aggravationof the offence ; it increases the alarm produced,and diminishes the probability of detection;and hence arises the propriety of additional punishment.Analogy would recommend the imprintingon the offender a representation of the disguiseassumed. This impression might be made eitherevanescent or indelible, according as the imprisonmentby which it may be accompanied, is to beeither temporary or otherwise. If evanescent, itmight be produced by the use of a black wash.If indelible, by tattooing. The utility of thispunishment would be most particularly felt incases of premeditated murder, rape, irreparablepersonal injury, and theft, when accompanied withviolence and alarm.SEC. V. OTHEIl SOURCES OF ANALOGY.There are other characteristic circumstances,which do not, like the foregoing, fall into classes ;which may, however, according to the nature ofthe different offences, be employed as a foundationfor analogy.In the fabrication of base coin, the art of thedelinquent may furnish an analogous source ofpunishment. He has made an impression uponthe metal he has employed ; a like impression62 B.I. CH. VIII. OF ANALOGY BETWEENmay be made on some conspicuous part of hisface. This mark may be either evanescent orindelible, according as the imprisonment by whichit is to be accompanied is either temporary or perpetual.At Amsterdam, vagabonds and idle persons arecommitted to the House of Correction, called theRasp House. It is said, that among other speciesof forced labour, in which such characters are employed,there is one reserved for those who areincorrigible by other means ; which consists inkeeping a leaky vessel, in which the idle prisoneris placed, dry, by means of a pump at which hemust work, if he would keep himself from beingdrowned. Whether this punishment is in use ornot, it is an example of an analogous punishmentcarried to the highest degree of rigour. If sucha method of punishment is adopted, it ought to beaccompanied with precise regulations for adjustingthe punishment to the strength of the individualundergoing it.The place in which a crime has been committedmay furnish a species of analogy. Catherine II.condemned a man who had committed some knavishtrick at the Exchange, to sweep it out every daythat it was used, during six months.Note by DUMONT.I am not aware of any objection having been urged againstthe utility of analogy in punishments : whilst it is spoken of onlyin general terms, everybody acknowledges its propriety : whenwe proceed to apply the principle, the imagination being thechief judge of the propriety of its application, the diversity ofopinion is infinite. Hence some persons have been struck withextreme repugnance in contemplating the analogous punishmentsproposed by Mr. Bentham,* whilst others have consideredthem only as fit subjects for ridicule and caricature.Train -s che Legislation.B.I.CH.VIII. CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS. G3Success depends upon the choice of the means employed.Those sources of analogy ought therefore to be avoided whichare not of a sufficiently grave character to be used as punishments; but, it may be observed, that v/ith relation to certainoffences, those, for instance, which are accompanied by insolenceand insult, that an analogous punishment which excites ridicule,is well calculated to humble the pride of the offender, and gratifythe offended party.Everything ought also to be avoided which has an appearanceof great study and refinement. Punishment ought only to beinflicted of necessity, and with feelings of regret and repugnance.The multitude of instruments possessed by a surgeon, may becontemplated with satisfaction, as intended to promote the cureand lessen the weight of our sufferings. The same satisfactionwill not, however, be felt in contemplating a variety of punishments,and they will most likely be considered as degrading tothe character of the legislator.With these precautions, analogy is calculated to produce onlygood effects. It puts us in the track of discovering the mosteconomical and efficacious punishments. I cannot resist thepleasure of citing an example furnished me by a Captain in theEnglish Navy: He had not studied the principles of Mr. Bentham,but he knew how to read the human heart.The leave of absence generally granted to sailors, was fortwenty-four hours : if they exceeded this time, the ordinarypunishment was the cat-o-nine-tails. The dread of this punishmentwas a frequent cause of desertions. Many Captains, inorder to prevent both these offences, refused all leave of absenceto their sailors, so that they were kept on shipboard for yearstogether. The individual to whom I refer, discovered a methodof reconciling the granting of leave with the security of theservice. He made a simple change in the punishment : Everyman who exceeded his prescribed time of leave, lost his right toa future leave, in proportion to his fault. If he remained onshore more than twenty-four hours, he lost one turn : if morethan forty-eight hours, he lost two turns ; and so of the rest.The experiment was perfectly successful. The fault becameless frequent, and desertions were unknown.CHAPTER IX.OF RETALIATION.IF the law of retaliation were admissible in allcases, it would very much abridge the labours ofthe legislators. It would make short work of thebusiness of laying out a plan of punishment : aword would supply the place of a volume.*Before we say anything as to the advantage ofthe rule, it will be proper to state with precisionwhat is meant by it. The idea given of it inBlackstone s Commentaries, seems to be a correctone ; it is that rule which prescribes, in the wayof punishment, the doing to a delinquent the samehurt he has done (one might perhaps add, or attemptedto do) to another. If the injury weredone to the person, the delinquent should bepunished in his person : if to property, in his property: if to the reputation, in his reputation.This is the general scheme ; but this, however, initself, is not quite enough. To make the punishmentcome incontestably under the law of retaliation,the identity between the subject of the offenceand that of the punishment should be still morespecific and determinate. If, for example, theinjury were to a man s house, for instance, by thedestruction of his house, then the delinquent shouldhave his house destroyed : if to his reputation, byThe law of retaliation was often adopted in the early attemptsat legislation. Among the laws of Alfred we find thefollowing article: "Si quis alterius occult effoderit, com-pense proprio, den tern prudence, manum pro manu, pedes propede, actionem pro adustione, vultus pro vulture, vixen promine." Will, LI. Hang. Sax. p. 30. Art. 19.B.I.CH.IX. OF RETALIATION. 05causing him to lose a certain rank, then the delinquentshould be made to lose the same rank : ifto the eyes, then the criminal should be made tolose his eyes : if to his lip, then to lose his lip :and in short, the more specific and particular theresemblance between the subject of the offenceand of the punishment, the more strictly and in-contemptibly it would appear to come under therule. It is when the person is the subject of theinjury, that the resemblance is capable of beingrendered the most minute ; for it is in this casethat by means of the strict identity of the partaffected, " the hurt" is capable of being renderedthe most accurately the "same." An eye for aneye, and a tooth for a tooth, are the familiar instancesthat are put of the law of retaliation. In this case,too, the identity may be pushed still further, byaffecting the same part in the same manner ; thesameness of the hurt depending on the identity ofthe one circumstance as well as of the other.Thus, if the injury consisted in the burning outof an eye, the punishment will be more strictlythe same, if it be effected by burning rather thancutting out the eye of the delinquent.The great merit of the law of retaliation is itssimplicity. Kit were capable of universal adoption,the whole penal code would be contained inone law: "Let every offender suffer an evilsimilar to that which he has inflicted."No other imaginable plan can for its extent findso easy an entrance into the apprehension, or sitso easy on the memory. The rule is at once soshort and so expressive, that he who has onceheard it, is not likely to forget it, or ever to thinkof a crime, but he must think also of its punishment.The stronger the temptation to commit anoffence, the more likely is its punishment to be anF00 B.I. CH.IX. OF RETALIATION.object of dread. Thus the defence is erected onthe side of danger.One advantage that cannot be denied to thismode of punishment is its popularity, requiringlittle expense of thought, it will generally be foundto possess the judgment of the multitude in itsfavour. Should they in any instance be disposedto quarrel with it, they will still be ready enoughprobably to own it to be consonant to justice : butthat justice, they will say, is rigid justice, or tovary the jargon, justice in the abstract. All thiswhile, with these phrases on their lips, they wouldperhaps prefer a milder punishment, as being moreconsonant to mercy, and, upon the whole, moreconducive to the general happiness : as if justice,and especially penal justice, were something distinctfrom, and adverse to, that happiness. When,however, it happens not to give disgust by itsseverity, nothing can be more popular than thismode of punishment. This may be seen in thecase of murder, with respect to which the attachmentto this mode of punishment is warm andgeneral. Blood (as the phrase is) will have blood.Unless a murderer be punished with death, themultitude of speculators can seldom bring themselvesto think that the rules of justice arepursued.The law of retaliation is, however, liable to avariety of objections, one of which, so far as itapplies, is conclusive against its adoption. In agreat variety of cases it is physically inapplicable.Without descending far into detail, a few instancesmay suffice as examples. In the first place, itcan never be applied when the offence is merelyof a public nature, the characteristic quality ofsuch offences being, that no assignable individualis hurt by them. If a man has been guilty of highB.I. CH.IX. OK RETALIATION. 67treason, or has engaged in criminal correspondencewith an enemy, or has, from cowardice, abandonedthe defence of a post entrusted to him ; howwould it be possible to make him suffer an evilsimilar to that of which he has been the cause.It is equally inapplicable to offences of thesemi-public class to offences which affect a certaindistrict, or particular class of the community.The mischief of these offences often consists inalarm and danger, which do not affect one individualalone, and therefore do not present anyopportunity for the exercise of retaliation.With respect to self regard ing offences, consistingof acts which offend against morality, theapplication of this law would be absurd. Theindividual has chosen to perform the act, to do thesame thing to him would not be to punish him.In offences against reputation, consisting, forinstance, in the propagation of false reports affectingthe character, it would be useless as a punishmentto direct a similar false report to be propagatedaffecting the character of the delinquent.The like evil would not result from the circulationof what was acknowledged to be false.In offences against property, the punishment ofretaliation would at all times be defective in pointof exemplarity and efficacy, and, in many cases,altogether inapplicable ; those who are most aptto injure others in this respect, being, by theirpoverty, unable to suffer in a similar manner.For a similar reason it cannot be constantlyapplied to offences affecting the civil condition ofindividuals, to say nothing of the reasons thatmight render it ineligible if it were possible to beapplied.These exceptions reduce its possible field ofaction to a very small extent, the only classes of68 B.I. CH.IX. OF RETALIATION.offences to which it will be found applicable, withany degree of constancy, are those that affect theperson, and even here must be assumed whatscarcely ever exists, a perfect identity of circumstances.Even in this very limited class of cases,it would be found to err on the side of excessiveseverity. Its radical defect is, its inflexibility.The law ought so to apportion the punishment asto meet the several circumstances of aggravationor extenuation that may be found in the offence :retaliation is altogether incompatible with anysuch apportionment.The class of people among whom this mode ofpunishment is most likely to be popular, are thoseof a vindictive character. Mahomet found it establishedamong the Arabians, and has adopted it inthe Koran, with a degree of approbation, thatmarks the extent of his talent for legislation. " Oyou who have a heart, you will find in the law ofretaliation, and in the fear that accompanies it,universal security." (Vol. I, ch. ii, On the Law.)Either from weakness or ignorance, he encouragedthe prevailing vice which he ought to havechecked.CHAPTER X.POPULARITY.To prove that an institution is agreeable to theprinciple of utility, is to prove, as far as can beproved, that the people ought to like it : but whetherthey will like it or no after all, is anotherquestion. They would like it if, in their judgments,they suffered themselves to be uniformlyand exclusively governed by that principle. Bythis principle they do govern themselves in proportionas they are humanised and enlightened ;accordingly, the deference they pay to its dictatesis more uniform in this intelligent and favouredcountry than perhaps in any other. I speak here,taking the great mass of the people upon thisoccasion, as they ought to be taken upon everyoccasion, into the account ; and not confining myviews, as is too commonly the case, to men ofrank and education.Even in this country, however, their acquiescenceis far from being as yet altogether uniformand undeviating: in some instances their judgmentsare still warped by antipathies or prejudicesunconnected with the principle of utility, andtherefore irreconcilable to reason. They are aptto bear antipathy to certain offences withoutregard to even their imputed mischievousness, andto entertain a prejudice against certain punishmentswithout regard to their eligibility withrespect to the ends of punishment.The variety of capricious objections to whicheach particular mode of punishment is exposed,70 B.I. CH.X POPULARITY.has no other limits than the fecundity of the imagination: with some slight exceptions, they mayhowever be ranged under one or other of thefollowing heads : Liberty Decency ReligionHumanity. What I mean by a capricious objection,is an objection which derives the whole ofits apparent value from the impression that is aptto be made by the use of those hallowed expressions: the caprice consists in employing them inaperverted sense.1. Liberty. Under this head there is little to besaid. All punishment is an infringement onliberty : no one submits to it but from compulsion.Enthusiasts, however, are not wanting,who, without regarding this circumstance, condemncertain modes of punishment, as, for example,imprisonment accompanied with penal labour,as a violation of the natural rights of man. In afree country like this, say they, it ought not tobe tolerated, that even malefactors should bereduced to a state of slavery. The precedent isdangerous and pernicious. None but men groaningunder a despotic government can endure thesight of galley-slaves.When the establishment of the penitentiary systemwas proposed, this objection was echoed andinsisted on, in a variety of publications that appearedon that occasion. Examine this senselessclamour, it will resolve itself into a declarationthat liberty ought to be left to those that abuseit, and that the liberty of malefactors is an essentialpart of the liberty of honest men.2. Decency. Objections drawn from the topicsof decency are confined to those punishments, ofwhich the effect is to render those parts which itis inconsistent with decency to expose, the objectsof sight or of conversation.B.I. C1I.X POPULARITY. 71Who can doubt, that in all punishments, careshould be taken that no offence be given to modesty.But modesty, like other virtues, is valuableonly in proportion to its utility. When thepunishment is the most appropriate, though noteither in its description or its execution altogetherreconcilable with modesty, this circumstanceought not, as it appears to me, to stand in theway of the attainment of any object of greaterutility. Castration, for example, seems the mostappropriate punishment in the case of rape, thatis to say, the best adapted to produce a strongimpression on the mind at the moment of temptation.Is it expedient, then, on account of suchscruples of modesty, that another punishment, as,for example, death, should be employed, whichis less exemplary, and, consequently, less efficacious?*3. Religion. Among Christians there are somesects who conceive that the punishment of deathis unlawful : life, say they, is the gift of God, andman is forbidden to take it away.We shall find in the next book, that very cogentreasons are not wanting for altogether abolishingcapital punishment, or, at most, for confining itto extraordinary cases. But this pretence ofIt is said, that in one of the cities of Greece, among theyoung women, instigated by I know not what disease of theimagination, the practice of suicide was for a time extremelyprevalent. The magistrates, alarmed by its frequency, orderedthat as a sort of posthumous punishment, their bodies, in a stateof nudity, should be drawn through the public places. Into thetruth of the relation, it is needless to inquire : but the narratoradds, the offence thenceforth altogether ceased. Here, then, isan instance of the utility of a law offensive to modesty, provedby its efficacy : for what higher degree of perfection can belooked for in any penal law than that of preventing the offence.72 B.I. CH.X. POPULARITY.unlawfulness is a reason drawn from false principles.Unlawful, means contrary to some law. Those,who, upon the occasion in question, apply this expressionto the punishment of death, believe themselves,or endeavour to make others believe, thatit is contrary to some Divine law : this Divine lawis either revealed or unrevealed ; if it be revealed,it must be to be found in the text of those bookswhich are understood to contain the expressions ofGod s will ; but as there exists no such text inthe New Testament, and as the Jewish law expresslyordains capital punishment, the partizansof this opinion must have recourse to some Divinelaw not revealed to a natural law that is tosay, to a law deduced from the supposed willof God.But if we presume that God wills anything, wemust suppose that he has a reason for so doing, areason worthy of himself, which can only be thegreatest happiness of his creatures. In this pointof view, therefore, the Divine will cannot requireanything inconsistent with general utility.If it be pretended that God can have any willnot consistent with utility, his will becomes afantastic and delusive principle, in which theravings of enthusiasm, and the extravagances ofsuperstition, will find sanction and authority.In many cases, religion has been to such adegree perverted as to become a bar to the executionof penal laws : as in the case of sanctuariesopened for criminals, in the Romish churches.Theodosius I. forbade all criminal proceedingsduring Lent, alleging, as a reason, that the judgesought not to punish the crimes of others whilstthey were imploring the Divine forgiveness forB.I.CH.X. POPULARITY. 73their own transgressions. Valentinian I. directedthat at Easter all prisoners should be discharged,except those that were accused of the most malignantoffences.Constantine prohibited, by law, the brandingcriminals on the face, alleging, that it is a violationof the law of nature to disfigure the majestyof the human face the majesty of the face of ascoundrel !The Inquisition, says Bayle, that it might notviolate the maxim, Ecclesia non novi sanguine,condemned its victims to be burnt alive. Religionhas had its quibbles as well as the law.4. Humanity. Attend not to the sophistriesof reason, which often deceive, but be governedby your hearts, which will always lead you toright. I reject, without hesitation, the punishmentyou propose, it violates natural feelings, itharrows up the susceptible mind, it is tyrannicaland cruel. Such is the language of your sentimentalorators.But abolish any one penal law merely becauseit is repugnant to the feelings of a humane heart,and, if consistent, you abolish the whole penalcode, there is not one of its provisions that doesnot, in a more or less painful degree, wound thesensibility.All punishment is in itself necessarily odious ;if it were not dreaded, it would not effect its purpose; it can never be contemplated with approbation,but when considered in connection withthe prevention of the crime against which it isdenounced.I reject sentiment as an absolute Judge, butunder the control of reason it may not be a uselessmonitor. When a penal dispensation isrevolting to the public feeling, this is not of itself74 B.I. CH.X. POPULARITY.a sufficient reason for rejecting it, but it is areason for subjecting it to a rigorous scrutiny. Ifit deserves the antipathy it excites, the causes ofthat antipathy may be easily detected. We shallfind that the punishment in question is mis-seatedor superfluous, or disproportionate to the offenceor that it has a tendency to produce more mischiefthan it prevents. By this means we arrive at theseat of the error. Sentiment excites to reflection,and reflection detects the impropriety of the law.The species of punishment that command thelargest share of public approbation are such asare analogous to the offence. Punishments ofthis description are commonly considered just andequitable ; but what is the foundation of thisjustice and equity I know not. The delinquentsuffers the same evil he has caused. Ought thelaw to imitate the example it condemns ? Oughtthe Judge to imitate the malefactor in his wickedness? Ought a solemn act of justice to be thesame in kind as an act of criminality ?This circumstance satisfies the multitude ; themouth of the criminal is stopped, and he cannotaccuse the law of severity, without at the sametime being equally self-condemned.Fortunately, the same bent of the imaginationthat renders this mode of punishment popular,renders it at the same time appropriate. Theanalogy that presents itself to the people, presentsitself, at the moment of temptation, to the delinquent,and renders it a peculiar object of dread.It is of importance to detect and expose erroneousconceptions, even when they happen toaccord with the principle of utility. The coincidenceis a mere accident ; and whoever on any oneoccasion forms his judgment, without reference tothis principle, prepares himself upon any other toB.I. CII.X. POPULARITY. 75decide in contradiction to it. There will be nosafe and steady guide for the understanding in itsprogress till men shall have learnt to trust to thisprinciple alone, to the exclusion of all others.When the judgment is to decide, the use of laudatoryor vituperative expressions, is the merebabbling of children. They ought to be avoidedin all philosophical disquisitions, where the objectought to be to instruct and convince the understanding,and not to inflame the passions.RATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BOOK II.OF CORPORAL PUNISHMENTS.CHAPTER I.SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE * PUNISHMENTS.A PUNISHMENT is simply afflictive when theobject aimed at is to produce immediate temporarysuffering, and is so called to distinguish itfrom other classes of corporeal punishments in whichthe suffering produced is designed to be more permanent.Simple afflictive punishments are distinguishedfrom one another by three principal circumstances: the part affected, the nature of theinstrument, and the manner of its application.I am sensible how imperfectly the word afflictive is calculatedto express the particular kind of punishment I have hereemployed it to express, in contradistinction to all others ; but Icould find no other word in the language that would do it better.It may be some reason for employing it thus, that in French itis employed in a sense nearly, if not altogether, as confined : fand the pains it is the nature of the punishments in question toproduce, Cicero expresses by a word of the same root: " "(says that orator in his Muscular Disputations, when heis defining and distinguishing the several sorts of pain,) " cstcegritudo cum vexation corporis. J+ Causes Celebes, chap. iv. p. 229. Ed. Arasterd. 1764.i Lib. iv c. 8.B.1I. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS. 77To enumerate all the varieties of punishmentwhich might be produced by the combination ofthese different circumstances, would be an uselessas well as an endless task. To enumerate theseveral parts of a man s body in which he is liableto be made to suffer, would be to give a completebody of anatomy. To enumerate the several instrumentsby the application of which he mightbe made to suffer, would be to give a completebody of natural history. To attempt to enumeratethe different manners in which those instrumentsmay be applied to such a purpose, would be toattempt to exhaust the inexhaustible variety ofmotions and situations.Among the indefinite multitude of punishmentsof this kind that might be imagined and described,it will answer every purpose if we mention someof those which have been in use in this and othercountries.The most obvious method of inflicting this speciesof punishment, and which has been most commonlyused, consists in exposing the body to blowsor stripes. When these are inflicted with a flexibleinstrument, the operation is called whipping.When a less flexible instrument is employed, theeffects are different ; but the operation is seldomdistinguished by another name.In Italy, and particularly in Naples, there is amethod, not uncommon, of punishing pickpockets,called the Strappado. It consist in raising theoffender by his arms, by means of an engine likea crane, to a certain height, and then letting himfall, but suddenly stopping his descent before hereaches the ground. The momentum which hisbody has acquired in the descent, is thus made tobear upon his arms, and the consequence generallyis, that they are dislocated at the shoulder : to78 B. II. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.prevent the permanent evil consequences, a surgeonis then employed to reset them.There were formerly in England two kinds ofpunishment of this class, discarded now even fromthe military code, in which they were longestretained. The one called Picketing, which consistedin suspending the offender in such mannerthat the weight of his body was supported principallyby a spike, on which he was made to standwith one foot : the other, the Wooden Horse, as itwas called, was a narrow ledge or board, on whichthe individual was made to sit astride ; and theinconvenience of which was increased by suspendingweights to his legs.Another .species of punishment formerly practisedin this country, but now rarely used, consistedin subjecting the patient to frequent immersionsin water, called ducking. The individualwas fastened to a chair or stool, called the duckking-stool, and plunged repeatedly. In this casethe punishment was not of the acute, but of theuneasy kind. The physical uneasiness arises partlyfrom the cold, partly from the temporary stoppageof respiration. It has something of the ridiculousmixed with it, and was most generally applied toscolding women, whose tongues disturbed theirneighbours. It is a relict of the simplicity of theolden time. It is still occasionally resorted to,when the people take the administration of thelaws into their own hands ; and is not uncommonlythe fate of the pickpocket who is detectedat a fair or other place of promiscuous resort.The powers of invention have been principallyemployed in devising instruments for the productionof pain, by those tribunals which have soughtto extort proofs of his criminality from the individualsuspected. They have been prepared for allfi.II. C.J. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS. 79parts of the body, according as they have wishedto stretch, to distort, or to dislocate them. Screwsfor compressing the thumbs ; straight boots, forcompressing the shins, with wedges driven in bya mallet ; the rack, for either compressing or extendingthe limbs ; all of which might be regulatedso as to produce every possible degree of pain.Suffocation was produced by drenching, andwas practised by tying a wet linen cloth over themouth and nostrils of the individual, and continuallysupplying it with water, in such manner,that every time the individual breathed, he wasobliged to swallow a portion of water, till his stomachbecame visibly distended. In the infamoustransactions of the Dutch at Amboyna, This speciesof torture was practised upon the English who fellinto their power.It would be useless to pursue this afflictingdetail any further. How variously soever thecauses may be diversified, the effect is still oneand the same ; viz. organical pain, whether of theacute or uneasy kind. This effect is common toall these modes of punishment. There are otherpoints in which they may differ: 1. One of themmay carry the intensity of the pain to a higher orlower pitch than it could be carried by another.2. One may be purer from consequences which,for the purpose in question, it may or may not beintended to produce.These consequences may be 1. The continuanceof the organical pain itself beyond the timeof applying the instrument 2. The production ofany of those other ill consequences which constitutethe other kinds of corporeal punishment3. The subjecting the party to ignominy.In the choice of punishment, these circumstances,80 B.IJ. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.how little soever they are attended to in practice,are of the highest importance.It would be altogether useless, not to say mischievous,to introduce into the penal code a greatvariety of modes of inflicting this species of punishment.Whipping the mode which has been mostcommonly in use, would, if proper care were, takento give to it every degree of intensity, be sufficient,if it were the only one. Analogy, however, incertaincases, recommends the employment ofother modes. The multiplication of the instrumentsof punishment, when not thus justified,tends only to render the laws odious.Among other works undertaken by order ofthe Empress Maria Theresa for the ameliorationof the laws, a description was compiled of thevarious methods of inflicting torture and punishmentin the Austrian dominions. It formed a largefolio volume, in which not only all the instrumentswere described, and represented by engravings,but a detailed account was given of the manipulationsof the executioners. This book was onlyexposed for sale for a few days, Prince Kaunitz,the prime minister, having caused it to be suppressed.He was apprehensive, and certainly notwithout reason, that the sight of such a work wouldonly inspire a horror of the laws. This objectionfell with its whole force upon the instrumentsfor the infliction of torture, which has since beenabolished in all the Austrian dominions. It ishighly probable that the publication of this workcontributed to produce this happy event. If so,few books have done more good to the world, ifcompared with the time they continued in it.A valuable service would be rendered to societyby the individual, who, being properly qualifiedB.I I. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS. 81for the task, should examine the effects producedby these different modes of punishment, and shouldpoint out the greater or smaller evil consequencesresulting from contusions produced by blows witha rope, or lacerations by whips, &c. In Turkeypunishment is inflicted by beating the soles of thefeet. Whether the consequences are more or lesssevere, I know not. It is perhaps from somenotion of modesty that the Turks have confinedthe application of punishment to this part of thehuman body.If the suffering produced by a punishment ofthis class is rendered but little more than momentary,it will neither be sufficiently exemplary toaffect the spectators, nor sufficiently efficacious tointimidate the offenders. There will be little inthe chastisement but the ignominy attached to it ;and this would have but little effect upon that classof delinquents upon whom such punishments aregenerally inflicted ; the quantity of suffering ought,therefore, if possible, to be regulated by the laws.Of all these different modes of punishment,whipping is the most frequently in use ; but inwhipping not even the qualities of the instrument*are ascertained by written law : while the quantityofferee to be employed in its application is altogetherintrusted to the caprice of the executioner.He may make the punishment as trifling or asThe Chinese, owing perhaps to the extensive use they makeof this mode of punishment, have attempted, by fixing the lengthand breadth at the extremities, and weight of the bamboo, torender uniform the amount of the suffering produced by thismode of punishment ; but one material circumstance that theyhave omitted to regulate, and certainly the most difficult to regulate,is the degree of force with which the stroke is to be applied ;an omission that leaves the uncertainty nearly in the same stateas in this country. See the Penal Code of China, translated bySir G. T. Staunton, p. 24.G82 B. II. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.severe as he pleases. He may derive from thispower a source of revenue, so that the offenderwill be punished, not in proportion to his offence,but to his poverty. If he has been unfortunate,and not able to secure his plunder, or honest, andhas voluntarily given it up, and thus has nothingleft to make a sop for Cerberus, he suffers therigour perhaps more than the rigour of the law.Good fortune and perseverance, in dishonesty,would have enabled him to buy indulgence.The following contrivance would, in a measure,obviate this inconvenience : A machine might bemade, which should put in motion certain elasticrods of cane or whalebone, the number and size ofwhich might be determined by the law : the bodyof the delinquent might be subjected to the strokesof these rods, and the force and rapidity withwhich they should be applied, might be prescribedby the Judge : thus everything which is arbitrarymight be removed. A public officer, of more responsiblecharacter than the common executioner,might preside over the infliction of the punishment ;and when there were many delinquents to bepunished, his time might be saved, and the terrorof the scene heightened, without increasing theactual suffering, by increasing the number of themachines, and subjecting all the offenders topunishment at the same time.SEC. II. EXAMINATION OF SIMPLE AFFLICTIVEPUNISHMENTS.The examination of a punishment consists incomparing it successively with each of the qualitieswhich have been pointed out as desirable in alot of punishment, that it may be observed in whatdegree some are possessed and the others wanted ;and whether those which it possesses are moreB. II. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS. 83important than those which it wants ; that is tosay, whether it is well adapted for the attainmentof the desired end.It will be remembered, that the several qualitiesdesirable in a lot of punishment are variability,equability, commensurability, characteristicalness,exemplary, frugality, subserviency to reformation,efficiency with respect to disablement, subserviencyto compensation, popularity, and remis-nobility.That any species of punishment does not possessthe whole of these qualities, is not a sufficientreason for its rejection: they are not all of equalimportance, and indeed no one species of punishmentwill perhaps ever be found in which they areall united.Simple afflictive punishments are capable ofgreat variability : they may be moderated or increasedat will. Their effects, however, are farfrom equable : the same punishment will not producethe same effects when applied to both sexes,when applied to a stout young man, and an infirmold man. These punishments are almostalways attended with a portion of ignominy, andthis does not always increase with the organicpain, but principally depends upon the conditionof the offender. For this reason, there is scarcelya punishment of this description which would beesteemed slight, if inflicted upon a gentleman.It was inattention to this circumstance that wasone cause of the dissatisfaction occasioned by theStat. 10 Geo. Ill, called the Dog Act, passed torestrain the stealing of Dogs : among the punishmentsappointed was that of whipping. There isone thing in the nature of this species of propertywhich renders the stealing of it less incompatible84 B.II.C,!. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.with the character of a gentleman than any otherkind of theft. It is apt therefore to meet with indulgencefrom the moral sanction, for the samereason that enticing away a servant is not consideredas a crime, on account of the rational qualitiesof the subject of property in these cases.An individual also may be innocent, notwithstandingappearances are against him. A dog is susceptibleof volition, and even of strong social affections,and may have followed a new master withouthaving been enticed.The same inattention has been observed to beremarkably prevalent throughout the whole systemof penal jurisprudence in Russia. In the reignwhich preceded that of the mild and intelligentCatherine II, neither rank nor sex bestowed anexemption from the punishment of whipping. Theinstitutions of Poland were also chargeable withthe same roughness ; and it was no uncommonthing for the maid of honour of a Polish princessto be disciplined in public by the Maitre d Hotel.Nothing more completely proves the degradationof the Chinese than the whips which are constantlyused by the Police. The mandarins of the firstclass, the princes of the blood, are subjected tothe bamboo, as well as the peasant.The principal merit of simple afflictive punishments,is their exemplary. All that is sufferedby the delinquent during their infliction may beexhibited to the public, and the class of spectatorswhich would be attracted by such exhibitions, consists,for the most part, of those upon whom theimpression they are calculated to produce wouldbe most salutary.Such are the most striking points to be observedwith respect to these punishments. There is littleB.II. C.I. SIMPLE AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS. 85particular to be remarked under the other heads.They are of little efficiency as to intimidation orreformation, with the exception of one particularspecies penitential diet; which, well managed,may possess great moral efficacy. But as this isnaturally connected with the subject of imprisonment,the consideration of it is deferred for thepresent.CHAPTER II.OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.UNDER the name of complex afflictive punishments,may be included those corporeal punishments,of which the principal effect consists in thedistant and durable consequences of the act ofpunishment. They cannot be included under onetitle. They include three species, very differentthe one from the other in their nature and theirimportance.The permanent consequences of an afflictivepunishment may consist in the alteration, the destruction,or suspension of the properties of a partof the body.The properties of a part of the body consist ofits visible qualities, as of colour and figure, andits uses.Of these three distinct kinds of punishments,the first affects the exterior of the person, its visiblequalities : the second affects the use of the organicfaculties, without destroying the organ itself: thethird destroys the organ itself. *SEC. I. OF DEFORMATION, OR PUNISHMENTS WHICHALTER THE EXTERIOR OF THE PERSON.It was an ingenious idea in the first legislatorwho invented these external and permanentlyvisible punishments, punishments which are in-The first may be included under the general name of Deformation,the second under the name of Dishabilitation : theyrender the organ impotent and useless. The third has alreadya proper name Mutilation.B.II.CH.II. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVE, ETC. 87flitted without destroying any organ without mutilationoften without physical pain ; in all caseswithout any other pain than what is absolutelynecessary, which affect only the appearance ofthe criminal, and render that appearance lessagreeable, which would not be punishments if theywere not indications of his crimes.The visible qualities of an object are its colourand figure ; there are therefore two methods ofaltering them: 1. Discolouration 2. Disfiguration.1. Discolouration may be temporary or permanent.When temporary, it may be produced byvegetable or mineral dyes. I am not acquaintedwith an instance of its use as a punishment. Ithas always appeared to me that it might be veryusefully employed as a precaution to hinder theescape of certain offenders, whilst they are undergoingother punishments.Permanent discolouration might be produced bytattooing ; the only method at present in use isbranding.*Tattooing is performed by perforating the skinwith a bundle of sharp-pointed instruments, andsubsequently filling the punctures with colouredpowder. Of all methods of discolouration, this isthe most striking and the least painful. It waspractised by the ancient Picts, and other savagenations, for the purpose of ornament.Judicial branding is effected by the applicationof a hot iron, the end of which has the form whichScarification and corrosion might be employed for the samepurpose. The first is attended with this inconvenience, theibrm which the cicatrix will take cannot be determined beforehand; it may leave none, or an accidental incision may leavea similar one. Corrosion by chymical caustics may not be liableto the same inconvenience ; but its effects have not been tried.88 B.IJ.CH.II. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVEit is desired should be left imprinted on the skin.This punishment is appointed for many offences inEngland, and among other European nations.How far this mark is permanent and distinct, Iknow not ; but every one must have observed thataccidental burnings often leave only a slight cicatrixa scarcely sensible alteration in the colourand texture of the skin.If it is desired to produce deformity, a part ofthe body should be chosen which is exposed toview, as the hand or the face ; but if the object ofthe punishment is only to mark a conviction of afirst offence, and to render the individual recognisablein case of a relapse, it will be better thatthe mark should be impressed upon some part ofthe body less ordinarily in view, whereby he willbe spared the torment of its infamy, without takingaway his desire to avoid falling again into the handsof justice.2. Disfigurement may in the same manner beeither permanent or transient. It may be performedeither on the person, or only on its dress.When confined to the dress, it is not properlycalled disfigurement ; but, by a natural associationof ideas, it has the same effect. To this head maybereferred the melancholy robes and frightfuldresses made use of by the Inquisition, to give tothose who suffer in public a hideous or terribleappearance. Some were clothed in cloaks paintedto represent flames ; others were covered withfigures of demons, and different emblems of futuretorments.Shaving the head has been a punishment formerlyused. It was part of the penance imposedupon adulterous women by the ancient Frenchlaws.The Chinese attach great importance to theB.II. CH.II. PUNISHMENTS. 89length of their nails ; cutting them might thereforebe used as a penal disfigurement. Shaving thebeard might be thus employed among the Russianpeasants, or a part of the Jews.The permanent means of disfigurement are morelimited. The only ones which have been in use,and which may yet be employed in certain countries,were applied to certain parts of the head,which may be altered without destroying the functionswhich depend on those parts. The commonlaw of England directs the nostrils to be slit, orthe ears cut off, as the punishment for certainoffences. The first of these punishments hasfallen into disuse : the second has been rarely employedin the last century. In the works of Pope,and his contemporary writers, may be seen how fartheir malignity was pleased by allusions to thisspecies of punishment, which had been applied tothe author of a libel in their times.The cutting off and slitting of the nose, the eyelids,and the ears, were once in common use inRussia, without distinction of sex or rank. Theywere the common accompaniments of the knoutand exile : but it ought to be observed that thepunishment of death was very rare.SEC. II. OF DISABLEMENT, OR PUNISHMENTSCONSISTING IN DISABLING AN ORGAN.To disable an organ is either to suspend or destroyits use without destroying the organ itself.It is not necessary here to enumerate all theorgans, nor all the methods by which they may berendered useless. We have already seen that itwould not be useful to have recourse to a greatvariety of afflictive punishments, and that therewould be many inconveniences in so doing. If90 B.II.CH.II. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVEwe were to follow the law of retaliation, the catalogueof possible punishments would be the sameas that of the possible offences of this kind.i. The visual organ. The use of which may besuspended by chymical applications, or by mechanicalmeans, as with a mark or bandage. Thevisual faculty may also be destroyed by chymicalor mechanical means.No jurisprudence in Europe has made use ofthis punishment. It has heretofore been employedat Constantinople, under the Greek emperors, lessas a punishment, it is true, than as a politic methodof rendering a prince incapable of reigning. Theoperation consisted in passing a red hot plate ofmetal before the eyes.ii. The organ of hearing. This faculty may bedestroyed by destroying the tympanum. A temporarydeafness may be produced by filling thepassage of the ears with wax. As a legal punishment,I know of no instance of its use.in. The organ of speech. Gagging has moreoften been employed as a means of precautionagainst certain delinquents, rather than as a methodof punishment-general Tally was sent to hispunishment with a gag in his mouth ; and thisodious precaution perhaps only served to turnpublic opinion against his judges, when his characterwas re-established. It has sometimes beenemployed in military prisons. It has the merit ofanalogy, when the offence consists in the abuse ofthe faculty of speech.Gagging is sometimes performed by fixing awedge between tht jaws, which are rendered immoveable: sometimes by forcing a ball into themouth, &c.iv. The hands and feet. I shall not speak of theIi.II.CH.II. PUNISHMENTS. 91various methods by which these members may berendered for ever useless. If it were necessary tobe done, it would not be difficult to accomplish.Handcuffs are rings of metal, into which thewrists are thrust, and which are connected togetherwith a bar or chain. This apparatus completelyhinders a certain number of movements,and might be employed so as to prevent them all.Fetters are rings of metal, into which the legsare fixed, united in the same manner by a chain orbar, according to the species of restraint which itis desired to produce. Handcuffs and fetters areoften employed conjointly. Universal use is madeof these two methods, sometimes as a punishment,properly so called, but more frequently to preventthe escape of a prisoner.The pillory is a plank fixed horizontally upon apivot, on which it turns, and in which plank thereare openings, into which the head and the hands ofthe individual are put, that he may be exposed tothe multitude. I say to the gaze of the multitudesuch is the intention of the law ; but it not unfrequentlyhappens, that persons so exposed areexposed to the outrages of the populace, to whichthey are thus delivered up without defence, andthen the punishment changes its nature; itsseverity depends upon the caprice of a crowd ofbutchers. The victim for such he then becomescovered with filth, his countenance bruised andbloody, his teeth broken, his eyes purled up andclosed, no longer can be recognized. The police,at least in England, used to see this disorder, norseek to restrain it, and perhaps would have beenunable to restrain it. A simple iron trellis, in theform of a cage, placed around the pillory, would,however, suffice for stopping at least all those92 13.11. CH.II. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVEmissiles which might inflict any dangerous blowsupon the body.The Carcan, a kind of portable pillory, is aspecies of punishment which has been used inmany countries, and very frequently in China, itconsists of a wooden collar, placed horizontally onthe shoulders, which the delinquent is obliged tocarry without relaxation for a longer or shortertime.SEC. III. OF MUTILATIONS.I understand by mutilation, the extirpation of anexternal part of the human body, endowed with adistinct power of movement, or a specific function,of which the loss is not necessarily followed bythe loss of life : as the eyes, the tongue, thehands, &c.The extirpation of the nose and of the ears isnot properly called mutilation, because it is notupon the external part of these organs that theexercise of their functions depends ; they protectand assist that exercise, but they do not exercisethese functions. There is, therefore, a differencebetween that mutilation which causes a total lossof the organ and that which only destroys itsenvelope. The latter is only a disfigurement whichmay be partly repaired by art.Everybody knows how frequently mutilationswere formerly employed in the greater number ofpenal systems. There is no species of them whichhas not been practised in England, even in timessufficiently modern. The punishment of deathmight be commuted for that of mutilation underthe Common Law. By a statute passed underHenry VIII, the offence of maliciously drawingblood in the palace, where the king resided, waspunished by the loss of the right hand. By aB.II. CH.II. PUNISHMENTS. 93statute of Elizabeth, the exportation of sheep waspunished by the amputation of the left hand.Since that time, however, all these punishmentshave fallen into disuse, and mutilations may nowbe considered as banished from the penal code ofGreat Britain.Examination of complex afflictive Punishments.The effects of simple afflictive punishments areeasily estimated, because their consequences areall similar in quality, and immediately produced.The effects of all other punishments are not ascertainedwithout great difficulties, because theirconsequences are greatly diversified, are liable togreat uncertainty, and are often remote. Simpleafflictive punishments must always be borne bythe parties on whom they are inflicted : all otherpunishments are deficient in point of certainty :the more remote their consequences, the morethese consequences escape the notice of those whoare deficient in foresight and reflection.Around a simple afflictive punishment a circlemay be drawn, which shall inclose the wholemischief of the punishment ; around all otherpunishments the mischief extends in circles, theextent of which is not, and cannot be marked out.It is mischief in the abstract, mischief uncertainand universal, which cannot be pointed out withprecision. When the effects of punishments arethus uncertain, there is much less ground forchoice, for the effects of one punishment may bethesame with those of another. The same consequencesoften resulting from very differentpunishments. The choice must therefore bedirected by probability, and be governed by thepresumption that certain punishments will more94 B.II. CH.II. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVEprobably produce certain penal consequences thanany other.Independently of the bodily sufferings resultingfrom them, punishments which affect the exteriorof the person, often produce two disadvantageouseffects, the one physical the individual may becomean object of disgust ; the other moral hemay become an object of contempt ; they may producea loss of beauty or a loss of reputation.One of these punishments, which has a greatermoral than physical effect, is a mark producingonly a change of colour, and the impression of acharacter upon the skin ; but this mark is anattestation that the individual has been guilty ofsome act to which contempt is attached, and theeffect of contempt is to diminish goodwill, theprinciple that produces all the free and gratuitousservices that men render to one another ; but inour present state of continual dependance uponeach other, that which diminishes the goodwillof others towards us, includes within itself an indefinitemultitude of privations.*When such a mark is inflicted on account of acrime, it is essential that a character should beSeaman relates a fact which proves what has been abovesaid of the indefinite consequences of these punishments. Speakingof a Frenchman, named Degrades, who had introduced theculture of Indigo into Surinam, and who, during many years,had enjoyed general esteem in that colony. He states, thatbeing at the house of one of his friends in Demerara, he becameill of an abscess, which formed in his shoulder. He would notsuffer it to be examined : it became dangerously worse, but hisresistance remained still the same : at last, not hoping for acure, he put an end to his life with a pistol-ball, when thesecret was revealed, it was found that his shoulder was markedwith a letter V, or Voleur. Narrative of an Expedition againstthe Revolted Negroes of Surinam, by Major Seaman, chap, xxvii.B.1I. CH.II. PUNISHMENTS. 95given to it, which shall clearly announce the intentionwith which it was imposed, and whichcannot be confounded with cicatrices of woundsor accidental marks. A penal mark ought to havea determinate figure and the most suitable, aswell as the most common, is the initial letter ofthe name of the crime. Among the Romans,slanderers were marked on the forehead with theletter K. In England, for homicide, committedafter provocation, offenders were marked in thehand with the letter M (for manslaughter), andthieves with the letter T. In France, the markfor galley-slaves was composed of the threeletters GAL.In Poland, it was the custom to add a symbolicalexpression : the initial letter of the crime wasenclosed in the figure of a gallows. In India,among the Gentoo, a great number of burlesquesymbolical figures are employed.A more lenient method, which may be referredto the same head, is a practice too little used, ofgiving to offenders a particular dress, which servesas a livery of crime. At Hanare, in Germany,persons condemned to labour on the public workswere distinguished by a black sleeve in a whitecoat. It is an expedient which has for its objectthe prevention of their escape ; as a mark of infamy,it is an addition to the punishment.On the score of frugality, deforming punishmentsare not liable to any objection; disablementand mutilation are ; if the effect of either is toprevent a man getting his livelihood by his ownlabour, and he has no sufficient income of hisown, he must either be left to perish, or be suppliedwith the means of subsistence ; if he wereleft to perish, the punishment would not be meredisablement or mutilation, but death. If he be96 B. II. CH. II. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVEsupported by the labour of others, that labourmust either be bestowed gratis, as would be thecase if he were supported on the charity of relationsand friends, or paid for, at public cost ; ineither case it is a charge upon the public. Thisconsideration might of itself be considered a conclusiveobjection against the application of thesemodes of punishment, for offences that are apt tobe frequently committed, such as theft or smuggling; the objection applies, however, in its fullforce, to such of these modes of punishment onlyas have the effect of depriving the particular individualin question of the means of gaining hislivelihood.In respect of sensibility, they are also eminentlydefective ; a consideration which affordsan additional reason for making a very sparinguse of them.In respect also of variability, these punishmentsare scarcely in a less degree defective. The lossof the eyes, or of the hand, is not to a man whocan neither read or write, the same degree ofpunishment as it would be to a painter, or anauthor. Yet, however different in each instancemay be the degree of suffering produced by themass of evil to which the infliction of the punishmentin question gives birth, all who are subjectto it will find themselves more or less affected ; ofthese inequalities, and therefore of the aggregateamount of the punishment in each particular instance,it is impossible to form any estimate ; itdepends on the sensibility of the delinquent, andother circumstances, which cannot be foreseen.By a slothful man, the loss of a hand might notbe regarded as a very severe punishment, it hasnot been uncommon for men to mutilate or disablethemselves to avoid serving in the army.B.1I.CH.II. PUNISHMENTS. 97In point of variability, the several classes ofpunishment now before us, when considered all together,are not liable to much objection ; there is agradation from less to more, which runs throughthe whole of them. The loss of one finger is lesspainful than the loss of two, or of the whole hand.The loss of the hand is less than the loss of an arm.But when these punishments are considered singly,the gradation disappears. The particular mutilationdirected by the law, can neither be increasedor diminished, that it may be accommodated tothe different circumstances of the crime or of thedelinquent. This objection recurs again underthe head of Equability. The same nominal punishmentwill not always be the same real punishment.In respect of exemplary, the punishments inquestion possess this property in a higher degreethan simple afflictive punishments, this latter speciesof punishment not being naturally attendedwith any distant consequences (their infamy excepted),the whole quantity of pain it is calculatedto produce is collected, as it were, into a point,and exposed at once to the eyes of the spectator ;while of the other, on the contrary, the consequencesare lasting, and are calculated perpetuallyto awaken in the minds of all, to whose eyes anyperson that has suffered this species of punishmentmay happen to present himself, the idea of the lawitself, and of the sanction by which its observanceis enforced. For this purpose it is necessary, however,as has been already observed, that the penalmark should be such as at first glance to be distinguishedfrom any mark that may have been theresult of accident that misfortune may be protectedfrom the imputation of guilt.The next property to be desired in a mode ofpunishment, is subserviency to reformation. In98 B.Il.C.ll. OF COMPLEX AFFLICTIVE, ETC.this respect the punishments under consideration,when temporary, have nothing in themselves thatdistinguishes them from any other mode of punishment; their subserviency to reformation is as theirexperienced magnitude. It is the infamy attendanton them that gives them those effects whichare apt in this respect to distinguish them to theirdisadvantage.Infamy, when at an intense pitch, is apt to havethis particular bad effect : it tends pretty stronglyto force a man to persist on that depraved courseof life by which the infamy was produced. Whena man falls into any of those offences that themoral sanction is known to treat with extremerigour, men are apt to suppose that the moralsanction has no hold upon him. His character,they say, is gone. They withdraw from him theirconfidence and goodwill. He finds himself in asituation in which he has nothing to hope for frommen, and for the same reason nothing to fear : heexperiences the worst already. If, then, he dependupon his labour for subsistence, and hisbusiness is of such sort as requires confidence tobe reposed in him, by losing that necessary portionof confidence he loses the means of providinghimself with subsistence, his only remaining resourcesare then mendicity or depredation.From these observations it follows, that mutilationought to be reserved as punishments for themost mischievous offences, and as an accompanimentof perpetual imprisonment. An exception tothis rule may perhaps be found in the case of rape,for which analogy most strongly recommends apunishment of this kind.CHAPTER III.OF RESTRICTIVE PUNISHMENTS TERRITORIALCONFINEMENT.RESTRICTIVE punishments are those which restrainthe faculties of the individual, by hinderinghim from receiving agreeable impressions, or fromdoing what he desires. They take from him his>erty with respect to certain enjoyments andcertain acts.Restrictive punishments are of two sorts, accordingto the method used in inflicting them. Some)rate by moral restraint, others by physical restraint.Moral restraint takes place when themotive presented to the individual to hinder himfrom doing the act which he wishes to perform isniy the fear of a superior punishment; for, inder to be efficacious, it is necessary that thepunishment with which he is threatened, must begreater than the simple pain of submitting to therestraint imposed upon him.The punishment of restraint is applicable to allsorts of actions in general, but particularly to thefaculty of loco-motion. Everything which restrainsthe locomotive faculty, confines the individual,that is to say, shuts him up within certain limits,and may be called territorial confinement.In this kind of punishment the whole earth, inrelation to the delinquent, is divided into two veryunequal districts ; the one of which is open to himand the other interdicted.If the place in which he is confined is a narrow100 B.II. C.III. OF RESTRICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.space surrounded with walls, and the doors ofwhich are locked, it is imprisonment.If the district in which he is directed to remainis within the dominions of the state, the punishmentmay be called Relegation. If it is withoutthe dominions of the state, the punishment is calledBanishment.The term relegation seems to imply, that thedelinquent is sent out of the district in which heordinarily resides. This punishment may consistin his confinement in that district where he ordinarilyresides, and even in his own house. It maythen be called quasi imprisonment.If it refers to a particular district, which he isprohibited from entering, it is a sort of exclusion,which has not yet a proper name, but which maybecalled local interdiction.Territorial confinement is the genus which includesfive species : imprisonment, quasi imprisonment,delegation, local interdiction, and banishment.CHAPTER IV.IMPRISONMENT.IMPRISONMENT makes a much more extensivefigure than any other kind of hardship that can beinflicted in the way of punishment. Every otherkind of hardship (death alone excepted) may beinflicted for two purposes punishment and compulsion.Imprisonment, besides these two purposes,may be employed for another. Safe custody; when thus employed, it is not a punishment,properly so called. It is intended only to ensurethe forthcomingness of an individual suspected ofhaving committed an offence, that he may be presentto undergo the punishment appointed for thatoffence, if he be found guilty. When thus employed,it ought not to be more severe than isnecessary to insure forthcomingness. Whateverexceeds this, is so much misery in waste.When imprisonment is intended to operate as apunishment, it may be rendered more or less severe,according to the nature of the offence and the conditionof the offender. It may be accompanied byforced labour, which may be imposed upon all ;but it ought not to be so imposed without referenceto the age, the rank, the sex, and the physicalpowers of the individuals. Other punishments,which may be employed in addition to hard labour,and of which we shall have occasion to speak in afuture chapter, are diet, solitude, and darkness.When imprisonment is inflicted for the purposeof compulsion, the severer it is, the better, and thatfor various reasons.102 B.II.CH.IV. IMPRISONMENT.When it is protracted, but slight, the danger isthat the prisoner may come by degrees to accommodatehimself to it, till at last it ceases in a mannerto operate upon him. This is found not uncommonlyto be the case with insolvent debtors.In many of our gaols there are so many comfortsto be had by those who have money to purchasethem, that many a prisoner becomes in time tolerablywell reconciled to his situation. When thisis the case, the imprisonment can no longer be ofuse in any view.The severer it is, I mean all along in point ofintensity, the less of it, in point of magnitude, willbe consumed upon the whole ; that is, in point ofintensity and duration taken together ; the morefavourable, in short, will it be to the sufferer : itwill produce its effects at a cheaper rate. Thesame quantity of painful sensations, which, underthe milder imprisonment, are diffused through alarge mass of sensations, indifferent or pleasurable,being, in the severer imprisonment, brought together,will act with collected force, and produce astronger impression : the same quantity of painwill therefore go farther this way than in any other.Add to this, that in this way the same quantity ofsuffering will not have so pernicious an influenceon his future life. In the course of a tedious confinement,his mental faculties are debilitated, hishabits of industry are weakened, his business runsinto other channels, and many of those casualopportunities which might have afforded the meansof improving his fortune, had he been at liberty toembrace them, are irrecoverably gone. These evils,which, though they may come eventually to be felt,are too distant and contingent to contribute anythingbeforehand to the impression it is intendedto produce, are saved by placing the magnitude of13. II, CH.1V-imprisonment. 1Q3the punishment in intensity rather than in duration.By the fundamental constitution of man s naturewithout anything being done by any one to producea change in his situation, if left to himself, inasituation in which he is debarred from exercisingthe faculty of loco-motion, he will in a short timebecome a prey to various evils, to the action ofvarious causes producing various organical painswhich, sooner or later, are sure to end ultimatelyin death. If duration and neglect be added to imprisonment,it necessarily becomes a capital punishment.Since, therefore, it is followed by an infinitevariety of evils which the individual is unablehimself to guard against, and against which precautionsmust be taken by others to preserve him,it follows, that to form a just notion of imprisonment,it must be considered, not simply by itselfbut in common with different modes and consequences.We shall then see that, under the samename, very different punishments may be inflicted.Under a name which presents to the mind onlythe single circumstance of confinement in a particularplace, imprisonment may include everypossible evil ; from those which necessarily followm its train, rising from one degree of rigour toanother, from one degree of atrocity to anothertill it terminates in a most cruel death ; and thiswithout being intended by the legislator, but altogetherarising from absolute negligence negligenceas easy to be explained as it is difficult tobe palliated.We shall class under three heads the penal circumstanceswhich result from this condition1. Necessary inconveniences, which arise from thecondition of a prisoner, and which form the essenceimprisonment. 2. Accessory inconveniences104 B.II. CH.IV. IMPRISONMENT.which do not necessarily, but which very frequentlyfollow in its train. 3. Inconveniencesarising from abuses.I. Negative evils, inseparable from imprisonment.1. Privation of the pleasures which belong tothe sight, arising from the diversity of objects intown and country.2. Privation of the liberty of taking pleasurableexercises that require a large space, such as ridingon horseback or in a carriage, hunting, shooting,&c.3. Privation of those excursions which may benecessary even for health.4. Privation of the liberty of partaking of publicdiversions.5. Abridgment of the liberty of going out toenjoy agreeable society, as of relations, friends, oracquaintance, although they should be permittedto come to him.6. Privation of the liberty, in some cases, ofcarrying on business for a livelihood, and abridgmentof such liberty in all cases.7. Privation of the liberty of exercising publicoffices of honour or trust.8. Privation of accidental opportunities of advancinghis fortune, obtaining patrons, formingfriendships, obtaining a situation, or forming matrimonialalliances for himself or children.Although these evils may in the first instancebe purely negative, that is to say, privation ofpleasures, it is evident that they bring in theirtrain of consequences positive evils, such as theimpairing of the health and the impoverishment ofthe circumstances.B.II. CH.IV. IMPRISONMENT. 105II. Accessory evils, commonly attendant on the conditionof a prisoner.1. Confinement to disagreeable diet. The wantof sufficient food for the purpose of nourishment, isa distinct mischief, which will come under anotherhead.2. Want of comfortable accommodations for repose: hard bedding, or straw, or nothing but thebare ground. This hardship alone has beenthought to have been productive, in some instances,of disease, and even death.3. Want of light. By the exclusion of thenatural light of the sun by day, and the not furnishingor not permitting the introduction of anyartificial means of producing light by night.4. Total exclusion from society. This evil iscarried to its height when a prisoner is not permittedto see his friends, his parents, his wife, orhis children.5. Forced obligation of mixing with a promiscuousassemblage of his fellow prisoners.*6. Privation of the implements of writing, forThis inconvenience would be apt to be attended with effectsof the most serious nature in the case of an Hindoo of any ofthe superior castes; an association, however involuntary, withpersons of an inferior rank, or contaminated character, causinga forfeiture of caste, which, among the Hindoo, is productiveof the same afflictions as excommunication at its first institutionwas intended to produce amongst Christians extreme infamy,and an utter exclusion from society, but that of persons markedwith the same stigma. It has been said, I hope without truth,that by some unhappy neglect, when the Rajah Nuncomar, aman of the first rank in Bengal, was in custody for the forgeryfor which he was afterwards tried under the laws of Great Britain,and executed, proper care was not taken to protect himfrom this ideal contamination. If this be true, before he wasproved guilty, he was made to suffer a punishment greater perhapsthan that to which he was afterwards sentenced.10G B.II. CH. IV. IMPRISONMENT.the purposes of correspondence. A useless severity,since everything which is written by a prisonermay be properly submitted to inspection.If ever this privation is justifiable, it is in cases oftreason and other party crimes.7. Forced idleness, by the refusal of all meansof necessary occupation : as of the brushes of apainter, the tools of a watchmaker, or of books,&c. This has sometimes been carried to such adegree of rigour as to deprive prisoners of allamusement.These different evils, which are so many positiveevils in addition to the necessary evils of simpleimprisonment, may be useful in penal and penitentialimprisonment. We shall hereafter shew inwhat manner they ought to be used. But withrespect to the fifth evil, the forced obligation ofmixing with a promiscuous assemblage of prisoners,it is always an evil, and an evil whichcannot be obviated without a change in the systemand construction of prisons.We proceed to the consideration of evils purelyabusive : of those which exist only by the negligenceof the magistrates, but which necessarilyexist, where precautions have not been taken toprevent their existence. We shall present twocatalogues ; one of the evils, the second of theirremedies.Evils. Remedies.1. . 1.Pains of hunger and thirst : Sufficient nourishment.general debility death. f2. 2.Sensation of cold in various Sufficient clothing, adapteddegrees of intensity : stoppage to the climate and the seasonof the circulation mortification fire.of the extremities * death.Howard, p. 39.B. II. CH. IV. IMPRISONMENT.Evils.3.Sensation of heat : habitualdebility death.4.Sensation of damp and wetness: fevers and other disordersdeath.5.Noisome smells, collectionsof vitrifiable matter : habitualdebility-falling off of the membersby gangrene gaol-fevercontagious diseases death.6.Pain or uneasiness resultingfrom the bites of vermin : cutaneousdiseases want of sleepdebility inflammation feverdeath.7.Various diseases.Painful sensations arisingfrom indelicate practices.9.Tumultuous noises indecentpractices indelicate conversations.10.Evils resulting from the religioussanction from thenon-exercise of the ceremoniesprescribed by it.Remedies.3.Shelter from the sun in hotweather fresh air.4.The ground everywhere coveredwith boards, or bricks,or stone fresh air tubes forconveying heated air.5.Fresh air change of clotheswater and other implementsof washing fumigationswhitewashing the walls medicinesand medical assistance.6.Chymical applications to destroythem cleanliness aperson with proper implementsfor their destruction and removal.7.Medicines and medical advice.8.Partitions to keep the prisonersseparate during the hourof rest, at least those of theone sex from those of the other.9.Keepers to be directed topunish those guilty of suchpractices. The punishment tobe made known to the prisonersby being fixed up in the prison.10.In Protestant countries, achaplain to perform divineservice. In Roman Catholiccountries, a priest to performmass, and to confess the prisoners,&c. *It was mentioned as a circumstance of peculiar distress attending the fateof many of the numerous state prisoners confined in Portugal during the Marquisof Pombal s administration, their being debarred, during a course of years,the comforts of confession. When this circumstance was brought to light, itproduced a considerable degree of public indignation.CHAPTER V.IMPRISONMENT FEES.ANOTHER way in which a man is often made tosuffer on the occasion of imprisonment, is thebeing made to pay money under the name of fees.This hardship, on the very first inspection, whendeduced as a consequence from a sentence orwarrant of imprisonment, can be classed under noother title than that of an abuse ; for naturally ithas just as much to do with imprisonment ashanging has.This abuse is coeval with the first barbarousrudiments of our antient jurisprudence ; when themagistrate had little more idea of the ends ofjustice than the freebooter ; and the evils heinflicted were little more than a compensation forthe evils he repressed. In those times of universaldepravity, when the magistrate reaped almostas much profit from the plunder of those whowere, or were pretended to be, guilty, as from thecontributions of those who were acknowledgedinnocent ; no pretext was too shallow to cover theenterprises of rapacity under the mask of justice.All the colour which this abuse is capable ofreceiving, seems to have been taken from aquibbling and inhuman sarcasm. " Since youhave lodging found you," says the gaoler to theprisoner, " it is fit, like other lodgers, you shouldpay for it." Fit it certainly would be, if thelodger came there voluntarily ; the only circum.II. CH.V. IMPRISONMENT FEES. 109stance in the case which is wanting to make it ajust demand instead of a cruel insult.But the gaoler, like every other servant of thestate, it will be said, and with perfect truth, mustbe satisfied for his trouble ; and who more fit thanthe person who occasions it ? I answer any personwhatever ; if contrary to the most obvious principlesof justice, some one person must bear thewhole charge of an institution, which if beneficialto any, is beneficial to all. I say anybody ;because there is no person whose clear benefitfrom the punishment of the criminal (I am speakinghere of the judicial, appointed punishment, theimprisonment ; and I mean clear benefit afterinconvenience has, been deducted) is not greaterthan the criminals. This would hold good werethe peculiar circumstances of the criminal out ofthe question ; but when these come to be considered,they add considerable force to the aboveconclusion. In the case of nineteen delinquentsout of twenty, the utter want of all means of satisfyingtheir lawful debts was the very cause andmotive to the crime. Now then, whereas it isonly possible in the case of a man taken at randomthat he has not wherewithal to pay, it iscertain that in nineteen cases out of twenty thedelinquent has not.So powerful is the force of custom, that for along series of years, Judges of the first rank, andcountry magistrates, none of whom but wouldhave taken it ill enough to have had their wisdomor their humanity called in question, stand uponrecord as having given their allowance to thisabuse. If any one of these magistrates had everhad the spirit to have refused this allowance, thegaoler would for a moment have remained unpaid,and from thenceforward the burthen would have110 13. II. CH.V. IMPRISONMENT FEES.been taken up by that public hand which, fromthe beginning, ought to have borne it.*So far is this hardship from being justifiable onthe score of punishment, that in most, if not in allour prisons, it is inflicted indiscriminately on allwho enter, innocent or guilty. It is inflicted at allevents, when it is not known but they may beinnocent: for it is inflicted on them at firstentrance when committed only for safe custody.This is not all ; it is inflicted on men after theyhave been proved to be innocent. Even this isnot all ; to fill up the measure of oppression, it isinflicted on them because they have been provedinnocent. Prisoners, after they have been acquitted,are, as if to make them amends for theunmerited sufferings they have undergone, loadedwith a heavy fine, professedly on the very groundof their having been acquitted. In some gaols, ofperson acquitted of murder a sum of money isexacted, under the name of an acquittal, equal towhat it costs an ordinary working man to maintainhimself for a quarter of a year : a sum such asnot one man in ten of that class, that is, of theclass which includes a great majority of the wholepeople, is ever master of during the course of hiswhole life.By the old law, when money was recovered against a Hundred,the Sheriff laid hold of the first Hundred he met, andmade him pay the whole. Even this was a better expedientfor providing for the public burthen than the one in question.IllCHAPTER VI.IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.WE now proceed to examine the degree in whichimprisonment possesses the several propertiesdesirable in a lot of punishment.1. Imprisonment possesses the property ofefficacy with respect to disablement in great perfection.The most dangerous offender, so long ashis confinement continues, is deprived of thepower of doing mischief out of doors; his viciouspropensities may continue at their highest pitch,but he will have no opportunity of exercisingthem.2. Imprisonment is generally exceptionable onthe score of frugality ; none of the inconveniencesresulting from it being convertible to profit. It isalso generally accompanied with expense, on accountof the maintenance of the persons confined.In these calculations of expense, that loss oughtnot to be forgotten which results from the suspensionof the lucrative labours of the prisoner, aloss which is often continued beyond the periodof his imprisonment, owing to the habits of idlenessit has induced.*3. Imprisonment is objectionable in respect ofequality. If we recur to the catalogue of privationsof which it consists, it will be seen that theinequality is extreme, when one prisoner is sickly,This objection to imprisonment is carefully removed in theplan of Adoption Imprisonment, an account of which is givenin Book V, ch. 3.112 B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.and the other healthy ; when one is the father ofa family, and the other has no relations ; whenthe one is rich and accustomed to all the enjoymentsof society, and the other poor, and hisusual condition is one of misery.One party may be deprived of his means ofsubsistence ; another may be scarcely affected inthis respect. It may be said, is not this lossmerely temporary ? May it not be considered asaforfeiture which forms a part of the punishment?If the individual belong to a profession,the exercise of which cannot be interrupted withoutgreat risk of its total loss ; the consequencemay be his absolute r n n. This is one of thosecases iu which a latitude/niaj^ properly be left tothe Judge of commuting this punishment foranother. A pecuniary punishment may frequently,with propriety, be substituted. The greater numberof offenders, however, are not in a condition tofurnish this equivalent. It would therefore benecessary to have recourse to simply afflictivepunishments. The degree of infamy attached tothese punishments would, however, not be anobjection in case the offender consented to theexchange ; and this consent might be made anecessary condition.Among the inconveniences which may be attachedto imprisonment, there is one which isparticularly inequitable. Take away paper andink from an author by profession, and you takeaway his means of amusement and support. Youwould punish other individuals, more or less, accordingas a written correspondence happened tobe more or less necessary for their business orpleasure. A privation so heavy for those whom itaffects, and at the same time so trifling for thegreater number of individuals, ought not to beB.TI. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. 113admitted in quality of a punishment. Whyshould an individual who has received instructionin writing, be punished more than another. Thiscircumstance ought rather to be a reason forindulgence; his sensibility has been augmentedby education ; and the instructed and cultivatedman will suffer more from imprisonment than theignorant and the clownish.On the other hand, though the punishment ofimprisonment is inequitable, it should be observed,that it naturally produces an effect upon every one.There is no individual insensible to the privationof liberty to the interruption of all his habits, andespecially of all his social habits.4. Imprisonment is eminently divisible withrespect to its duration. It is also very susceptibleof different degrees of severity.5. Under the present system, the exemplaryof imprisonment is reduced to the lowest term. Inthe Adoption, the facility afforded to the admissionof the public, adds much to this branch of itsutility.However, if the prisoners are not seen, the prisonis visible. The appearance of this habitationof penitence may strike the imagination andawaken a salutary terror. Buildings employedfor this purpose ought therefore to have a characterof seclusion and restraint, which should take awayall hope of escape, and should say, " This is thedwelling place of crime."6. Simplicity of description. Under this headthere is nothing to be desired. This punishmentis intelligible to all ages, and all capacities. Confinementis an evil of which everybody can forman idea, and which all have, more or less, experienced.The name of a prison at once recalls theideas of suffering as connected with it.114 B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.Let us here stop to examine three auxiliarypunishments, that under special circumstances,and for a limited time only, may be usefully madeto accompany afflictive imprisonment. Theseauxiliaries are solitude, darkness, and hard diet.Their distinguishing merit consists in their subserviencyto reformation.That the three hardships, thus named, have apeculiar tendency to dispose an offender to penitence,seems to be the general persuasion of mankind.The fact seems to be pretty generallyacknowledged ; but the reasons are not altogetherobvious, nor do they seem to be very explicitlydeveloped in the minds of those who show themselvesstrenuously convinced of the fact. Animperfect theory might naturally enough induce oneto deny it. " What is it," it may be said, " thatis to produce in the offender that aversion to hisoffence which is stiled penitence ? It is the painwhich he experiences to be connected with it.The greater then that pain, the greater will be hisaversion ; but of what kind the pain be, or fromwhat source it issues, are circumstances that makeno difference. Solitude, darkness, and hard diet,in virtue of a certain quantity of pain thus produced,will produce a certain degree of aversionto the offence ; be it so. But whipping, or anyother mode of punishment that produced a greaterpain, would produce a stronger aversion. Now,the pain of whipping may be carried to as high apitch as the pain produced by this group of hardshipsaltogether. In what respect then can thesehave a greater tendency to produce penitencethan whipping ?"The answer is, that the aversion to the offencedepends, not merely upon the magnitude of thepain that is made to stand connected with it ; butB.I1.CU.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. 115it depends likewise upon the strength of the connectionwhich is made to take place betweenthose two incidents in the patient s mind. Nowthat solitude, darkness, and hard diet have agreater tendency than any other kind of hardshipto strengthen this connection, I think, may besatisfactorily made out.Acute punishment, such as whipping, at thetime it is inflicted, leaves no leisure for reflection.The present sensation, with the circumstances thataccompany it, is such as engrosses the wholeattention. If any mental emotion mixes itselfwith the bodily sensation, it will rather be that ofresentment against the Executioner, the Judge,the Prosecutor, or any person whose share in theproduction of the suffering happens to strike thesufferer most, than any other. The anguish issoon over, and as soon as it is over, the mind ofthe patient is occupied in the eager pursuit ofobjects that shall obliterate the recollection of thepain that he has endured ; while all the objects bywhich he is surrounded contribute to repel thosesalutary reflections upon which his reformationdepends. Indeed, as soon as the anguish is over,a new emotion presents itself, an emotion of joywhich the patient feels at the reflection that hissuffering is over.The gradual and protracted scene of sufferingproduced by the combination of punishments we arenow considering, is much more favourable to theestablishment of the wished for effect. By solitude aman is abstracted from those emotions of friendshipor enmity which society inspires, from the ideas ofthe objects their conversation is apt to bring toview : from the apprehension of the disagreeablesituations their activity threatens to expose him116 B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.to, or the pleasures in which they solicit him toengage. By confinement he is abstracted from allexternal impressions but such as can be affordedhim by the few and uninviting objects that constitutethe boundaries, or compose the furniture, ofa chamber in a prison, and from all ideas which,by virtue of the principle of association, any otherimpressions are calculated to suggest.By darkness, the number of the impressions he isopen to is still further reduced, by the striking offall those which even the few objects in question arecalculated to produce upon the sense of sight.The mind of the patient is, by this means, reduced,as it were, to a gloomy void ; leaving himdestitute of all support but from his own internalresources, and producing the most lively impressionof his own weakness.In this void, the punishment of hard diet comesand implants the slow but incessant and corrodingpain of hunger ;-while the debility that attendsthe first stages of it, (for the phrensy that is apt toaccompany the last stages is to be alwaysguarded against) banishes any propensity whichthe patient might have left, to try such few meansof activity as he is left deprived of, to furnishhimself with any of the few impressions he is stillopen to receive. Meantime, that pain and thisdebility, however irksome, are by no means soacute as to occupy his mind entirely, and preventaltogether its wandering in search of other ideas.On the contrary, he will be forcibly solicited topay attention to any ideas which, in that extremevacancy of employment, are disposed to presentthemselves to his view.The most natural of all will be to retrace theevents of his past life; the bad advice he received,B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. JlTihis first deviations from rectitude, which have led.to the commission of the offence for which he is atthe time undergoing punishment ; a crime, all thepleasures derived from which have been alreadyreaped, and of which all that remains is the melancholysuffering that he endures. He will recallto his recollection those days of mlf6cence~~Ttndsecurity ^EIctL were .formerly his lot, and whicfrpcontrasted with his present wretchedness, will"present themselves to his imagination with anincreased and factitious degree of splendour. Hispenitent reflections will naturally be directed tothe errors of which he has been guilty : if he hasawife, or children, or near relations, the affectionthat he once entertained for them, may be renewedby the recollection of the misery that he has occasionedthem.Another advantage attendant on this situation,is, that it is peculiarly fitted to dispose a man tolisten with attention and humility to the admonitionsand exhortations of religion. Left in thisstate of destitution in respect of all external pleasures,religious instructions are calculated to takethe stronger hold of his mind. Oppressed by thestate of wretchedness in which he finds himself,and by the unlooked-for or unknown events thathave led to the detection of his crime, the more hereflects upon them, the more firmly will he beconvinced of the existence of a providence whichhas watched over his actions, and defeated hisbest concerted contrivances. The same God thatpunishes him, may also save him ; and thenceforwardthe promises of eternal bliss or torment willmore anxiously engage his attention promises ofhappiness in another state of being, in case ofrepentance, and denunciations of torments preparedfor the guilty in the regions of eternal night,118 B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.of which his present situation seems a prelude anda foretaste, will fix his regard. In a frame of mindsuch as this, to turn a deaf ear to the admonitionsand consolations afforded by religion, a man mustbe very different from the ordinary caste of men.Darkness, too, has, in circumstances like this, apeculiar tendency to dispose men to conceive, andin a manner to feel, the presence of invisible agents.Whatever may be the reason, the fact is notoriousand undisputed. When the external senses arerestrained from action, the imagination is moreactive, and produces a numerous race of idealbeings. In a state of solitude, infantine superstitions,ghosts, and spectres, recur to the imagination.This, of itself, forms a sufficient reason fornot prolonging this species of punishment, whichmay overthrow the powers of the mind, and produceincurable melancholy. The first impressionswill, however, always be beneficial.If, at such a time, a minister of religion, qualifiedto avail himself of these impressions, is introducedto the offender thus humiliated and castdown, the success of his endeavours will be almostcertain, because in this state of abandonment hewill appear as the friend of the unfortunate, andas his peculiar benefactor.This course of punishment, thus consisting ofsolitude, darkness, and hard diet, is, as has beenobserved, when embodied, a sort of discipline tooviolent to be employed, except for short periods :if greatly prolonged, it would scarcely fail of producingmadness, despair, or more commonly astupid apathy. This is not, however, the placefor fixing the duration of the punishment properfor each species of offence : it ought to vary accordingto the nature of the offence, the degree ofobstinacy evinced by the offender, and the symp-B. II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. 119toms of repentance which he exhibits. What hasbeen already said, is sufficient to shew that themass of punishments in question may be employedwith the greatest advantage simultaneously : theymutually aid each other. In order to producethe desired effect most speedily, even the sort offood allowed may be rendered unpalatable as wellas scanty, otherwise there would be danger lestto a young and robust person the constantly-recurring gratification afforded to the palate, might renderhim insensible to the loss of all other pleasures.If any punishment can in itself be popular, this,I think, promises to be so. It bears a strongerresemblance than any other to domestic discipline.The tendency which it has to lead the offender toacknowledge the evil of his offence, and the justiceof his sentence, is the same which an indulgentfather desires his punishments to possess,when he inflicts them upon his children ; and thereis no aspect which it is more desirable the lawshould assume than this.The effects produced by solitary confinement,are not matters of mere conjecture ; they havebeen ascertained by experience, and are reportedupon the best authorities.Speaking of the cells in Newgate, " I wastold," says Mr. Howard,* " by those who attendedme, that criminals who had affected an air of boldnesson their trial, and appeared quite unconcernedat the pronouncing sentence upon them, werestruck with horror, and shed tears, when broughtto these darksome, solitary abodes".I remember an instance," says Mr. Hanway,fsome years before the law for proceeding to sen-page152. t Page 75.120 B.II.CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED,hence upon evidence, of a notorious malefactor,who would not plead. It was a question, whetherhe should be brought to tha press; but the jailorprivately recommended to the magistrates to trysolitary confinement in prison. This produced theeffect, for in less than twenty-four hours, thedaring, artful felon chose to hold up his hand atthe bar, and quietly submit to the laws, ratherthan remain in such a solitary state without hope."The same gentleman mentions* a set of cells,provided for the purpose of solitary confinement, inClerkenwell Bridewell,by order of the Justices of thePeace for that division. One of those magistrates, hesays, assured him, " That every person committedto those solitary apartments, had been in a fewdays reformed to an amazing degree." The apartments,though solitary, were not dark, nor is anythingsaid about the circumstance of diet.Directly opposed to solitary imprisonment isthe promiscuous association of prisoners. Thesuffering which results from this circumstance, isnot the result of direct intention on the part of themagistrate. It is an evil acknowledged, and yetsuffered still to exist to a very considerable extent.It is evidently not so much inflicted as admitted,from the supposed inability of Government to excludeit ; the great and only objection to its exclusionbeing the expense of the arrangements necessaryto the accomplishment of that purpose. Theadvantage by which it is recommended, is that offrugality. It is less expensive to shut up prisonersin one room, than to provide separate apartmentsfor each one, w or even to keep them divided intoclasses, -j*Page 74.t It must be acknowledged that this difficulty was very greatbefore the invention of the plan of central inspection.B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. 121This promiscuous assemblage of prisoners, consideredas part of the punishment, has no penaleffect upon the most audacious and the most perverse.On the contrary, with reference to them,it renders imprisonment less painful, the tumultwith which it surrounds them, diverts them fromthe misery of their situation, and from the reproachesof their consciences. It is therefore anevil most severe for the prisoner of refinement andsensibility. It is an addition to the punishmentof imprisonment, evidently unequal, exemplary,and unprofitable, producing a variety ofunknown sufferings, such that those only who haveexperienced them, can be fully acquainted withtheir extent.But the great and decisive objection to the promiscuousassociation of prisoners, considered as apunishment, is, that it is directly opposed to theirreformation. Instead of rendering a delinquentbetter, its evident tendency is to make him worse.The ill effect which, in the instance of indelibleinfamy, is only problematical, is, in the instanceof this species of hardship, certain : it obliteratesthe sense of shame in the mind of the sufferer : inother words, it produces insensibility to the forceof the moral sanction.This ill effect of the promiscuous association ofprisoners, is too obvious not to strike even themost superficial spectator. Criminals, confinedtogether, are corrupted, it is said, by the societyof each other : there are a thousand ways of diversifyingthe expression, and it is generally set offwith great exuberance of metaphor. The wordcorruption, and the greater part of the terms thatcompose the moral vocabulary, are not calculated,of themselves, to convey any precise import, butserve rather to express the disapprobation which122 B.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.he who uses them happens to entertain of the practicesin question, than the tendency to producemischief, which is, or at least ought to be, theground of it. In order then to form a precise ideaof the phenomena in which this corruption displaysitself, let us examine the mischievous habits producedby this promiscuous intercourse, and theway in which it tends to produce mischief insociety.The ill consequences of the association in question,may be comprised under the following heads:1 . It strengthens, in the minds of all parties concerned,the motives which prompt to the commissionof all sorts of crimes.2. It diminishes the force of the considerationswhich tend to restrain them.3. It increases their skill, and by that meansthe power, of carrying their obnoxious propensitiesinto practice.Crimes are the sort of acts here in question.Now, the names of crimes are words, for whichprecise ideas have, or might at least be found;they are evils of a certain description. The namesof the motives that prompt a man to the commissionof a crime, are also the names of pains andpleasures. In examining, therefore, the consequencesof the association of delinquents, underthe foregoing heads, we tread upon clear and palpableground, unobscured by metaphor and declamation.1 . As to the motives by which men are promptedto the commission of crimes. These are the expectationof the pleasures which are the fruit ofthem. By far the greater number of the offenceswhich bring men to a prison, are the offspring ofrapacity. Crimes issuing from any other motive,are so few as scarcely to demand in this view anyB.II. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. J 23separate notice. The bulk of offenders will be ofthe poorer sort ; among them the produce of alittle plunder will go in the purchase of pleasuremuch beyond that which the ordinary produce oftheir labour would enable them to purchase ; suchas more food, more delicate liquors, in greaterplenty and more delicious, finer clothes, andmore expensive pleasures. These things naturallyform the subject of conversation among the prisoners,and an inexhaustible subject of boastingon the part of those who by their skill or good fortunehave acquired the means of enjoying them.These recitals give a sort of superiority whichthose who possess it are fond, from a principle ofvanity, to display and magnify to the humble andadmiring crowd of their less fortunate associates.They inflame the imagination of the hearers ; and,in a word, their propensity to gratify their rapacityby all sorts of crimes, is increased by the prospectof the pleasures of which the means are furnishedby these crimes. The more numerous the association,the more varied the exploits to be recounted; and what subject more naturally thesubject of conversation, than the circumstanceswhich have brought them together.2. While, on the one hand, as has been just observed,all the vicious propensities are nourishedand invigorated, on the other hand, all considerationstending to restrain the commission ofoffences, are repelled and enfeebled. These considerationsbelong to the one or the other of thethree sanctions the political, the moral, or thereligious.Those derived from the political sanction, are thevarious punishments appointed by law; amongstthese, that which they are actually undergoing,have undergone, or are about to undergo. Of124 B. 1I.CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.these sufferings it will naturally be the study ofthem all to make as light as possible ; to whichend the society of each other will afford themmany powerful assistances. From pride, eachman will endeavour to make his own sense of hisown sufferings appear to others as slight as possible: he will undervalue the afflicting circumstancesof his situation : he will magnify any littlecomforts which may attend it, and, as the commonphrase is, will put as good a face upon the matteras he can. Thus the most intrepid and proudbecome a pattern for all the others. The sensibilitiesof all are gradually elevated to the samepitch : it would be matter of shame to them notto bear their misfortunes with equanimity. Evenfrom mere sympathy, many will derive a powerfulmotive to soothe the sufferings of their partners inaffliction to congratulate them on the terminationof such as are past, to relieve them under such asare present, and to fortify them against such asmay be to come. It may possibly be observed,that to ascribe to persons of the class in questionany such benevolent affections, is to attribute tothem virtues to which they are altogether strangers.But to suppose that men consist only of twoclasses, the altogether good, and the altogetherbad, is a vulgar prejudice. The crime which subjectsa man to the lash of the law, may leave himpossessed of a thousand good qualities, and moreespecially of sympathy for the misfortunes of others.Daily experience may convince us of this, and leadus to believe that the criminal are not alwaysaltogether vicious.The considerations derived from the moral sanction,are the various evils, positive and negative,apprehended from the ill-will of such persons withwhom the person in question is in society. Whilstfc.II. CH.VI. - IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. 125a man remains in general society, though hisracer may be the subject of general suspicion, hewill be obliged to keep a guard upon his actions,that he may not too strongly confirm these suspicions,and render himself altogether despicable.But in a prison the society is unmixed, having interestsof its own, opposite to the former, governedby habits and principles opposite to those whichare approved in general society. The habits andpractices which were odious there, because theywere mischievous there, not being mischievous,are not odious here. Theft is not odious amongthieves, who have nothing to be stolen. It is invain for them to make pretensions to probity ; theyagree, therefore, by a tacit convention, to undervaluethis virtue. The mixed qualities of patience,intrepidity, activity, ingenuity, and fidelity, whichare beneficial or not according as they are subservientto the other, will be magnified to the prejudiceof the former. A man will be applaudedfor his patience, though it were exerted in lying inwait for a booty ; for his intrepidity, though manifestedin attacking the dwelling of a peaceablehouseholder, or in defending himself against theministers of justice ; for his activity, though employedin seizing the unwary traveller ; for hisingenuity, though displayed in working upon thesympathetic feelings of some deluded, compassionatebenefactor ; for his fidelity, though employedin screening his associates in some enterpriseof mischief from the pursuit of the injured.These are qualities which enjoy the highest estimationin such society, and by their possession,that thirst for sympathy and applause is gratified,of which every man, in whatever situation he isplaced, is desirous.The probity which is held in honour, in such126 B.1I.CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED.society, is not intended to be useful to mankind atlarge : its rules may be strictly observed in thesociety in which it is established, and disregardedto the prejudice of all persons not connected withthat society. The Arabs, who live by plunder,are remarkable for their honesty towards the membersof their own tribe. Thus also, that there ishonour among thieves, has become proverbial.*The considerations derived from the religioussanction, are the sufferings apprehended from theimmediate will of the Deity, in some degree perhapsin the present, but chiefly in a future life.This displeasure is, under the Christian religion,and particularly the Protestant, invariably believedto be annexed, with few or no exceptions,to all those mal practices which bring men intoprisons. The considerations, therefore, which thatsanction affords are to be numbered among theconsiderations which tend to restrain men fromcommitting crimes. Now the force of this sanction,acting in opposition to that of the local moralsanction, which is generated and governs in aprison, will naturally have the whole force of thislatter exerted against it to overthrow it. Notthat a prison is the region of acute and scrupulousThe influence of a man s conduct on the happiness of thewhole race of sensitive beings, must be taken into the account,before it can with propriety be termed virtuous or vicious, simplyand without addition. The same conduct which is pernicious,and on that account is or ought to be disreputable in society atlarge, is beneficial to, and on that account, held in honour by,a smaller society included within the former. The member ofparliament who solicits or defends for his borough a privilegedetrimental to the nation, is called a patriot in his borough.The man who devised the oath by which the candidates for degreeswere made to engage not to propagate, elsewhere than atOxford and Cambridge, the seeds of what was thought usefullearning, was probably thought a man of great merit in thoseUniversities.B.II. CH.VJ. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED. 127philosophy. The arguments there made use of, willbe addressed to the passions rather than the judgment.The being of a God, the authority of Revelation,will not be combatted by reason. The force ofthis sanction will be eluded rather than opposed ;the attention will be diverted from the idea ofGod s displeasure, to the improbability of its beingmanifested. The authority of revelation will becombatted by satires upon its ministers ; and thatman will be pronounced brave, who shall dare todeny the one, and despise the other. And argumentsof this kind will be found to have mostinfluence upon the members of such societies.3. The third and last of the ways in whichthe association of malefactors in prisons contributesto corrupt them, is by increasing their skill, andby that means their power of carrying their mischievouspropensities, whatever they may be, intopractice.That their conversation will naturally turn upontheir criminal exploits has been already observed.Each malefactor will naturally give a detail of theseveral feats of ingenuity which, in the course ofthose exploits, the occasion led him to practice.These facts will naturally be noted down, were itonly on the score of curiosity. But as means ofgratifying those propensities, which the situationin question has a strong tendency to strengthenand confirm, they will make a much more forcibleimpression. An ample mass of observations willbe soon collected, drawn from the experience ofthe whole society, and each particular member ofit will soon be wise with the wisdom of the whole.Prisons, therefore, have commonly and very properlybeen stiled schools of vice. In these schools,however, the scholar has more powerful motivesfor, and more effectual means of, acquiring the128 B.JI. CH.VI. IMPRISONMENT EXAMINED .sort of knowledge that is to be learnt there, than hehas of acquiring the sort of knowledge that is taughtin more professed schools. In the professed schoolhe is stimulated only by fear, he strives against hisinclination. In these schools of vice he is stimulatedby hope, acting in concert with his naturalinclination. In the first, the knowledge impartedis dispensed only by one person ; the stock ofknowledge proceeds from one person : in theothers, each one contributes to the instruction ofall the others. The stock of knowledge is theunited contribution of all. In professed schoolsthe scholar has amusements more inviting to himthan the professed occupations of the school. Inthese he has no such amusements, the occupationin question is the chief of the few pleasures of whichhis situation admits.To the most corrupt, this promiscuous associationis mischievous. To those committed for afirst offence, who have yielded to the temptationsof indigence, or have been misled by evil example; who are yet young and not hackney incrimes ; punishment, properly applied, mightwork reformation. This association can onlyrender such more vicious ; they will pass frompilfering to greater thefts, till they are guilty ofhighway robbery and murder. Such is the educationyielded by promiscuous association ofcriminals in prison.CHAPTER VII.GENERAL SCHEME OF IMPRISONMENT.LET there be three kinds of imprisonment, differingone from another in the degree of theirseverity.The first for insolvent : in case of rashness orextravagance, in lieu of satisfaction. The second,for malefactors whose imprisonment is to be temporary.These may be stiled second-rate malefactors.The third, for malefactors whose imprisonmentis perpetual. These may be stiled first-ratemalefactors.1st. Let all insolvent be upon the footing ofbankrupts ; compellable to discover, under pain ofdeath, or other heavy penalty ; on discovery notliable to imprisonment of course, but liable incaseof rashness or extravagance ; or else let rashnessor extravagance be presumed in the firstinstance; and let it lie upon the insolvent toexculpate himself. To the same prison let suchpersons be committed as are arrested upon niesneprocess. On persons of this class the imprisonmentcomes in before judgment to enforce ; afterjudgment to stand in lieu of satisfaction. Herelet there be no mark of infamy. Nor let there behere any rigour, either real or apparent.The second kind of imprisonment is designedfor correction as well as for example. The real,therefore, and the apparent punishment ought tobe upon a par. Here, let labour be added to imprisonment,and for the last week, or fortnight, ormonth, solitude, darkness, and spare diet. HereK130 B.II.CH.VII. GENERAL SCHEMElet a stigma be inflicted ; but let that stigma beatemporary one. It will answer two purposes :first, that of example, as increasing the apparentpunishment : second, that of security, by preventingescape.The third kind of imprisonment is destined forexample only. The end of correction is precluded ;since the delinquent is never to mix with societyagain. Here too, for the same purposes as in theformer case, let a stigma be inflicted ; and let thatstigma be perpetual. Here let the apparent conditionof the delinquent be as miserable, and thereal as comfortable, as may be. Let the gentlemanoccupy himself as he pleases. Let theyeoman, who has an art, exercise his art, and lethim be a sharer in the profits. Let the labour ofthe yeoman who knows no art be more moderatethan in the temporary prison.The diet in many prisons is in part provided forbyprivate benefactions. Such benefactions are ofuse only upon supposition of that gross negligenceon the part of Government, of which they are apregnant testimony. The demand a man in thesituation in question has for food, is not at allvaried by the happening or not happening of acasual act of humanity by a chance individual.Whatever be the proper allowance, he ought tohave as much, although no private benefactionwere given for that purpose ; he ought not tohave more, were the amount of such benefactionsever so considerable. If ever the legislature shouldfulfil this obvious and necessary duty, all suchprivate benefactions should be taken into thehands of the public. Such resumption, far frombeing a violation of the wills of the benefactors,would be a more complete execution of them thanany they could have hoped for.B. II. CH.VJI. OF IMPRISONMENT. 131For the same reason all casual benefactions ofparticular persons, to particular delinquents,should be prevented. The way to do this, is notto prevent the money s being given ; but to preventits being spent, at least, in food and liquors ;the introduction of money could not be preventedwithout establishing a search too troublesome andhumiliating to be executed with the strictnessrequisite to answer the purpose. But articles sobulky as those of food and liquors might easily beexcluded. Such an institute would tend in noinconsiderable degree to promote restitution. Atpresent, in all offences of rapacity, that is in nineteenout of twenty, of the crimes that are committed,*the greater a man s guilt has been, themore mischief he has done, the better he fareswhile he is in prison. It is seldom that the wholeproduce of the crime is found upon the delinquentat the time of his being apprehended ; and thoughit be found on him, if it consists in money, it is seldomthat it can be identified in such manner as towarrant the restitution of it against the consent ofthe delinquent. Commonly, if it is not spent, it isin the hands of some friend of the delinquent ; anassociate in iniquity, a wife or mistress. Thussecured, it is disposed of at his direction, andeither lavished in debauchery, or in feeing lawyersto obstruct the course of justice.When, therefore, the plunder is of no use to him,it will require a much less effort, on his part, torestore it to the right owner. The workings ofconscience will be powerfully seconded by suchan institution.Whatever, therefore, is found upon the person,See Howard s Tables.132 B.II. CH.VII. GENERAL SCHEMEor in the possession of any one who, by virtue ofa charge upon oath, is apprehended for a felony,should be impounded in the hands of the officer.As much of it as consists in money, or other articlesthat include a considerable value in a small compass,should be sealed up with the seal of themagistrate ; who should have it in his option tokeep it in his own custody, or commit it to that ofthe ministerial officer, giving, in either case, areceipt to the suspected felon.An objection to imprisonment, when all areupon an equal footing with respect to entertainment,is that the punishment is apt to be disproportionate.The rich are punished more than thepoor ; or, in other words, those who have beenaccustomed to good living, more than those whohave been accustomed to hard living. On theother hand, to allow those who are committed forcrimes of rapacity to give in to any expence whileany part of the booty they may have maderemains unrestored, is to allow them to enjoy theprofit of their crimes ; to give the criminal anindulgence at the expense of those whom he hasinjured.Here, then, arises a difference in the treatmentproper to be given in this respect to differentcrimes. Persons committed for crimes of rapacity,should, in the case where the profit of the crimehas been reaped, be debarred, until complete restitutionshall have been made, of the liberty ofprocuring themselves those indulgences that are tobe had for money. Persons committed for anyother crimes may be allowed it.With respect to restitution, a further caution isto be observed. It will happen very frequentlythat a person apprehended for one offence, hasB. II. C1I.V1I. OF IMPRISONMENT. J33been guilty of many others. For this reason it isnot the restitution of the booty gained by the firstoffence for which the malefactor is apprehended,that ought to be deemed sufficient to entitle himto the liberty of purchasing indulgences. A timeought to be limited, (suppose a month or sixweeks) and notice given for any persons who,within a certain time, (suppose a year) havebeen sufferers by him, to come in and oppose theallowance of such liberty. Very light proof insuch case ought to be held sufficient.Let us return for a moment to the different kind*of prisons : the different purposes for which theyare destined ought to be very decidedly marked intheir external appearance, in their internal arrangements,and in their denomination.The walls of the first sort ought to be whiteof the second, grey of the third, black.On the outside of the two last kinds of prisonsmay be represented various figures, emblematicalof the supposed dispositions of the persons confinedin them. A monkey, a fox, and a tiger,representing mischief, cunning, and rapacity, thesources of all crimes, would certainly form moreappropriate decorations for a prison than the twostatues of melancholy and raving madness, formerlystanding before Bedlam. In the interior lettwo skeletons be placed, one on each side of aniron door : the occasional aspect of such objects iscalculated to suggest to the imagination the mostsalutary terrors. A prison would thus representthe abode of death, and no youth that had oncevisited a place so decorated could fail of receivinga most salutary and indelible impression. I amfully aware, that to the man of wit, these emblematicalfigures may serve as matter for ridicule :in poetry they are admirable, in reality despicable.134 B.II. Cheviot. GENERAL SCHEMEFortunately, however, they are more assailable byridicule than by reason.*Distinguishing the several species of prisons bycharacteristic denominations, is far from being auseless idea. Justice and humanity to insolventdebtors, and to persons detained upon suspicion,require that they ought to be screened even fromthe apprehension of being confounded with delinquents,a risk to which they are naturally exposed,where all places of confinement bear the sameappellation. If no such sentiment were found tobe already in existence, the legislator ought tomake it his business to create it : but the truth is,that it does exist, and it is the most valuableclasses of the community that are most severelywounded by this want of discrimination.A difference in the situation and name affordsanother means of aggravating one of the most importantparts of the punishment the apparentpunishment.The first sort of prison may be called the Housefor Safe Custody the second, the PenitentiaryHouse the third, the Black Prison.The first of these names does not convey anyidea of misconduct ; the second does, but at thesame time presents the idea of reformation ; thethird is calculated to inspire terror and aversion.With a view to reformation in the case of offencespunished by temporary imprisonment, part of thepunishment may consist in learning by heart acertain part of the criminal code, including thatpart which relates to the offence for which theparty is punished. It might be digested into theform of a Catechism.Of the importance of symbols, and the uses that have beenmade of them, by the Catholic clergy, after the example ofancient Rome, see Emile, torn. iv.B. II. CH.VII. OF IMPRISONMENT. 135In second-rate felonies and misdemeanors,where, after being punished, the offender is returnedinto society, it is of importance to lightenas much as possible the load of infamy he has beenmade to bear. The business is to render infamousnot the offender, but the offence. The punishmentundergone, upon the presumption of hisbeing reclaimed, he ought not, if he is returnedinto society, to have his reputation irretrievablydestroyed. The business is, then, for the sake ofgeneral prevention, to render the offence infamous,and, at the same time, for the sake of reformation,to spare the shame of the offender as much aspossible. These two purposes appear, at first, tobe repugnant : how can they be reconciled ? Thedifficulty, perhaps, is not so great as it at firstappears. Let the offender, while produced for thepurpose of punishment, be made to wear a mask,with such other contrivances upon occasion as mayserve to conceal any peculiarities of person. Thiscontrivance will have a farther good effect in pointof exemplary. Without adding anything to theforce of the real punishment, on the contrary,serving even to diminish it, it promises to addconsiderably to the force of the apparent. Themasks may be made more or less tragical, in proportionto the enormity of the crimes of those whowear them. The air of mystery which such acontrivance will throw over the scene, will contributein a great degree to fix the attention bythe curiosity it will excite, and the terror it willinspire.CHAPTER VIII.OF OTHER SPECIES OF TERRITORIAL CONFINEMENT QUASI IMPRISONMENT DelegationBANISHMENT.Quasi Imprisonment consists in the confinementof an individual to the district in which his ordinaryplace of residence is situated.Relegation consists in the banishment of an individualfrom the district in which his ordinary placeof residence is situated, and his confinement tosome other district of the state.Banishment consists in the expulsion of a manfrom the country in which he has usually resided,and the prohibition of his return to it.These three species of punishment may be eithertemporary or perpetual.Relegation and banishment are punishments unknownto the English law. Transportation, as weshall presently have occasion to observe, is in itsnature totally different. The exclusion of Papistsfrom a certain district about the court is to beconsidered rather as a measure of precaution thanof punishment.It is true, that the condition of persons livingwithin the rules of a prison corresponds prettyaccurately with the idea of territorial confinement.But this kind of territorial confinement is not inflictedin a direct way as a punishment. Thepunishment inflicted by the law is that of imprisonment,which the prisoner is allowed to commuteupon paying for it. A man is not committedto the rules : ree is committed to the prison, andB. II. CH.VIII. QUASI Imprisonment, ETC. 137upon paying what the jailor chooses, or is permittedto demand, he has the liberty of the rules ;that is, of being in any part of a certain districtround about the jail.*The several inhabitable districts which are privilegedfrom arrest, may be considered as scenes ofterritorial confinement with respect to offenderswho resort to them to escape being arrested, andsent to prison. A man in such cases voluntarilychanges the severer species of restraint into amilder.In France, instances of delegation were not unfrequent.Under the old regime, a man wasordered to confine himself to his estate, or to quithis estate and go and live at another place. Apunishment, however, of this sort, almost alwaysfalls upon a man of rankled generally was ratheran arbitrary expression of the personal displeasureof the sovereign than a regular punishment inflictedin the ordinary course of justice. Theperson on whom it fell was commonly a disgracedminister, or a member of parliament. It has repeatedlyhappened that a whole parliament hasbeen relegated for refusing to register a particularedict. In these cases, however, it was often employed,not so much as a punishment, as a meansof prevention to prevent what were called intrigues.The exercise of such an act of authoritywas a symptom of apprehension and weakness onthe part of the minister.When a man is banished from all the dominionsof his own state, he has either the whole world bestappears from Mr Howard, that in England there are sixprisons that have Rules belonging to them. In London, twothe Fleet (p. 156), and the King s Bench (p. 196): in Carmarthen,two (pp. 422, 468) ; one in the Cornish borough of Lost-withal(p. 386) ; and one in Newcastle-upon-Tyne (p. 422).138 B.II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC.sides left for him to range in, or he is confined to aparticular part of it. In the first case it may besaid to be indefinite, with respect to the locus adquern, in the other definite.*It might seem at first sight as if the defining thelocus ad quern in banishment would be an operationnugatory and impracticable. For banishment isone of those punishments that are to be carriedinto effect, if at all, only by the terror of ulteriorpunishment. Now to be liable to ulterior punishmentat the hands of his own state, a man mustbe still in the power of that state ; which, by thesupposition, it would appear as if he could not be.There are three cases, however, in which he maybeso still. 1. Where the banishment is onlytemporary. 2. Where, though his person is outof the dominions of his 3wn state, his property, orsome other possession of his, is still within itspower. 3. Where the foreign state to which heis exiled is disposed on any account to co-operatewith his own, and either to punish, or give up toInstances of definite banishment are what one would notexpect to find frequent in any system of legislation. In banishment,the object in general is to get rid of the malefactor ; andwhat becomes of him afterwards is not minded. If it were anobject of choice with the Government, what country the delinquentshould betake himself to, the circumstances that could notbut serve to determine such a choice would naturally be suchas were of a temporary nature. This, accordingly, was the casewith an Act of the British Parliament, which furnishes the onlyinstance that occurs to me of a punishment of this nature. Bystatute 20 Geo. II, c. 46, the king is empowered to commutethe punishment incurred by persons engaged in the late rebellion,into transportation to America, and the persons thus dealtwith are made subject to the pains of capital felony, not only asusual in case of their returning to any part of Great Britain orIreland, but besides that, in case of their going into any part ofthe dominions of France or Spain, nations with whom the Britishwas then at war.B.II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC. 139punishment, such persons as the latter shall deemdelinquents.The inconveniences of territorial confinement,whether by delegation or banishment, are for themost part of the same description as those of simpleimprisonment ; they are apt in some respectsto be greater, in others less severe than simpleimprisonment.Territorial confinement is, however, susceptibleof such infinite diversity, arising from the natureof the place the extent of the district the circumstancesof the delinquent that nothing likeuniformity can be met with, and scarce any propositioncan be laid down respecting it, that shall begenerally true.In case of delegation, the liberty of beholdingthe beauties of nature ana of the arts, of enjoyingthe company of one s friends and relations, ofserving them and advancing one s own fortune, isliable to be more or less abridged.The liberty of exercising any public power, andof taking journies for the sake of health or ofpleasure, are subject to be entirely taken away.The liberty of carrying on business for a livelihoodwill be subject to be more or less abridged,according to its nature ; and in respect of someparticular species of business or trade, the opportunityof exercising it will be subject to be entirelytaken away.In respect to banishment, the inconveniences areliable to vary to such a degree, both in qualityand species, that nothing can be predicated of thismode of punishment that shall be applicable to allcases.The sort of evils with which it will be found tobe most generally accompanied, may be arrangedunder the following heads :}40 B.II. CU.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC.Separation from one s friends, relations andcountrymen.Loss of the liberty of enjoying objects of pleasureor of amusement to which one has beenaccustomed, as public diversions, or the beautiesof nature or art.Loss of the opportunity of advancement in theway of life in which one had engaged, as in themilitary line or in public offices.Loss of the opportunity of advancing one s fortune,and derangement in one s affairs, whether oftrade or any other lucrative profession. But underthis head scarce anything can with certaintybe said till the business of each delinquent isknown, and the country to which he is relegated.All opportunity of advancing one s fortune may betotally taken away, or nay be changed more orless for the worse, but it may even be improved.A workman acquainted with only one branch of acomplicated manufacture, if relegated to a countryin which no such manufacture was carried on,would lose the whole of his means of subsistence,so far as it depended upon that manufacture. Aman engaged in his own country in the professionof the law, relegated to a country governed bydifferent laws, would find his knowledge altogetheruseless. A clergyman of the church of Englandwould lose the means of subsistence derivablefrom his profession, if relegated to a country inwhich there were no members of that sect to befound.The quantity of suffering incident to banishment,and, in some cases, to delegation, will dependupon the individual s acquaintance, or want of acquaintance,with foreign languages. For thispurpose it ought to be borne in mind that in everycountry the great majority of the people know noBait. CH. VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC. 141other language than their own. A great deal willdepend upon the language a man speaks. A German,or an Italian, merely by being banished hisown state, would suffer nothing in this respect,because in other states he will find the bulk ofthe people speaking precisely the same language.Next to a German or an Italian, a Frenchmanwould be least exposed to suffer, on account of thepopularity of the French language in other Europeannations. An Englishman (except in America)a Swede, a Dane, and a Russian, would find themselvesworse off in this respect than inhabitantsof other European countries.A man being among people with whose languagehe is unacquainted, is liable to be exposed to themost serious evils. A difficulty in conversationimports a difficulty in making known all one swants ; in taking the necessary steps for procuringall sorts of pleasures, of warding off all sorts ofpains. Though so much of the rudiments of alanguage should be acquired as may be sufficientfor the common purposes of life, a man rarely acquiresit in such perfection as to enable him toenjoy, unembarrassed, the pleasure of conversation;he will feel himself condemned to a perpetualstate of inferiority, which must necessarily interferewith, and obstruct his engaging in any profitableemployment.To some people, banishment may be renderedin the highest degree irksome by the manners andcustoms of the people among whom the individualis cast. The words manners and customs are hereemployed in their greatest latitude, and are consideredas comprising every circumstance uponwhich a state of comfortable existence depends.The principal objects to which they refer are diet,cloathing, lodging, diversions, and everything B.II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC.pending on difference of government and religion ;which last has, among the loser classes at least,no inconsiderable influence upon the sympathiesand antipathies of persons in general.Throughout Europe, especially among personsin the higher ranks of life, a certain degree of conformityin manners and customs prevails : but aGentoo, banished from his own country, would berendered extremely wretched, especially on thescore of religion.Change of climate is another circumstance ofimportance; the change may be for the better;but the bulk of mankind, from the effects of longhabit, with difficulty accustom themselves to aclimate different from that of their native country ;the complaints of expatriated persons usually turnupon the injuries their health sustains from thiscause.With respect to all these several evils which arethus liable to arise out of the punishment of banishment,no one of them is certain to have place ;they may or may not exist ; in respect of severitythey are liable to unlimited variation, and it mayeven happen that the good may preponderate overthe evil.*In point of frugality, it seems as if these severalGallic having been exiled to the isle of Lesbos, informationwas received at Rome that he was amusing himself there, apparentlyvery much to his satisfaction ; and that what had beenimposed upon him as a punishment, had, in fact, proved to hima source of pleasure : upon this they determined to recal him tothe society of his wife and to his home, and directed him toconfine himself to his house, in order that they might inflictupon him what he should think a punishment. Essais de Montaigne,liv. i, c. 2.So far the French writer: Tacitus saysItalia exacts : et quia incusabatur facile toleraturus lilium,defects Lesbos, insula nobile et america retrahitur in arbem, cussdominus magistrates. Ann, liv. vi, c. 3.B.1I. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC. 143punishments were all of them more eligible thanimprisonment, at least than the system of imprisonmentas at present managed ; and that quasi-imprisonmentand delegation are more frugal thanbanishment.Under imprisonment, a man must at all eventsbe maintained. Simple imprisonment adds nothingto the facility which any man has of maintaininghimself by his labour. It takes from that facilityin many cases. By imprisonment some people willalways be altogether debarred from maintainingthemselves. These must be maintained at theexpense of the public. An imprisoned man, therefore,is, on an average, a burthen. His value tothe state is negative. A man at liberty is, at anaverage, a profit. His value to the state is positive; for each man, at an average, must producemore than he consumes, else there would be nocommon stock. A banished man is neither a burthennor a profit. His value to the state is 0. Itis greater, therefore, than that of an imprisonedman.The value of a man under quasi-imprisonmentand delegation, may, it should seem, be taken asequivalent or not in any assignable degree, lessthan that of a man at large. In the only instancesin which these modes of punishment occur in England,the sufferer, instead of receiving anythingfrom the public, pays.*In point of certainty, they have none of themI am speaking of the rules in the six jails in England thathave rules. The public is not at the expense of finding lodging.The houses are the property of private individuals, who get somewhatmore for them than could be got for houses in the samecondition out of the rules. Besides this advanced rent, the prisonerpays fees for the indulgence, which go towards the jailor ssalary.144 B.II. CM. VII I. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC.anything to distinguish them from other punishments.In point of equality, they are all of them deficient,*but especially the two latter, and most ofall the last.To be confined to within the circuit of a smalltown can scarcely but be a punishment in somedegree to almost all, though to some more, toothers less. To live out of one s own province, orout of one s own country, is a very severe punishmentto many ; but to many it is none at all.It is impossible to state with any accuracy thedifference in this respect between delegation andbanishment. In one point of view it should seemas if banishment were the more penal. For thedifference in point of laws, language, climate andcustoms, between one s own province and anotherprovince of one s own state, is upon an average notlikely to be so great as between one s own provinceand a foreign state. In nations, however,that have colonies, it will generally happen thatthere are provinces more dissimilar to one anotherupon the whole in those respects than some ofthose provinces may be to other provinces of neighbouringnations. How small a change, for instance,would an Englishman find in crossing from.Dover to Dunkirk, and how great a change ingoing from the first of those places to the East orWest Indies ?This inequality may be illustrated by the history of theyoung Venetian noble delegated to the Isle of Candia. Despairingof being allowed to revisit the walls of his native city,and of again embracing his friends and his aged father, he committedanother crime, unpardonable by the laws of the State,because he knew that he should be reconveyed to Venice fortrial, and to suffer death. Moore s View of Society and Mannersin Italy, torn, i, lett. xiv.B.II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC. 145In point of variability, except in respect of time,no punishment of the chronical kind can be moreineligible than these. But in point of intensity,although the degrees of suffering they are liable toproduce in different persons are so numerous, yetthey are not by any means subject to the regulationof the magistrate. It is not in his power tofix the quantity of punishment upon the whole toanything near the mark he may pitch upon in hisown mind.In point of exemplary they all yield to everyother mode of punishment, and banishment to theother two. As to banishment, what little exemplacity it possesses, it possesses upon the face of thedescription. The descriptions of orators and poetshave rendered it in some degree formidable uponpaper. On the score of execution, it is the essentialcharacter of it to have none at all. Removed outof the observation of his countrymen, his sufferings,were they ever so great, can afford no example tohis countrymen. This is the lowest degree ofinexemplarity a punishment can possess, wheneven tho person of the sufferer is out of the reachof observation. The two others are upon a footingwith pecuniary punishment : in which the personof the sufferer is under observation, and occasionallyperhaps his sufferings ; but there is no circumstanceto point out the derivation of the latter from thepunishment that produced them. They are inferiorto imprisonment : because there the main instrumentof punishment, the prison, is continuallybefore his eyes. To quasi-imprisonment anddelegation there belongs no such instrument thepunishment as we have observed, being producedin the first instance not by any material but merelyby moral means.*The little benefit that banishment, in so far as it operatesL146 13. II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC.On the score of subserviency to reformationthere seems to be a considerable difference amongthese three punishments. Quasi imprisonment isapt to be unserviceable in this view : delegationand banishment rather serviceable than otherwise,more especially the latter.1. Quasi imprisonment is apt to be disservice-able.The reasons have been already given underthe head of Imprisonment. The property whichwe mentioned as being incident to imprisonment, Imean of corrupting the morals of the prisoners bythe accumulating, if one may so say, of the peccantmatter, is incident to quasi imprisonment only in asomewhat less degree. Under the former theycan have no other company than that of each other:under the latter there may be room for some admixtureof persons of repute. Under the formerthey are forced into the company of each other :under the latter they may choose to be alone.2. Relegation is apt to be rather serviceablethan otherwise : as in solitary imprisonment, ifthe delinquent has formed any profligate connections,it separates him from them, and doesnot, like simple imprisonment, lead him to formnew ones of the same stamp. Turned adriftamong strangers he cannot expect all at once tomeet with a set of companions prepared to joinwith him in any scheme of wickedness. Shouldhe make advances and be repulsed, he exposeshimself to their honest indignation, perhaps to thecensure of the law. Should the company hehappens to fall in with be persons as profligate ashimself, it would be some time before he couldestablish himself sufficiently in their confidence.as a punishment, can be of in the way of example, is reaped byforeign states ; by that state to wit which the banished manchooses for his asylum.U.II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC. 147If he continues to make war upon mankind it mustbe with his own single strength. He may find iteasier to betake himself to charity or to honestlabour. He is separated not only from the objectswhich used to supply him with the means tocommit crimes, but from those which used to furnishhim with the motives. The company he meetswith in the new scene he enters upon will either behonest, or at least, for aught he can know to thecontrary, will for some time seem to be so. In themeantime the disapprobation he may hear themexpress for habits resembling those which subjectedhim to the punishment he is undergoing, may cooperatewith that punishment, and contribute tothe exciting in him that salutary aversion to thosehabits which is styled repentance.3. In this respect banishment is apt to be rathermore serviceable than delegation. If the delinquentbe still of that age at which new habits of life areeasily acquired, and is not insensible to the advantagesof a good reputation, his exile, if the characterin which he appears is not known, will be themore likely to contribute to his reformation, fromhis finding himself at a distance from those whowere witnesses of his infamy, and in a countryin which his endeavours to obtain an honest livelihood,will not be liable to be obstructed by findinghimself an object of general suspicion. But eventhough he were to carry with him to the place ofhis banishment his original vicious propensities, hewould not find the same facilities for giving effectto them, especially if the language of the countrywere different from his own. The laws also of theforeign country being new to him, may on thataccount strike him with greater terror than the lawsof his own country, which he had perhaps beenaccustomed to evade. And even in case of meetsB.II. CH.VIII. QUASI IMPRISONMENT, ETC.ing with success in any scheme of plunder, thewant of established connections for the disposingof it would render the benefit derivable from itextremely precarious. The consideration of allthese difficulties would tend to induce him toresort to honest labour as the only sure means ofobtaining a livelihood.But, taking all the above sources of uncertaintyinto consideration, it will be found that the casesare very few in which banishment can be resortedto as an eligible mode of punishment. In whatare called state offences it may occasionally beemployed with advantage, in order to separate thedelinquent from his connections, and to removehim from the scene of his factious intrigues. Inthis case, however, it would be well to leave himthe hope of returning as a stimulus to good conductduring his banishment.CHAPTER IX.OF SIMPLY RESTRICTIVE PUNISHMENTS.HAVING now considered the several punishmentswhich restrain the faculty of locomotion, we proceedto the consideration of those which restrainthe choice of occupations. These may be calledsimply restrictive punishments, and consist in asimple prohibition of performing certain acts.Upon this occasion we may recur to a distinctionalready explained, which exists between restraintand punishment. The Civil Code andPolice Code are full of restraints, which are notpunishments. Certain individuals are prohibitedfrom selling poison. Innkeepers are prohibitedfrom keeping their houses open after a certain hour.Persons are prohibited from exercising the professionsof medicine or of the law, without havingpassed through certain examinations.Simply restrictive punishments consist in thepreventing an individual from enjoying a commonright, or a right which he possessed before. Ifthe prohibition respects a lucrative occupation, iffor example an innkeeper or a hackney-coachman is deprived of his licence, the prohibition actsas a pecuniary punishment, in its nature very inequable and frugal. If a man is deprived ofthe means of earning his subsistence, he muststill be supported ; the punishment therefore fallsnot upon the individual alone, but upon otherswhom it was not intended to affect.Employments which are not lucrative maybeof an agreeable nature ; their variety is infi-150 B.II.CH.IX. OF SIMPLY RESTRICTIVEnite : but there is one point in which thay allagree, and which will render it unnecessary tosubmit them to a detailed discussion. There arenone of them, or at least scarcely one, which by itsdeprivation furnishes a sufficient portion of evilto enable us to rely upon its effect.As respects pleasures, the mind of man possessesa happy flexibility one source of amusementbeing cut off it endeavours to open upanother, and always succeeds ; a new habit iseasily formed ; the taste adopts itself to newhabits, and suits itself to a great variety of situations.This ductility of mind, this aptitude toaccommodate itself to circumstances as theychange, varies much in different individuals ; andit is impossible beforehand to judge, or even toguess, how long an old habit will retain its dominion,so that its privation shall continue a realpunishment.This is not the only objection Restrictive lawsare very difficult of execution : they always requirea subsidiary punishment of which the effectis uncertain. If you prohibit an individual fromgaming, drunkenness, dancing and music, it becomesnecessary to appoint an inspector for allthese things, in all places, to see that your prohibitionis observed. In a word, punishments of thiskind are subject to this dilemma : either the attachmentto the object prohibited is very weak orvery strong: if strong, the prohibition will beeluded ; if weak, the object desired will not beobtained.In respect of exemplary they are equallydefective : the privations they occasion are not ofa nature to be generally known, or if known toproduce a strong effect upon the imagination : theB.II. CU.IX. PUNISHMENTS. 151misery they produce rankles in the mind ; but iscompletely hidden from the public eye.These are some of the circumstances which havereduced the employment of these punishmentswithin so narrow a compass : they are too uncertainin their effects, and too easily eluded, to allowof their use, as the sanction to a general law. Itis true that if Judges were acquainted with thecharacters and circumstances of individuals, theymight avail themselves of them with good effect;but this knowledge can scarcely ever be expected.This species of punishment is well suited todomestic government. There is no pleasure whicha parent or teacher cannot employ as a reward,by permitting its enjoyment, or convert into asource of punishment, by restricting its use.But though restraints of this nature, that is tosay, prohibition of agreeable occupation, do notalone form effective punishments, there is one caseinwhich they may be usefully employed in additionto some other punishment analogy recommendssuch employment of them. Has an offencebeen committed at some public exhibition, it maybewell to prohibit the delinquent from attendingsuch public exhibitions for a time.Among simply restrictive punishments, there isone of which a few examples are found, and whichhas not received a name : I have called it banishmentfrom the presence. It consists in an obligationimposed upon the offender immediately to leavethe place in which he meets with the offendedparty. The simple presence of the one is a signalfor the departure of the other. If Filius, the partyinjured, enters a ball or concert room, a publicassembly or public walk Titus is bound instantly152 B.II. CH.IX. OF SIMPLY RESTRICTIVEto leave the same. This punishment appearsadmirably well suited for cases of personal insult,attacks upon honour, and calumnies, in a word inall crimes which render the presence of the offenderparticularly disagreeable and mortifying to theparty offended.In the employment of this punishment care mustbe taken that power be not given to the party injuredto banish the offender from places in whichhe is carrying on his habitual operations, or wherehis presence may be necessary for the discharge ofany particular duty. Hence it will, in many cases,be found indispensable to make exceptions inrespect of churches, courts of justice, markets,and political assemblies.Instances in which this mode of punishment hasbeen employed may be found in the decrees of theFrench Parliaments. It will be sufficient to mentionone instance. A man of the name of Aujayhaving insulted a lady of rank in the most grossmanner, among other punishments, he was ordered,under pain of corporal punishment, to retire immediatelyfrom every place at which this lady mighthappen to be present.*In the Intrigues of the Cabinet may be seenthe account of a quarrel between Madame deMontbazon and the Princess de Conte, in thecourse of which the former was guilty of very grossinsults towards the Princess. The Queen, Annof Austria, ordered that Madame Montbazonshould retire from every place at which the Princesswas present. fUnder the English law there are various instancesin which, though not under the name ofCauses Celebres, torn. iv. p. 307. t Anquetil, torn. iii.fi.Il.CH.IX. PUNISHMENTS. 153punishment, restrictions are imposed upon certainclasses of persons. Catholics were formerly notallowed to exercise either the profession of the lawor that of medicine. Persons refusing to takethe sacrament according to the rites of the Churchof England were excluded from all public offices.Such was the law : the practice was alwaysotherwise : in point of fact, a very large proportionof offices, civil and military, were filled bypersons who had never taken the oaths required,but who were protected from the penalties towhich they would otherwise have been subjectedby an annual bill of indemnity. In point of right,the security thus afforded was a precarious one,but the uninterrupted practice of nearly a centuryleft little room for apprehension on the part of thepersons interested.The restrictions here in question were not designedto operate as punishments ; they were originallyimposed with a view of avoiding the dangerwhich, it was apprehended, might be incurred byvesting in the hands of persons of certain religiouspersuasions, situations of public trust. This, atleast, was the avowed political reason : the truecause of the exclusion was however religious animosity: they were acts of antipathy.But these were not the only motives : self-interesthad its share in producing the exclusion.Exclude one set of persons, and you confer abenefit on another set : those to whom the right isreserved have to contend with a smaller numberof competitors, and their prospect of gain is increased: these restrictive laws, originating in religioushatred, were afterwards maintained by injustice; the persecution began by misguided bigotry,was persisted in long after the original inducementhad been forgotten, from the most sordid injus-154 B.II. CH.IX. OF SIMPLY RESTRICTIVE, ETC.time. This is the short history of the persecutionsin Ireland. For the benefit of the Protestants,the restrictive laws against the Catholics werekept in force : out of eight millions of inhabitants,a selection was made of one million, on whom wereconferred all offices of power or of profit. In thisstate of things, whilst privileges are, by the continuanceof the persecuting laws, placed in thehands of the persecutors, the procuring their abolitionmay be expected to be attended with nosmall difficulty. The true motive the sordidone will long be concealed under the mask ofreligion.Though it may be said that these restrictionsare not designed to operate as punishments, andthat, in the making of this general law, no particularindividual was aimed at, yet there resultsfrom it a distinction injurious to the particularclass of persons affected by it necessarily injurious,since the continuance of the law can be justifiedonly by supposing them to be dangerous anddisloyal. Such laws form a nucleus around whichpublic prejudice collects ; and the legislator, byacquiescing in these transient jealousies, strengthensthem, and renders them permanent. Theyare the remnants of a disease which has been universal,and which, after its cure, has left behind itdeep and lasting scars.CHAPTER X.OF ACTIVE OR LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT.ACTIVE punishment is that which is inflictedon a man by obliging, or to use another word,compelling him to act in this or that particularway, to exert this or that particular species ofaction.There are two kinds of means by which a manmay be compelled to act, physical and moral ; thefirst applies itself to his body, the other to hismind, to his faculty of volition.The actions which a man may be compelled toperform by physical means are so few, and sounprofitable, both to the patient and to others, asnot to be worth taking into the account.When the instrument is of the moral kind, it isby acting on the volition that it produces its effect.The only instrument that is of a nature to act immediatelyupon the volition, is an idea ; but notevery idea ; only an idea of pleasure or of pain, asabout to ensue from the performance or non performanceof the act which is the object of thevolition.It cannot be an idea of pleasure which can soact upon the volition as to give birth to an act theperformance of which shall be a punishment ; itmust therefore be an idea of pain, of any pain,no matter what, so it be to appearance greater thanthe pleasure of abstaining from the performance ofthe penal act.It is manifest, therefore, that when a punishmentof the laborious kind is appointed, another punishesB.II. CH.X. OF ACTIVE ORment must necessarily be appointed along with it.There are, therefore, in every such case,two differentpunishments at least necessarily concerned. One,which is the only one directly and originally intended,the laborious punishment itself; whichmay be styled the principal or proper punishment :the other, in case of the former not being submittedto, is called in to its assistance, and may bestyled the subsidiary punishment.This subsidiary punishment may be of any kindthat, in point of quantity, is great enough. Itought not, however, to be likewise of the laboriouskind ; since in that case, as well as in the case ofthe principal punishment, the will of the patient isnecessary to constitute the punishment ; and todetermine the will, some incident is necessary thatdoes not depend upon the will. It will be necessary,therefore, to employ such punishments as arepurely passive, or those restrictive punishments inwhich the instrument is purely physical.In regard to this class of punishments, one thingis here to be noted with reference to the instrument.In punishments of this kind, there is a linkor two interposed between the instrument and thepain produced by means of it. The instrumentfirst produces the volition, that volition produces acorrespondent external act : and it is that actwhich is the immediate cause by which the painhere in question is produced. This punishmentthen, we see, has this remarkable circumstance todistinguish it from other punishments, it is producedimmediately by the patients own act : it is thepatient who, to avoid a greater punishment, inflictsit on himself.What then is the sort of act that is calculatedto produce pain in the case of active punishment?It admits not of any description more particularB.II.CH.X. LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT. 15?than this : that it is any act whatever that a manhas a mind not to do ; or in other words that onany account whatever is disagreeable to him.An occupation is a series of acts of the samekind, or tending to the same end. An occupationmay be disagreeable on a positive or a negativeaccount ; as being productive, in a manner more orless immediate, of some positive pain, or as debarringfrom the exercise of some more agreeableoccupation.Considered in itself, an occupation may be eitherpainful, pleasurable, or indifferent; but continuedbeyond a certain time, and without interruption(such is the constitution of man s nature,) everyoccupation whatsoever becomes disagreeable: notonly so, but such as were in the beginning pleasurablebecome, by their continuance, more disagreeablethan such as were originally indifferent.*To make the sum of his occupations pleasurable,every man must therefore be at liberty to changefrom one to another, according to his taste. Henceit is that any occupation which, for a certain proportionof his time, a man is compelled to exercise,without the liberty of changing to another, becomesdisagreeable, and in short becomes a punishment.Active punishments are as various as the occupationsin which, for the various purposes of life,men can have occasion to be employed. Thesebeing usually inflicted on all offenders indiscriminately,have been such as all offenders indiscriminatelyhave been physically qualified to undergo.To eat grapes, for instance, is what, at certain times at least,will probably be to most men rather an agreeable occupation :to pick them an indifferent one. But in two or three hours, forexample, the eating them will become intolerable, while thepicking them may still remain, perhaps, in itself nearly a matterof indifference .158 B.II. CH.X. OF ACTIVE ORThey have consisted commonly in various exertionsof muscular force, in which there has been little or nodexterity required in the manner of its application.In general, they have been such as to produce aprofit : a collateral benefit in addition to thatexpected from the punishment as such.Among the modes of penal labour, a very commonone has been that of rowing. This is anexercise performed chiefly by main strength, withvery little mixture of skill, and that presentlyattained. Some vessels, of a bulk large enough tobear any sea, have been made so as to be put inmotion in this manner, even without the help ofsails. This occupation is more unpleasant in itselfthan that of an ordinary seamen, as having lessvariety, besides that the rowers are confined bychains. Such vessels are called gallies, and therowers gally-slaves. This punishment, thoughunknown in England, is in use in most of the maritimestates of Europe, and particularly in theMediterranean and Adriatic Seas.In many countries, malefactors have been employedin various public works, as in the cleansingof harbours* and the streets of towns, in makingroads, building and repairing fortifications, andworking in mines.Working in the mines is a punishment employedin Russia and in Hungary. In Hungary the minesare of quicksilver, and the unwholesome effectsof that metal, upon a person who is exposed to theeffluvia of it for a length of time, may be one reasonfor employing criminals in that work, in preferenceto other persons.The employment of malefactors for the cleaning of harbourswas, for the first time, introduced into this country in the year1776, by stat. 16 Geo. III. c. 43.B.II. CI1.X. LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT. 159Beating hemp is the most common employmentwhich delinquents are put to in our workhouses.Persons of both sexes being subjected to it, withoutdistinction.From the nature of the service, active punishmentsmay be distinguished into two sorts, specificand indiscriminate. I call it specific, when itconsists in the being obliged to do such and sucha particular kind or kinds of work : indiscriminate,when it consists in the being obliged to do not anykind of work in particular, but every kind of workin general, which it shall please such or such aperson to prescribe. If such person take all theprofit of the work, he is called a master. If theprofit is received by some other person, he iscalled a keeper, or overseer. There are cases ofa mixed nature, in which, in certain respects, theservitude is indiscriminate, as to other respects,specific.At Warsaw, before the partition of Poland, therewas a public workhouse, in which convicts wereconfined in ordinary to particular employmentsdetermined by the laws or custom of the place.To this workhouse, however, any person whothought proper might apply, and upon givingsecurity for their forthcomingness, and paying acertain stipulated price for their use, a certainnumber of the convicts were allotted to him, to beemployed in any piece of work for a given time.The services they were employed upon weregenerally of a rough kind, such as digging a ditch,or paving a court ; and a soldier, or a party ofsoldiers, according to the number of convicts thusemployed, was placed over them as a guard.This custom was also in use in Russia.*See the Abbe Chappe s travels in that country. The Abbe160 B. II.CH.X. OF ACTIVE ORThis distinction between specific and indiscriminateservitude, may be illustrated by two examples,derived from the English law.The example of specific punishment is affordedby the statute which directs the employment ofcertain malefactors on board the hulks, in improvingthe navigation of the Thames. The statutedetermines the kind of labour, and the subsidiarypunishments by which it is to be enforced.Indiscriminate servitude is part of the punishmentinflicted by our laws under the name oftransportation. This servitude is sometimes limitedas to its duration, but is without limitation, andwithout restriction, in respect of the services whichmay be required.All these kinds of labour, whether indiscriminateor specific, require as a necessary accompanimentthat the individual should be upon that spot wherethe business is to be done. Some import imprisonment; all of them import restraint upon occupations,to wit, upon all occupations incompatiblewith those in which they constrain a man to employhimself. The degree of this restraint is in amanner indefinite. To lay a man, therefore, undera particular constraint of any kind, is for that timeto lay him under an almost universal restraint.The clear value then of the pleasure which a manloses by being compelled to any particular occupation,is equal to that of the greatest of all thepleasures which, had it not been for the compulsion,he might have procured for himself.had particular reason to remember it. Wanting, for the purposeof some experiment, to have the earth dug, he was complimentedwith the use of a dozen of these poor prisoners. Havinggiven them some money to purchase liquor, they employed it inmaking their guard drunk, and then took to flight. Vol. I,page 149.B.II.CH.X. LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT. 1C IUpon examining laborious punishment, weshall find it to possess the properties to be wishedfor in a mode of punishment, in greater perfection,upon the whole, than any other singlepunishment.1 . It is convertible to profit. Labour is in factthe very source of profit. Not that, after all, itspower in this way is so extensive as that ofpecuniary punishment. For, from the punishmentof one man in this way, all the profit that isto be reaped is that which is producible by thelabour of one man; a limited and never veryample quantity. On the other hand, from thepunishment of a man in the pecuniary way, itmay happen that a profit shall be reaped equalto the labour of many hundred men. The difference,however, in favour of this punishment is,that money is a casual fund ; labour one thatcannot fail. Indeed, upon the whole, thoughpecuniary punishment be in particular instancescapable of being more profitable, yet, consideringhow large a proportion of mankind, especially ofthose most liable to commit the most frequentand troublesome kinds of crimes, have no otherpossession worth estimating than their labour :laborious punishment, if managed as it might andought to be, may perhaps be deemed the mostprofitable upon the whole.2. In point of frugality to the state, laboriouspunishment, considered by itself, is as little liableto objection as any other can be. I say, consideredby itself: for, when coupled with imprisonment,as it can hardly but be in the case ofpublic servitude, it is attended with those expensesto the public which have been noticed under thearticle of imprisonment. These, however, are notto be charged to the account of the laborious part162 B.II. CH.X. OF ACTIVE ORof the punishment : so that the advantage whichlaborious punishment has on this score over simpleimprisonment is quite a clear one. But theformer of these two punishments, though separablefrom the latter in idea, is not separable inpractice. Imprisonment may be made to subsistwithout labour : but forced labour cannot be madeto subsist without imprisonment. The advantagethen which servitude has in this respect, when comparedwith imprisonment, ceases when comparedwith any other mode of punishment. However,the profit gained by the one part is enough, undergood management, to do more than balance theexpense occasioned by the other. So that uponthe whole it has the advantage, in point ofeconomy, over any other mode of punishment butpecuniary.3. It seems to stand equally clear of objection inpoint of equability. As to the restraint it involves, itaccommodates itself of itself to each man s circumstances.For, with respect to each man, it hasthe effect of restraining him from following thoseoccupations, whatever they may be, which are tohim most pleasurable. The positive servitudeitself will be apt to sit heavier on one man thananother. A man who has not been used to anykind of labour will suffer a good deal more, forsome time at least, than one who has been usedto labour, though of a different kind or degreefrom that in question. But this inconveniencemay be pretty well obviated by a proper attentionto the circumstances of individuals.4. In point of variability, though it is not perfectthroughout, yet it is perfect as far as it goes.In a very low degree it is not capable of subsisting; on account of the infamy it involves, at leastin a country governed by European manners. One ofB. II. CII.X. LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT.the most odious acts of the reign of the Emperor,Joseph II, was the sentencing persons of high rankto labour in the public works. The Protestantsof France considered the condemnation of theirreligious ministers to the galleys as a personalinsult done to themselves : in this respect then itfalls short of pecuniary punishment. After thatexception it is capable of being varied to the utmostnicety : being variable as well in respect ofintensity, as of duration.5. In point of exemplary it has no peculiaradvantage; neither is it subject to any disadvantage.Symbols of suffering it has none belongingto itself : for the circumstance which distinguishespenal servitude from voluntary labour is but aninternal circumstance the idea of compulsionoperating on the patient s mind. The symbols,however, that belong necessarily to the punishmentit is naturally combined with, I mean imprisonment,apply to it of course ; and the meansof characterising the condition of the patient bysome peculiarity of dress are so obvious, thatthese may be looked upon as symbols naturallyconnected with it.6. In point of subserviency to reformation it issuperior to any other punishment, except thatmode of imprisonment which we have alreadyinsisted on as being peculiarly adapted to thispurpose.* Next to the keeping of malefactorsasunder, is the finding them employment whilethey are together. The work they are engagedin confines their attention in some measure : thebusiness of the present moment is enough tooccupy their thoughts ; they are not stimulatedby the impulse of ennui to look out for thoseSupra, p. 114.164 fi.II. CH.X. OF ACTIVE ORtopics of discourse which tend, in the manner thathas been already explained, to fructify the seedsof corruption in their minds : they are not obliged,in search of aliment for speculation, to send backtheir memory into the field of past adventures, orto set their invention in quest of future projects.This kind of discipline does not indeed, like theother, pluck up corruption by the roots : it tendshowever to check the growth of it, and render thepropensity to it less powerful. Another circumstance,relative to the nature of this discipline,contributes to check the progress of corruption :to insure the performance of their tasks it isnecessary that the workmen should be under theeye of overseers. The presence of these willnaturally be a check to them, and restrain themfrom engaging in any criminal topics of discourse.So much for the tendency which this punishmenthas to keep men from growing worse. Ithas besides this a positive tendency to make thembetter. And this tendency is more obvious andless liable to accident than the other. There is atendency, as has been already observed, in man snature to reconcile and accommodate itself toevery condition in which it happens to be placed.Such is the force of habit. Few occupations are soirksome that habit will not in time make them sittolerably easy. If labour then, even thoughforced, will in time lose much of its hardship, howmuch easier will it become when the duration andthe mode are in some measure regulated by thewill of the labourer himself; when the bitter ideasof infamy and compulsion are removed, and theidea of gain is brought in to sweeten the employment?in a word, when the labourer is left towork at liberty and by choice ?7. This mode of punishment is not altogetherB.II. CH.X. LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT. 165destitute of analogy, at least of the verbal kind, tothat class of crimes which are the most frequent,and for which an efficacious punishment is mostwanted : crimes, I mean, that result from a principleof rapacity or of sloth. The slothful man is constrainedto work. The vagabond is confined to aparticular spot. The more opposite the restraintthus imposed is to the natural inclination of thepatient, the more effectually will he be deterredfrom indulging his vicious propensities by the prospectof the punishment that awaits him.8. With regard to the popularity of this speciesof punishment in this country, the prejudices of thepeople are not quite so favourable to it as couldbe wished. Impatient spirits too easily kindledwith the fire of independence have a word for it,which presents an idea singularly obnoxious to apeople who pride themselves so much upon theirfreedom. This word is slavery. Slavery theysay is a punishment too degrading for an Englishman,even in ruins. This prejudice may be confutedby observing, 1st, That public servitude isa different thing from slavery. 2dly, That if itwere not, this would be no reason for dismissingthis species of punishment without examination.If then upon examination it is found not to be possessed,in a requisite degree, of the properties tobe wished for in a mode of punishment that, andnot the name it happens to be called by, is a reasonfor its rejection : if it does possess them, it is notany name that can be given to it that can changeits nature. But these observations have beenmore fully insisted on in the Chapter on Popularity.Having thus spoken of this species of punishmentin general, let us stop a moment to considerthe different kinds of labour which ought to bepreferred.16G B.I I. CH.X. OF ACTIVE ORThe principal distinction is that of public andprivate labour.In public works, the infamy of their publicitytends to render the individuals more depravedthan the habit of working tends to reform them.At Berne there are two classes of fixed labourers,the one employed in cleaning the streets, and inother public works ; the others employed in the interiorof the prison. The latter, when set atliberty, rarely fall again into the hands of justice;the former are no sooner set at liberty than theyare guilty of new crimes. This difference is accountedfor at Berne by the indifference to shamethey contract in a service, the infamy of whichis renewed day by day. It is probable that afterthe notoriety of this disgrace, nobody in the countrywould like to hold communication with or toemploy them.The rough and painful kinds of labour whichare ordinarily selected for this kind of punishmentdo not generally seem suitable. It is difficultto measure the powers of individuals, or todistinguish real from simulated weakness. Subsidiarypunishments must be proportioned to thedifficulty of the labour and to the indisposition toperform it. The authority with which an inspectormust be armed is liable to great abuses ; torely upon his pity, or even upon his justice, in anemployment which hardens the heart, betrays anignorance of human nature ; so soon as it becomesnecessary to inflict corporal punishment, the individualwho is charged with its execution will becomedegraded in his own opinion, and he willrevenge himself by the abuse of his authority.Nam nil asperity hnmili (jni surgit in altum.*Clan oran.B.1I. CH.X. LABORIOUS PUNISHMENT. 167Labours which require great efforts ought to beperformed by free labourers. The labour obtainedby the force of fear is never equal to that which isobtained by the hope of reward. Constrainedlabour is always inferior to voluntary labour ; notonly because the slave is interested in concealinghis powers, but also because he wants that energyof soul upon which muscular strength so muchdepends. It would be a curious calculation toestimate how much is lost from this cause in thosestates where the greater portion of labour is performedby slaves. It would tend greatly to provethat their gradual emancipation would be a nobleand beneficial measure.Labour in mines, except in particular circumstances,is little suitable for malefactors, partlyfor the reason above given, and partly from thedanger of degrading this occupation. The ideasof crime and shame will soon be associated withit ; miner and criminal would soon become synonymous; this would not be productive of inconvenienceif the number of malefactors were sufficientfor working the mines, but if the contrary isthe case, there might be a lack of workmen, fromthe aversion inspired towards this kind of labour inthose who used to exercise it voluntarily, or whoare at liberty to choose respecting it.CHAPTER XI.CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.CAPITAL punishment may be distinguished into1st, simple; 2nd, afflictive.I call it simple when, if any bodily pain be produced,no greater degree of it is produced thanwhat is necessary to produce death.I call it afflictive, when any degree of pain isproduced more than what is necessary for thatpurpose.It will not be necessary, upon the present occasion,to attempt to give an exhaustive view of allthe possible modes by which death might be producedwithout occasioning any, or the least possiblequantity of collateral suffering. The taskwould be almost an endless one : and whenaccomplished, the only use to which it could beapplied would be that of affording an opportunityof selecting out of the catalogue the mode thatseemed to possess the desired property in thegreatest perfection, which may readily be donewithout any such process.The mode in use in England is far from beingthe best that could be devised. In strangulationby suspension, the weight of the body alone isseldom sufficient to produce an immediate andentire obstruction of respiration. The patient,when left to himself, struggles for some time:hence it is not uncommon for the executioner, inorder to shorten his sufferings, to add his ownweight to that of the criminal. Strangling bythe bowstring may to some, perhaps, appear aB.II. CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. 1G9severer mode of execution ; partly from the prejudiceagainst every usage of despotic governments,partly by the greater activity exerted byexecutioners in this case than in the other. Thefact however is, that it is much less painful thanthe other, for it is certainly much more expeditious.By this means the force is applied directlyin the direction which it must take to effect theobstruction required : in the other case, the forceis applied only obliquely ; because the force oftwo men pulling in that manner is greater thanthe weight of one man.It is not long, however, even in hanging, beforea stop is put to sense ; as is well enough knownfrom the accounts of many persons who have survivedthe operation. This probably is the case agood while before the convulsive struggling areat an end ; so that in appearance the patientsuffers more than he does in reality.With respect to beheading, there are reasons forsupposing that the stop put to sensation is notimmediate : a portion of sensibility may still bekept up in the spinal marrow a considerable timeafter it is separated from the brain. It is so, atleast, according to all appearance, for differentlengths of time in different animals and insects,which continue to move after their heads are separatedfrom their bodies.SECT. II. AFFLICTIVE CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.To exhaust this part of the subject it would benecessary to make a catalogue of every variouspunishments this description of which, in practice,there has been any example, adding to them suchothers as the imagination could be made to supply ;but, the ungrateful task performed, of what use170 B.II. CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.would it be ? We shall the more willingly refrainfrom any such labour as in the more modern Europeancodes these punishments have been altogetherdiscarded ; and in those in which they have notbeen formally abolished, they have long fallen intodesuetude. Let us rejoice in these improvements :there are few opportunities in which the philosophercan offer to the governors of the world morejust or more honourable congratulations. Theimportance of the subject, however, will not admitof its being passed over in perfect silence. Thesystem of jurisprudence in question has been toolong established, it has had too many apologists,and has had for its supporters too many great names,to allow of its being altogether omitted in a workexpressly treating on the subject of punishment.It may besides be of use to shew that reason concurswith humanity in the condemning punishmentsof this description, not merely as being useless,but as producing effects contrary to the intentionof the legislator.If the particular nature of the several species ofpunishments of this description be examined, aswell those that have for a long time past been abolished,such as crucifixion and exposure to wildbeasts, as those that have been in use in variousparts of modern Europe, such as burning, impaling,tearing to pieces, and breaking on the wheel, it willbe found in all of them that the most afflictive partconsists in their duration: but this circumstanceis not of a nature to produce the beneficial effectthat may have been expected from it.When any particular species of punishment isdenounced, that part of it which takes the strongesthold of the imagination is its intensity : its durationmakes a much more feeble impression. A slightapparent addition of organical suffering made toB.1I.CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. 171the ordinary mode of inflicting the punishment ofdeath, produces a strong effect upon the mind : theidea of the duration of its pains is almost whollyabsorbed by the terrors of the principal part of thepunishment.In the legal description of a punishment, itsduration is seldom (distinctly) brought to view ;it is not mentioned, because in itself it is naturallyuncertain : it depends partly upon the physicalstrength of the patient, and partly upon variousother accidental circumstances. To this remarkableand important feature of this species of punishmentthere is no means by which the attentioncan be drawn and fixed upon it : upon those whoreflect, it produces no impression; upon those whodo not reflect, it is altogether lost.It is true that the duration of any particularpunishment might be fixed by law ; the numberof hours or minutes might be determined, whichshould be employed in performing the several prescribedmanipulations. This obviously would beamode of fixing the attention upon this particularfeature of the punishment : but even this mode,perfect as it may appear to be, would be foundvery inadequate to produce the desired effect.By the help of pictures, the intensity of any particularspecies of punishment may be more or lessfaithfully represented ; but to represent its durationis impossible. The flames, the rack and allthe engines of torture, together with the convulsivethroes of the half-expiring and wretched sufferer,may be depicted, but time cannot. Apunishment that is to be made to last for twohours will not appear different from a punishmentthat is to last only a quarter of an hour. Thedeficiencies of art may, to a certain degree, be com-172 B.II.CH.XT. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.penates for by the imagination : but even thenthe reality will be left far behind.It is true that upon bystanders the duration ofthe punishment is calculated to make a strongimpression : but even upon them, after a certaintime, the prolongation loses its effect, and givesplace to a feeling directly opposite to that whichit is desirable to produce sentiments of pity andsympathy for the sufferer will succeed, the heartof the spectator will revolt at the scene he witnesses,and the cry of suffering humanity will beheard. The physical suffering will not be confinedto the offender : the spectators will partake of it :the most melancholy accidents, swooning, anddangerous convulsions will be the accompanimentsof these tragic exhibitions. These sanguinary executions,and the terrific accounts that are spreadconcerning them, are the real causes of that deep-rootedantipathy that is felt against the laws andthose by whom they are administered ; an antipathywhich tends to multiply offences by favouring theimpunity of the guilty.The only reason that can be given by anygovernment, that persists in continuing to employamode of punishing so highly penal, is, that thehabitual condition of the people is so wretched thatthey are incapable of being restrained by a morelenient kind of punishment.Will it be said that crimes are more frequent incountries in which punishments such as those inquestion are unknown. The contrary is the fact.It is under such laws that the most ferocious robbersare found : and this is readily accounted for.The fate with which they are threatened hardensthem to the feelings of others as well as their own.They are converted into the most bitter enemies,B.II.CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. 173and every barbarity they inflict is considered as asort of reprisal.Upon this subject, as upon so many others,Montaigne was far beyond the age in which helived. All beyond simple death (he says) appearsto me to be cruelty. The legislator ought not toexpect that the offender that is not to be deterredby the apprehension of death, and by being beheadedand hanged, will be more effectually deterredby the dread of being exposed to a slowfire, or the rack. And I do not know indeed butthat he may be rendered desperate.*By the French Constituent Assembly afflictivepunishments were abolished. In the Code Napoleon,beheading is the mode prescribed for inflicting thepunishment of death. And it is only in the caseof parricide, and of attempts made upon the life ofthe sovereign, that to the simple punishment ofdeath the characteristic afflictive punishment ofcutting off the head of the offender is added.In this country, the only crime for which afflictivepunishment is in use, is that of high treason.The judgment in high treason consists of sevendifferent operations of the afflictive kind. 1.Dragging at a horse s tail along the streets fromthe prison to the place of execution. 2. Hangingby the neck, yet not so as entirely to destroy life.3. Plucking out and burning of the entrails whilethe patient is yet alive. 4. Beheading. 5.Quartering. 6. Exposure of the head and quartersin such places as the King directs. This mode ofpunishment is not now in use. In favour of nobility,the judgment has been usually changed intoLiv. ii. ch. 27. Cowardice the mother of cruelty.Et lupus et turpes instant orientalis uriEt quicunque minor debilitate fera est.OVID.174 B.II. CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.beheading : in favour of the lower classes, intohanging.I wish that upon this part of our subject wecould end here ; but unfortunately there remainsto be mentioned an afflictive mode of punishmentmost excruciating, and more hideous than any ofwhich we have hitherto spoken, and which is stillin use. It is not in Europe that it is employed,but in European colonies in our own West IndiaIslands.The delinquent is suspended from a post bymeans of a hook inserted under his shoulder, orunder his breast bone. In this manner the suffereris prevented from doing anything to assist himself,and all persons are prohibited, under severe penalties,from relieving him. He remains in this situation,exposed to the scorching heat of the day,where the sun is almost vertical, and the atmospherealmost without a cloud, and to the chillingdews of the night ; his lacerated flesh attracts amultitude of insects, which increase his torments,and under the fever produced by these complicatedsufferings, joined to hunger and thirst, all ragingin the most intense degree, till he graduallyexpires.When we reflect on this complication of sufferings,their intensity surpasses everything that theimagination can figure to itself, and consider thattheir duration continues not merely for manyhours, but for many days, it will be found to beby far the most severe punishment ever yet devisedby the ingenuity of man.The persons to whom this punishment has beenhitherto appropriated, are negro slaves, and theircrime, what is termed rebellion, because they arethe weakest, but which, if they were the strongest,would be called an act of self-defence. TheB.II. CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. 175constitutions of these people are, to their misfortune,in certain respects so much harder thanours, that many of them are said to have lingeredten or twelve days under these frightful torments.It is said that this punishment is nothing morethan is necessary for restraining that people, andkeeping them in their servile state ; for that thegeneral tenor of their lives is such a scene ofmisery, that simple death would be generally arelief, and a death less excruciating would scarceoperate as a restraint.This may perhaps be true. It is certain that apunishment to have any effect upon man mustbear a certain ratio to the mean state of his wayof living, in respect of sufferings and enjoyments.But one cannot well help observing where thisleads. The number of slaves in these colonies isto that of freemen as about six to one ; theremay be about three hundred thousand blacks andfifty thousand whites; here there are three hundredthousand persons kept in a way of life thatupon the whole appears to them worse than death,and this for the sake of keeping fifty thousandpersons in a way of life not remarkably morehappy than that which, upon an average, the samenumber of persons would be in where there wasno slavery ; on the contrary, it is found that meningeneral are fond, when they have the opportunity,of changing that scene for this. On the otherhand, it is not to be disputed that sugar andcoffee, and other delicacies, which are the growthof those islands, add considerably to the enjoymentsof the people here in Europe ; but takingall these circumstances into consideration, if theyare only to be obtained by keeping three hundredthousand men in a state in which they cannot bekept but by the terror of such executions : are170 B.II.CH.XI. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.there any considerations of luxury or enjoymentthat can counterbalance such evils.At the same time, what admits of very littledoubt is, that the defenders of these punishments,in order to justify them, exaggerate the miseriesof slavery, and the little value set by the slavesupon life. If they were really reduced to such astate of misery as to render necessary laws soatrocious, even such laws would be insufficient fortheir restraint ; having nothing to lose, they wouldbe regardless of all consequences ; they would beengaged in perpetual insurrections and massacres.The state of desperation to which they would bereduced would daily produce the most frightfuldisorders. But if existence is not to them a matterof indifference, the only pretence that there isin favour of these laws falls to the ground. Letthe colonists reflect upon this ; if such a code benecessary, the colonies are a disgrace and an outrageon humanity : if not necessary, these lawsare a disgrace to the colonists themselves.CHAPTER XII.CAPITAL PUNISHMENT EXAMINED.IN making this examination, the following plan willbe pursued. The advantageous properties ofcapital punishment will in the first place be considered: we shall afterwards proceed to examineits disadvantageous properties.We shall, in the last place, consider the collateralill effects resulting from this mode of punishment:effects more remote and less obvious, but sometimesmore important, than those which are moreimmediate and striking.The task thus undertaken would be an extremelyungrateful and barren one, were it notthat the course of the examination will lead us tomake a comparison between this and other modesof punishment, and thus to ascertain which isentitled to the preference. On the subject ofpunishment, the same rule ought in this respectto be observed as on the subject of taxes. Tocomplain of any particular tax as being an injudiciousone, is to sow the seeds of discontentednothing more : to be really useful, this in itselfmischievous discovery, should be accompanied bythe indication of another tax which vvill proveequally productive, with less inconvenience.SECT. I. ADVANTAGEOUS PROPERTIES OF THEPUNISHMENT OF DEATH.1. The most remarkable feature in the punishmentof death, and that which it possesses in the178 B.II. CH. XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTgreatest perfection, is the taking from the offenderthe power of doing further injury. Whatever isapprehended, either from the force or cunning ofthe criminal, at once vanishes away. Society isin a prompt and complete manner delivered fromall alarm.2. It is analogous to the offence in the case otmurder; but there its analogy terminates.3. It is popular in respect of that same crime,and in that alone.4. It is exemplary in a higher degree perhapsthan any other species of punishment, and in countriesin which it is sparingly employed, an executionmakes a deep and lasting impression.It was the opinion of Eeccaria that the impressionmade by any particular punishment was inproportion to its duration, and not to its intensity.<< Our sensibility" (he observes) " is more readilyand permanently affected by slight but reiteratedattacks than by a violent but transient affectionFor this reason the putting an offender to deathforms a less effectual check to the commission otcrimes than the spectacle of a man kept in a stateof confinement, and employed in hard labour, to makesome reparation by his exertions for the injury hehas inflicted on society"*Notwithstanding such respectable authority, 1am apt to think the contrary is the case. Thisopinion is founded principally on two observations.Death in general is regarded by most men asthe greatest of all evils, and they are willing tosubmit to any other suffering whatever in order toavoid it. 2. Death, considered as a punishment, isalmost universally reckoned too severe, and menplead, as a measure of mercy, for the substitution olDCS Delits et des Peines. Sect. xvi.B.II. CII.XII. EXAMINED. 179any other punishment in lieu of it. In respect toduration, the suffering is next to nothing. It musttherefore, 1 think, be some confused and exao-o- erated notion of the intensity of the pain of death,especially of a violent death, that renders the ideaof it so formidable. It is not without reason, however,that with respect to the higher class of offenders,M. Beccaria considers a punishment of thelaborious kind, moderate we must suppose in itsdegree, will make a stronger impression than themost excruciating kind of death that can be devised.But for the generality of men, among thosewho are attached to life by the ties of reputation,affection, enjoyment, hope, capital punishmentappears to be more exemplary than any other.5. Though the apparent suffering in the punishmentof death is at the highest pitch, the real sufferingis perhaps less than in the larger portion ofafflictive punishment. In addition to their durationthey leave after them a train of evils which injurethe constitution of the patient, and render theremainder of his life a complication of sufferings.In the punishment of death the suffering is momentary: it is a negation of all sensation.When the last moment only is considered, penaldeath is often more gentle than natural death, and,so far from being an evil, presents a balance ofThe suffering endured must be sought forin some anterior period. The suffering consists inapprehension. This apprehension commences fromthe moment the delinquent has committed thecrime ; it is redoubled when he is apprehended.It increases at every stage of the process whichrenders his condemnation more certain, and is atits height in the interval between sentence andexecution.The more solid argument in favour of the pussB.II. CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTpunishment of death, results from the combined forceof the above considerations. On the one hand, it isto men in general of all punishment of the greatestapparent magnitude, the most impressive and themost exemplary; and on the other hand, to thewretched class of beings that furnish the mostatrocious criminals, it is less rigorous thanitappearsto be. It puts a speedy termination to an uneasy,unhappy, dishonoured existence, stript of all trueworth : Heu ! Heu ! quatn male, est extra legemlicentious.*SECT II. DESIRABLE PENAL QUALITIES WHICHARE WANTING IN CAPITAL PUNISHMENT1 . The punishment of death is not convertible toprofit : it cannot be applied to the purpose of compensation.In so far as compensation might bederived from the labour of the delinquent, the verysource of the compensation is destroyed.2. In point of frugality, it is pre-eminently defective.So far from being convertible to profit,to the community it produces a certain loss, bothin point of wealth and strength. In point ofwealth, a man chosen at random is worth to thepublic that portion of the whole annual income ofthe state which results from its division by thenumber of persons of which it consists. Thesame mode of calculation will determine the lossin respect of strength. But the value of a manwho has been proved guilty of some one or otherof those crimes for which capital punishment isdenounced, is not equal to that of a man taken atrandom. Of those by whom a punishment ofthis sort is incurred, nine out of ten have divestedPatron Satyr.B.II.CH.XII. EXAMINED. 181themselves of all habits of regular industry ; theyare the drones of the hive : and with respect tothem, death is therefore not an ineligible mode ofpunishment, except in comparison with confinementand hard labour, by which there is a chanceof their being reformed and rendered of some useto society.2. Equability is another point, and that a mostimportant one, in which this punishment is eminentlydeficient. To a person taken at random,it is upon an average a very heavy punishment,though still subject to considerable variation. Butto a person taken out of the class of first-ratedelinquents, it is liable to still greater variation.To some it is as great as to a person taken at random; but to many it is next to nothing.Death is the absence of all pleasures indeed,but at the same time of all pains. When a personfeels himself under temptation to commit a crimepunishable with death, his determination to commitit or not to commit it is the result of the followingcalculation. He ranges on one side theclear portion of happiness he thinks himself likelyto enjoy in case of his abstaining : on the other,he places the clear happiness he thinks himselflikely to enjoy in case of his committing thecrime, taking into the account the chance thereappears to him to be, that the punishment threatenedwill abridge the duration of that happiness.Now then, if in the former case there appears tobe no clear happiness likely to accrue to him,much more if there appears to be a clear portionof unhappiness ; in other words, if the clear portionof happiness likely to befal him appearsto be equal to*, 0, or much more if it appears to beZero.182 B.II. CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTnegative, the pleasure that constitutes the profitof the crime will act upon him with a force thathas nothing to oppose it. The probability of seeingit brought to an abrupt period by death willsubtract more or less from the balance : but at anyrate there will be a balance.Now this is always the case with a multitudeof malefactors. Rendered averse to labour bynatural indolence or disuse, or hurried away bythe tide of some impetuous passion, they do lookupon the pleasures to be obtained by honest industryas not worth living for, when put in competitionwith the pains : or they look upon life asnot worth keeping, without some pleasure or pleasureswhich, to persons in their situation, are notattainable but by a crime.I do not say that this calculation is made withallthe formality with which I have represented it.I do not say that in casting up the sum of pains onthe one side and pleasures on the other, exact careis always used to take every item into the account.But however, well or ill, the calculation is made :else a man could not act as he is supposed to do.Now then, in all these cases, which unhappilyare but too frequent, it is plain the punishment ofdeath can be of no use.It may be said, no more would any other punishment.For any other punishment, to answerits purpose, must have the effect of deterring orotherwise disabling the person in question fromcommitting the like crimes in future. If then heois thus deterred or disabled, he is reduced to asituation in which, by the supposition, death wasto him an event desirable upon the whole. Beingthen in his power, he will produce it.The conclusion, however, is not necessary.There are several reasons why the same impulseB. II. Cii. XII. EXAMINED. 183which is strong enough to dispose a man to meetdeath at the hands of justice should not be strongenough to dispose him to bring on himself thatevent with his own hand.In the first place, the infliction of it as a punishmentis an event by no means certain. It isin itself uncertain ; and the passion he is supposedto be influenced by, withdrawing his attention fromthe chances that are in favour of its happening,makes it look still more uncertain.In the next place, although it were certain, it isat any rate distant : and the mortification he undergoes,from the not possessing the object of hispassion, is present.Thirdly, Death is attended with much morepain when a man has to inflict it on himself withhis own hand, than when all he does is simply toput himself in a situation in which it will be inflictedon him by the hands of another, or by theoperation of some physical cause. To put himselfin such a situation, requires but a single and suddenvolition, and perhaps but a single act in consequence,during the performance of which hemay keep his eyes shut, as it were, against theprospect of the pain to which he is about to subjecthimself. The moment of its arrival is at anuncertain distance. The reverse is the case wherea man is to die by his own hand. His resolutionmust be supported during the whole period oftime that is necessary to bring about the event.The manner is foreseen and the time immediate.It may be necessary that even after a part of thepain has been incurred, the resolution should goonand support itself, while it prompts him to addfurther pain before the purpose is accomplished.Accordingly, when people are resolved upondeath, it is common for them, when they have anB.II. CH.XIT. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTopportunity, to choose to die rather by the handof another than by their own. Thus Saul choseto die by the hand of his armour-bearer ; TiberiusGracchus by that of his freeman. So again theEmperor Nero by one of his minions.Fourthly, when a man is prompted to seek reliefin death, it is not so much by the sudden vehemenceof some tempestuous passion, as by a closepersuasion that the miseries of his life are likelyto be greater than the enjoyments ; and, in consequence,when the resolution is once taken, to restsatisfied without carrying it immediately intoeffect; for there is not a more universal principle ofhuman conduct, than that which leads a man tosatisfy himself for awhile with the power, withoutproceeding immediately, perhaps without proceedingever, to the act. It is the same feeling whichso often turns the voluptuous man to a miser.Now this is likely enough to be the condition ofthose who, instead of death, may have been sentencedto another punishment. They defer the executionof their design from hour to hour : sometimesfor want of means, sometimes for want of inclination,till at last some incident happens that puts in theirheads a train of thought which in the end divertsthem from their resolution. In the mental as wellas in the material part of the human frame, thereis happily a strong disposition to accommodateitself by degrees to the pressure of forced andcalamitous situations. When a great artery is cutor otherwise disabled, the circumjacent smallerones will stretch and take upon themselves thewhole duty of conveying to the part affected thenecessary supplies. Loss of sight improves thefaculty of feeling. A left hand learns to performthe offices of the right, or even the feet, of both.An inferior part of the alimentary canal has learnedB.II.CH.XII. EXAMINED. 185to perform the office, and even to assume the textureof the stomach.The mind is endowed with no less elasticity anddocility, in accommodating itself to situationswhich at first sight appeared intolerable. Inall sufferings there are occasional remissions,which in virtue of the contrast are converted intopleasure. How many instances are there of menwho, having suddenly fallen from the very pinnacleof grandeur into the gulphs of misery, have, whenthe old sources of enjoyment were irrecoverablydry, gradually detached their minds from all recollectionsof their customary enjoyments, and createdfor themselves fresh sources of happiness. TheComte de Lauzun s Spider, the straw-works ofthe Dicere, the skilfully wrought pieces of carvedwork made by the French prisoners, not to mentionothers, are sufficient illustrations of this remark.Variability is a point of excellence in which thepunishment of death is more deficient than in anyother. It subsists only in one degree ; the quantityof evil can neither be increased or lessened.It is peculiarly defective in the case of the greaterpart of the most malignant and formidable speciesof malefactors that of professed robbers andhighwaymen.*" Are you not aware that we are subject to one diseasemore than other men ?" said a malefactor upon the rack to hiscompanion, who shrieked from pain. When one observes thecourage or brutal insensibility, when in the very act of beingturned off, of the greater part of the malefactors that are executedat Newgate, it is impossible not to feel persuaded thatthey have been accustomed to consider this mode of endingtheir days as being to them a natural death as an accident ormisfortune, by which they ought no more to be deterred fromtheir profession than soldiers or sailors are from theirs, by theapprehension of bullets or of shipwreck.186 B.I I. CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT4. The punishment of death is not admissible.* Otherspecies of afflictive punishments it is true are exposedto the same objection, but though irremissiblethey are not irreparable. For death there isno remedy.No man, how little soever he may have attendedto criminal procedure, but must have been struckat the very slight circumstances upon which thelife of a man may depend ; and who does notrecollect instances in which a man has been indebtedfor his safety to the occurrence of someunlooked-for accident, which has brought his inno-There is an evil resulting from the employment of death asapunishment which may be properly noticed here. It destroysone source of testimonial proof . The archives of crime are in ameasure lodged in the bosoms of criminals. At their death, allthe recollections which they possess relative to their own crimesand those of others perish. Their death is an act of impunityfor all those who might have been detected by their testimony,whilst innocence must continue oppressed, and the right cannever be established, because a necessary witness is subtracted.Whilst a criminal process is going forward, the accomplices ofthe accused flee and hide themselves. It is an interval ofanxiety and tribulation. The sword of justice appears suspendedover their heads. When his career is terminated, it is for theman act of jubilee and pardon. They have a new bond of security,and they can walk erect. The fidelity of the deceased isexalted among his companions as a virtue, and received amongthem for the instruction of their young disciples, with praisesfor his heroism.In the confines of a prison this heroism would be submitted toa more dangerous proof than the interrogatories of the tribunals.Left to himself, separated from his companions, a criminal ceasesto possess this feeling of honour which unites him to them. Itneeds only r. moment of repentance to snatch from him thosediscoveries which he only can make ; and without his repentance,what is more natural than a feeling of vengeance against thosewho caused him to lose his liberty, ;md who, though equally culpablewith himself, yet continue in the enjoyment of liberty !He need only listen to his interest, and purchase by songe usefulinformation some relaxation of the rigour of his punishment.B.II.CH.XII. EXAMINED. 187hence to light. The risk incurred is doubtlessgreater under some systems of jurisprudence thanunder others. Those which allow the torture tosupply the insufficiency of evidence derived fromother sources : those in which the proceedings arenot public, are, if the expression may be used,surrounded with precipices. But it may be said,is there or could there be devised any system ofpenal procedure which could insure the Judgefrom being misled by false evidence or the fallibilityof his own judgment? No; absolute security inthis branch of science is a point which, though itcan never be attained, may be much more nearlyapproached than it has hitherto been. Judgeswill continue fallible, witnesses to depose falsehoodor to be deceived ; whatever number may deposeto the same fact, the existence of that fact is notrendered certain ; as to circumstantial evidence, thatwhich is deemed incapable of explanation, but bysupposing the existence of the crime, may be theeffect of chance or of arrangements made with theview of producing deception. The only sort ofevidence that appears entitled to perfect conviction,is the voluntary confession of the crime by theparty accused, but this is not frequently made,and does not produce absolute certainty, sinceinstances have not been wanting, as in the case ofwitchcraft, in which individuals have acknowledgedthemselves guilty, when the pretendedcrime was impossible.These are not purely imaginary apprehensionsdrawn from the region of possibility : the criminalrecords of every country afford various instancesof these melancholy errors ; and these instances,which, by the concurrence of a number of extraordinaryevents have attained notoriety, cannot fail188 B.II.CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTto excite a suspicion, that though unknown, manyother innocent victims may have perished.It must not be forgotten either, that the cases inwhich the word evidence is most apt to be employed,are not unfrequently those in which thetestimony adduced is exposed to most suspicion.When the pretended crime is among the numberof those that produce antipathy towards the offender,or which excite against him a party feeling,the witnesses almost unconsciously act as accusers.They are the echoes of the public clamour. Thefermentation goes on increasing, and all doubt islaid aside. It was a concurrence of such circumstanceswhich seduced first the people and thenthe Judges in the melancholy affair of Calas.These melancholy cases in which the most violentpresumptions, which fall little short of absolutecertainty, are accumulated against an individualwhose innocence is afterwards recognized, carrywith them their own cause : they are the crueleffects of chance, and do not altogether destroypublic confidence. To produce any such effectwe must be able to detect in such erroneous decisionsproofs of temerity, ignorance, and precipitation,an obstinate and blind adherence to viciousforms, and of those determined prejudices whichthe very situation of Judge is apt to generate. AJudge, whose business it is to deal with humannature in its worst forms, having daily before hiseyes the false pretences and mendacity to whichthe guilty have recourse, perpetually contrivingexpedients for unveiling imposture, graduallyceases to believe in the innocence of those accused,and by anticipation expects to find a criminal usingall his arts to deceive him. That it is the characterof all Judges to be actuated by these prejudicesB.II.CH.XII. EXAMINED. 189I am far from thinking ; but when the propriety ofarming men with the power of inflicting the punishmentof death is the question under consideration,it ought not to be forgotten, before putting intotheir hands the fatal weapon, that they are notexempted from the weaknesses of humanity, thattheir wisdom is not increased, neither are theyrendered infallible by thus arming them.The danger attending the use of capital punishmentappears in a more striking point of viewwhen we reflect on the use that may be made ofit by men in power, to gratify their passions, bymeans of a Judge easily intimidated or corrupted.In such cases, the iniquity covered with the robeof justice may escape, if not all suspicion, atleast the possibility of proof. Capital punishment,too, affords to the prosecutor as well as tothe Judge, an advantage that in all other modesis wanting : I mean greater security against detection,by stifling by death all danger of discoveryarising from the delinquent, at least : while helives, to whatever state of misery he may bereduced, the oppressed may meet with some fortunateevent by which his innocence may beproved, and he may become his own avenger.A judicial assassination, justified in the eyes ofthe public by a false accusation, with almost completecertainty assures the triumph of those whohave been guilty of it. In a crime of an inferiordegree, they would have had everything to fear ;but the death of the victim seals their security.If we reflect on those very unfrequent occurrences,but which may at any time recur, thoseperiods at which the Government degenerates intoanarchy and tyranny, we shall find that thepunishment of death, established by law, is aweapon ready prepared, which is more susceptible188 B.H.CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTto excite a suspicion, that though unknown, manyother innocent victims may have perished.It must not be forgotten either, that the cases inwhich the word evidence is most apt to be employed,are not unfrequently those in which thetestimony adduced is exposed to most suspicion.When the pretended crime is among the numberof those that produce antipathy towards the offender,or which excite against him a party feeling,the witnesses almost unconsciously act as accusers.They are the echoes of the public clamour. Thefermentation goes on increasing, and all doubt islaid aside. It was a concurrence of such circumstanceswhich seduced first the people and thenthe Judges in the melancholy affair of Calas.These melancholy cases in which the most violentpresumptions, which fall little short of absolutecertainty, are accumulated against an individualwhose innocence is afterwards recognized, carrywith them their own cause : they are the crueleffects of chance, and do not altogether destroypublic confidence. To produce any such effectwe must be able to detect in such erroneous decisionsproofs of temerity, ignorance, and precipitation,an obstinate and blind adherence to viciousforms, and of those determined prejudices whichthe very situation of Judge is apt to generate. AJudge, whose business it is to deal with humannature in its worst forms, having daily before hiseyes the false pretences and mendacity to whichthe guilty have recourse, perpetually contrivingexpedients for unveiling imposture, graduallyceases to believe in the innocence of those accused,and by anticipation expects to find a criminal usingall his arts to deceive him. That it is the characterof all Judges to be actuated by these prejudicesB.II.CH.XII. EXAMINED. 189I am far from thinking ; but when the propriety ofarming men with the power of inflicting the punishmentof death is the question under consideration,it ought not to be forgotten, before putting intotheir hands the fatal weapon, that they are notexempted from the weaknesses of humanity, thattheir wisdom is not increased, neither are theyrendered infallible by thus arming them.The danger attending the use of capital punishmentappears in a more striking point of viewwhen we reflect on the use that may be made ofit by men in power, to gratify their passions, bymeans of a Judge easily intimidated or corrupted.In such cases, the iniquity covered with the robeof justice may escape, if not all suspicion, atleast the possibility of proof. Capital punishment,too, affords to the prosecutor as well as tothe Judge, an advantage that in all other modesis wanting : I mean greater security against detection,by stifling by death all danger of discoveryarising from the delinquent, at least: while helives, to whatever state of misery he may bereduced, the oppressed may meet with some fortunateevent by which his innocence may beproved, and he may become his own avenger.A judicial assassination, justified in the eyes ofthe public by a false accusation, with almost completecertainty assures the triumph of those whohave been guilty of it. In a crime of an inferiordegree, they would have had everything to fear ;but the death of the victim seals their security.If we reflect on those very unfrequent occurrences,but which may at any time recur, thoseperiods at which the Government degenerates intoanarchy and tyranny, we shall find that thepunishment of death, established by law, is aweapon ready prepared, which is more susceptible192 B.II. CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTinjured not to prosecute the offenders, for fear ofbringing them to the scaffold ; a disposition on thepart of the public to favour their escape ; a dispositionon the part of the witnesses to withholdtheir testimony, or to weaken its effect ; a dispositionon the part of the Judges to allow of a mercifulprevarication in favour of the accused ; and allthese anti-legal dispositions render the executionof the laws uncertain, without referring to that lossof respect which follows upon its being consideredmeritorious to prevent their execution.SECT. III. RECAPITULATION AND COMPARISON OFTHE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH, WITH THOSEPUNISHMENTS WHICH MAY BE SUBSTITUTEDFOR IT.The punishment of death, it has been observed,possesses four desirable properties.1 . It is in one case analogous to the offence.2. In that same case it is popular.3. It is in the highest degree efficacious in preventingfurther mischief from the same source.4. It is exemplary, producing a more lively impressionthan any other mode of punishment.The two first of these properties exist in thecase of capital punishment when applied to murder; and with reference to that species of offencealone are they sufficient reasons for persevering inits use ; certainly not : each of them, separatelyconsidered, as of very little importance. Analogyis a very good recommendation, but not a goodjustification. If in other respects any particularmode of punishment be eligible, analogy is anadditional advantage : if in other respects it beineligible, analogy alone is not a sufficient recommendation: the value of this property amounts toBell. CII. Xlf. EXAMINED. 193very little, because, even in the case of murder,other punishments may be devised, the analogyof which will be sufficiently striking.In respect also of popularity, the same observationsapply to this mode of punishment. Everyother mode of punishment that is seen to be equallyor more efficacious will become equally or morepopular. The approbation of the multitude willnaturally be in proportion to the efficacy of thepunishment.The third reason, that it is efficacious in preventingfurther mischief from the same source, is somewhatmore specious, but not better founded. Ithas been asserted, that in the crime of murder itis absolutely necessary; that there is no othermeans of averting the danger threatened from thatclass of malefactors. This assertion is, however,extremely exaggerated : its groundlessness maybeseen in the case of the most dangerous speciesof homicide. Assassination for lucre, a crimeproceeding from a disposition which puts indiscriminatelythe life of every man into immediatejeopardy. Even these malefactors are not sodangerous nor so difficult to manage as madmen ;because the former will commit homicide only atthe time that there is something to be gained by it,and that it can be perpetrated with a probabilityof safety. The mischief to be apprehended frommadmen is not narrowed by either of these circumstances.Yet it is never thought necessary thatmadmen should be put to death. They are notput to death : they are only kept in confinement ;and that confinement is found effectually toanswer the purpose.In fine, I can see but one case in which it canbe necessary, and that only occasionally : in thecase alleged for this purpose by M. Beccaria,o194 B.II. CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.the case of rebellion or other offence againstgovernment of a rebellious tendency, when, bydestroying the chief you may destroy the faction,where discontent has spread itself widely througha community, it may happen that imprisonmentwill not answer the purpose of safe custody. Thekeepers may be won over to the insurgent party,or if not won over, they may be overpowered.They may be won over by considerations of a conscientiousnature, which is a danger almost peculiarto this case ; or they may be won over byconsiderations of a lucrative nature, which dangeris greater in this case than in any other, sinceparty projects may be carried on by a commonpurse.What, however, ought not to be lost sight of inthe case of offences of a political nature is, that ifby the punishment of death one dangerous enemyis exterminated, the consequence of it may be themaking an opening for a more formidable successor.Look, said the executioner, to an aged Irishman,shewing him the bleeding head of a manjust executed for rebellion : " Look at the head ofyour son." " My son (replied he) has more thanone head." It would be well for the legislator beforehe appoints capital punishment, even in thiscase, to reflect on this instructive lesson.The fourth reason is the strongest. The punishmentof death is exemplary, pre-eminently exemplary: no other punishment makes so strong animpression.This assertion, as has been already noticed, istrue with respect to the majority of mankind, it isnot true with respect to the greatest criminals.It appears however to me that the contemplationof perpetual imprisonment, accompanied with hardlabour and occasional solitary confinement, wouldB.II. CH.XII. EXAMINED. 195produce a deeper impression on the minds of personsin whom it is more eminently desirable thatthat impression should be produced, than evendeath itself. We have already observed that tothem life does not offer the same attractions as itdoes to persons of innocent and industrious habits.Their very profession leads them continually toput their existence in jeopardy ; and intemperance,which is almost natural to them, inflames theirbrutal and uncalculating courage. All the circumstancesthat render death less formidable to them,render laborious restraint proportionably moreirksome. The more their habitual state of existenceis independent, wandering, and hostile tosteady and laborious industry, the more they willbe terrified by a state of passive submission andof laborious confinement, a mode of life in thehighest degree repugnant to their natural inclinations.Giving to each of these circumstances their dueweight, the result appears to be that the prodigaluse made by legislators of the punishment of deathhas been occasioned more by erroneous judgments[arising from the situation in which they areplaced with respect to the other classes of thecommunity] than from any blameable cause.Those who make laws belong to the highestclasses of the community, among whom death isconsidered as a great evil, and an ignominiousdeath as the greatest of evils. Let it be confinedto that class, if it were practicable, the effectaimed at might be produced ; but it shews a totalwant of judgment and reflection to apply it to adegraded and wretched class of men, who do notset the same value upon life, to whom indigenceand hard labour is more formidable than death,196 B.II. CH.XII. CAPITAL PUNISHMENTand the habitual infamy of whose lives rendersthem insensible to the infamy of the punishment.If, in spite of these reasons, which appear to beconclusive, it be determined to preserve the punishmentof death, in consideration of the effects itproduces in terrorem, it ought to be confined tooffences which, in the highest degree, shock thepublic feeling for murders, accompanied withcircumstances of aggravation, and particularlywhen their effect may be the destruction of numbers; and in these cases expedients by which itmay be made to assume the most tragic appearancemay be safely resorted to, in the greatestextent possible, without having recourse to complicatedtorments.SECT. IV. COLLATERAL EVIL EFFECTS OF THEFREQUENT USE OF THE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH.The punishment of death, when applied to thepunishment of offences in opposition to publicopinion, far from preventing offences, tends toincrease them by the hope of impunity. Thisproposition may appear paradoxical ; but theparadox vanishes when we consider the differenteffects produced by the unpopularity of thepunishment of death. In the first place it relaxesprosecution in criminal matters, and in the nextplace foments three vicious principles. 1. Itmakes perjury appear meritorious, by founding iton humanity ; 2. it produces contempt for thelaws, by rendering it notorious that they are notexecuted ; 3. it renders convictions arbitrary andpardons necessary.The relaxation of criminal procedure resultsfrom a series of transgressions on the part of theB.IJ. CM. XII. EXAMINED. 197different public functionaries, whose concurrenceis necessary to the execution of the laws : eachone alters the part allotted to him, that he mayweaken or break the legal chain by which he isbound, and substitute his own will for that of thelegislator ;* but all these causes of uncertainty incriminal procedure are so many encouragementsto malefactors." Observe that juryman in a blue coat," said one of theJudges at the Old Bailey to Judge Nares. " Do you see him?"Yes." " Well there will be no conviction of death to-day."And the observation was confirmed by the fact.RATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BOOK III.OF PRIVATIVE PUNISHMENTS, OR FORFEITURES.CHAPTER I.PUNISHMENT ANALYZED.WE now come to the last of the two grand divisionsof Punishments Privative Punishments, orForfeitures.The word forfeiture is never used but with referenceto some possession.*As all our ideas are derived ultimately from the senses,almost all the names we have for intellectual ideas, seem to bederived ultimately from the names of such objects as affordsensible ideas : that is, of objects that belong to one or other ofthe three classes of real entities. Insomuch that, whether weperceive it or no, we can scarce express ourselves on any occasionbut in metaphors. A most important discovery this in themetaphysical part of grammar, for which we seem to be indebtedto M. d Lambert. See his Melanges, torn. 1,Disc. Prelim, #c.The way in which the import of the word forfeiture is connectedwith sensible ideas seems to be as follows : the words toforfeit come either immediately, or through the medium of theold French, from the modern Latin word forisfacere. Formsmeans out of doors, or out of the house ; facere, is to make orB.III.CH.I. PUNISHMENT ANALYZED. 199Possessions are either substantial or ideal substantialwhen it is the object of a real entity (as ahouse, a field) ideal, when it is the object of afictitious entity (as an office, a dignity, a right.)The difficulty of dealing with cases of this descriptionwill immediately be seen. Real entitieshave all a common genus, to wit, substance. Fictitiousentities have no such common genus, and canonly be brought into method in virtue of the relationthey bear to real objects.Possessions, of whatsoever nature they be, whetherreal or fictitious, are valuable ; and to forfeitthem can never otherwise be a punishment, thanas far as they are instruments of pleasure or security.By specifying then the sort of persons orthings from which the benefit said to belong to afictitious possession is actually derived, all will bedone that can be done towards giving a methodicalview of those possessions, and of the penalconsequences of forfeiting them.*to cause to be. The conceit then is that, when any object is inaman s possession, it is as it were within doors ; within hishouse; any act, therefore, which, in consequence of some optionof the law, has the effect of causing the object to be nolonger in his possession, has the effect of causing it, as it were,to be out of his doors, and no longer within his house.Forfeiture is, in some cases, though rarely, applied to corporalpunishments. Thus capital punishment is called forfeiture of life ;mutilation, forfeiture of limbs or members. It is also, with theaddition of the word liberty, applied to corporal punishments ofthe restrictive classes, as in the case of imprisonment and quasiimprisonment. The other modes of confinement require furtheradditions to be made to them : as to express foreign banishment,forfeiture of the liberty of residing in any part of the dominionsof the state : to express domestic banishment, forfeiture ofthe liberty of being any longer in the place of his abode. Theinfinite variety of specific restraints may also be expressed bythe phrase of forfeiture of liberty, with so many different additions: forfeiture of the liberty of exercising such or such anoperation, forfeiture of the liberty of pleading, &c.200 B.I1I. CH.I. PUNISHMENT ANALYZED.To investigate, therefore, the several kinds ofproper forfeitures, it is necessary to investigatethe several kinds of possessions. On this subject,however, as it comes in only collaterally on thepresent occasion, it will not be necessary to insistvery minutely.Possessions are derived either from things only,or from persons only ; or from both together.Those of the two first sorts may be styled simplepossessions : those of the other complex.Possessions derived from things may consisteither 1. in money : these may be called pecuniary;2. in other objects at large. The formermay be styled pecuniary, the latter quasi-peunary. Accordingly, forfeiture of money may bestyled pecuniary forfeiture : forfeiture of any otherpossession derived from things, quasi-pecuniary.Quasi-pecuniary forfeitures are capable of a varietyof divisions and subdivisions : but as thesedistinctions turn upon circumstances that make nodifference in the mode of punishment, it will notbe necessary, on the present occasion, to enter intoany such detail.Possessions derived from persons, consist in theservices rendered by those persons. Services maybedistinguished into exigible and ineligible. Byexigible I mean such as a man may be punished(to wit, by the political sanction) for not rendering ;by inexigible, such as a man cannot be punishedfor not rendering ; or, if at all, not by any othersanction than either the moral or the religious.*To services ineligible, but by the force of these auxiliarysanctions, correspond what are called imperfect rights. Whateverright a man may have to a service, which the party is notpunishable by law for not, rendering him, is what is culled bywriters on the pretended law of nature, an imperfect right; andthe obligation to render any such service, an imperfect obligation.B.III.CH.I. PUNISHMENT ANALYZED. 201The faculty of procuring such as are exigible iscommonly called power, to wit power over persons: the facuky or chance of procuring such asare ineligible depends, in great measure, uponreputation; hence result two farther kinds of forfeiture: forfeiture of power and forfeiture of reputation.*Reputation may be distinguished into naturaland factitious ; by factitious I mean that which isconferred by rank or dignity.Credibility is a particular species of reputation :the reputation of veracity. Hence we have twofurther kinds of forfeiture, both subordinate to thatof reputation: forfeiture of rank or dignity, andforfeiture of credibility.As to complex possessions, and the forfeituresthat relate to them, these are too heterogeneous tobe arranged in any systematic method : all thatcan be done is to enumerate them. Thus muchonly may be said of them in general, that the ingredientsof each of them are derived from boththe classes of objects which we have mentioned asbeing the sources from which the several kinds ofsimple forfeitures are derived.It should seem, however, that they might allof them, without any great violence, be broughtunder the title of conditions. Conditions then mayin the first place be distinguished into ordinaryand peculiar.Ordinary conditions or modes of relationship,may be distinguished into natural and acquired.Of services that are altogether ineligible, such as are strictlyspontaneous, gratuitous, depend altogether upon goodwill :upon the goodwill of the party rendering them to the party towhom they are rendered. This goodwill depends, in great measure,upon the reputation of the party to whom they are rendered.202 B.IIl. CH.I. PUNISHMENT ANALYZED.By natural conditions I mean those which necessarilybelong to a man by birth : to wit in virtueof either his own birth or that of some other personto whom he stands related. Such as that ofson, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister, andso on through the several modes of relationship,constituted by the several degrees of consanguinity.To stand in any of these relations to suchor such a person may be the source of variousadvantages. These conditions, it is plain, cannotthemselves be forfeited ; a man, however, may,and in some instances has been said to have forfeitedthem, and may actually be made to forfeitmany of the advantages attending them.Acquired conditions may be distinguished inthe first place into political and religious ; andpolitical again into domestic and public. Domesticconditions maybe distinguished into family conditionsand professional. Family conditions are1st. The matrimonial ; or that of being husbandor wife to such a person ; 3d and 4th, that ofbeing guardian or ward ; 5th and 6th, that ofbeing master or servant to such a person.By public political condition, I mean that ofbelonging to any voluntary society of men institutedon any other than a religious account.By religious condition, I mean that of belongingto any society or sect instituted for the sake ofjoining in the performance of religious ceremonies.Of conditions that may be termed peculiar, theseveral sorts may, it should seem, be all comprisedunder the head either 1st. of conditions constituted,either 1st, by offices ; or 2dly, by corporationprivileges. A right of exercising an officeis an exclusive right to render certain services.Conditions constituted by offices may be rankedin the number of complex possessions, inasmuchB.III. CH.l. PUNISHMENT ANALYZED. 203as they are apt to include the three simple possessionsfollowing : to wit, a certain share ofpower, a certain rank, and a certain salary, or feesor other emoluments coming under the head ofpecuniary or quasi-pecuniary possessions.Of offices there is an almost infinite variety ofkinds, and a still greater variety of names, accordingto the almost infinite modifications of rank andpower in different countries, and under differentgovernments. This head is, consequently, susceptibleof a great variety of divisions and subdivisions; but these it will not be necessary, on thepresent occasion, to consider.Corporations may be distinguished into politicaland religious. Under the head of religious corporationsmay be included the various monasticorders established in countries professing theRoman Catholic religion.As to political corporations, the catalogue of thepossessions that may be annexed to the conditionof one who is a member of those bodies are sovarious, that no other account need, on the presentoccasion, or indeed can be given of it, than thatthere are scarce any of the simple possessionsabove enumerated, but may be included in it.*To the condition of one who is a member of areligious order or corporation may be annexed,besides the above possessions others, the valuewhereof consists in such or such a chance as theymay appear to confer of enjoying the pleasures ofa future life, over and above such chance of enjoyingthe same pleasures as appears to be conferred byA share beneficial or fiduciary in the use, of such a quantityof money, of such an estate in land : a share in such an officeof power or trust : an exemption from such a tax or other publicburthen : the exclusive privilege of such or such an occupation.204 B.1II.CH.I. PUNISHMENT ANALYZED.the condition or privilege of being an ordinary professorof the same religion.As an appendix to the above list of possessionsmay be added two particular kind of possessions,constituted by the circumstance of contingency, asapplied in different ways to each one in that list.These are the legal capacity of acquiring, asapplied to those articles respectively, and theprotection of the law, whereby a man is securedagainst the chance of losing them, if acquired.These abstract kinds of possessions form the subjectof so many kinds of forfeiture : forfeiture oflegal capacity and forfeiture of the protection ofthe law : forfeiture of legal capacity with respectto any possession, taking away from a man whateverchance he might have of acquiring it ; forfeitureof protection, subjecting him to a particularchance of losing it.*Forfeiture of protection may be considered also, in anotherpoint of view, as being the forfeiture of the services of suchministers of Justice, whose office it is to afford a man protection inthe enjoyment of the possession in question.CHAPTER II.OF THE PUNISHMENTS BELONGING TO THE MORALSANCTION*.PUNISHMENTS of this class admit of no distinctions: and this, however paradoxical it may seem,from no other reason than their extreme variety.The way in which a man suffers who is punishedby the moral sanction is, by losing a part of thatshare which he would otherwise possess of theesteem or love of such members of the communityas the several incidents of his life may lead him tohave to do with. Now it is either from theesteem they entertain for him, or the love theybear him, or both, that their good-will towards him,in a great measure, depends : moreover, the way inwhich this good-will displays itself, is by disposingthe person who entertains such affection, to rendergood offices, and to forbear doing ill offices (or inother words, to render ineligible services to theparty towards whom it is entertained ; the way inwhich the opposite affection, ill-wills displays itself,is accordingly by disposing the former toforbear doing good offices, and if it has risen to acertain degree, by disposing him to render ill-offices,as far as may be consistent with his ownsafety, to the latter.Now then, from the good offices of oneman to another, may all sorts of possessions,and through them, or even more immediately,all sorts of pleasures, be derived. On the otherhand, from the withholding of the good officesone man might have expected from another,may all sorts of pains, and death itself, be also20G B.III. CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGINGderived ; much more may they from positive ill-officesadded to those other negative ones. Andwhat are the good offices which you may be disposedto withhold from me, or the ill offices youmay be disposed to do me, from my having becomethe object of your ill-will? It is plain notone or other particular species of good or ill office,but any species whatever, just as occasion serves,that shall be proportionate to the strength of yourill-will and consistent with your own safety. Thisconsideration will make our work short under thehead which respects the several modes or speciesof punishment subordinate to the mode in question.The same consideration will make it equallyshort under the second head, relative to the evilsproducible by the mode or modes of punishmentin question. These, it must have been alreadyseen, may be all sorts of evils : all the differentsorts of evils which are producible by any of thepunishments belonging to the political sanction ;by any punishments properly so called : in aword, all the different sorts of evils to whichhuman nature is liable.But though the punishments belonging to themoral sanction admit not of any varieties that areseparable from one another, there are two distinctparcels, as it were, into which the evils producedby any lot of punishment issuing from this source,on the occasion of any offence, may be divided.One (which, as being the basis of the other, maybementioned first, though the last in point oftime) consists of the several contingent evils thatmay happen to the offender in consequence of theill-will he has incurred ; the other consists of theimmediate pain or anxiety, the painful sense ofshame, which is grounded on the confused .CH.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 207prehension of the unliquidated assemblage of evilsabove-mentioned. It is this last which is referablein a peculiar manner to the moral sanction, andwhich cannot be produced by the political, anyotherwise than as far as those who have the managementof that sanction can gain an influenceover the moral : it may therefore, for distinctionsake, be styled the characteristic evil of the moralsanction. This must obtain, in a greater or lessdegree, upon every instance of detected delinquency,unless in those callous and brutish natures,if any such there be, in whom all sense ofdisgrace, and all foresight of the consequences, isutterly extinguished. The others above spokenof may be styled the casual evils.These casual evils, (as we have already intimated)owing to their extreme uncertainty, admitnot of any determinate variations in point of quality; in point of quantity, however, they do admitof some distinctions resulting from, 1st, theirIntensity ; 2dly, their Extent. This distinctionought not to be overlooked, since we shall haveoccasion to make frequent application of it topractice.These two lots of evils, howsoever distinguishable,intermix with and aggravate one another. I havedone an immoral act : I am discovered : I perceiveas much. Now then, before I happen to haveoccasion to avail myself of the good offices of suchof my acquaintance as come to know of it, before Ihappen to be in a way to suffer from the denial ofthose good offices, in a word, before I have experiencedany of the casual evils annexed by themoral sanction to my delinquency, I already foreseemore or less clearly, and apprehend more or lessstrongly, the loss of those good offices and of thatgood will : I feel the painful sense of shame, the208 B.III.C1I.II. OF Punishments BELONGINGpain of ignominy ; I experience, in a word, thecharacteristic evil of the moral sanction as thepunishment of my misbehaviour. This sense ofshame stamps the marks of guilt upon my deportment.This being the case, either out of despairI avoid my acquaintance, or else I put myself intheir way. If I avoid them, I by that meansalready deprive myself of their good offices : if 1put myself in their way, the guilt which is legiblein my countenance, advertises and increases theiraversion : they either give an express denial to myrequest, or what is more common, anticipate it bythe coldness of their behaviour. This receptiongives fresh keenness to the sting of shame, or (inthe systematical language I have ventured to makeuse of,) the experiment I have made of the casual,evils adds force to the characteristic evils of thissanction.We have already intimated the distinction betweenpositive and negative ill offices ; to theformer, and even in a few instances to the latter, itis the duty, and a great part of the business, of thepolitical magistrate to set limits. These limits,however, may come accidentally to be transgressed,as there are scarce any laws that can be made butwhat may come accidentally to be disobeyed. Onthis account, the evils that may result from thissource remain still undeterminate and unlimited.But were the laws that might be made in thisbehalf ever so certain in their operation, those evilswould still remain indeterminate and unlimited,notwithstanding. For so uncertain and unforeseenable may be the connection between the refusal ofa good office, and the miseries which in particularcircumstances may be the consequences of sucha refusal, that no law could make a secure provisionagainst those miseries in every case, withoutB.III.CH.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 209such a subversion of all liberty and all property aswould produce much greater miseries. Yourgiving me a shilling to buy me food, or taking metwenty miles to a physician, may on a criticaloccasion save me from an excruciating disease ;but no law, without leaving it to the determinationof the person in want, can with sufficient certaintydescribe such occasions ; nor can any law, withoutdepriving you of all liberty and all property, obligeyou to give money to, or take a journey for everyman who shall determine himself to be in want ofsuch assistance.Howsoever this be with regard to negative illoffices, positive ill offices not only may be limited,but in most cases may be and commonly are forbidden.In no settled state of government is privatedispleasure permitted to rise so high as to ventitself indiscriminately in any of those direct ways ofinflicting pain which the political magistrate himselfmay have thought it expedient to recur to. Howeverflagrantly immoral may have been the conductof a delinquent, persons at large are never permitted,of their own authority, to punish him bybeating or maiming, or putting him to death.Positive ill offices may be divided into such asdisplay themselves in actions at large, and suchas display themselves in discourse. Now, it isto speech that the latitude which is still left tothe right of rendering positive ill offices in a directway, is principally confined :* and even thisright is commonly subject to a number of limitations.But ill offices which are confined toI am conscious that the distinction here stated, betweenthe direct and indirect way of rendering ill offices is far enoughfrom being explicit; but there would be no way of making itso without despatching a large and intricate title of the doctrineof offences.210 B.III. CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGINGspeech are not, if they stop there, productive ofany evil. When they are, it is ultimately by disposingother persons to entertain a displeasureagainst the same person, and manifest it by actionsof another kind. If then such positive illoffices as display themselves in actions at large beexcluded, all that remains is resolvable ultimatelyinto negative ill offices. And of these, those whicha delinquent has in ordinary cases to apprehendamount only to such as are not illegal.Nor is even this a contemptible and inconsiderablesource of suffering. Dependent as men in astate of society are upon one another, the punishmentderived from the source in question, evenwhen narrowed by all these restrictions, may, and,indeed, frequently does rise to a tremendousheight. It admits of no evasion : it comes upona man from all quarters : he can see no end to itsduration, nor limits to its effects. It is not unusualfor it to bereave him of the chief pleasuresand sources of profit he has set his heart upon : itmay deprive him of all those profits and enjoymentshe had been accustomed to expect at thehands of his friend or his patron : by setting hiscommon acquaintance at a distance from him, itmay fill the detail of his life with a perpetualtrain of disappointments and rebuffs. It leaveshim joyless and forlorn : and, by drying up thesource of every felicity it embitters the wholecurrent of his life.Were we indeed to enquire minutely into the distinctionbetween the nature of the political andmoral sanctions, it would come out that, of theevils which when considered as issuing from themoral sanction I have stiled casual evils, some areeven more likely to be brought upon a man by theaction of one of these sanctions, and some othersB.I1I. CH.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 211by that of the other. But as to the species ofevil, this is all the distinction we shall be able tomake out; for there is not any evil which theexertion of one of these forces may bring upon aman, but which may also be brought upon him bythe action of the other.The most studied and artificial torments, forinstance, that can be invented by a political magistrate,and the most unlikely for a man to beexposed to suffer by the unassisted powers ofnature, or even from the unauthorised resentmentof an individual, are what he may by accident beexposed to from the latter source. It may be forwant of some evidence that an individual mightfurnish, and from ill-will forbears to furnish, thatI may have been doomed to these torments by aJudge ; or if the like torments be supposed to beinflicted by the unauthorized violence of an enemy,they may be attributed in the first placeindeed to the vengeance of that enemy; but in thesecond place, to the dis-esteem and ill-will borneme by some stranger, who having it in his powerto rescue me, yet exasperated against me onaccount of some real or supposed instance of immoralityin my behaviour, chose rather to see mesuffer than to be at the pains of affording me hisassistance.On the other hand, the whole sum of the evilsdepending upon the moral sanction, to wit, notonly the casual evils, but the sense of infamywhich constitutes the characteristic evil, is liablein many instances to be brought upon a man bythe doom of the political magistrate. This is whatwe have found it unavoidably necessary, onvarious occasions, to give intimation of, and whatwe shall have need more particularly to enlargeupon hereafter.212 B.III.CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGING3. It is in the manner, then, in which the evilsthat come alike under the department of each ofthe two sanctions come to be inflicted, that theonly characteristic difference discernible betweenthese two sanctions are to be seen. With regardto punishment issuing from the political sanction,the species, the degree, the time, the place, theperson who is to apply it, are all assignable.With regard to that which may issue from themoral sanction, none of these particulars are assignable.When I say assignable, I must be understoodto speak with reference to some particular timecoincident with or subsequent to that of the commissionof the offence. At that very time, then,with respect to political punishment, that is, withrespect to personal punishments and forfeitures,many of those particulars, and sometimes all ofthem, are assignable, and may be foreseen. Atthe time the offence, theft suppose, is committing,it may be foreseen that a number of stripes givenwith such an instrument, not more than so manynor fewer than so many, will be inflicted (in caseof detection) so many days or weeks hence, atsuch a place and by the hands of such an executioner: and vice versa, when they come to be inflicted,the punishment will be seen to be theconsequence of such an offence. Now when theorganical pain produced by the punishment thus inflictedis over, all the punishment for that offence,as far as depends upon the political sanction, iscommonly over and at an end. But as to the illoffices, as well negative as positive, which constitutethe substance and groundwork of the moralsanction, no man can tell what they will be, whatparticular evils they will subject a man to, whenthey will commence, or when they will end,B.III. CI1.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 213where they will display themselves, nor who willrender them. Nor vice versa, when they haveactually been rendered, when such or such aneighbour has shut his door against me, and I ampining with hunger or shivering with cold, can Ialways know for certain that the immorality I wasguilty of at such or such a time was the occasionof his unkindness. In a word, dcterminateness isthe perfection of the punishments belonging to thepolitical sanction : j/zdeterminateness is the veryessence of those issuing from the moral.A word or two may be of use in this place withrespect to the nomenclature employed in speakingof the punishments belonging to this sanction.The expressions made use of on this occasion aresingularly various : a whole legion of fictitiousentities are created for the purpose of representingthe one fundamental idea in question, under thedifferent aspects of which it is susceptible. Thenames of these fictitious entities are many of themdisparate ; they require different sets of words toenable them to make a meaning : and the coincidencelies not between the import of these nameswhen separately taken, but between certain sentencesor propositions, in which they may respectivelybe made to bear a part. Among thesewords may be reckoned reputation, honour, character,good name, dishonour, shame, infamy, ignominy,disgrace, aversion, and contempt. Inspeaking then of a man as suffering under a punishmentof the moral sanction, it may be more orless convenient, according to the occasion, to useamongst others any of the following expressions.We may say that he has forfeited his reputation,his honour, his character, his good name ; that hisfame has been tarnished ; that his honour, hischaracter, or his reputation has received a stain ;214 B.IIT.CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGINGthat he stands disgraced ; that he has becomeinfamous ; that he has sunk under a load of infamy,ignominy, or disgrace ; that he has fallen into disgrace,into dis-esteem, into disrepute ; that he hasincurred the ill-will, the aversion, the contempt ofthe neighbourhood, of the public; that he is becomean object of aversion or contempt. It werethe task rather of the lexicographer than the juristto exhaust the catalogue of these expressions.Those which have been already exhibited may besufficient to advertise the reader of the similaritythere may be in point of sense between a varietyof other expressions of like import, however dissimilarthey may be in sound.Hitherto we have considered the punishmentbelonging to the moral sanction in no other pointof view than that in which it appears when standingsingly, uncombined with and uninfluenced bythe political. In this state the direction given toit,and the force with which it acts, are determinedaltogether by the persons to whom it belongsultimately to dispense it, unassisted anduncontrolled by the political magistrate. In thisstate it acted before the formation of politicalsociety, before the creation of that artificial bodyof which the political magistrate is the head. Inthis state, by its connection with the variousmodes of conduct which happened to be employedto prohibit or to recommend, it gave birth to thatfictitious set of rules which are what some moralistshave sometimes at least in view, when theyspeak of the law of nature. In this state it wasan engine, to the power of which the politicalmagistrate was a witness, before the constructionof that which is of his own immediate workmanship.It then was, it still is, and it ever must beanengine of great power in whatever direction itB.1II. CH.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 215be applied ; whether it be applied to counteractor to promote his measures. No wonder then heshould have sought by various contrivances topress it into his service. When thus fitted upand set to work by the political magistrate, itbecomes a part of the vast system of machinery towhich we have given the name of the political sanction.And now then we are in a condition todiscuss the nature of that genus of politicalpunishment which, in systems of jurisprudence,is commonly spoken of under the name of infamy,or forfeiture of reputation.SEC. II. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OFTHE PUNISHMENTS BELONGING TO THE MORALSANCTION.We will now proceed to examine the punishmentsbelonging to the moral sanction itself,independently of any employment of it by themagistrate to aggravate or guide the effect of hisdesigns.Punishments of this class, as has been alreadysaid, admit of no distinctions ; they comprise allsorts of evils : the ill-will produced manifestsitself in a variety of modes, that can neither becalculated or foreseen. They admit then of no precisedescription ; for it is only when the effects aredeterminate that a punishment admits of a description.Will they be analogous to the offence, orfrugal, or excessive ? upon these points nothingcan be said.Our observations will be comprised under threeheads their divisibility, equability, and exemplary.1 . These punishments admit of minute division :they have all the degrees possible from mere216 B.III. CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGINGblame to infamy, from a temporary suspension ofgood-will, to active and permanent ill-will : butthese several degrees depend altogether upon accidentalcircumstances, and are incapable of beingestimated by anticipation. Punishments of thepecuniary or chronical class, as, for example, imprisonment,are susceptible of being exactlymeasured : punishments that depend on themoral sanction, not. Before they are experienced,the value put upon them is necessarily extremelyinaccurate. In respect of intensity they are liableto be inferior to the greater part of tfyose belongingto the political sanction ; they consist more in privationsof pleasure than in positive evils. Thisit is that constitutes their principal imperfection ;and it is solely for supplying this imperfectionthat penal laws were established.One of the circumstances by which their effectis weakened, is the locality of their operation. Doyou find yourself exposed to the contempt of thepeople with whom you are in the habit of associating? to exempt yourself from it, all that youhave to do is to change your abode. The punishmentis reduced to the giving a man the optionto remain exposed to the inconveniences resultingfrom this contempt, or to inflict on himself thepunishment of banishment, which may not beperpetual. He does not abandon the hope ofreturning, when by lapse of time the memory ofhis transgressions shall be effaced, and the publicresentment appeased.2. In respect of equability these punishments arereally more defective than at first sight they mightappear. In every condition in life each man has hisown circle of friends and acquaintance. To becomean object of contempt or aversion to this society isa misfortune as great to one man as to another ;B.III. CH.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 217this is the result that may at first view presentitself to the mind, and which, to a certain extent,is really correct ; it will, however, upon a morenarrow scrutiny of the matter, be found, that inpoint of intensity this class of punishment is subjectto extreme variation, depending as it does uponthe condition in life, wealth, education, age, sex,and other circumstances ; the casual evils resultingfrom the punishments belonging to this sanctionare infinitely variable : shame depends upon sensibility.Women, especially among civilized nations, aremore alive to, and susceptible of, the impressionof shame than men. From their earliest infancy,and even before they are capable of understandingthe object of it, one of the most importantbranches of their education is, to instil into themprinciples of modesty and reserve ; and they arenot long in discovering that this guardian of theirvirtue is at the same time the source of theirpower. They are, moreover, physically weaker,and more dependent than men, and stand more inneed of protection ; it is more difficult for them tochange their society, and to remove from theplace of their abode.At a very early age, generally speaking, sensibilityto the moral sanction is not remarkablyacute : in old age it becomes still more obtuse.Avarice, the only passion that is fortified by age,subdues all sense of shame.A weak state of health, morbid irritability, anybodily defect, any natural or accidental infirmity,are circumstances that aggravate the suffering fromshame as from every other calamity.Wealth, considered of itself, independently ofrank and education, lias a tendency to blunt theforce of these impressions. A rich man has it in218 B.1II. CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGINGhis power to change his residence, to procurefresh connections and acquaintance, and by thehelp of money to purchase pleasures for whichother people are dependent upon goodwill. Thereexists a disposition to respect opulence on its ownaccount, to bestow on the possessor of it gratuitousservices, and, above all, external professionsof politeness and respect.Rank is a circumstance that augments thesensibility to all impressions that affect thehonour : but the rules of honour and morality arenot always calculated upon the same scale : thehigher ranks are, however, in general more aliveto the influence of opinion than the inferiorclasses.Profession and habitual occupation materiallyaffect the punishments proceeding from thissource. In some classes of society, the point ofhonour is at the very highest pitch, and any circumstanceby which it is affected produces a moreacute impression than any other species of shame.Courage, among military men, is an indispensablequalification : the slightest suspicion of cowardiceexposes them to perpetual insults : thence, uponthis point, that delicacy of feeling among menwho, upon other points, are in a remarkable degreeregardless of the influence of the moral sanction.The middle ranks of society are the most virtuous,it is among them that in the greatest numberof points the principles of honour coincide withthe principles of utility : it is in this class alsothat the inconveniences arising from the forfeitureof esteem are most sensibly felt, and that the evilconsequences arising from the loss of reputationproduce the most serious ill consequences.Among the poorer classes, among men who liveby their daily labour, sensibility to honour is inB.III. CH.1I. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 219general less acute. A day labourer, if he is industrious,though his character is not unspotted,will be at no loss for work. His companions arecompanions of labour, not of pleasure : from theirgratuitous services he has little to expect and aslittle to ask. His wants are confined to the merenecessaries of life. His wife and his children owehim obedience, and dare not withhold it. Thepleasures which arise from the exercise of domesticauthority fill up the short intervals of labour.3. The greatest imperfection attending punishmentsarising from the moral sanction, is theirwant of exemplary . Their effect, in this respect,is less than that of any of the punishments of thepolitical sanction. When a man is exposed tosuffering from loss of reputation, it may be unknownto all the world, or at least the knowledgemay be confined to those who are the instrumentsof his punishment, and to the immediate circle ofhis friends and acquaintance. But these arewitnesses only of a small part of his sufferings.They perceive that he is treated with indifferenceor disdain they observe that he does not findprotection or confidence ; but all these observationsare transitory. The individual, wounded bythese signs of coldness or aversion, shuns thecompany of the authors or the witnesses of hisshame ; he retires to solitude, where he suffers insecret, and the more unhappy he is, the smalleris the number of the spectators of his punishment.Punishments, connected with the moral sanction,are advantageous with reference to reformation.When a man suffers in consequence of aviolation of the established rules of morality, hecan only refer the evil he experiences to its truecause ; the more sensible he is to shame, the morehe will fear to increase it : he will become either220 B.III. CH.II. OF PUNISHMENTS BELONGINGmore prudent that he may avoid detection, ormore careful to save appearances, or he will infuture submit to those laws which he has beenunable to break without suffering. Public opinion,with the exception of a few cases, is not implacable.There is among men a reciprocal need ofindulgence, and a levity and ease in forgettinginstead of forgiving faults, when the remembranceof them is not renewed by fresh failures.On the other hand, with respect to dishonourableactions for which there is neither appeal orpardon, the punishment of infamy acts as a discouragement,and not as a motive to reformation.Nemo dignitary perditce pare it.These disadvantages are in measure compensated,and this sanction receives a degree of forcewhich is often wanting in the political sanction,from the certainty of its action. There is nooffending against it with impunity an offenceagainst one of the laws of honour, arouses all itsguardians. The political tribunals are subjectedto a regular process, they cannot pronounce adecision without proof, and proofs are often defective.The tribunal of public opinion possessesmore liberty and more power ; it is liable to beunjust in its decisions, but they are never delayedon that account; they can be reversed at pleasure.Trial and execution proceed with equal steps,without delay or necessity for pursuit. There areeverywhere persons ready to judge and to executethe judgment. This tribunal always inclines tothe side of severity ; its Judges are interested bytheir vanity and their love of display in makingits decisions severe ; the more severe they appear,the more they flatter themselves with the possessionof the good esteem of others. They seem tothink that the spoliation of one character formsH.I1I. CII.II. TO THE MORAL SANCTION. 221the riches of another. Thus, although the punishmentsof the moral sanction are indeterminate,and, for the most part, when estimatedseparately, of little weight, yet by the certaintyof their operation, their frequent recurrence, andtheir accumulation, from the number of those whohave authority to inflict them, they possess adegree of force which cannot be despised by anyindividual, whatever may be his character, hiscondition, or his power.The power exercised by the moral sanctionvaries according to the degree of civilization.In civilized society there are many sources ofenjoyment, and consequently many wants, whichcan be supplied only from considerations of reciprocalesteem ; he who loses his reputation isconsequently exposed to extended suffering in allthese points.The exercise of this sanction is also favoured orrestrained by different circumstances. Under apopular Government it is carried to the highestdegree, under a despotic Government it is reducedalmost to nothing.Easy communications, and the ready circulationof intelligence, by means of newspapers,augments the extent of this tribunal, and increasesthe submission of individuals to the empireof opinion.The more unanimous the decisions of the moralsanction the greater their force. Are its decisionsdifferent among a great number of different sectsor parties, whether religious or political, they willcontradict each other. Virtue and vice will notuse the same common measure. Places of refugewill be found for those who have disgraced themselves,and the deserter from one sect or partywill be enrolled in another.CHAPTER III.FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.WE now come to consider the Punishment ofInfamy or Forfeiture of Reputation.* The natureof this punishment we have already had occasionto discuss, in treating of the moral sanction fromThough infamy is the more common, forfeiture of reputationis the more convenient expression of the two. Infamy is aterm which appears forced, when applied to any other than veryhigh degrees of the punishment in question : the phrase forfeitureof reputation is accommodated to one degree as well asanother ; for the quantity of reputation may be conceived to bedivided into as many lots or degrees as there can be reasonfor.The turn and structure of language having put a man s reputation,like his estate, upon the footing of his possessions, menhave considered and spoken of the subject as if it were a quantityalike determinate, and as if a man might be made to forfeitthe whole of his reputation at a single stroke, as he may thewhole of his estate. But that this, though possible in the latterinstance, is impossible in the former, will presently be seen bytracing up these fictitious objects of possession to the realobjects from whence they are respectively derived. A man sestate is derived out of things : out of certain determinate allotmentsof things moveable or immoveable ; or if any part of it bederived immediately out of persons, it is derived out of theservices of a few persons, and those persons (and very frequentlythose services due from each person) determinate and certain.But a man s reputation is derived immediately out ofpersons: out of the services of persons; out of any services ofany persons whatsoever: out of the services of as many persons,be they who they may, as choose to render him any. This is astock which the political magistrate can never perhaps by anyoneoperation, nor indeed by any number of operations of anykind, be certain of exhausting : much less by any such vagueand feeble operations as those are by which an offender is com-B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 223which it derives its origin. All that remainsfor us to do in this place, is to state the variouscontrivances by which the political magistrate hasgone about to modify its direction and to augmentits force.In point of direction the way in which he influencesthe action of this punishment is very simple;it is this, by annexing it to the commission of anyact which, by prohibiting, he has constituted anoffence.In point of force, he may influence it by variousmeans.The methods by which this may be done maybedivided in the first place into legislative or executive.1st. It may be done by methods simplylegislative, without any of that interference which,in the case of ordinary punishments, is necessaryof the executive power : the law in this case commitsto each individual, in as far as he himself isconcerned, the office of Judge and Executioner.2nd. But in this case, as in any other, the law maycarry itself into execution in the ordinary methodsof procedure ; authorising the Judge either inimitation of his predecessors, or in conformity tothe letter of positive law, to direct and animatethe resentment of the community at large.only understood to have been made to incur the forfeiture ofreputation, that is, the punishment of infamy.If there be, it is that punishment which, if the vulgar traditionis to be depended upon, was inflicted by Richard III onJane Shore: the direct prohibiting of all persons from renderingto the offender any kind of service. But this is but in otherwords the punishment of starving. The same punishment hassometimes been denounced in other countries where, beingstrictly executed, it has been, as it could not but be, attendedwith that effect, ft Case of the Albigenses. See Rapin (Montfort). See Watson s Phil. 2d.224 B.IJI. C.TII. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.By the simple exercise of the legislative office,the law may annex to any mode of conduct acertain quantity of disrepute in the followingways:J. By simply prohibiting any mode of conduct;although no political penalty be also employed toenforce the prohibition. This is the lowest degreein which the political magistrate can be instrumentalin applying the force of the several sanctions.This slightest exertion of the force of themoral sanction is inseparable, we see, from anexertion of that of the political. A few wordsmay be of use on this occasion, to shew to whatcauses it is owing that a certain share of theformer of these forces is become, as it were,appurtenant to the other.2. If no political penalty is denounced, thecommunity find in this circumstance a stronger oradditional reason for annexing their disesteem tothe breach of it. For since it must be evident tothe legislator, as it is to every man, that no rulecan have any effect without a motive to prompt aman to observe it, his omitting to annex any otherpenalty is naturally understood to be a kind oftacit warning to the community at large to takethe execution of the law into their own hands.All he does in such case is to give direction to themoral sanction, trusting to its native force for theexecution of his law.3. If the ordinance be accompanied by an expressexhortation to obey it, or, what comes tomuch the same thing, if the terms in which it isdelivered savour of exhortation, this is anotherand more express declaration of his persuasion ofthe utility of the ordinance he promulgates. Andthe more anxious he is that it should meet withobedience, the more pernicious [it shews] he .C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 225pears to deem the conduct of any one who disobeysit, or at least the more convinced he shewshimself to be, that to a certain degree at least thenon-observance of it would be pernicious to thecommunity.*5. A fifth expedient, by which the moral sanctionis called upon in a manner still more expressto enforce political ordinance, is by censure directlylevelled at him, whosoever he shall proveto be, that shall infringe it. This censure may belevelled at the offender either immediately, or elsemediately, by being immediately pointed at theoffence. |6. A sixth expedient is by transferring, or atleast endeavouring to transfer, upon one offence,the measure of disrepute that naturally attendsupon another. The way in which this is done, isby affecting to regard the obnoxious practice inquestion as an evidence of another practice ofwhich men are already in the habit of bestowinga superior degree of disrepute. J It is plain thatThis anxiety may be grounded or excited not solely by asupposed utility of the law, but in some degree by a supposedpropensity in the people to disobey it.f Of terms of condemnation applied directly to the offence,the improve? factum of the Lex Valerian may serve for an example.Valerian Lex, quum eum qui provocasset virgins cadi securiquenecari voluisset, siquis adversus ea fecisset, nihil ultra quamimprove 1 factum abject." Live, 1. 10, ch. 9.The laws of Greece and Rome afford several examples, wherefordifferent offences, the offender is pronounced infamousI Of this we have an example in certain laws of Seleucusthe Dorian Legislator, pretended to have been preserved (saymy authority) by Diodorus Stimulus. " Let not a free womango forth from the city in the night, unless when she goes to prostituteherself to her gallant. Let her not wear rich ornaments orSo by 9 Ann. c. 14, 5, a loss at play, if prosecuted on that statute, is to bedeclared infamous. Vide etiam stat. Ed. 6.B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF Reputations T .the cases in which this can be attempted with anyprospect of success must necessarily be limited.To warrant the inference, some appearance inconnection, however superficial, there must bebetween the two offences. But any little connexion,however slight, is ordinarily sufficient. Insuch a case, men in general are not apt to be verydifficult with regard to the evidence. The vanityof being thought sagacious, the pride of sitting injudgment and condemning, the hope of earning acertain measure of reputation on the score ofvirtue at an easy rate. The love of novelty andparadox, and the propensity to exaggeration,especially on the unfavourable side, second theaim of the legislator.So much for the ways in which the politicalmagistrate may exert an influence over the moralsanction by the bare exercise of his legislativepowers : we now come to the instances, in whichhe requires the assistance of the Executive.Of all the expedients that may be classed underthis head, the least severe is that of publication,the making public the fact of the offence, accompaniedwith a designation of the offender. It isprincipally in point of extent that a measure of thissort tends to add to the natural quantum of disrepute: though something likewise may be supposedto be contributed by it in point of intensity,on account of the certainty which it gives to men sgarments interwoven with gold, unless she be a courtezan."Prince. of Pen. Law, c. 26.This was as much as to say, that if he knew of a woman sgoing abroad in a lone place at the unseasonable hour he isspeaking of, the legislator should take it for granted that suchwas the errand she went out upon. If she dressed in a mannerin which it was particularly the business of courtesan to dress,he should take for granted her being of that stamp.ll.IH.C.Iir. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 227opinions of the delinquency of the offender. Eventhis mode of proceeding, mild as it may appear,is capable of various degrees of severity, accordingto the various degrees of publicity that maybegiven to the fact. It may be registered in awritten instrument to which few people haveaccess ; it may be registered in a written instrumentto which any person may have access. Itmay be notified by proclamation, by sound oftrumpet, by beat of drum. Since the inventionof printing, it may be recorded in indelible characters,and circulated through the whole state.*It is obvious that the discredit reflected by thisexpedient must be greater or less in point of intensityas the offence is esteemed more or lessdisreputable.The censure which in the law is pronouncedin general terms upon such uncertain persons asmay chance to become offenders, may, upon conviction,by the assistance of the executive power,be brought home to, and personally levelled at anyindividual offender. And this may be done in amanner more or less public, and either in a settledform of words, or with more latitude in a speechad libitum, to be delivered by the Judge. fBut the severest expedient for inflicting infamyis that which consists in the applying of somepolitical punishment, which, by its influence onIu certain offences against the Police, for instance, inselling bread by short weight, it is not an uncommon thing,,where the decree of delinquency appears to be considerable, forthe magistrate to threaten the offender, that upon the next convictionhe shall be advertised in the newspapers. Such a punishmentseems to be looked upon as more severe than the fineimposed by statute.t When the punishment is capital, or the sentence discretionary,it is common with us in England to preface it withsuch a speech.228 B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.the imaginations of mankind, is in possession ofthe power of producing this effect. This leads usto enquire into the different measures of infamythat stand naturally annexed to the several modesof punishment ; and in the course of this enquirywe shall find reason to distinguish certain punishmentsfrom the rest by the special epithet of infamous.A certain degree of infamy or disrepute, wehave already remarked, is what necessarily attendson every kind of political punishment. But thereare some that reflect a much larger portion ofinfamy than others.* These, therefore, it is plain,are the only ones which can be stated properly bythat name.Upon looking over the list of punishments weshall find that it is to those which come under thename of corporal punishments that this propertyof reflecting an extraordinary degree of infamy isalmost exclusively confined. Pecuniary punishments,which are the most common, are attendedwith a less degree of infamy than any other ; unlessit be quasi-pecuniary punishments ; which inthis respect, as in most others, are pretty muchupon a par with pecuniary. Next to these comethe several modes of confinement ; among which,if there be any difference, quasi imprisonment andlocal interdiction seem the mildest in this respect,next to them banishment, and imprisonment theseverest. Of specific restraints and active punishmentsat large, they are so various, that it is notAware of this circumstance, the Roman lawyers have takena distinction between the infamia facti and the infamia juris :the natural infamy resulting from the offence, and the artificialinfamy produced through the means of the punishment by thelaw. See Keinecc. Elementa Jur. Civil. Pand. 1.3. tit. 2. "399,whose explanation however is not very precise.B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.easy to give an account. In general they seem tobe on a footing with those punishments that aremildest in this respect, unless where, by means ofanalogy, they are so contrived as to reflect andaggravate in a peculiar manner the infamy of theoffence.* The same account may be given of allthe other kinds of forfeiture.With regard to corporal punishments short ofdeath, there is no punishment of this class but isunderstood to carry with it a very high degree ofinfamy. The degree of it, however, is not by anymeans in proportion to the organical pain or inconveniencesthat are respectively attendant uponthose punishments. On the contrary, if there beany difference, it seems as if the less the quantityis which a punishment imparts, of those or anyother kind of inconveniences, the greater is thequantity which it imports of infamy. The reasonmay be, that since it is manifest the punishmentmust have been designed to produce suffering insome way or other, the less it seems calculated toproduce in any other way, the more manifest it isthat it was for this purpose it was made choice of.Accordingly, in regard to punishments to whichthe highest degrees of infamy are understood to beannexed, one can scarcely find any other sufferingwhich they produce. This is the case with severalspecies of transient disablement ; such as thepunishments of the stocks, the pillory, and thecarcan : and with several species of transient aswell as of perpetual disfigurement; such as ignominiousdresses and stigmatization. Accordingly,Such as the obligation to ask pardon, an instance of activepunishment : the forbearing to carry on an employment whichthe offender has exercised fraudulently, an instance of restrictivepunishment : the forbearing to come into the presence ofthe party injured, an instance of ambulatory confinement.230 B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.these modes of punishment are all of them regardedas neither more nor less than so many ways ofinflicting infamy. Infamy thus produced by corporalpunishments, may be stiled corporal ignominyor infamy.According as the corporal punishment that ismade choice of for the sake of producing theinfamy is temporary or perpetual, the infamyitself may be distinguished into temporary andindelible. Thus the infamy produced by thestocks, the pillory, and the carcan, is but temporary;that which is produced by an indeliblestigma is perpetual. Not but that any kind ofinfamy, howsoever inflicted or contracted, maychance to prove perpetual ; since the idea of theoffence, or what comes to the same thing, of thepunishment, may very well chance to remainmore or less fresh in men s minds to the end ofthe delinquent s life : but when it is produced byan indelible stigma, it cannot do otherwise thancontinue so long as the mark remains, whatsoeverhappens to him. Wheresoever he goes, and howlong: soever he lives, he bears about him the evilhence of his guilt.Mutilation and the severer kinds of simpleafflictive punishments, discoloured, disfigurementand disablement, are all attended likewisewith a very intense degree of infamy ; that is inas far as the effects produced by them are knownto be produced on purpose in the way of punishment.But with regard to many of the sorts of~ jpunishment that come under the three latterheads, as the effects of them are, upon the face ofthem, no other than might have been produced byaccident, they are therefore the less certain of producingthe effect of infamy. The infamy producedby these punishments is, in point of duration, of aB.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 231mixed nature, as it were, between temporary andperpetual. At the time of the execution it standsupon a par in this respect with the pillory or thestocks, with whipping, or any other kind of simpleafflictive punishments : after that time it is greaterthan what is produced by any of these punishments,because the visible consequences still continue: it is not however so great as what is producedby stigmatization, because it does not ofitself, like that galling punishment, make knownthe guilt of the delinquent to strangers at the firstglance.Nearly allied to corporal infamy are two otherspecies of infamy, which as they derive their influencealtogether from that which is possessed bycorporal infamy, may be stiled quasi-corporal.The one is inflicted by an application made,instead of to a man s body, to some object, theidea of which, by the principle of association, hasthe effect of suggesting to the imagination, theidea of a punishment applied actually to the bodyitself. This, inasmuch as it operates by theforce of symbols or emblems, may be styled symbolicalor emblematical corporal infamy.* Theother is inflicted by a punishment applied indeedto the body, but not till after it has ceased to beAmong the ancient Persians, in some cases, when the criminalwas of high rank, instead of whipping the man himself, itwas the custom to whip his clothes. To this head may also bereferred the custom which prevails in France and other nationsupon the continent of executing criminals in effigy. Thefeigned punishments inflicted on the effigy is commonly, I suppose,the same that would have been really inflicted upon theman s person for the same offence; nor is it usual, I believe, toemploy this punishment where the delinquent is forthcoming.In Portugal, several of the persons who were concerned inthe attempt upon the late king s life were punished in thismanner.232 B.III. C.1II. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.susceptible of punishment, I mean not till afterdeath ; this may be styled posthumous or post-oratorycorporal infamy.*To the head of forfeiture of reputation must bereferred a forfeiture of a very particular kind, forfeitureof credibility ; that is, in effect, forfeiture ofso much of a man s reputation as depends uponthe opinion of his veracity. The effect of thispunishment (as far as it can be carried into effect)is to cause people to bestow on the delinquent thatshare of ill-will which they are naturally disposedto bear to a man whose word they look upon asnot being to be depended upon for true.This punishment is a remarkable instance of theempire attempted, and not unsuccessfully, to beexercised by the political magistrate over the moralsanction. Application is made to the executors ofthat sanction, that is the public at large, to bestowon the delinquent not so much of their dis-esteemin general, nor yet so much of their dis-esteem asthey are disposed to annex to some particular offenceof which he has been found guilty, but such ashare as they are disposed to annex to anotheroffence of which he has not been proved guilty,and which, unless by accident, has no connectionwith that of which he has actually been provedguilty.To this bead may be referred a part of the punishment inuse in England for High Treason, according to the CommonLaw ; the taking out and burning of the entrails, the cutting offthe head, and the dividing the body into four quarters, whichare disposed of at the King s pleasure. 2 Hawkins, 443.By an English statute, in cases of murder, the Judge is enjoinedto order the body (after the criminal has been put todeath by hanging) to be publicly dissected, and is empowered toorder it to be hung in chains, as the phrase is : which is practisedby suspending it from a gibbet in an iron frame.B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 233The method too which is taken to inflict thispunishment is equally remarkable. It is inflictednot by any restraint or other punishment appliedto the delinquent, but by a restraint laid upon anotherperson, a Judge, or by an inconvenience whichmay be of any kind whatsoever, thrown (as thecase may require) upon any person whatsoever.The Judge is forbidden to interrogate him, or topermit him to be interrogated as a witness in anycause, as also to pay any regard on any suchoccasion, to any instrument purporting to containhis written attestation. The party who may havestood in need of his evidence for the preservationof his life, liberty, or fortune, or the public whomay have stood in need of it to warrant thepunishment, and guard itself against the enterprisesof another, perhaps more atrocious, criminal,are precluded from that benefit.I know not of any instance in which it isabsolutely clear that a man has been made toincur this singular kind of forfeiture in the expressview of punishment. In all the cases in whichit has been adopted, it is not impossible but thatthe restraint which it imports may have beenimposed in no other view than that of improvingthe rules of evidence, and guiding the Judgeagainst error in his decision upon the questions offact brought before him.Be this as it may, it is certain that in the Englishlaw it stands annexed in many instances tooffences which have not the remotest connectionwith the veracity or mendacity of theoffender.*For instance, to High Treason, or the adherence to the unsuccessfulside in a competition for the Crown ; to Homicide com-234 B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.To this head also must be referred the punishmentof forfeiture of rank, otherwise entitleddegradation. For the purpose of understandingthis modification of ignominious punishment, reputationmust be distinguished into natural or ordinary,and factitious or extraordinary. By naturalshare of reputation and goodwill, I mean thatwhich each man possesses in virtue of his own personalconduct and behaviour. By factitious, I meanthat extraordinary share of these possessions which,independently of a man s personal conduct, is bestowedon him by the institution and contrivanceof the political magistrate.This kind of factitious reputation is commonlyannexed to office or employment : but it sometimesexists by itself. This is the case, for instance,in England, with the ranks of gentleman,esquire, knight, and baronet, and the ranks derivedfrom academical degrees.Rank may be conferred either by custom or byauthority. When derived from custom, it is annexedeither to family or to occupation. Whenderived from authority, it is annexed to the person.But whether it were conferred by authorityor no, it is in the power of authority to diminishthe reputation belonging to it, if not wholly totake it away. A sentence of a Judge degrading aman from the rank of gentleman, cannot cause aman not to have been born of a father that was amitted in revenge, on a sudden quarrel, or in the course of aduel, by consent : to Rape and other irregularities of the venerealappetite. This, however, seems to proceed not so much fromdesign as from inattention in the authors of our Common Law ;and is one of the many absurd and mischievous consequencesthat follow from the lumping together offences of the mostheterogeneous natures under the name of Felonies.B.III.C.llI. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 235gentleman, but it may divest him of a greater orless share of that respect which men were disposedbefore to pay him on that account.As to the mode of inflicting degradation, it maybeinflicted by any process that serves to expressthe will of the magistrate, that the delinquent beno longer considered as possessing the rank inquestion, with or without corporal ignomy.Degradation, did it answer precisely to the definitiongiven of it, when it is stiled forfeiture ofrank, should take away from a man that precisequantity of reputation, and consequently of goodoffices, and consequently of happiness, for whichhe stands indebted to his rank. But as thesequantities are incapable pf being measured, oreven estimated with any tolerable degree of exactness,the punishment of degradation can neverwith any certainty be made to answer precisely tosuch definition. It seems probable that a manwho has once been possessed of a certain rank,can never be totally deprived of all the reputation,respect, and good offices that are commonly renderedto that rank : the imaginations of mankindare too stubborn to yield instant and perfect obedienceto the nod of power. It seems probable,notwithstanding that the condition of a man whohas undergone a degradation of rank is therebycommonly rendered worse upon the whole than ifhe had never been possessed of it ; because ingeneral simply not to possess, is not so bad ashaving possessed to lose. To speak with moreprecision, it should seem that the characteristicpain of the moral sanction produced by such apunishment, is in general more than equivalent tothe sum of such of the casual benefits of that sanctionas the punishment fails to take away.236 B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.It is common enough to speak of a total loss ofreputation ; and some Jurists speak of such a lossas if it could easily be, and were frequently incurred.But such a notion is not compatible withany precise idea of the import of that term. Tounderstand this, it will be necessary to conceive inidea a certain average or mean quantity of reputationequal to Zero, from whence degrees of goodreputation may be reckoned on one side, and ofbad reputation on the other. This mean quantityof reputation, or goodwill call that which anygiven member of the community may be deemedto possess, who has no rank, and who either hasneither merits nor demerits, if such a human beingbe conceivable, or rather whose merits stand exactlyupon a level with his demerits. All abovethis average quantity may be stiled good reputation,all below it bad reputation. In one sensethen, a total forfeiture of reputation should consistof nothing more than a total forfeiture of goodreputation, as thus defined. Now then, accordingto this account of the matter, a total forfeiture ofreputation would be nothing more than what isvery possible, and indeed must be very frequent.But it is plain that this is not what the Jurists,nor indeed what persons in general, in speaking ofa total forfeiture of reputation, have in view. Forall that this would amount to, would be the reducingthe delinquent to a level with a man of ordinarymerit and condition : it would not put hisreputation upon so low a footing as that to whicha man of ordinary merit and reputation would bereduced by the slightest instance of moral or politicaldelinquency. What they have in view isthe acquisition, if one may so term it, of a certainshare of ill reputation, the quantity of which theyB. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 237view iii a confused manner, as if it were determinate,and consisted of all the ill reputation a mancould possibly acquire. But this, it is plain, itnever can do, at least in the cases to which theyapply it. For they speak of such an event as if itcould be and commonly were the effect of a singleinstance of delinquency ; for instance, a robbery orordinary murder. This, it is plain, it can never be,unless it should be maintained that an act of parricide,for example, would not make a man worselooked upon than he was before, after having committedonly a robbery or ordinary murder. It isplain that the maximum of bad as well as that ofgood reputation is an infinite quantity, and that inthis sense there is no such thing within the sphereof real life as a total forfeiture of reputation.SECT. II. SIMPLE IGNOMINIOUS PUNISHMENTSEXAMINED.The infliction of ignominious punishment is anappeal to the tribunal of the public an invitationto the people to treat the offender with contempt,to withdraw from him their esteem. It is (tospeak in figurative language) a bill drawn uponthe people for so much of their ill-will as theyshall think proper to bestow. If they look uponhim in a less favourable light than they wouldotherwise, the draft is honoured : if they do not,it is protested, and the charge is very apt to fallupon the drawer. Ignominious punishments arelike those engines which are apt to recoil, andoften wound the hand that adroitly uses them.But if skilfully managed, what important servicesmay they not be made to render ! Thelegislator, by calling in to his aid, and trusting to238 B.III. c.ui. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION .the moral sanction, increases its power and theextent of its influence : and when he declares thatthe Ions of honour is to be considered as a severepunishment, he gives to it in the eyes of every manan additional value.*1 . This species of punishment, so far as it goes,is not without some commodious properties : it isvariable in quantity from the paternal admonitionof the Judge, to a high degree of infamy. Accompaniedwith more or less publicity, with variouscircumstances of disgrace and humiliation, thelegislator may proportion the punishment to themalignity of the offence, and adapt it to the variouscircumstances of age, rank, sex, and profession.Every station in life will, for this purpose, affordfacilities that are peculiar to it, and in particularthe military.In point of variability, punishments of this kindhave an advantage over every other mode of punishment.This quality is desirable in a mode ofpunishment that it may be capable of being madeto bear a due proportion to every offence to which itis annexed. With regard to all other kinds ofpunishments that are constituted solely by the law,the proportion must be settled by the law ;whereas this mode has a tendency to fall into thatproportion of itself. The magistrate pronouncesthe people execute. The people, that is, as manyof the people as think proper : they execute it,that is, in whatever proportion they think proper.The malignity towards the delinquent is in generalproportionate to the malignancy of his offence. Itis not, however, like corporal punishment, capableSee Traites de Legislation, torn. iii. c. 17. Emploi duMobile de 1 Honneur.B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 239of being universally applied to all offences. Inmany cases an offence may be productive of realmischief, but a mischief which the people, theexecutioners of this mode of punishment, are notqualified to perceive. On this part of the subjectwe shall have occasion to speak further presently.2. In point of exemplary , this mode of punishmentcannot be excelled. Whatever it is that aman suffers by the publication of his offence, whetherby degradation or by being subject to ignominiousexposure ; it is evident that he suffers it fromthe infamy attached to his character under the sanctionof the legislator.3. In point of frugality it is advantageousenough. The mischief apprehended from theill-will annexed to a disreputable act, bears, I suppose,at least as high a ratio to the eventual mischief,as the mischief apprehended from any othermode of punishment does to the eventual.4. In point of popularity it cannot be excelled.For what objection can the people have to aman s being punished in this manner, when all thatis done to him is the giving them notice that withinthe bounds which the law allows, they themselvesmay punish him as they please, when they themselvesare both Judges and executioners?5. They are admissible. An erroneous sentencemay be annulled. A greater degree of notorietymaybe given to the justification than accompaniedthe condemnation. The stain that had been thusaffixed on his character will not only be completelyeffaced, but the supposed offender, from the unjustpersecution that he will have undergone, willbecome a general object of sympathy, and especiallyto those who have been instrumental ininflicting the punishment.What is more, even though justly inflicted, the240 B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.patient, by the stimulus he will have received,may be excited to exertions to recover the esteemhe has lost, and to earn fresh honours to hide hisdisgrace. In the army it has happened that wholebodies of troops, after having been stigmatized bytheir officers, have atoned for their offence by distinguishedacts of valour, and have received thehighest marks of honour.This advantage is not possessed by ignominiouscorporal punishments : the stain that they leave isindelible ; and unless the patient expatiates himself,his lost reputation is irrecoverable.Having thus stated the properties that belongto punishments of this kind, we proceed to noticea difficulty which arises in their application, andwhich is peculiar to them. The legislator cannotat pleasure attach to any given species of offencethe degree of infamy that he may be desirous ofaffixing to it. There are some classes of offencesreally detrimental to the country, such, for example,as election bribery and smuggling, for thepunishing of which the legislator has no means ofpressing the great bulk of the people into the service.Upon other points the popular sentimentsare in direct opposition to those of the legislature :there are others in which they are wavering,neutral, or too feeble to serve his purpose. Thecase of duelling may serve as an example.So far" (says Rousseau) " is the censorial tribunalfrom leading the public opinion, it followsit : and when it departs from it, its decisions arevain and nugatory. "*Be it so ; but what follows from this ? Is itthat the legislator is to be the slave of the mostmischievous and erroneous popular notions ? No.Contrat Social. Liv. iv. c. 7.B.1II. C.IIJ. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 241This would be to quit the helm while the vesselwas surrounded with rocks. His greatest difficultywill consist in conciliating the public opinion, incorrecting it when erroneous, and in giving it thatbent which shall be most favourable to produceobedience to his mandates.The legislator is in an eminent degree possessedof the means of guiding public opinion. Thepower with which he is invested gives to hisinstructions, whenever he may bestow them, fargreater weight than would be attributed to themif falling from a private individual. The public,generally speaking, presumes that the governmenthas as its command more completely than any privateman, the requisite sources of information. Itis presumed also that in the great majority of casesits interest is the same with that of the people,and that it is unblessed by personal interest, whichis so apt to misguide the opinion of individuals. Ifthings go on unprosperous, the responsible agentsbecome subject to the animadversion of the public :if prosperously, they have the credit and theadvantage. Of this people in general have aconfused notion, and it is the ground of theirconfidence.In extirpating prejudices that appear to him tobe mischievous the legislator has the means oflaying the axe to the root of the evil. lie mayform institutions which, without inculcating doctrinesin direct repugnance to received opinions,may indirectly attack them. Instead of plantingagainst them a battery he may sink a mine beneaththem, the effect of which will be infallible.The legislator is clothed not only with politicalbut with moral power. It is what is commonlyexpressed by the words consideration, respect,R242 B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.confidence. There are not wanting instances inwhich, by means of such instruments, the mostimportant effects have been produced.A certain degree of infamy, it is obvious, mustnaturally result upon a conviction for any offencewhich the community are accustomed to markwith their displeasure : thus much results fromthe bare conviction, indeed from the bare detection,without any express designation of the magistrate.The only way, therefore, in which the magistratecan produce any additional degree of infamy, Imean all along pure and simple infamy, is bytaking extraordinary measures to make public thefact of the offence. In this way it is only inpoint of extent that the magistrate adds to theactual portion of infamy that flows from the offence.In point of intensity, there is but one way inwhich the law can contribute anything to theinfliction of simple infamy. This is by bestowingon the act in question some opprobrious appellation: some epithet, calculated to express ill-willor contempt on the part of him who uses it.Thus, a legislator of ancient Rome, (in a passageof Livy, quoted by the Author of Principles ofPenal Law*) after describing a particular modeof offence, is said to have done nothing moretowards punishing it, than by subjoining thesewords, improve factum. Here the legislator beginsthe song of obloquy, expecting that thepeople will follow in chorus. The delinquent isto be pelted with invectives, and the legislatorbegins and casts the first stone.But when the object of the legislator is toconciliate the public opinion, and especially whenP. 290, 1st edit.B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 243that opinion is opposite to the one he would establish,he must address himself to their reason.I hope it will not be supposed that under thename of reasons, I have here in view those effusionsof legislative babbling, those old-womanishaphorisms, mocking the discernment of the people,degrading the dignity of the legislature, whichstuff up and disgrace the preambles of our statute-books." Whereas it has been found inconvenientWhereas great mischiefs have arisen" as ifit were endurable that a legislator should prohibita practice which he did not think " inconvenient,"which he did not think " mischievous,"and as if, without his saying as much, the peoplewould not give him credit for wishing that it mightbe believed he thought it.Of what sort then should the reasons be whichthe legislator ought to employ to back and justifyan epithet of reproach ? They should be such asmay serve to indicate the particular way in whichthe practice in question is thought liable to domischief; and by that means, point out the analogythere is between that practice, and thoseother practices, more obviously but perhaps notmore intensely mischievous, to which the peopleare already disposed to annex their disapprobation.Such reasons, if reasons are to be given,should be simple and significant, that they mayinstruct, energetic that they may strike, short thatthey may be remembered.Take the following as an example in the case ofsmuggling. Whosoever deals with smugglers lethim be infamous. He who buys uncustomed goodsdefrauds the public of the value of the duty. Byhim the public purse suffers as much as if he hadstoke the same sum out of the public treasury. He244 B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.who defrauds the public purse defrauds every memberof the community.*As the legislator may lay the hand of reproachupon him who counteracts the purposes of thelaw, so may he take it off from him who forwardsthem. Such is the informer : a sort of man onwhose name the short-sightedness and prejudiceof the people, inflamed by the laws themselves,have most unreservedly cast an odium. The informers law might be prefaced in the followingmanner :It is the artifice of bad men to seek to draw contemptupon them who, by executing the laws, wouldbe a check upon their misdeeds. If the law is just,as it ought to be, the informer is the enemy of noman, but in proportion as that man is an enemy to therest. In proportion as a man loves his country hewill be active in bringing to justice all those who, bythe breach of the laws, entrench on its prosperity .It will be remarked, that in this new part of thelaw in this struggle to be made against the errorsof the moral sanction there is work for the dramatistas well as the legislator, or else, that thepolitician should add somewhat of the spirit ofI say the public purse, I do not say the public simply.Far from the pen of the legislator be that stale sophistry ofdeclaiming moralizers, which consists in giving to one species ofmisbehaviour the name and reproach of another species of ahigher class, confounding in men s minds the characters of viceand virtue. Pure from all taint of falsehood should the legislatorkeep his pen; nor think to promote the cause of utilityand truth by means which only tyranny and imposture canstand in need of. In what I have said above there is nothingbul what is rigorously and simply true. But it were not trueto say that a theft upon the public were as mischievous as atheft upon an individual ; from this there results no alarm, andthe more the loss is divided the lighter it falls upon each.B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 245the dramatist to all the information of the lawyer.Thus wrote the legislators of ancient days, menwho spoke the significant and enchanting languageof ancient Greece. Poetry was invited to the aidof law. No man had ever yet thought of addressingthe people in the barbarous language thatdisgraces our statute-book, where the will of thelegislator is drowned in a sea of words. Habitedin a Gothic accoutrement of antiquated phrases,useless repetitions, incomplete specifications, entangledand never-ending sentences, he maymerely, from incomprehensibility, inspire terror,but cannot command respect. It may be matterof astonishment, why the arbiters of our life andof our property, instead of disporting themselvesin this grotesque and abject garb, cannot expressthemselves with clearness, with dignity, and withprecision : the best laws would be disfigured ifclothed in such language.In a moderate and virtuous government,"says an elegant and admired writer, " the idea ofshame will follow the finger of law."Yes, so as his finger be not so employed as tocounteract and irritate the determined affectionsof the people. He goes on and says, " whateverspecies of punishment is pointed out as infamous,will have the effect of infamy." True, whateveris appointed by the legislator as a mark to signifyhis having annexed his disapprobation to anyparticular mode of conduct, will have this effect;it will make the people sensible that he wishes tobe thought to disapprove of that mode of conduct;in most cases, that he does really disapprove of it.But to say that whatever the legislator professesto disapprove of, the people will disapprove oftoo, is, I doubt, going a degree too far.We may direct his attention to an instance of246 B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.an offence which, under as moderate and virtuousa government, I dare believe, (all prejudicesapart) as ever yet existed, laws have renderedpenal, magistrates have endeavoured to renderinfamous, by a punishment which in generalmarks the patient with infamy, but which nolaws, no magistrates, no punishments, will in thiscountry ever render infamous. I mean state-libelling.The offence of libelling, as marked out by thelaw as it stands at present, is this ; it is the publishingrespecting any man anything that he doesnot like. This being the offence of libelling ingeneral, the offence of state-libelling is the publishingrespecting a man in power anything whichhe does not like.A libel is either criminative or vituperative. Bycarminative, I mean such an one as charges a manwith having done a specific act (determinable bytime and place,) of the number of those that aremade punishable by law. By vituperative, simplyvituperative, I mean such an one as, withoutcharging a man with any specific fact, does nomore than intimate, in terms more or less forcible,the disapprobation in which the libeller holds thegeneral conduct or character of the party libelled.Such are all those epithets of vague reproach,liar, fool, knave, wicked profligate, abandonedman, and so forth : together with all those compositionswhich in the compass of a line or of avolume intimate the same thing. A carminativelibel therefore is one thing : a vituperative isanother. The law knows not of these terms : butit acknowledges the distinction they are hereintended to express.Of these two, a libel of the carminative kindadmits, we may observe, of another much moreB. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 247confined and determinate definition : a vituperativelibel will admit of no other than that whichis given above.Now then so it is, that for a libel simplyvituperative, against a private person, the law willnot let a man be punished by what is called anaction to the profit of the party, unless it be underparticular circumstances, which it is not here theplace to dwell upon. But by imprisonment, or tothe profit of the Crown, by what is called anindictment, or more especially what is called aninformation, it will let him be punished at thecaprice, (for no rules are or can be laid down toguide discretion) at the caprice, I say, and fancyof the Judges. For a libel of the carminative kind,against a private person, the law will not let aman be punished, if the libeller can prove hischarge to be a true one. But for a libel against aman in power, carminative or vituperative, true orfalse, moderate or immoderate, it makes a manpunishable at all events, without distinction. Ifit be true, it is so much the worse ; Judges, thinkingto confound reasoning by paradox, have notscrupled to hazard this atrocious absurdity. TheJudges of antiquity broached it long ago ; succeedingJudges have adhered to it ; present Judges,whose discernment cannot but have detected it,present Judges, as if borne down by the irresistibleweight of authorities, recognize it ; and ittriumphs to this hour.This being the case, he who blames the proceedingsof a man in power, justly or unjustly, isa libeller : the more justly, the worse libeller.But for blaming the proceedings of men in power,and as they think j justly, never will the people ofthis country look upon a man as infamous.Lawyers may harangue, juries may convict; but248 B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.neither those juries, nor even those lawyers will,in their hearts, look upon him as infamous.*The practical conclusion resulting from this is,that the legislator ought never directly to opposethe public opinion by his measures, by endeavouringto fix a stain of ignominy upon an act of thedescription of those in question, which are equallyliable to originate in the most virtuous as in themost vicious motives, and which consequentlyescape general reprobation.But it is not less true, that in a very extensiveclass of cases, an argument addressed to the understandingsand sentiments of the people, would,if properly applied, have some considerable effect,as well as on arguments addressed to their fears.If he thought the experiment worth trying, thelegislator might do something by the opinion of hisprobity and his wisdom, and not be forced to doeverything by the terror of his power. As hecreates the political sanction so he might lead themoral. The people even ih this country are byno means ill-disposed to imagine great knowledgewhere they behold great power. A few kindwords, such as the heart of a good legislator willfurnish without effort, will, if the substance of thelaw be not at variance with them, be enough to divin1758, Dr Shebbearc, was pilloried for writing a libelagainst the then King under a Whig administration. He stoodin triumph. The people entertained him with applause. Atanother time, J. Williams, bookseller, was pilloried for publishinga libel against his Majesty George the Third, under an administrationcharged with Toryism : the people made a collectionfor him. At another time, W. Beckford, Lord Mayor of London,replied extempore, in an unprecedented and affronting manner,to a speech from the throne : the citizens put up his statue inGuildhall. Shame did not then, I think, follow the finger ofthe Jaw.t 2 Bur. 792.B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 249pose the people to be not uncharitable in theiropinion of his benevolence.Not that the legislator in our days, and in thosecountries which, on the subject of government,one has principally in view, ought to expect topossess altogether the same influence over themoral sanction as was exercised by the legislatorsof such small states as those of Greece and Italyin the first dawning of society. The most prominentreason of this difference is, that in monarchicalgovernments it is birth, and not any personalqualifications, that fix a man in this office. It israre that the person in whose name laws are issuedis the person who is believed to make them. It isone thing to make laws, and another to touch themwith a sceptre.The Catherine and Gustavus govern, and areseen to do so. Other Princes are either openlygoverned, or locking up their bosoms from thepeople reign as it were by stealth.In a mixed government like our s, where thesovereign is a body, he has no personal character.He show r s himself to the people only in his compositions,which are all that is known of him.By those writings he may doubtless give someidea of his character. But as his person is in amanner fictitious and invisible, it is not to be expectedthat the idea of his character should make sostrong an impression upon the imagination of thepeople, as if they had the idea of this or thatperson to connect it with.In the small states of Greece the business oflegislation stood upon a very different footing.The Alehouses, the Solon, the Lycurgus, werethe most popular men in their respective states.It was from their popularity, and nothing else, thatthey derived their title. They were philosophers250 B. III. C. III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION.and moralists as well as legislators : their laws hadas much of instruction in them as of coercion : asmuch of lectures as of commands. The respectof the people had already placed the power of themoral sanction in their hands, before they wereinvested with the means of giving direction to thepolitical. Members of a small state, the peopleof which lived as if they were but one family ; theywere better known to the whole people, for whomthey made laws, than with us a member ordinarilyis by the people of the county he is chosen for.In those days, men seem to have been moreunder the government of opinion than at present.The word of this or that man, whom they knew andreverenced, would go further with them than atpresent. Not that their passions, as it shouldseem, were more obsequious to reason ; but theirreason was more obsequious to the reason of asingle man. A little learning, or the appearanceof it, gleaned from foreign nations, gave a man anadvantage over the rest, which no possible superiorityof learning could give a man at present. Ipsedixit is an expression that took its rise from theblind obsequiousness of the disciples of Pythagoras: and not ill characteristic of the manner ofthinking of those who pretended to make any useof their thinking faculty throughout ancientGreece.*Let me be permitted here to illustrate what has been saidof the power possessed by ancient legislators, by a modern example,borrowed from what to some persons will appear a frivoloussubject, and certainly from a frivolous person. Thelegislator in question was a master of ceremonies. For a longseries of years, by the authority of opinion, Nash, commonlycalled Beau-Nash, regulated at Bath, the conduct of the companyassembled at that place during the season : sovereignarbiter and director of all points pertaining to the custom andetiquette of the place, of the order in which balls, concerts, &c.B.III. C.III. FORFEITURE OF REPUTATION. 251were to succeed each other. How did he goto work? " Letsuch a thing be done," said the legislator of the Bath Assemblies.Let not such a thing be done." " Let such an Assembly take placeon such a day : that it begin at such an hour, thai it finishes atsuch an hour," &c. &c. Setting aside the extreme disparity ofthe object, the resemblance is striking between these ordinancesof fashion, and such laws of antiquity as have been handeddown to us. There were no punishments properly so called.The company assembling met there, confiding in his prudenceand experience in the concerns he had to regulate, put into hishands a certain quantity of the power of the moral sanction,and the public voice was ready to be raised against the infractionsof his rules; and laws the weakest in appearance, weremost strictly obeyed.CHAPTER IV.OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES.WE now come to consider the several kinds ofForfeitures, and first, the sorts of forfeiture thatbear the name of pecuniary and quasi-pecuniary :forfeiture of money, and what is exchangeable formoney.A pecuniary forfeiture is incurred when a manis, by a judicial sentence, compelled to pay a sumof money to another, or, as it is in some casescalled, a fine.As to the methods which may be taken by thelaw to inflict a punishment of this sort ; they areasfollows :1. The simplest course is to take a sum ofmoney, to the amount in question, out of the physicalpossession of the delinquent, and transfer itinto the physical possession of the person who is toreceive it ; after which, were he to meddle againwith the money so taken, he would be punishedjust as if he had meddled with any other parcel ofmoney that never was in his possession. Thiscourse can only be taken when it happens to beknown that the delinquent has such a sum in hispossession, and where it lies. But this is seldomthe case.2. The next and more common expedient is totake such and such a quantity of what other corporaleffects he may have in his physical possessionas, if sold, will produce the sum in question,and to make sale of them accordingly, and bestowthe produce as before.B.III. C.IV. OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES. 2533. Another expedient is, to make use of compulsivemeans to oblige him to produce the sumhimself. These means will be either, 1st, thesubjecting him to a present punishment, to betakenoff as soon as he has done the thing required :or, 2d, the threatening him with some futurepunishment, to be applied at such or such a timein case of his not having done by that time thething required.4. A fourth expedient is to take such propertyof his, whether in money or other effects, orwhereof, though the legal right to them, or in acertain sense the legal possession of them, is inhim, the physical possession is in other people.As the existence of such legal right, and the placewhere the effects in question are deposited, arecircumstances that can seldom be known but byhis means, this makes it necessary to apply compulsionto him to oblige him to give the requisiteinformation.Of these four expedients, the first and secondcommonly go together, and are put in practiceindiscriminately at one and the same operation.The officer to whom the business is entrusted, ifhe finds money enough, takes money : if not, hetakes other effects to make up the deficiency. Thefirst then may, in future, be considered as includedunder the second.In England, the second and the third have bothof them been in practice from time immemorial :not indiscriminately however, but according to thename that has been given to the punishment bywhich the money has been exacted. When thispunishment has been called a fine, the third methodhas been exclusively employed : when it hasbeen called damages, the second and third havebeen employed together, not indeed in their full254 13. III. C.IV. OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES.force, but under certain restrictions too particularto be here insisted on.The fourth is comparatively of late invention.It was first applied to traders by one of the BankruptLaws, and has since been extended by theInsolvent Acts to persons at large, where the obligationthey are under to pay money bears thename of debt. Such is the case in many instanceswhere that obligation is imposed in a view topunishment.SECT. II. PECUNIARY FORFEITURES EXAMINED.1. As to the evils produced by a punishment ofthis kind, they are all reducible to the pain of privationoccasioned by the loss of so much money.*2. Pecuniary forfeiture shares with penal servitudein the striking advantage of being convertibleto profit.The quantity of profit is not limited in this caseas in that. This is its peculiar excellence ; andthis it is that adapts it particularly to the purposeof compensation.3. In respect of equality, it is not less advantageous.No punishment can be made to sit moreequally than this can be made to sit on differentindividuals ; so as the quantum of it be proportionedto the means which the delinquent has ofbearing it. For money (that is, the ratio of agiven sum of money to the total sum of a man scapital) we have already shewn to be the mostaccurate measure of the quantity of pain or pleasurea man can be made to receive. The pleasureswhich two men will be deprived of, by being madeto lose each a given part (suppose a tenth) ofSec Intro. to Morals and Legislation, Ch. 3.B.III. C.IV. OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES. 255their respective fortunes, will in specie perhaps bevery different ; but this does not hinder but that,on taking into the account quantity on the onehand and actual expectations and probable burthenson the other, they may be the same ; theywill be the same as nearly as any two quantitiescan be made to be so by any rule of measuring.It is from his money that a man derives the mainpart of his pleasures ; the only part that lies opento estimation. The supposition we are forced tofollow is, that the quantities of pleasure men arecapable of purchasing with their respective capitalsare respectively equal. This supposition is, itmust be supposed, very loose indeed, and inaccurate,because the quantity of a man s capital issubject to infinite fluctuations, and because thereis great reason to suppose that a richer man is aptto be happier upon an average than a poorer man.It is, however, after all nearer to the truth than anyother general suppositions that for the purpose inquestion can be made.4. In point of variability, it is evident nothing canexcel this mode of punishment, as far as it extends.It commences at the very bottom of the scale. Inthis respect it has greatly the advantage over corporalpunishments, which are always complicatedwith a certain degree of infamy ; while in the instanceof pecuniary punishments, no other infamyis produced than what is necessarily attached tothe offence.5. In respect of frugality. Pecuniary punishment,especially when the relative quantum of itis orreat, is liable to a disadvantage which balanceso * oin some degree against the advantage which it hasof being convertible to profit. Along with thedelinquent, other parties who are innocent are exposedto suffer; to wit, whatever persons were256 B.III. C.IV. OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES.comprised within the circle of his dependents.This suffering is not the mere pain of sympathy,grounded on the observation of his suffering : if itwere, there would be no reason for making mentionof it as belonging in a more especial mannerto the present mode of punishment. It is an originalpain, produced by a consciousness of the losswhich they themselves are likely to incur by theimpoverishment of their principal. This evil againis not a mere negative evil ; the evil which consistsin the not being to have the comforts whichhad it not been for his impoverishment they wouldhave had. If it were, there could be no morereason for taking it into the account on this occasionthan the pain of sympathy. For, whatever itbe, it is balanced, and that exactly, by the pleasurethat goes to those persons, whosoever theybe, to whose profit the money is applied. Thepleasure resulting from the use of that money isneither diminished nor increased by the operation:it only changes hands. The pain then, that is peculiarto this species of punishment, is neithermore nor less than the pain of disappointment producedby the destruction of those expectationswhich the parties in question had been accustomedto entertain, of continuing to participate in the fortuneof their principal, in a measure proportionedto that in which they had been accustomed to participatein it.6. In point of exemplary, it has nothing in particularto boast of. At the execution of it, nospectacle is exhibited : the transfer of a sum ofmoney on this account has nothing to distinguishit from the case of an ordinary payment. It is notfurnished with any of those symbolical helps toexemplary which belong to most punishmentsof the corporal kind. Upon the face of the .CH.IV. OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES. 257scription, the exemplary it possesses is in proportionto the quantum of it : that is, in the ratioof the quantum of the forfeiture to the capital ofhim whom it is to affect.There is one case, however, in which it is particularlydeficient in this article. This is when it islaid on under the shape of costs. Upon the faceof the law nothing occurs from whence any adequateidea can be drawn of what eventually turnsout to be the quantum of the punishment.7. In point of sensibility it is in an eminentdegree advantageous. Under no other mode ofpunishment can reparation be made for an unjustsentence with equal facility.8. In point of popularity this punishment exceedsevery other. It is the only one of any consequenceagainst which some objection or other of the popularcast has not been made.In point of quantity pecuniary forfeitures aresusceptible of varieties which may have considerableinfluence on their effects.The quantum of such a forfeiture, as inflicted bystatute or common law, may be either discretionaryor indeterminate : or if determinate, it may beeither limited or fixed ; and in either case it maybedetermined, either absolutely or by reference.In the latter case, with regard to the standards bywhich it is determined, it would manifestly be invain to attempt to set any bounds to their variety.The circumstances most commonly made choice offor this purpose are 1. The profit of the offence ;2. the value of the thing which is the subject-matterof the offence ; 3. the amount of the injury ;4. the fortune of the offender.In England a punishment of this kind is knownin different cases by different names, which havenothing to do with the nature of the punishment258 B.III.CH.IV. - OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES.(that is of the suffering) itself, nor essentially withthe manner in which it is inflicted. They aretaken only from the accidental circumstance of themanner in which the produce of the punishment isdisposed of.When this produce is given to the King or hisgrantee, the punishment being left unlimited bythe legislature, after the quantum of it has beensettled by a Judge, it is called Fine.When, after being limited by the legislature, ithas been settled by the Judge, the name employedto denote it by, howsoever applied, has commonlybeen the general term of Forfeiture.When the quantum of it has been left unlimitedby the legislature, and the produce of it givento a party injured by the offence, the punishmentis called Damages. In this case the settling ofthe quantum has generally been committed to aSECT. III. - OT QUASI-PECUNIARY FORFEITURES.By quasi-pecuniary forfeitures I mean the forfeituresof any kind of property that is not money,but is of such a nature as admits of its being exchangedfor money.The enumeration of the different species of propertybelongs more to a treatise upon civil lawthan to a work upon punishments. As manyspecies of property, so many species of forfeiture.The observations we have made upon pecuniarypunishments may in general be applied to quasi-pecuniarypunishment. The evil produced bytheir infliction may be estimated according to thepecuniary value lost ; but there is one exceptionto be made with respect to objects possessing avalue in affection. An equivalent in money willB.III.CH.IV. OF PECUNIARY FORFEITURES. 259not represent any of the pleasures attached tothese objects. The loss of patrimonial lands, ofthe house which has passed from father to son inthe same family, ought not to be estimated at theprice for which those lands or that house wouldsell.Punishments of this kind are in general moreexemplary than pecuniary punishments. Theconfiscation of lands, of a manor, for instance, morevisibly bears the marks of a punishment, attractsthe attention of a greater number of persons thanafine of the same or of a greater value. The factof the possession is a fact known through all thedistrict : a fact of which the recollection must berecalled by a thousand circumstances, and perpetuatedfrom generation to generation.These considerations open a vast field for reflection,upon the use of confiscations of territorialproperty, especially in the case of those equivocalcrimes called rebellions or civil wars. They perpetuaterecollections which ought to be effaced.We shall recur to this subject when we speak ofPunishments misplaced. Book IV.CHAPTER VFORFEITURE OF CONDITION.WHEN the property under consideration consistsof a real tangible entity, as a house or lands, itpresents itself under its most simple and intelligibleshape : but when it is of an incorporeal nature, itcan only be designated by abstract terms ; and toexplain those terms it is necessary to have recourseto those real entities from which those fictitiousentities derive their name and their signification.In order to explain the nature of any particularcondition in life, for example that of husband, it isnecessary to state the right conferred upon him bythe law, over the person, the property, and theservices of an existent being the woman to whomhe is married. To explain the nature of rank it isnecessary to explain the rights that it confersthe exclusive privilege of using a certain title, of beinghabited in a particular manner, of being entitledto priority upon certain occasions ; in short, to enjoysuch honours as are attached to the particular rankinquestion. So far the effect produced is producedby the operation of the law. As to the honour itself,which is the source of their value, depends upon themoral sanction. It is, however, a species of property.A man invested with a certain rank is entitledto receive from persons at large ineligible services,services of respect, and which will be generallyrendered to him in consideration of his rank.B.IIJ. CH.V. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 261In respect of offices, public offices, we may pointout the power possessed by the person holdingthem over his subordinates, the emoluments thatare attached to them, and the ineligible servicesthat may result from the possession of them, thatis to say, benefits resulting from the dispositionthat may be supposed to be felt by persons atlarge to render services to a man placed in anofficial station.By the same process we may explain the natureof all rights ; for example, the right of voting in aParliamentary election. Every person in possessionof this right has the privilege of giving a vote,by which he influences the choice of the person tobe invested with a particular species of power.The value of this interest, under the present stateof things, consists principally in giving the electora certain power over the candidate and his friends.An honest and independent exercise of this rightis a means of acquiring reputation. To generousand benevolent minds there also accrues from it apleasure of sympathy, founded on the prospect ofpublic happiness, that is to say, upon the influencethat the choice of a virtuous and enlightened candidatemay have upon the public welfare.The value of a condition in life, of a right, of aprivilege, being explained to consist in power,profit, and reputation, that is to say, the pleasuresresulting from the possession of it, we are in possessionof all the necessary elements for estimatingthe evil accruing from their loss, or, in other words,the magnitude of the punishment occasioned bytheir forfeiture.To give an analytical view of all the modificationsof which property is susceptible, and every speciesof forfeiture to which it may be exposed, wouldbe a work of almost endless labour. We shall B.III. CH.V. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.tent ourselves here with giving a few examples,beginning with,SECT. I. THE MATRIMONIAL CONDITION.The evils liable to be experienced by the husbandfrom the forfeiture of this condition consistin the loss of the pleasures belonging to it.1. The pleasures, which are the principal objectsin the institution of marriage, may be dividedinto, 1st Pleasures of sense ; and 2nd Pleasuresproceeding from the perception of an agreeableobject, which depends partly on the senses, andpartly on the imagination.2. The innumerable minor pleasures of allkinds resulting from those ineligible serviceswhich belong to a husband s authority. Notwithstandingtheir variety, they may be all ofthem comprised under the head of pleasures ofpossession.3. The pleasures resulting from the use of theproperty derived from the wife : these belong tothe same head as the preceding.4. Where the wife has separate property, overwhich a power of disposal is reserved to her,pleasure resulting from the hope of becoming possessedof this part of her property. Pleasure ofexpectation founded on the pleasures derivablefrom the possession of wealth.5. The pleasure resulting from the persuasionof being beloved. This affection producing avariety of uncontrollable services, which have allthe charms of appearing to be spontaneous, asthose that are the result of friendship. Thesepleasures may be referred to the pleasures of themoral sanction.6. The pleasure resulting from the good reputeB.III. CH.V. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 263of the wife which is reflected upon the husband,and which has a natural tendency, as honour derivedfrom any other source, to conciliate to himthe esteem and goodwill of persons in general.This may also be referred to the pleasures arisingfrom the moral sanction.7. The pleasure of witnessing her happiness,and especially that part of it which he is mostinstrumental in producing. This is the pleasureof benevolence or goodwill.8. The pleasure resulting from the several un-commendableservices received at the hands of thefamily of which he has become a member. Thismay be referred to the pleasures of the moralsanction.9. The pleasure of power, considered generally,independently of any particular use that may bemade of it, with which he is invested, in virtue ofthe exclusive controul he possesses over the fundfor reward and punishment. This may be referredto the pleasures of the imagination.10. The pleasure resulting from the conditionof father. This we shall have occasion to noticein considering the evils resulting from the forfeitureof the condition of the father.This same catalogue, with such slight variations,as the reader will find no difficulty in making, isapplicable to the condition of wife.The task of coolly analysing and classifyingfeelings of this nature may appear tedious, but itis not the less necessary if we would estimatethe amount of evil resulting from the loss of thiscondition.SECT. II. THE PATERNAL CONDITION.The evils resulting from the forfeiture of the264 B.IIl. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.condition of father may be referred most of themto the loss of the following pleasures :1. The pleasures derived from the imagininghis own existence perpetuated in that of his child.This is a pleasure of the imagination.2. The pleasure of having at his command,during the child s minority, the services that hemay be in a condition to render. This is a pleasureof power.3. The pleasure of employing, in so far as itcan be done without diminution, the separateproperty of this child. This is a pleasure referableto two sources, that of father, and of guardian(of which presently).4. The pleasure of filial affection, a pleasure ofthe moral sanction.5. The pleasure reflected upon him by thegood repute of his child. This also is a pleasure,of the moral sanction.6. The pleasure of advancing the happiness ofhis child : pleasure of benevolence or goodwill.7. The pleasure derived from the several un-eligibleservices that he may hope to receivefrom the connections that his son, as he grows up,may form in the world. Pleasure of the moralsanction.8. The pleasure resulting from the sentimentof paternal power. This is a pleasure of theimagination.9. In some cases the pleasure derived from theexpectation of becoming possessed of the wholeor a part of the property the child may haveacquired, or in case of his death the actual possessionof such property. Pleasure in the onecase of expectation founded on the pleasuresderivable from the possession of wealth, in theother case from the actual possession of wealth.B.III. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 265SECT. III. CONDITION OF CHILD.Pleasures belonging to the condition of child :1. The pleasure derived from the use of theexigible services of the parent.2. The pleasure resulting from the power ofusing certain parts of the property belonging tothe father.3. The pleasure resulting from the persuasionof being beloved by him.4. The pleasure derived from the good reputeof the father, which is reflected upon the child.5. The pleasure of witnessing the father s happiness,and of contributing to promote it : apleasure rendered more vivid by being accompaniedwith sentiments of gratitude.6. The pleasure resulting from the connectionsof the father, and the right he may have to certainservices at their hands.7. The pleasure derived from the hope of inheritingthe whole or a part of his father s property,or if he be dead, from the possession of the property.SECT. IV. PLEASURES DERIVED FROM THE CONEdition OF TRUSTEE.The pleasures resulting from standing in thecondition of trustee, are the following :1. The pleasure resulting from the hope of contributingto the happiness of the individual whoseinterest is in question. This is a pleasure of benevolenceor goodwill.2. The pleasure derived from the hope of theineligible services to be expected from the gratitudeof the individual in question. Pleasure of themoral sanction.266 B.III. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.3. Pleasure founded on the hope of receivingineligible services at the hands of persons benefitedby the being entrusted with the use of thetrust property. This also is a pleasure of themoral sanction.4. Pleasure founded on the hope of sharing inthe esteem, the goodwill, and the ineligible servicesof the different persons to whom his capacityand probity in the management of the trust propertymay have become known. This is also apleasure of the moral sanction.5. When a salary is annexed to the duty : pleasureof pecuniary profit.It is but too well known, that the pleasuresrespectively belonging to these conditions are liableto vanish, and at any rate to be alloyed by acorresponding set of pains. These pains are tooobvious to need insisting on. The value of anysuch condition may therefore be either positive ornegative ; in plain terms, a man may either be thebetter for it or the worse. Where the value of itis positive, it will consist of the sum of the valuesof the several pleasures after that of the severalpains had been deducted : when negative, as thesum of the value of the pains after that of the pleasurehas been deducted. When therefore the valueof any such condition happens to be negative, asentence taking a man out of it, must needs operatenot as a punishment but as a reward.With regard to those pleasures or benefits whichare common to several of the above conditions, itis manifest that, though the pleasure is in each ofthese several cases nominally the same, they areliable to be very different in point of value. Thusthe pleasure of contributing to the happiness ofthe person who forms the other term in the relation,is incident to the condition of parent, and alsoB.I1I.C.V. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 2G7to that of a guardian : but it is more certain andmore vivid in the case of the father than in that ofthe guardian. To engage, however, further insuch details, besides their being so obvious, wouldlead us from the subject of politics to that ofmorals.Let us now proceed to consider the manner inwhich the several forfeitures may be produced, or,as the case be, any part of them may be employedas an instrument of punishment.The advantages of the conjugal condition maybesubtracted as a punishment by a judicial sentence,declaring that the offender is not, or shallnot be any longer considered as the husband orwife of the person in question.The consequence of such sentence would be,not completely to destroy the advantages of thatcondition, but to render them precarious.If after this sentence has been pronounced theycohabit, or are suspected of cohabiting together,the woman is considered as a concubine. Whenthis sort of connexion is known to subsist, it is insome countries punished by the moral sanction, inothers, both by the moral and political.* By legaldivorce, a man is also deprived in the whole or inpart of the ineligible services derived from theright he has over the property of his wife, andespecially of those services derived from cohabitedthe laws of the State of Connecticut (North America)If a man aud woman who have been divorced shall againcohabit together as man and wife, they shall be punished asadulterers ;" and " the punishment for adultery is discretionarywhipping, branding in the forehead with the letter A, andwearing a halter about the neck on the outside of the garmentsso as to be visible. On being found without the halter, oninformation and proof made before an assistant or justice of thepeace, he may order them to be whipped not exceeding thirtystripes." Swift s Laws of Connecticut, vol. ii, p. 328.268 B.III. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.tion, it would make him dependant upon her withrespect to the testamentary disposition over suchpart of her property of which she might have anabsolute power of disposal.With respect to the pleasures derivable from therelation of father, the law, it is true, cannot deprivea man altogether of the pleasures connectedwith this condition, but it may be greatly embittered; as, for example, by a retrospective sentence,declaring his children to be illegitimate.Upon those who might be born subsequent to thesentence of divorce, the punishment would fallwith much greater certainty, for the public opinion,which would not be forward in supporting thedegradation of children born under the faith oflawful wedlock, would not exercise the sameindulgence towards those who were born after adivorce.The paternal and filial condition may, in so faras the nature of the case admits of it, be in thesame manner subtracted by a judicial sentence,declaring that the offender is not, or shall no longerbe considered as, the father or the son of the personin question.The certain effects of a sentence of the kind inquestion, in respect of the father, would be to deprivehim of all legal power over the person of hischild : in respect of the child, to deprive him oftaking by inheritance or representation the propertyof his father.As to the other advantages derivable from theserelations, the sentence may or may not have anyeffect, according to the feelings of the parties interested: its operation will depend upon thefather and the son upon their more immediateconnections, and upon the public in general.As to the office of guardian and other offices ofB.III.C.V. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 269a fiduciary nature, the sentence will operate to thewhole extent of those offices : a legal interdictionof all the acts annuls all the advantages issuingfrom them.It may at first sight appear extraordinary that apower should be attributed to the magistrate, ofdestroying relations founded in nature. It is, itmay be observed, an event an event that hasalready happened ; and how can it be in thepower of any human tribunal to cause that whichhas taken place, not to have taken place ? Thiscannot be accomplished ; but the magistrate mayhave power to persuade people to believe that anevent has happened in a manner different fromwhat it actually did happen. It is true that, uponthe parties themselves, and upon the persons whohave a direct knowledge of the fact, the power ofthe magistrate, as to this purpose, is altogethernugatory, but with the public at large an assertionso sanctioned would have the greatest weight.The principal obstacle to the exercise of any suchpower, however, is, that a declaration to this effectas a penal instrument would, upon the face of it,bear marks of its own falsehood. This is a dilemmafrom which there is no escaping. If the offenderis not the father of the person in question, todeclare that he is not is not an act of punishment :if he is his father, the declaration is false.The idea of employing as a mode of punishmentthe subtraction of any of the rights attached to theseveral conditions as above, is not however so extravagantas at first might be imagined. If not the sameO C7 Othing, what approaches very near to it is alreadyin use.This object may be effected in two modes; one,the endeavouring to cause it to be believed that the270 B. III.C.V. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.offender does not stand in the relation of father orof son, as the case may be, to the person regardedas such : the other is in endeavouring to cause itto be believed that from the non-observance ofsome legal form, the progeny is illegitimate.A case somewhat analogous to this, is thatfamous one upon which so many volumes havebeen written corruption of blood; or, in otherwords, the perfection of inheritable blood. Theplain object, stripped of all disguise, is to preventa man from inheriting, as he would have done ifthis punishment had not been pronounced: butwhat is endeavoured to be done by the help of thisexpression is, to cause it to be believed that theblood of the person in question undergoes somereal alteration, which is a part of the punishment.Another example in which, at least in words, acontrol is assumed over events of the descriptionof those in question, is by that barbarous maximthat a bastard is the son of no one ; a maxim whichhas a tendency, as much as it is in the power ofwords to give it, to deprive a man of all parentalconnexions. It is not, however, ever employed asapunishment.Another example, opposite to the preceding one,is that other legal maxim, pater est quern nuptialdemonstrate: a maxim by which sanction is frequentlygiven to a palpable falsehood. By recentdecisions, the severity of this rule has howeverbeen relaxed, it being now settled that thoughmarriage is to be considered as presumptive proofof filiation, it may be rebutted by evidence of theimpossibility of any connexion having taken place.In France, a mode of punishment has been employedwhich, it is true, without any such pretenceas that of destroying the fact of parentage,B. III. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 271endeavoured, as far as might be, to abolish alltrace of it, by imposing on the person in questionthe obligation of changing his name.*The same punishment has been employed inPortugal. fThe punishment, consisting in the forfeiture ofcredibility, is another example, no less remarkable,of an attempt to exercise a despotic control overthe opinions of men. As part of the punishmentfor many sorts of offences, which do not importany want of veracity, the offender is declared tohave lost all title to credence : the visible sign ofthis punishment is the not being permitted to deposein a court of justice.The forfeiture of the conjugal condition, at leastto a certain extent, is frequently among the consequencesof imprisonment, especially when withimprisonment is combined penal labour. Thispart of the punishment is not formally denounced,but it is not the less real. It is not ever in expressterms declared that a man is divested of this condition; but he is in fact precluded from the principalenjoyments of it, and the condition separatefrom the pleasures that belong to it is evidentlynothing more than a mere name. The forfeiture istemporary or perpetual, according as the imprintis either one or the other.SECT. V. CONDITION OF LIBERTY.Liberty being a negative idea (exemption fromobligation,) it follows that the loss of liberty is apositive idea. To lose the condition of a freemanis to become a slave. But the word slave or stateThis was done in the case of Damien and Ravaillac.+ In the case of certain persons convicted of an attemptagainst the life of the King.272 B. III. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.of slavery, has not any very definite meaningwhich serves to designate that condition, as existingin different countries. There are some countriesin which slavery is unknown. In countriesin which slavery is in use it exists under differentforms, and in different degrees. The pain of servitudewould be different, according to the class towhich the offended might be aggregated.Slaves are of two classes they may belong tothe government or to individuals.The condition of public slaves, determined byregulation, fixing the nature and amount of thework, and the coercive punishments whi theperformance of it may be compelled, is not distinguishablefrom the condition of persons condemnedfor life to penal labour : if there exist no suchregulations, it varies little from private slavery.A public slave, unprotected by any such regulations,is placed under the despotic controul of anoverseer, who is bound to employ him, for thebenefit of the public, in a certain sort of occupation: this power, arbitrary as it is, does not extendto life and death. This condition varies very littlefrom that of private slavery. A negro, for example,employed upon a plantation belonging tothe crown is not from this circumstance in acondition greatly superior to what he would be inif standing in the same relation to a private individual,who, instead of being his own overseer,employed an agent for that purpose.The most ready means of forming a correct conceptionof the condition of slavery, is by consideringit in the first instance as absolute and unlimited.In this situation the door is exposed toevery possible species of evil. The punishmentdesignated then by the expression forfeiture ofliberty, is no other than the being exposed to aB.III. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION. 273greater or less chance, according to the characterof the master, of suffering all sorts of evils : thatis to say, of all evils resulting from the differentmodes in which punishment may be inflicted.To form an accurate notion of this situation, allthat is required, is to glance the eye over all thepossible varieties of punishment. The slave, withrespect to the individual standing in the conditionof master, is absolutely deprived of all legalprotection.*Such is the nature of slavery under its mostsimple form : such is the nature of the total deprivationof liberty. The different restrictionsthat may be imposed on the exercise of thispower, renders the state of servitude more or lessmild.There are then two heads to which the evilsresulting from this condition may be referred.1. The risk, on the part of the slave, of beingsubject to every possible evil : with the exceptionof such only as the master is expressly prohibitedfrom inflicting. 2. The continuity of thepain founded on the apprehension of these sufferings.SECT. VI. CONDITION* OF POLITICAL LIBERTY.I shall say but one word upon a subject thatwould require a volume.The loss of political liberty is produced by achange in the condition: not merely of any particularindividual, but of the whole community. The lossof liberty is the result of a fresh distribution of theSuch a condition would be too rigorous for criminals : it isfor innocent men that it is reserved.T274 B.11I. Civ. FORFEITURE OF CONDITION.power of the governing body ; a distributionwhich renders the choice of the persons, or theirmeasures, less dependant upon the will of the personsgoverned. A fresh distribution of powerdepends absolutely upon a corresponding dispositionto pay obedience to that fresh distribution.When superior physical force is in the possessionof those from whom obedience is demanded, it isevident that the power of commanding can beexercised only in so far as that obedience is rendered.As this disposition to pay obedience maybeproduced by the conduct of a single individualof the governing class, it may be, and has frequentlybeen said, that a single man has destroyedthe constitutional liberty of a whole nation. Butif the analysis of such events be followed out, itwill be found, that this liberty can be destroyedonly by the people themselves.CHAPTER VI.FORFEITURE OF THE PROTECTION OF Tie LAW.A CLASS of forfeitures as miscellaneous and extensiveas any, and the last that we shall now takenotice of, is that of the protection, whatever it be,which the law affords a man for the enjoyment ofthe objects of possession. This is not altogetherthe same thing with a forfeiture of the possessionsthemselves. In the instance of some of them, thelaw, by taking from him the possessions themselves,excludes him, by sure and physical means, fromthe enjoyment of them. In the instance of others,the law, without taking away from him altogetherthe physical capacity of enjoying them, punisheshim in the case of his attempting to enjoy them.In the remaining cases, the law uses not either ofthose compulsive methods : it, however, does anact by which the parties on whose choice the enjoymentof the object in question depends, are disposed,on pre-established principles, to put an endto it. It therefore, in this case, likewise becomesstill the author of the punishment. This is thecase with the forfeitures in which the politicalsanction produces its effect : not by its own immediateenergy, but by the motion it gives, if one mayso say, to the moral and religious sanctions.In the case of forfeiture of protection, the lawtakes no such active part. All it does is this. Itsimply withdraws in part, or altogether, that punishmentby means of which it protects a B.III.C.VI. FORFEITURE OF PROTECTION, ETC.lessor in the enjoyments those several possessions.If then, every man refrain from disturbing him inthe enjoyment of any such possession, it is wellthe law does nothing of itself to prompt them to it.But if any persons of their own notion choose todisturb him, it is also well the law does nothing ofitself to hinder them. Forfeiture of protection isin short neither more nor less than the forfeiture ofthe use of the ministers of justice, that is, of suchpersons whose business it is to protect the severalmembers of the community in the enjoyment oftheir respective rights.Between forfeiture of protection, and forfeitureof capacity, the difference is, that by the latter,the law does what is necessary to prevent aman s acquiring a possession : in the former, itforbears to do anything to prevent his losing it.When considered with reference to the individualwho has forfeited the protection of the law, thisspecies of punishment may be called forensic disability; it forms part of the artificially complexpunishment of outlawry ; the consideration ofwhich will be subsequently resumed.*Book v. ch.v.RATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BOOK IV.OF THE PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT : OR SAY, OFMIS-SEATED PUNISHMENT.WHAT is here meant by mis-seated punishmentis not that which in another place was meant bygroundless punishment.The case in which the epithet groundless wasapplied to the subject punishment, is that inwhich by the supposition there was no offence inthe case, no act to which, by the annexation ofeventual punishment, any such character as thatof an offence ought, by the legislature, to havebeen superinduced.The case in which the epithet mis-seated isapplied to the same subject, the case which on thepresent occasion is in view is that in which thereexists an offence, that is, an act fit to be, as above,converted into an offence an act to which it is fitthat punishment be accordingly attached, and inwhich case punishment is attached accordingly.Thus far all is right : but what there is wrong inthe case consists in this, that punishment is to befound, which, in consideration of the same offence,has been attached to a wrong person : that some278 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.persons, one or many, are to be found on whom,in respect of that same offence, no punishmentfrom which they could have been saved ought tohave been attached, but on whom punishment, ofsome sort or other, from which they might havebeen saved, does notwithstanding stand attached.When, in so far as by appointment of the legislatoror of the Judge, acting (as in all cases ofunwritten or judge-made law) in the place of thelegislator, punishment is inflicted on any personby whom no part has been borne in the offence, itmay be said to be mis-seated : seated in a placewhich is not its proper place.In this case, if along with the non-offender, nooffender suffers, the mis-seated punishment maybe,as in practice it has been termed, vicarious : ifin the contrary case, extravasated punishmentthat is, flowing in a wrong channel.Punishment ought naturally to be the work ofreflection : but whether it be vicarious or extravasated,should there be found an instance inwhich the infliction of it appears to have beenthe result, not so much of reflection and thought,as of want of thought, (and the mass of such instanceswill be found but too extensive) in suchcase it may be termed random punishment.Punishment (which is mis-seated, and in particularthat which is in an extravasated state),may be so unavoidably or avoidable.First, as to the case in which the extravasationis unavoidable. On another occasion, in anotherwork, and for another purpose, this case hasalready been brought to view : viz. under thehead of " Circumstances influencing sensibility "*Whether in the way and for the purpose ofIntroduction to Morals and Legislation.B. IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 279punishment, or in any other way, and for any otherpurpose, a man cannot be made to suffer, but hisconnections, if he have any always his connectionsin the way of sympathy, frequently hisconnections in the way of interest, (understandself-regarding interest) are made to suffer alongwith him : and forasmuch as it can only be bysome rare accident, that a man can be found, whohas not in either of those ways any connections ;thence it follows, that if where it is unavoidable,the certainty or probability of its extravasationwere regarded as a sufficient cause for forbearingto inflict punishment, it would only be by acorrespondent rare accident, that any thingcould be done for the prevention of offences ofany sort) the consequence of which would begeneral impunity to crimes and other offences ofall sorts, and with it the destruction of societyitself.In so far as it is mis-seated, and is not unavoidablyso, punishment, it is almost needless to observe,is, with reference to the person on whom itis thrown, groundless : as such it is thrown away :it is so much evil expended in waste : reformation,determent, disablement it contributes notany thing to any one of the proper ends of punishment; not so much as to vindictive satisfactionfor injury, at least to any mind that isnot more or less deranged ; it is repugnant toutility, inconsistent with humanity, inconsistentwith justice.To all these it is repugnant ; but what it is notrepugnant to, is English law, written as well asunwritten ; for under both these dispensations,instances of it are to be found instances altogetherdeplorable in extent as well as abundance.When the epithet unavoidable is on this occasion280 B. IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.employed, some such imitative clause as is expressedby the words without preponderant inconveniencemust be understood. For, in point ofpossibility, punishment, L e. the infliction ofsuffering on that score, being on the part of thelegislator and the Judge an act of the will, toavoid inflicting it will on this as on every otheroccasion, be respectively in their power at alltimes, not only on this but on every occasion.On so simple a condition as that of seeing government,and with it society itself, perish, you mayavoid inflicting punishment altogether.Bearing continually in mind this necessary andnot obvious limitation, in answer to the question,what, in regard to mis-seated punishment,ought to be the conduct of the legislator, twosimple propositions may be laid down withoutdifficulty.1. One is Where it is unavoidable, mis-seatedpunishment may be employed.2. Where it is avoidable, mis-seated punishmentought in no case to be employed.Unhappily there exists not a system of establishedlaw which does not exhibit instances inwhich mis-seated punishment is thus wrongfullyemployed.First, as to the case when the application thusmade of the matter of punishment is unavoidable :not to be avoided without letting in, in some othershape, evil in such a quantity, as after deductionmade of the evil saved on the score of punishment,shall leave a nett balance on the side ofevil upon the whole.Now, taking the matter on the footing of theprinciples of utility, punishment, however mis-seated,not only may be, but ought to-be introduced: and on the part of him by whom thatB.1V. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 281principle is embraced, and taken for his constantguide, to say that of punishment so circumstancedthat it ought not to be introduced, would beequivalent to a contradiction in terms.But, says an objector, punishment in so far asit is inflicted falls upon the guiltless, and to inflictpunishment on the guiltless is to violate one of themost important, and fundamental, and universallyrecognized principles of justice.The answer is this being one of those principleswhich in substance are continually alludedto, but which in truth are not any where to befound, cannot with propriety be employed in thecharacter of an objection to any rule which, standingexpressed in a determinate form of words, isseen to be unexceptionable.To inflict punishment when, without introducingpreponderant inconvenience, the infliction of suchpunishment is avoidable, is, in the case of theinnocent, contrary to the principle of utility.Admitted : and so is it in the case of the guiltylikewise.To punish where, without introducing preponderantinconvenience, such punishment, is unavoidable,is not in either case contrary to theprinciple of utility : not in the case of the guilty :no, nor yet in the case of the innocent.What then are the cases in which the applicationof punishment to the innocent is avoidable ?What the cases in which it is unavoidable ?Answer. Wheresoever, punishment not being,in the case in question, in itself undue, it is inyour power to apply to the guilty punishment inas great a quantity as (supposing it actually administered)is commensurate to the end of punishmentnamely, without having recourse to theinnocent, there the evil, whatsoever it be, that282 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.would be produced by the infliction of punishmenton the innocent is avoidable.Now the fact is, and so it will be found, that(with the exception of such suffering as extravasatedand overflows upon the innocent, inconsequenceof their connexion in the way ofsympathy or particular and casual interest)wheresoever the nature of the case admits ofthe distinguishing who is innocent from who isguilty, the infliction of suffering on the innocentis avoidable.Define punishment in a certain way, and eventhe above limitation need not be made. Saythat to give it the character of punishment, it isnecessary that the suffering that is inflicted should,the whole of it, be directly intentional ; that is,either mediately or ultimately intentional ; and inthat case, such part of the suffering as, in virtue oftheir connexion with the guilty person, falls unavoidablyupon third persons (a wife or husband,children, relations, dependants, friends or creditors,and so forth) is not punishment does notcome under the denomination of punishment.This, however, is but a question of words.Take any lot of evil you will, such as it is, it is,whatsoever be its name. Say that it is punishment,the reason for avoiding to produce it, if unavoidable,will not be the stronger ; say that it is not punishment,the reason for avoiding to produce it, ifavoidable, will not be the weaker.III. NATURALLY Extravasated PUNISHMENT. RULES CONCERNING IT.In regard to such punishment as comes underthe denomination of derivative or naturally .PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 283wasting punishment, the following seem to be therules that may be laid down.1 . The consideration that the lot of punishmentin question comes under the denomination of derivativeor extravasating punishment punishmentoverflowing upon the guiltless from the guiltycan never of itself constitute a sufficient reason forforbearing to inflict such punishment.For were that a sufficient reason, punishmentcould not, in the way of legislation, be appointedin any case.2. In so far as punishment not coming underthis denomination is capable of being inflicted to asufficient amount, without the addition of anypunishment which comes under this denomination,in other words, in as far as properly seated punishmentto a sufficient amount is capable of beinginflicted without the addition of derivative or extravasatingpunishment, no such addition oughtby the legislator to be appointed, viz. either prescribedor authorized.3. For so far as, without prejudice to the sufficiencyof the remainder, the lot of punishmentactually to be inflicted is capable of being clearedof derivative or extravasated punishment (punishmentor suffering borne by those who have hadno share either in the commission of the offenceor in the benefit of the offence) such clearanceought always to be made.4. In the account taken of the suffering for thepurpose of any punishment which is about to beinflicted by the Judge, such derivative sufferingought always to be comprised : comprised, in thefirst place, in respect of what it is in itself and ofitself; in the next place, in respect of the painwhich, if inflicted on the innocent connexions ofthe guilty person, it may be expected to produce,284 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.viz. in the shape of a pain of sympathy, in thebosom of the guilty person himself.5. Accordingly, in the case of a delinquenthaving such connections, to the end that the realquantity of punishment may not be greater thanin the case of a delinquent in the same degree ofdelinquency having no such connections, the nominalmay be, and so far as the deduction iscapable of being made with sufficient precision,ought to be, made by so much the less.6. For the purpose of making any such allowanceas may be requisite on this score, proceedthus : In the first place, settle with yourself whatwould be a sufficient punishment, on the suppositionthat the delinquent had no connexions :then, enquiring into such connexions, if any, as hehas, proceed to make such abatement, if any, asmay be requisite on this score.7. For any such purpose, the view of the Judgemust not absolutely confine itself to the connexionitself, the outward and visible sign and presumptiveevidence of the internal and invisible sympathy,viz. the fact that the delinquent has a wife,has children, has other persons in his dependence.Of the existence of the degree of sympathy naturallyand usually attached to the species of relationshipin question, the existence of the relationshipitself may, it is true, be received in the characterof prime facie or presumptive evidence.Such evidence as, in default of evidence to thecontrary, may be taken for conclusive.But supposing any such contrary evidence to beoffered, or to be capable of being, without preponderantinconvenience, collected, such presumptiveevidence as above mentioned ought not to betakenand acted upon as if conclusive.If for example it appear that in consequence ofB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 285ill usage inflicted by him, his wife has been separatedfrom him, it is not right that, on thataccount, he should be let off with a less punishment,merely because he has a wife : if it appearthat, in consequence of ill usage, or desertion, orneglect, on his part, children of his have beentaken in hand and provided for by some relation orprivate friend, or some public institution, it is notright that, merely because he has children, he shouldbe let off with a less punishment, as above.8. In so far as it is in the nature of the punishmentto extract and provide any quantity of matterapplicable to the purpose of compensation, thelegislator and the Judge, respectively actingwithin their respective spheres, ought not, in thecare taken by them to avoid the production ofunnecessary mis seated punishment, to confinethemselves to negative measures.If, for example, either by the general nature ofthe appointed punishment, imprisonment, for example,or banishment, or death, a separation ismade, or to the purpose in question, by specialappointment, can be made, between the lot of thedelinquent and the lot of his guiltless connexions,it may be right, out of and to the extent of thepecuniary means of the delinquent, to make a provisionfor his guiltless connexions.9. In other words. So far as can be done,without reducing to too low a pitch the sufferinginflicted on the delinquent, the claims of anyguiltless connexion of his, to be saved harmlessfrom such mis-seated punishment, as would otherwisebe made to overflow upon them from thepunishment inflicted upon him, should have thepreference over the interest of the public purse.This rule may, without reserve or difficulty, bein its full extent applied to ordinary creditors, to286 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.persons whose connexion with the delinquent isaccordingly a connexion purely in the way ofinterest, unaccompanied with any such connectionas in the case of wife and children, or othernear relatives, has place in the way of sympathy.For example, to speak particularly and precisely,on the score and for the purpose of punishment,money extracted from the pocket of a delinquentought not to be poured into the public purse, suchsum excepted as, if any, remains to be disposedof, after satisfaction of all just and bond Sidedemands made, or capable of being made, bycreditors.SECT. I. PUNISHMENT APPARENTLY, BUT NOTREALLY MIS-SEATED CIVIL RESPONSIBILITY.One class of cases may be marked out in whicha punishment to which it may happen in appearanceto be mis-seated is not mis-seated in reality.The offence is committed by A, who is a personunder power ; the punishment is inflicted on B, inwhom the power resides. In other words, thesubordinate is made responsible for the subordinate.To this class of cases may be aggregated thefollowing :"the husband for the wife.the father for the children.the guardian for his ward.the madman s keeper for M-iv rl man.Responsibility of \ the gaoler for prisonersthe sheriff for the gaoler,the military commander for subordinates,the master for his servants.B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 287In all these cases, though to appearance thepunishment may be mis-seated, yet in point offact the punishment is inflicted on the person havingthe power, not under the notion of innocenceon his part, but in contemplation of delinquencyon the score of negligence for an ill choice of, orwant of attention to, his subordinates. It is onhis part a transgression of the negative cast, consistingin the omitting to take proper precautionsfor the prevention of the positive offence committedby his subordinates.Under our law, the sheriff is punished if any ofthe prisoners under the gaoler s custody escape.The sheriff has not the immediate custody of theprisoners ; his other duties are incompatible withthat. From this circumstance alone then there isno reason for supposing any complicity on hispart. But the gaoler is appointed by him ; andthe object of the law is to render him circumspectin his choice. The gaoler himself is the personimmediately responsible, but as the safe custodyof prisoners is a matter of the highest importance,the punishment levelled at the sheriff is in thehighest degree expedient, and the more so as theamount of it is in certain cases left to the discretionof the Judge.The responsibility thus imposed on superiors forthe acts of their subordinates is founded not onlyon the reasons above mentioned, but on othersequally substantial, which have been more particularlydeveloped in another work.*SECT. II. MIS-SEATED PUNISHMENT, VARIETIES OF.Punishment is mis-seated in either of two cases1. Where the delinquent himself is not made toTraites de Legislation, torn, ii, p. 362.288 B.I.V. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.suffer at all, but some other is in his stead.2. When the delinquent himself is punished andsome other guiltless person with him in virtue ofan express provision by law.If the delinquent himself is not punished, butsome other person is in his stead, the punishmentmay be called vicarious punishment. It is thusthat in the case of a suicide, who is of courseremoved beyond the reach of human punishment,suffering is inflicted on his wife, his children, orhis dependants.When in virtue of a social connexion betweenthe delinquent and some other person, it passesfrom the delinquent upon that other, it may bestiled transitive punishment. It is thus that inour law the children and other descendants inmany cases are punished with their parents, forthe delinquencies of their parents and otherancestors.Where a large body of persons are punished atonce, upon a presumption that the delinquent ordelinquents are to be met with in that body, itmay be stiled collective punishment. Thus it is, inour law, corporations are in several cases punishablefor the delinquencies of the co-corporators.Lastly, where along with the delinquent a personis punished who is a total stranger to him ;the punishment in this case may, as far as thestranger is concerned, be stiled random punishment.Thus it is that by our law a person who, aftercertain acts of delinquency secretly committed,has bought land of the delinquent, loses his moneyand the land.Punishment by lot, as is sometimes practisedwhere the delinquents are numerous, as in largebodies of soldiery, comes not within this case.The persons who are made to cast lots are allB.IV. PIlOPEll SEAT OF PUXISIIM E N T. 289supposed to be delinquents. There is therefore,no punishment but what is /;/ propria personamin this case. It is not random punishment, butrandom pardon.In vicarious punishment, we see it is a thirdperson, as the phrase is, that is punished alone.In transitive punishment, a third person withthe delinquent in virtue of his connection withhim. In collective punishment, a large body ofthird persons, uncertain and indeterminate, becauseprobably the delinquent is of the number. Inrandom punishment, a single third person, who, forcertain is not the delinquent, and with whom thedelinquent has nothing to do.SECT. III. VICARIOUS PUNISHMENT.The case in which punishment is in the mostpalpable degree mis-seated, is that in which it hasreceived the name of vicarious : Upon the personwho has had any share, in the offence, no punishmentis inflicted, yet upon the same occasion,punishment is inflicted upon this and that person,who has not had any share in the offence.In the reign of James I, there lived a Sir KenelmDigby, who besides being a person of quality, wasan adept in the science of medicine. Dressing ofwounds is among the number of those operationsthat are attended with pain and trouble. Bymeans of a powder of Sir Kenelm s invention, thisinconvenience was saved. In addition to thispowder, all that he required for the cure of themost desperate wound, was a little of the bloodthat had been made to flow from it. To thisblood a competent dose of the powder beingapplied, the wound closed, and the cure wasradical. The presence of the patient was no morenecessary, than to our present quack doctors.290 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.While the compound of powder and blood, waslying upon Sir Kenelm s shelves the patient mightbe at the antipodes.Exactly of a piece with the therapeutics thatinvented this sympathetic powder, for such was thename which by the author was applied to it, arethe politics that gave birth to vicarious punishment.I was about to exhibit the absurdity and mischiefof this mode of punishment, but what endwould it answer ? A simple statement, that oneman is punished for the offence of another, iscalculated to produce a stronger impression on themind, than could be produced by the aid of logicand rhetoric. An error so extravagant couldnever have been acted on, but from confusion ofideas, or upon suppositions, the improbability ofwhich was altogether lost sight of.In the English law, the only instance whichis to be seen of a case of mis-seated punishment,which is clearly and palpably vicarious, is that ofthe punishment attached to suicide. It may perhapsbe said, that the man himself is punished asmuch as the case will admit of; that his body usedto be pierced with a stake, that he is still buriedwith ignominy, and that with respect to him,everything that could be done, is done ; that thisis not found sufficient, and that as an additionalcheck to the commission of this offence, it isnecessary to call in aid the contemplation of thesufferings that his wife and children may endureby his death. But the effect of this contrivanceis obviously very trifling. The prospect of thepain he shall suffer by continuing to live, affectshim more than that of the pain it seems to himthey will suffer upon his putting himself to death.He is more affected then with his own happinessB.IV. rilOPKll SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 291than with theirs. The selfish predominate in hismind over the social affections. But the punishmentof forfeiture, that is the punishment of thoserelations and friends, can have the effect of preventinghis design upon no other supposition, thanthat the social affections are predominant in himover the selfish, that he is more touched by theirsuffering than by his own; but this is shewn by hisconduct not to be the case.Nor is this all ; it is not only nugatory as to itsdeclared purpose, but in the highest degree cruel.When a family has thus been deprived of its head,the law at that moment steps in to deprive them oftheir means of subsistence.The answer to this may be, that there is somespecies of property, which upon this occasion isnot forfeited, that the law is not executed, that theJury elude it, by finding the suicide to be insane,and that, moreover, the King has the power ofremitting the forfeiture, and of leaving to thewidow and orphans the paternal property.That such is the disposition of Juries, and of theSovereign is undeniable : but is that a reason forpreserving in the penal code, a law that it is considereda duty invariably to elude ? And by whatmeans is it eluded ? By perjury. By a declarationmade by twelve men, upon oath, that thesuicide was deranged in his mind, even in cases inwhich all the circumstances connected with thecase exhibit marks of a deliberate and steadydetermination. The consequence is, that everysuicide who dies worth any property, is declaredto be non compos. It is only the poorest of thepoor, who, after making the same calculation thatwas made by Cato, and, finding the balance onthe same side, act accordingly, that are everfound to be in their senses, and their wives and292 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.children to be proper victims for the rigour ofthe law. The cure for these atrocious absurditiesis perjury : perjury is the penance, that at theexpense of religion, prevents an outrage onhumanity.In speaking of vicarious punishment, in orderto avoid the confusion that might be producedby its liability to be ranked under this head, itmay be necessary to mention a case belonging tothe subject of international law. The case ofreprisals in war. By a foreign nation, innocentpersons are subjected to the most rigorous punishmentto confinement, and even to death, thereal author of the offence not being in thejurisdiction of the foreign state. The exerciseof this power is justified by necessity, as a meansof preventing the infliction of injuries not warrantedby the rules of war.This is not strictly speaking vicarious punishment.The reprisals inflicted on his subjects,operate upon the Sovereign himself, either bythe compassion felt for their suffering, or by thefear, if patiently submitted to, of alienating theaffections of his people. It is more particularlyuseful between contending armies. Honour isthe principal sanction of the laws of war, butthe power of making reprisals is a very necessarycoadjutor. In these cases, what humanity dictates,is, that the sufferings inflicted on theinnocent should be the least possible, consistentwith the production of the desired effect, that theyshould be admissible, and that the utmost degreeof publicity should be given to them, either bypublic declarations or in any other more effectualmanner.One word more, and I have done. Instanceshave not been wanting in history, when an innocentB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 293person has offered to satiate the resentment ofthe person injured, and his self-devotion has beenreceived in expiation. What satisfaction did theoffended person reap from this sacrifice ? thedegradation and shame belonging to it. Theglory of the sufferer was the disgrace of theJudge.It may be asked. Is it possible to find anycase in which one person may, with propriety,be allowed spontaneously to subject himself tothe punishment designed for another a son forhis father a husband for his wife a friend forhis friend. Such cases might perhaps be imagined,but it is useless to enter upon the considerationof such deviations from the ordinary courseof things.SECT. IV. TRANSITIVE PUNISHMENT.It has already been observed, that it is thenature of all punishments, to affect not only thosethat are the immediate objects of them, but alsothose that are connected with the offender, in theway of sympathy, and their participation in hissuffering is unavoidable. With these we havenothing to do. What we have to do with arethose that the legislator by an express provisionof the law inflicts upon persons connected withthe delinquent punishments, the existence ofwhich depends entirely upon the legislator, andwhich, as he has created, he can abrogate them.Thus under the English law, with respect toproperty of a particular description, the innocentgrandson, by the delinquency of his father, ismade to lose the chance he had of succeedingto his grandfather, because no title can be deducedthrough the corrupt blood of the father : this is294 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.what, by English lawyers, is called corruption ofblood.*The strength of the argument lies in themetaphor : this cabalistic expression serves as anAs the subject is involved in a good deal of obscurity,it may be necessary, in order that the expediency of this modeof punishment may be understood, to state the nature of it alittle more explicitly.By a rule of positive law, founded on the most obvious dictateof utility, so obvious as to have been received with littlevariation over the whole world, a man is permitted to succeedin case of death to the property undisposed of by his nextrelation.This general rule is, with a variety of caprice, with which theconceptions and expectations of the people can never keeppace, differently narrowed and modified by the different laws ofvarious States. With us it is not in every instance that aman is permitted to succeed to his relation. And the miseryproduced by the unintelligible exceptions to the general provisionof the law, is in all cases, in proportion to the strengthof the expectation that is thus disappointed.Forfeiture is more penal in its consequences than escheat.By both forfeiture and escheat, an individual and his descendantsare made to lose their chance of coming to the estate ofhim, to whom they stood as next immediate descendants. Butcorruption of blood goes further. By corruption of blood, theparty in question, and his descendants, are made to lose thechance they had of succeeding either to a remote ancestor,or to any collateral relation.Offences by which the blood is said to be corrupted, arestiled, how different soever in their nature, by one commonappellation, felonies. Between my brother and me, the commonancestor is my father. If then, my father commit a felony,the consequence is, I am prevented from succeeding not only towhatever real property was my father s, but to whatever was mybrother s also, or that of any one descended from him : and this,because in making out my title to the property in question, invirtue of my relationship to my brother, I must reckon throughmy father, although my father (such is the provision made bythe law) could not himself have taken it. Between my paternaluncle and me, the common ancestor is my grandfather. If thenmy father commit a felony, I lose the chance of succeeding, notonly to whatever real property was his, but also to whateverB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 295answer to all objections ; the justice of themetaphor turns upon two suppositions.The one is, that where a man has committed afelony, (stolen a horse for instance) his bloodimmediately undergoes a fermentation, and, (accordingto the system of physiology in use uponthis occasion) becomes really corrupt.The other is, that when a man s blood is in thisstate of putrescent, it becomes just and necessaryto deprive his children not only of all realproperty, of which he was in the enjoyment, butof what might thereafter be derived through him.The end of punishment, is to restrain a manfrom delinquency. The question is, whether itbe an advantageous way of endeavouring at this,to punish in any, and what cases, in any, andwhat mode, to any, and what degree, his wife,his children, or other descendants ; that is, witha direct intention to make them sufferers.If a man can be prevented from running intodelinquency, by means of punishment hung overthe heads of persons thus connected with him, itis not, as in the cases above-mentioned, becauseit is expected that they should have it in theirpower to restrain him, by any coercion, physicalor mental, of their imposing. It is not that theyare likely to have it in their power, by anythingthey can do. In the case of the wife, it is not verylikely : in the case of children already born, it isstill less likely : in the case of children not yetborn, it is impossible. What is expected to workupon him, is the image of what they may bewas either my grandfather s or my uncle s. So also if mygrandfather commit a felony, I lose the chance of succeedingnot indeed to the property that was my father s, but however, towhatever was either my grandfather s, or my uncle s, or anydescendant of my uncle s.290 B.1V. Proper SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.made to suffer. The punishment then upon them,may be, and it is expected will be, without anyact of theirs, a punishment upon him. It willproduce in him a pain of sympathy.First, we will consider the case of the wife,where the punishment consists in being made tolose what is already in specific prospect : viz.The immoveable property in which she had herdower.It has been doubted whether it were possiblefor a man to love another better than himself; thatis to be affected, not merely momentarily, but foralength of time together, more by the painsand pleasures of another than by his own. Somehave denied the possibility, all will admit thatit is extremely rare. Suppose it then to happenin one case out of five hundred, and to do allpossible honour to the marriage state, let us supposethat this person whom a man loves betterthan he does himself, is never any other thanhis wife. But it is not so many as half thenumber of men of an age to commit crimes, thathave wives. Nor is there above one in a hundredwho has lands of which a wife is endowed.Upon this calculation, there is not above one manin 50,000 of those that are liable to this mode ofpunishment, on whom it would operate in as greata degree as if laid on himself. In the remaining49,999 instances, in order to produce the sameeffect, more punishment must be laid upon theinnocent wife, than would need to be laid uponthe offending husband. Let us suppose, for thepurpose of the argument, that every man loves hiswife half as much as he does himself, on this supposition,ten degrees or grains (or by what othername soever it shall be thought proper to callso many aliquot parts of punishment, must beB.IV. PROPER SEAT OK PUNISHMENT. 297laid upon the wife, in order to produce) the effectof five grains laid directly upon the husband. Onthis supposition, then in 49,999 cases out of50,000, half the punishment that is laid on in thisway, is laid on in waste.*What has been said with regard to the wife,may, without any very considerable variation, beapplied to the children. In this latter case, however,generally speaking, the affection is likelyto be more uniform and certain, and consequentlythe contemplation of the suffering they may beexposed to more certainly efficacious, in restrainingthe commission of the act intended to be guardedagainst. The same method, making due allowanceon this score, will therefore apply to this,as to the preceding case.What follows from this, therefore, is that till thewhole stock of direct punishment be exhaustedupon the offender himself, none ought in this wayto be attempted to be applied through the mediumof the innocent.If there is any case in which forfeiture can beemployed with advantage, it would be that ofrebellion. Rebellion, not treason, for treason is aname applied to a variety of offences that havenothing in common but their name. And if itwere employed against the descendants of a rebel,it should not be in the way of transitive punishment,nor in the way of punishment at all, but asameasure of self-defence : of self-defence againstthe mischief that might be expected, not from thecriminal who is no more, but from his dependants.It will not, it is hoped, be understood that any stress ismeant to be laid upon the particular number here employed :the reader may put in numbers for himself: they are merelygiven as a specimen of the manner in which such an enquiryought to be conducted.298 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.When the husband is engaged in rebellion, it isprobable that the affections of his wife* are enlistedon the same side. Is it certain ? By no means.But, however, it is probable. Is it probable thatso also are his children ? Is it certain ? By nomeans. All rebellions, and particularly the lastScotch rebellion, afford instances to the contrary.But, however, it is probable. What then shouldbe done? Presume guilt, and make it requirean effort to exempt the party from the consequences? No, but presume innocence, and makeit require an effort on the part of the Crown toafflict him. Let the Crown be empowered immediatelyupon the attainder of a rebel, to seize intoits hands the possessions, real as well as personal,of his wife, his children, and his other descendantstoo ; with a power to-continue the seizure fromyear to year upon special mention of each person,in so many proclamations to be issued for thatpurpose : and this too, property, under whatevertitle it might be held, without suffering the law, asit is now, to be turned into a dead letter, by expedientsfor giving to property such modification asto render it unforfeitable. This would be aremedy exactly analogous to the suspension of theHabeas Corpus Act : putting the near kindred of aconvicted rebel upon the same footing, with respectto their fortunes, which by that Act all men withoutdistinction are put upon, with respect to theirliberties. This would be a certain, not a casualsafeguard, giving strength to the Government,without bringing guiltless oppression upon thepeople.Those who lAve read Lord Clarendon s History, willremember what grievous complaints that historian, in speakingof the Duke of Albemarle, makes of the Duke s Presbyterianwife.15. IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 299State crimes, with treason at the head of them,may issue from various sources : from indigence,from resentment, from ambition ; but in manyinstances they are crimes of conscience. Bylawyers in this country, it is spoken of as one ofthose almost incredible abominations, at whichnature shudders : like murder, not to be committedby any man, but one who has sold himself to thedevil. They see not, or would not seem to see,that the character of rebel or of loyalist, turnsupon the accidents of war : that men may differwith the most perfect integrity, and with thepurest intentions about the title to the Crown, orto such a branch of public power, as well as abouta town, or a piece of land ; and that it is onlyparty prejudice that makes rebellion and wickednesssynonymous. But in those difficult anddistracted times, when right and duty are liable tobe confounded, the Hides, the Falklands, theSeldom, and the Hampden divide themselves :who can read the recesses of their hearts ; menenlist from pure motives in the worse, and fromsordid in the better cause. Now, when conscienceis the motive, it is always probable that the sameconscience which governs the principal maygovern the dependants, or in other words, thesame that governs the husband and the father, maygovern the wife whom he cherishes and the childrenwhom he educates. Rebellion then, is afamily offence.That treason, however, which consists in secretlyconspiring in a united nation with a foreign enemy,stands upon a very different footing. This isalways among offences against conscience. Itcan scarcely arise even from personal resentment :it arises from the most sordid of all sources lucre.Every one acknowledges the baseness of such acrime; and a man could scarcely be more detested300 E.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.by the public at large, than he would be if discoveredby his own family. This is no more afamily offence than robbery or murder are familyoffences. In this kind of offence, therefore, thereis not the same reason for casting the family uponthe mercy of the crown. Whatever the familysuffers is endured without reason and in waste.SECT. V. DISADVANTAGES OF THIS MODE OFPunishment.From what has been said, except in the abovecase of rebellion, it will be pretty apparent thatin point of certainty this mode of punishmentis eminently deficient. In by far the greaternumber of cases in which the offence has beencommitted, this punishment cannot take placefor want of a subject on which to operate. Aman that has no wife or children, cannot bepunished in the persons of his wife and children.Couple this circumstance with the cases in whichthe offender will have nothing to forfeit, and itwill be found that the punishment will be inoperativein nine hundred and ninety-nine cases outof a thousand. Now a punishment that is goodin one case only out of a thousand is good fornothing. Some other punishment then must beadopted in its room. This punishment mustbe as much as is enough in those cases, otherwisethere had as good be none. Now then as thatpunishment serves in all other cases, why mayit not in this one? If it is enough in those cases,it is, when added to the particular punishment inquestion, more than enough in this one. Nowthen, if it is more than enough, it is misery inwaste. It is, therefore, for the most part useless,and whenever it is not useless, it is mischievous.2. After this it is saying little to observe, thatB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 301in respect of equability it is not less defective,because, to a man who has no thought abouthis wife or children, or has taken a dislike tothem, it is at least matter of indifference to himwhatever may befall them ; in this therefore thepunishment of them is so much clear waste.3. In respect of Frugality it is in a very remarkabledegree defective, the quantity of evil that itis susceptible of producing is altogether boundless.Consider the chain of domestic connection,and calculate the number of descendants thata man may have ; the suffering communicatesfrom one to another, and destroys the peace of themost extensive families. To produce a directpunishment, which may be estimated as unity,indirect and mis-seated punishment must be createdequal to ten, twenty, thirty, a hundred, orperhaps, a thousand, &c.4. It is no less deficient in point of exemplary.What the delinquent himself suffers is knownalways by the sentence, it is in many casesvisible in the execution. The woman or thechild who is made to suffer for his crime, languishesin secret and unavailing misery.5. The punishment thus withdrawn from itsnatural course, possesses not so much as theadvantage of popularity ; it is directly adverseto the general sentiments of sympathy and antipathy.When the delinquent himself is punished,the public vengeance is satiated, and receivesno satisfaction from any ulterior punishment, ifhe is pursued beyond the tomb, and his innocentfamily are offered up as victims, feelings of pityare excited ; an indistinct feeling accuses thelaws of injustice, humanity declares itself againstthem, and on all sides the respect for the laws isweakened.302 B.TV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.SECT. IV. COLLECTIVE PUNISHMENTS.I now come to another case, of which examplesare to be met with in the penal dispensationsof most countries that of collective punishment,or the punishment of large bodies of men forthe delinquencies of a part of them. Under theEnglish law one instance is the punishmentinflicted on a whole corporation for the delinquencyof some of its members.When this mode of punishment is justifiable.,it is only on the score of necessity. Now toprove this necessity two matters of fact mustbe made appear; one is, that the guilty couldnot be punished without the innocent : the otheris, that the suffering of the innocent, when addedto that of the guilty, will not, in the whole,compose a mass of evil more than equivalent tothe benefit of the punishment.Of these two matters of fact the first is easyenough to be judged of; the latter must be left tovague conjecture.Of the administering this mode of punishmentthere are some remarkable instances both bycommon law, and by statute. The above principleswill enable us to form a judgment of thepropriety of those several proceedings.By the common law it is settled that theprivileges of a municipal corporation may beforfeited for the misconduct of the corporators :those privileges which are indiscriminately beneficialto all the persons who are free ofthe corporation, for the delinquency of themajority of any general assembly of those whoform the governing part of it. The power,however, of adjudging such a forfeiture has beenB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 303very rarely exercised, and the insidious and unconstitutionaluse that was attempted to be madeof it in the reign of Charles II, has cast a stigmaon the general doctrine ; so that it is not likelyto be ever more carried into practice. Such amode of punishment is plainly unnecessary andinexpedient. The particular delinquents in thisway may always be ascertained, and that muchmore easily and infallibly than in the case of ordinaryoffences ; their acts being, in the very essenceof them, public and notorious.Our own times have exhibited several instancesin which punishment, either in reality or toappearance, has been inflicted on a body of menfor the misbehaviour of a part of it. I will mentionthem in their order.The first I shall mention is the case of the cityof Edinburgh, which happened in 173G. A verynumerous mob rose up in arms, seized the CityGuard, possessed themselves of the city gates,and in defiance of the public authorities, putto death a Captain Portions, who lay under sentenceof death, but had been reprieved. Thisoutrage occasioned an Act of Parliament to bemade.* By this Act a particular punishmentis inflicted upon the Lord Provost of the town,for the particular neglect he is there chargedwith : but besides this, a fine is laid on the corporation.Of these punishments, that on the Provost,we may observe, was in propria persona m. Thefine on the corporation was a collective punishment,falling on as many persons as might findthemselves in any shape prejudiced by such fine.Now the ground of applying this latter punish -lOGeo. II, c. 34.304 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.merit was not the absolute impracticability ofapplying any punishment of the proper kind atall. The Provost, as we see, was punished forthe negative offence of his neglect. And itappears from another Act, which immediatelyfollows that in question, that a number of personswere actually fugitives for the principal offence.By the second Act these fugitives, in case of theirnot surrendering within such a time, were to sufferdeath, as were also those who should concealthem. If then they never surrendered, theyremained fugitives, and were punished by banishment.If they surrendered, the presumption wasthat they would be punished with the ordinarypunishment for the offence of which they wereguilty; this punishment, however, was not thoughtsufficient for so enormous and dangerous an outrage.As a supplement, operating in the wayof ex post facto law, this fine upon the corporationwas thought of. Now from such a punishment,considered in itself, it is not probable that anygreat effects could have been expected. It served,however, to point the moral sanction against theoffence, and to help express, as in the words ofthe Act, the " highest detestation and abhorrence"of the criminal transaction.In this case, as in that of rebellion, what may bepresumed even though the fact be not capable ofbeing established by evidence, is that there was acomplicity of affection, in virtue of which all theinhabitants joined in endeavouring to protect theoffenders from the visitation of the law.The next statute I shall take notice of in thisview is that for punishment of the corruption thatprevailed in the borough of New Skwxham.* A11 Gco. Ill, c. 55.B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 305society calling itself the Christian Society, consistingof a large majority of the electors, had formeditself, and subsisted for several years, for the purposeof selling the seats in Parliament for thatborough. On this account all who were membersof that society, were, by name, with great propriety,laid under a perpetual incapacitation. Somuch, considered as a punishment, was a punishmenthi propria personas. But the proper lightin which this measure ought to be consideredseems not to have been that of a punishment;for in this light it seems hardly to be justified.If it was a punishment, it was an er post factopunishment, which was the less necessary as therewas already a punishment of the same kind providedby the law : to wit, incapacitation, thoughit be but temporary. But in truth, by much thegreatest part of the efficacy which it was expectedto have, was built on another ground : on it, as ameasure of anticipation : calculated to prevent anevil which, but for such remedy, it was visiblyin the power, and as visibly in the intention, ofthe parties thus disabled to introduce : viz. asuccession of representatives brought in in thiscorrupt and unconstitutional way. It was thereforenot punishment for an evil past and gone, butself-defence against an evil still impending. Nowthe expence at which this benefit was purchasedfor the community, could not well be less in anyinstance than in this. The franchise of electworship, like any other branch of public power,is not an usufructuary possession, but a trust :an article of property which a man holds notfor his own benefit alone, but for that of the wholecommunity, of which he is himself but one.Those who are in possession of it find means,it is true, of deriving from it a personal benefit306 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.to themselves : but this is in direct repugnance tothe interest of the community and the end ofthe institution ; so that, with reference to theparticular interest of the possessor, it may betruly said, it is of the less value to him the moreconscientiously he discharges it. In truth, I seenot why, with respect to the possessor himself,it ought to be looked upon as anything.But the legislature went farther : besidesincapacitating the electors there named, who werea majority, but not the whole, it went on andcommunicated the right of election to all the forty-shillingfreeholders within a large district, of whichthe borough in question was but a part. Indoing this they lessened the right of the innocentburghers who remained.* And as to such partof it, the measure, if it be to be considered as ameasure of punishment, must be allowed to havebeen a punishment in aliens personas. Consideredin this light, it was not expedient, since it wasnot necessary, for the innocent not only could bebut actually were distinguished from the guilty.But in whatever light it may appear, consideredwith reference to the particular persons subjectedto that trifling disadvantage, as a measure ofreformation it cannot be too highly praised. Itstands as the pattern and ground-work of a greatplan of constitutional improvement. fThe punishment, if any, that was thus inflicted on theinnocent burghers, consisted in the pain of apprehension thatamong the new electors would be found some, and perhapsa majority of the whole, who would make an improper use ofthe power of which they were made partakers.f One thing let me be permitted to mention, which I thinkwould have been an improvement, and would have done all thatcould be wanting to reconcile the measure to the strict principlesof ordinary justice. A part of the electors stood in ameritorious light ; they had either the merit to withstand, orIV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 307SECT. VII. RANDOM PUNISHMENT.Random punishment is the epithet that may beapplied to mis-seated punishment, in those cases inwhich, without previous design, it has fallen uponthe innocent by some caprice of the imaginationtaken up at the moment, when the occasion andthe pretence has come for the infliction of it : not somuch as even the wretched sort of pretence whichthe good fortune to escape, the temptation to which theirco-electors yielded. Yet by the statute in question, the conditionof these meritorious part so far from being bettered wasrendered worse than it was before. There was a method bywhich this might, I think, have been prevented, without theleast prejudice to the reforming part of the measure, and at thesame time a signal encouragement held out to conscientiouselectors, and this without any prejudice to the reforming partof the measure. The expedient was a simple one. It was butthe adding to the number of votes which each of the soundvoters should have under the new constitution, in such mannerthat the weight of each man s suffrage should bear the sameproportion to that of the rest under the new constitution as ithad done under the old one. The benefit thus reserved wouldin such case have told for more than it was in reality. Themen by being only not punished, would have seemed to berewarded. They certainly would have been rewarded in pointof honour. If a religious attention were constantly to be paidto private subsisting interests, which being temporary mayalways be provided for at a small expense, reformation wouldbe delivered from much of that opposition which it is at presentapt to meet with. One may say to reformers, serve the whole,but forget not that each member is a part of it.Strictly speaking, it is true that the electors have no reason tocomplain, except as above, upon the occasion of an extensionof the elective franchise. The dilemma is clear: if you do notmean to discharge it conscientiously, you ought not to betrusted with it. If you do, it is of no benefit to you, and youcan have no ground to complain of its being taken from youfor the benefit of the State.308 B.1V. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.had place in the case of extravasated punishmenthaving place in the present case.For the illustration of this modification of mis-seatedpunishment we may again refer to the lawof forfeiture, to that of demands, and that of theexclusion put upon testimony, when for thepunishment of an incontestable number of innocentpersons, through the sides of one delinquent,and by wounds of every imaginable breadth, anddepth, and nature, the fact of his delinquencyforms the pretence.When a man who has a freehold interest inany lands commits an offence, part of the punishmentfor which is the forfeiture of such interest, andthen sells, or mortgages, or in any other mannerdisposes of that interest, and is afterwardsattainted for the offence, the law takes it backfrom those in whose favour it was disposed of,without deigning to enquire whether they knewanything of his having committed it. An individualcommits a secret murder, and sells you anestate : twenty years after he is discovered,prosecuted, attainted. The King, that is, somebodywho assumes his name, seizes the estate.If you have devised it, charged it, sold it, if,besides your s, it has passed through fifty otherhands, it makes no difference. If it was your wifewho had been murdered, it would make nodifference. You would lose your wife by thecrime and your fortune by the punishment.It might be supposed that the law lookedupon itself as driven to this expedient by theapprehension of fraudulent conveyances ; but thisis not the case. In the case of moveable andother personal property, it recognizes the practicabilityof distinguishing fraudulent conveyancesfrom fair. It establishes the latter : it vacatesB.1V. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 309only the former. Yet, it is obvious that im moveableproperty is much less obnoxious to such afraud than moveable.With all this the author of the Commentaries isperfectly well satisfied. " This may be hard,"he says, " upon such as have unwarily engagedwith the offender." But what of that? " thecruelty and reproach" continues he, "must lieon the part, not of the law, but of the criminal,who has thus knowingly and dishonestly involvedothers in his own calamities." To one who canreason in this manner, nothing that is establishedcan come amiss. So long as there is the leastparticle of guilt not only in him who is punishedbut in any one else, no law by which punishmentis inflicted can be cruel, no law deserving ofreproach.Another instance of random punishment is thatof Demands.You are a farmer. You employ a waggon.You send your son to drive it: he slips down, isrun over and killed. The King, or somebody inhis name, is to have your waggon. This is theconsolation which the law of England gives youfor your loss.This idea might be improved upon. Let it be alaw that when a man happens to break his neck,the people of his parish shall draw lots who shallbe hanged to keep him company. The punishmentwould be greater, but the reason for punishmentwould be the same.If instead of a waggon it had been a ship thatwas moving to your son s death, it would make nodifference : though the ship were laden with thetreasure of the Indies it would make no difference,the ship and its lading would be the King s.The source from whence this institution flowed310 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF Punishment.is pretty generally known : but it is not perhapsso generally observed that the institution is not ajust consequence, even from the ideas thenreceived. It was established, it is not easy to sayhow early, but however in the days of Catholicism.In those days, as soon as a man s soul hadleft its body, it used to go to a place called Purgatory,there to be broiled for 20,000 years. Nowin this life some souls love music, others not.But in that post, life which was then to come, allsouls were fond of it alike. Luther himself, whoought to know, is positive of it.* Not that allmusic was to their taste. It was only a particularkind of music, such as priests know only how tosing. But it was not reasonable that priestsshould sing unless they were paid for it ; for thelabourer is worthy of his hire. Now when a mandied thus suddenly, it was not probable that heshould have made any provision by his will forpaying them. Therefore it was necessary thatsomebody else should pay them. So far was inorder. But why resort to any other fund than theman s own property? Was he the poorer forhaving died a violent death, than if he had died anatural one? or for dying by the effect of a thingin motion, than if he had died by a fall from a thingat rest? And if, after all, he had nothing to payfor himself, could not the parish, or the hundred,or the next abbey have paid for him?I would not swear but the sages who inventedthis notable institution might think to do a spiteto the thing, the waggon, the ship, or whatever itwas, by making it forfeited ; as the Atheniansexterminated a stone that struck a man and killedhim, that is, carried it out of their country andSee Sir J. Hawkins s History of Music.B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 311threw it into another. Many a public institution,which the lawyer admires with humble deference,has had no better ground.The next instance of random punishment whichI would give, consists in the exclusion put upontestimony.I could wish to give the reader a precise list ofthe offences to which this punishment is annexed,but this I find to be impossible. Every principledelivered on this subject teems with contradiction.The remuneration which is sometimes made includesnearly every principal crime, comprehendingtreason, perjury, forgery, and such like crimes,theft, all crimes considered infamous, and felony.As to felony, this is spoken of as if it were a particularspecies of crime : the case is, that felonyis a collection of crimes as heterogenous as canbe conceived, and which have nothing in commonbetween them but the accidental circumstanceof being punished with the same punishment.Crimes of mere resentment, or malicious mischief,are by scores of statutes made felonies. Homicideintentional, in the heat of passion ; or unintentional,by an unlucky blow, is felony. Rape is felony.Crimes of lewdness are felonies. What is notfelony? The evidence of persons excommunicatedis not received, the reason annexed by some hasbeen, that these individuals not being under theinfluence of religion cannot be believed on theiroath. By others it has been generally said, thatthose who converse with excommunicated personsare excommunicated with them, and consequentlythey cannot be admitted to receive any questionsfrom a Court of Justice. Of this nature are thereasons frequently given for existing laws in thebooks of English jurisprudence.Without longer stopping, therefore, to ascertain312 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.in what cases testimony is refused, let us proceedto examine if this is a proper punishment, that isto say, if there is any case in which because a manhas committed a crime his testimony ought to berejected.The only reason there can be for rejecting awitness is this, that it appears more probable thatafter every expedient that can be put in practiceto get trie truth of him, the account he gives ofthe matter would rather mislead those who are tojudge than set them right. I say mislead thejudges; I do not say be a false one: for whetherit be true or not, is what to the purposes of justiceis a matter of indifference. The point is for themto (be enabled to) form such a notion of the fact indispute as shall prove a true one; by what meansthey come at it is no matter. He would commitperjury indeed, but that is quite another evil, andan evil for which there is another and more properremedy than that of prematurely repelling hisevidence. This want of veracity, therefore, is noobjection to him, unless he has the faculty ofmaintaining to the last such a degree of consistencyand plausibility as shall enable him to conceal it.As to want of veracity it should be consideredthat the greatest liar in the universe rarely swervesfrom truth (I mean what to him seems truth) inone instance out of a hundred. The natural bentof all mankind is to speak truth ; it requires theforce of some particular interest, real or imaginary,to overbalance that propensity. Some men, it istrue, are made to deviate from it by very slendermotives, but nobody tells a lie absolutely withouta motive.Now then, do but suppose him absolutely withoutany interest to give a false account, and themost abandoned criminal that ever was upon theB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 313earth might be trusted to as safely as the man ofthe most consummate virtue. Where then liesthe difference? In this, that the profligate manmay easily be made to fancy he has such aninterest in telling falsehood as shall preponderateover the interest he fancies he has in speakingtruth; the easier, the more profligate he is: theman of virtue, not without difficulty; the moredifficulty, the more he is confirmed in virtue.Now a motive to speak truth, in cases wherehe is called upon by law to give his testimony, iswhat every man has, and unless he be insanemust conceive himself to have; he has it from thepolitical sanction, in the penalties which the lawdenounces against falsehood in such cases: he hasit from the moral sanction, in the infamy annexedby men in general to such a conduct: he has itfrom the religious sanction, unless he be an atheist,and except in as far as dispensations or absolutionsmay intervene to take it off.The interest which a man may have onthe other hand to speak falsehood in such a case,may be distinguished into a natural interest, andan artificial one. What I mean by a naturalinterest need not be explained. I call that anartificial interest which he may derive in the wayof reward, by the express act of him who hassome natural interest. If you are at law for anestate, you have a natural interest in my tellingany story, true or false, that may serve, to establishyour title. If you give me a reward for tellingsuch a story, I have an artificial one, which israised up in me by you.Now whether a man has a natural interest or noin the fate of a contest, is in general pretty easyto be known; it is a question of itself: and ifdetermined in the affirmative, the tendency of the314 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.law is, to reject a man as a witness, upon thatdistinct ground, and without regard to his probityor improbity.The question is here concerning an artificialinterest, the existence, or non-existence of which,does not so readily lie within proof; but the lightsthat are to be had, are to be drawn from such circumstancesas may appear to affect the descriptionof a man s general character. Thus much onlyis certain, that in proportion as a man is more orless confirmed in virtue, the less or the more likelyis any artificial motive which may be presented tohim, to preponderate over the motives he has tospeak truth, and be effective, so as to determinehim to speak falsehood.It is here proper to be upon our guard against avulgar error. Men of narrow experience, of hastyjudgment, and of small reflection, in a word, thebulk of mankind, have in a manner but two classesin which to stow a man, in respect of merit :they know but of two characters, the good manand the bad man. If then they happen to view aman s conduct, in any instance, in a favourablelight, up he goes among the good men ; if in anunfavourable, down he goes among the bad men,and they fix a great gulph between the two. Iftheir opinion, with respect to either, comes tochange, as they have no intermediate stages, he isremoved from his station, with the same violenceas he was at first placed in it. But men of observationand cool reflection, who have had patienceand sagacity to make a narrow search into humannature, learn to correct the errors of this indolentand hasty system ; they know that in the scale ofmerit, men s characters rise one above the other,by infinite and imperceptible degrees ; and, at thesame time, that the highest is distant from theB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 315lowest, by a much less space than is commonlyimagined.Those who admit the truth of these observationswill see how precarious and ill-contrived a meansthe law takes to come at truth, by giving into theerror above noticed: by making one class of men,which it will hear, and another of men, whom itwill not suffer to be heard in any case, or on anyaccount. In a word, (for I own that the argumentcomes to this) that while it enjoins any classof persons to be excluded, at all events, to avoida small degree of possible inconvenience, itembraces a great degree of certain inconvenience.It is manifest, that the smaller the number ofpersons is whom it guards against, in proportionto those whom it remains still exposed to danger,the less is the advantage gained by it. Whomthen does it guard against? a few hundreds,perhaps, in a nation. And from whom does itremain exposed to danger ? all the rest of thenation. .For who is it from whom it does not standexposed, in any case, to a danger of this kind, Ideclare is more than I can imagine. If there beany man now living that can lay his hand upon hisheart, and solemnly declare, that in no instance,trivial or important, has he ever departed from therigid line of truth, upon the prospect of advantage,he has either more hypocrisy than I wouldwish to impute to any man, or more virtue than Ican persuade myself to exist in any man. Theonly person about whom I can be sure, and whoyet would not willingly yield the palm of integrityto any one that lives, nor barter any atom of itfor any other honour the world has to bestow, isfar, I know, from the thoughts of making any suchpretensions.There are cases in which the best man alive316 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.could scarcely be credited without danger : thereare cases in abundance, in which the worst manalive might be believed with safety. Such are allthose, where the circumstance of the case affordthe witness no natural motive to speak falsely :and the circumstances of the parties are such ascan afford him no artificial one. I am, for instance,as bad a man as, for the supposition s sake, youwould choose to have me. I happen to see oneman beating another, who afterwards seeks hisremedy at law against the oppressor, and calls measa witness, and the only witness. Now, it hashappened, that I have been convicted of perjury,over and over again, as many times as you please :I would swear my father s life away for a penny.But the parties are, both of them, miserably poor:they neither of them have a penny to tempt mewith. What then is there to induce me to give afalse account of the matter ? nothing. What thenis the danger of admitting me ? none at all.What the consequence of rejecting me ? thetriumph of oppression. Now, in a case like this,there is nothing singular nor improbable ; a thousandsuch might a man figure to himself with ease.Having proceeded thus far, I will venture toadvance this position, that a man s testimony oughtnot to be rejected at all events, even for thecrime of perjury : if not for perjury, it will follow,a fortiori, not for any other crime. I will just offera farther consideration or two, in support of thisopinion ; I will then give a short sketch of theevil consequences that result from such an absoluterejection ; I will thirdly offer an expedient,which, I think, would answer every good purposeof it; and lastly, I will state the different degreesof reason there may be, for extending the incapacityto the different crimes that may be proposed.B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 317Now then, let the crime of which the witnesshas been convicted, be that of perjury. He has,however, no natural interest to speak false ; if hehas, that forms another ground of disability, whichis not here in question. If then, he has an artificialinterest, it is the party that must give it him.But in this case, the party must be a suborner :unless then, he stand already convicted of subornationon a former occasion, there can be no groundfor repelling the perjured witness, withoutperemptorily attributing to another man, whosecharacter stands unimpeached, a crime of a similarcomplexion : a supposition, which no rule,either of law or reason, seems to warrant.I cannot help thinking, that these rules ofperemptory incompetency would never have beenlaid down, had those, who first started them, gonedeliberately and circumspectly to work, and carefullyexamined the consequences on both sides ofthe question. The evil consequences of the rule,they seemed scarcely to have cast their eyes on.They seem to have gone to work, as if they hadwitnesses enough in every case to pick and chooseout of; on which supposition, certainly, theywould do well to discard the worst, to pick outand retain none but the best, and such as shouldbe proof against all exception. All this wasmighty well, provided there was no danger on theother side. But the danger on the other side isterrible. It is a truth, however, which I canscarce help looking upon as very obvious, andcertainly it is an important one, that to mark anyman out as disabled from witnessing at all events,is to grant all men a license to do to him andbefore him all manner of mischief whatsoever.Now, as to what may be done to him, that indeedmay be taken as so much punishment of the prossB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.per kind, though it would be a strange loose andinconsiderate method of laying a man under proscription.*But as to mischief that maybe done to others inhis presence, or which, in any other way, othersmay suffer for want of his evidence, the case ofEnoch and Mackendar f may serve as an example.By the statute, which is called the Statute,of Frauds and Perjuries, three witnesses are necessaryto a will of land. In this case, the will hadthree witnesses, as it ought to have. Two stoodunimpeached ; but it was found out, that the other,once upon a time, had been convicted of pettylarceny, and been whipt. This was before theattestation, how long, it does not appear. Thesuit was commenced five years afterwards. Thisman being deemed a bad witness, (and as such,not to be heard) there wanted the requisite number,and the man, in whose favour the will hadbeen made, lost the estate. One may imagine theshock to a person, who thought he had all thesecurity for his estate which the law could givehim ; one may imagine the surprise and indignationthe testator, were he to arise out of his grave,must feel, at seeing his disposition vacated, by anincident which common prudence could never haveprompted him to guard against, unless, by lookingin a man s face, he could have told, that once inhis life he had been guilty of a trifling breach ofhonesty, and been whipt for it.The limits of this design will not permit me toexpatiate upon this subject any further, by suggestingcases of like mischief that are liable toIt would be worse, in some respects, than forfeiture ofreputation.f 2. Will. 18.B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 319happen, or collecting such as are known actuallyto have happened. This general sketch of thembeing given, the intelligent reader will readilyexcuse me from entering into the detail.Because a woman has been guilty of perjury,or any other offence which has rendered her testimonyinadmissible, it is just that she should bepunished ; but is it just, is it proper, that sheshould be delivered over to the lust of whateverman to whom her beauty may become an objectof desire ? If the law were known to be, in thisrespect, as it is said to be, the nation would becomea scene of lust, cruelty, and rapine ; but it happenshere, as it will sometimes happen in otherinstances, one mischief operates as a palliative toanother: the extreme absurdity of the law is veiledby men s utter ignorance of its contents.Let us turn back and look on the other side.What then would be the mischief of admitting thetestimony of a man thus stigmatized ? I see none :none at least that can for a moment stand in competitionwith the mischief on the other side."But the person so stigmatized does not deserveto be believed !" Does he not ? why am I to thinkso ? because you say so ? No ; but because meningeneral will say so too ! And will they then ?Yes, surely will they. I do believe it, and thereforeit is I say there is no danger. Let him beknown for what he is, and a Jury will be underthe strongest bias not to believe him. Their prejudicewill bear strong against him ; nor will anythingless than the strongest degree of probability,and the most perfect consistency in the wholenarration, be sufficient to induce them to believeit. I see not what it is that should justify theextreme distrust which Judges have shown ofJuries in establishing this rule : especially, as in320 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.case of a conviction of an innocent person, whichis the greatest danger the case is open to, it is soentirely in the power of the Judge to save theconvict. The general prejudice of mankind, aswe have before observed, leads them to exaggeratetion in the judgment they pronounce of the generaltenor of a man s character, from a single action ;in particular, to spread the stain that a single actof delinquency brings upon a man s character,farther than according to reason, it ought to go.It is from having been the dupes, as I take it, ofthis prejudice, that even Judges, the ancientJudges, who first laid down the law upon thispoint, first broached this rule. It may always beexpected to work, at least as strongly as it oughtto work, upon Juries taken from the body of thepeople.Were it then abolished, the conduct of Juries,then you think, would nearly be the same as if itsubsisted ? I think it probable. What advantagethen would you gain by the abolition ? This greatone : the chance that a delinquent might have ofimpunity in such a case, would no longer be visibleupon paper ; he would no longer see a formallicense given him, by the letter of the law, to commitall manner of wickedness in presence of anobject circumstanced like the party in question ;if a guilty person were acquitted upon that ground,it would appear as if, upon the whole, the storywas not credible, and that, in fact, no such crimewas committed as was charged, not that havingbeen committed, it was suffered to go unpunished.This then is the advantage, and I think a moreconclusive one cannot well be required to justifyany institution.All that prudence requires in such a case is,that the character of the witness, that is to say,B.IV. PROPER SEAT Of PUNISHMENT. 321the offence of which he was formerly guilty, shouldbe known, that those who are called upon toweigh his testimony, may be able to judge howfar he is to be believed.Suppose the party has been guilty of perjury,this crime most particularly affects his credibility.There is a great difference to be observed in thequality of the crime when committed in self-defence,in one s own cause, and when committedon the subornation of a stranger, and in an attackupon the life of an innocent person ; such distinctionsare most important, and readily offer themselvesto those who consult the dictates of commonsense,and do not surfer their eyes to be blinded bythe mist of technical jargon.The time which has elapsed since the offencewas committed is a consideration of importance.A man in his youth, at fourteen or fifteen years ofage, was led to take a false oath, and was convictedhe becomes reformed, during thirty orforty years, he maintains an unimpeachable character.His reformation is of no consequence, therecord of his forgotten crime is dragged from thedust with which it had been covered ; in accordancewith this rule, his testimony must be rejected ;upon every principle of common sense and ofutility, it would have been equally admissible withany other.In the prosecution of criminals, the testimony ofthose who have a manifest interest in their condemnation,is not refused, whether that interest bepecuniary, or arising from a desire of vengeance.Such testimony is, however, received with distrustand caution. This is well ; be equally distrustfulof a witness, whose previous conduct hasrendered him suspected ; but hear him, andexamine whether the circumstances of his crimeY322 B.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT.are of a nature to affect his credibility on eachparticular occasion .SECT. VIII. CAUSE OF THE FREQUENCY OFMIS-SEATED PUNISHMENT.As to the cause of the abuse thus made ofpunishment, it lies not very deep below the surface.It lies partly in the strength of the self-regarding,and dissocial passions, partly in theweakness of the intellectual faculties on the part oflegislators, and of Judges acting in the place oflegislators.It lies more particularly in the strength of thedissocial passions, and in that one of the falseprinciples, rivals to the principle of utility, viz. inthe principle of sympathy and antipathy, in the productionof which the dissocial affections, influencedand swollen to that pitch in which they assumethe name of passion, have so large a share.Urged on by the dissocial passion of antipathy,misguided by the principle of sympathy and antipathy,men in power have punished, because theyhated : taking as a sufficient warrant for the inflictionof the sufferings which they proposed to themselvesto inflict, the existence of that hatred, of which,as towards the person in question, in considerationof the act in question, the existence was demonstratedto them by their own feelings.That which was the cause, became naturally themeasure of what was done : punishing, because ofhis hate, it was, to the man with the strong hand,matter of course to punish in proportion to hishate.A lot of punishment, in which so much suffering,and no more, would fall upon the innocent, as consistentlywith the application of punishment to theB.IV. PROPER SEAT OF PUNISHMENT. 323guilty, was unavoidable, sufficed not for the gratificationof his hate : of that satisfaction whichconsists in his contemplation of another s suffering1 , he would have as much more as was to be had ;and frequently there was scarce a price, so as itwas at the expense of others only that that pricewas made up, and not any part at his expensethere was scarce a price at which he was notcontent to purchase it.RATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BOOK V.OF COMPLEX PUNISHMENTS.CHAPTER I.INCONVENIENCES OF COMPLEX PUNISHMENTS.WE have before observed that a penal act isnot simple in its effects, does not produce onesingle evil, that it produces many masses of evilat once. A punishment, considered as an act,may be simple, considered in its effects, complex.A man is imprisoned, here is a simple punishmentas respects the act on the part of theJudge : but as respects the individual the evilsresulting from it may be very various, affecting indifferentways his fortune, his person, his reputationand his condition in life.A simple punishment is that which is producedby a single act of punishment : a compoundpunishment, is that which requires more than oneoperation ; the punishment for an offence may includeimprisonment, a fine, a mark of infamy, &c. ifB.V. CH.I. COMPLEX PUNISHMENTS. 325all these are announced by the law ; if each ofthese punishments is expressed by a clear andfamiliar term, the punishment, though compoundor complex, may be a good one.Improper complex punishments are those ofwhich the integral parts are not known, thosewhich include evils that the law does not announce,which are only expressed by obscure andenigmatical names which do not exhibit theirpenal nature in clear characters, and whichare only understood by lawyers ; of this kindare transportation felony with and withoutbenefit of clergy preemunire outlawry excommunicationincompetency as a witness, and manyothers.Everything which is uncertain, everythingwhich is obscure, offends against the first conditionin framing a good law.The inconveniences attached to complex punishmentswhen thus defined are very great, but theymay be explained in a few words the legislatorknows not what he does the subject knows notwhat is meant by the punishment threatened.It becomes impossible for the legislator to dowhat is proper in each case, he therefore doeseither too much or too little every obscureexpression veils from his eyes the nature of thepunishment or punishments he employs : hestrikes blindfolded, and scatters suffering athazard. The Jury and the Judges who witnessthe inconveniences of the law in each particularcase, allow themselves to employ all possiblemeans to avoid them, they usurp the authorityof the legislator, and perjury becomes the habitualpalliative of his injustice or improvidence.If the law is executed, what happens ? theJudge in inflicting one useful punishment, is326 B.V. CH.I. COMPLEX PUNISHMENTS.obliged to inflict a multitude of useless punishments: punishments of which the offenders hadonly an imperfect idea, which produce mischief inpure waste, oftentimes the mischief spreads overpersons who are entire strangers to the offence,and the consequences are such that the legislatorwould have trembled had he foreseen them.We have already spoken of incompetency as awitness, we shall now direct our attention to theother punishments above-named.CHAPTER II.OF TRANSPORTATION.AMONG the advantages which the North Americanshave derived from their independence, thereis one which cannot fail to strike every manwho has any feeling of national pride; it hassaved them from the humiliating obligation ofo oreceiving every year an importation of the refuseof the British population, of serving as an outletfor the prisons of the mother country, wherebythe morals of their rising people were exposed toinjury, by a mixture with all possible kinds ofdepravity. North America, after having beenexposed to this scourge for upwards of a century,no longer serves as a receptacle for these livingnuisances; but can any limits be assigned tothe moral effects that may have been producedby this early inoculation of vice?I shall have occasion again to recur to thisimportant topic, when in speaking of the Colonyat New South Wales, and of the population nowforming there. I shall point out the inconvenienceswhich result from sending thither theseoperiodical harvests of malefactors.The present object is to show that the systemof transporting, as now managed, is essentiallydifferent from what it was under the old system,and that with the change of scene, the punishmentitself has in many respects been materiallyaltered; in some respects for the better, in manyothers for the worse.328 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.Under the old system of transportation to America,power being given for that purpose by Parliament,the convicts destined for transportationwere made over by the government to a contractor,who, for the profit to be made by sellingtheir services for the penal term to a master inAmerica, engaged to convey them to the scene ofbanishment. To banishment, the banishmentprescribed by law, was thus added in all cases inwhich the individuals were not able to purchasetheir liberty, the ulterior and perfectly distinctpunishment of bondage. But wherever it happenedthat through the medium of a friend, orotherwise, the convict could bid more for himselfthan would be given for his services by a stranger,he was set at liberty in the first port at which hearrived. The punishment was limited, as respectedhim, to simple banishment, the individual wastherefore punished with bondage rather for hispoverty than for the crime he had committed.Thus the most culpable, those who had committedgreat crimes and who had contrived tosecure the profits of their crimes, were leastpunished. The minor thieves, novices, and inexperiencedmalefactors, who had not secured theirplunder, bore the double chain of banishment andslavery.Under the system of transportation to BotanyBay, the whole expense is borne by the Government.The Governor of the Colony alwaysretains an authority over the convicts, and actsas their goaler; he provides them with habitations,employment, and food; they are placed underhis sole controul ; he may employ them eitherin public or private works. Hard labour, withsome few exceptions, is the lot of all ; exemptionfrom it cannot be purchased by money. InB.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 329this respect the inequality above spoken of, hasbeen greatly corrected, and the punishment havingbeen rendered more certain is consequentlymore efficacious.Transportation to America was attended withanother inconvenience, that country presentedtoo many facilities for the return of the convicts.A great number of them availed themselves ofthese opportunities, and returned to the mothercountry to exercise their fatal talents with superiorskill. Some when their terms of banishmenthad expired, many before that period hadarrived. As to the latter, the facility of returnwas one among the disadvantages attendingtransportation to America; as to the others, inthe eyes at least of those who conceive that thecommission of one offence ought not to operate asaforfeiture of all title to justice, this facility ofreturn could not fail to appear as an advantage.On the other hand, the distance of Botany Bayafforded a better security against illegal returns,being situated at the antipodes of Britain, withscarcely any existing commerce when first selected,the return of any of the convict population wasan event hardly to be looked for: whilst howevera security thus effectual was provided againstthe return of convicts whose terms had notexpired, an equally effectual barrier was raisedagainst the return of those whose terms hadexpired, and thus, at one stroke, all inferiordegrees of this punishment were, in nearly allcases, indiscriminately converted into the highest;whether such an effect was intended or not itis needless to enquire, but that such was the effectis indisputable.Transportation under the present system, is acomplex punishment, composed, first, of banishesB.V. CH.Il. OF TRANSPORTATION.merit, and, second, of hard labour, banishment,a punishment eminently defective, particularly inrespect of its inequality: hard labour, a punishmentin itself eminently salutary, but whenconnected with banishment, and, safe in this case,carried on under every possible disadvantage,failing altogether to produce any beneficial effects.In order to show how completely adverse thesystem of transportation to New South Wales isto the attainment of the several objects or ends ofpenal justice, it will be necessary shortly torecapitulate what those ends or objects are, andthen to show from the accounts which have beenfurnished, respecting the state of the convictpopulation of that Colony, in what degree theseends or objects have been respectively fulfilled.The main object or end of penal justice isexample; prevention of similar offences, on thepart of individuals at large, by the influenceexerted by the punishment on the minds ofbystanders, from the apprehension of similarsuffering in case of similar delinquency; of thisproperty transportation is almost destitute. Thisis its radical and incurable defect. The punishmentis not seen by, it is hidden, abstractedfrom, the eyes of those upon whom it is desirableit should operate in the way of example. Punishmentswhich are inflicted at the antipodes, in acountry of which so little is known, and withwhich communication was so rare, could makeonly a transient impression upon the minds ofpeople in this country. " The people saysan author, who had deeply considered the effectsof imagination, " the mass of the people make nodistinction between an interval of a thousandyears and of a thousand miles." It has beenalready said, but cannot be too often repeatedB.V. CII.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 331and enforced, that the utility and effect ofexample is not determined by the amount ofsuffering the delinquent is made to endure, butby the amount of apparent suffering he undergoes.It is that part of * his suffering which strikes theeyes of beholders, and which fastens on theirimagination, which leaves an impression strongenough to counteract the temptation to offend.However deficient they may be in respect ofexemplary, the sufferings inflicted on personscondemned to this mode of punishment are notthe less substantial and severe; confinement for anunlimited time in prisons or in the hulks, avoyage of from six to eight months, itself astate of constant sufferance from the crowdedstate of the ships and the necessary restraint towhich convicts are subjected the dangers ofthe sea exposure to contagious diseases whichare often attended with the most fatal consequences.Such are some of the concomitants ofthe system of punishment in question, whichserves as the introduction to a state of banishmentand bondage in a distant region, in which themeans of subsistence have been extremely precarious,and where by delay in the arrival of a vesselthe whole colony has been repeatedly exposed toall the horrors of famine. It is scarcely possibleto conceive a situation more deplorable than thatto which the convicts thus transported have beenexposed. Constant hard labour, and exposureto depredation, (if they have anything of whichthey can be plundered,) and occasional starvation;without the means of mending their conditionwhile they remain there, without the hope ofever leaving it; such has been the condition towhich persons banished to this Colony, for periodsthat in pretence were limited, have found B.V. CHill. OF TRANSPORTATION.selves exposed. Here then is punishment, partlyintentional, partly accidental, dealt out with themost lavish profuseness ; but compared with itseffects in the way of example, it may be consideredas so much gratuitous suffering inflictedwithout end or object. A sea of oblivion flowsbetween that country and this. It is not thehundredth, nor even the thousandth part of thismass of punishment that makes any impressionon the people of the mother country upon thatclass of people who are most likely to commitoffences, who neither read nor reflect, and whosefeelings are capable of being excited, not by thedescription, but by the exhibition of sufferings.The system of transportation has moreover thisadditional disadvantage, which not merely neutralizesits effects in the discouragement ofoffences, but renders it, in many cases, an instrumentof positive encouragement to the commissionof offences. A variety of pleasing illusions will,in the minds of many persons, be connected withthe idea of transportation, which will not merelysupplant all painful reflections, but will bereplaced by the most agreeable anticipations.It requires but a very superficial knowledge ofmankind in general, and more especially of theyouth of this country, not to perceive that a distantvoyage, a new country, numerous associates, hopeof future independence, and agreeable adventures,will be sufficiently captivating to withdraw themind from the contemplation of the painful partof the picture, and to give uncontrolled sway toideas of licentious fascinating enjoyment.*Not many years ago, two young men, the one about 14the other about 16 years of age, were condemned for a pettytheft, to be transported. Upon hearing this unlocked forB.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 333II. The second end or object of punishment isReformation : prevention of similar offences, onthe part of the particular individual punished ineach instance, by taking from him the will tocommit the like in future under this head whathas been done in the colony of New South Wales ?By referring to facts, we shall find, not onlythat in this respect it has been hitherto radicallydefective, but that from the nature of things itever must remain so.Connected with the system of transportation tothe American colonies, there were two circumstanceshighly conducive to the reformation of theconvicts transported their admission, upon landingin the country, into families composed of menof thrift and probity their separation from eachother.When a master in America had engaged aconvict in his service, all the members of thefamily became interested in watching his behaviour.Working under the eye of his master, he hadneither the inducements nor the means of givingloose to his vicious propensities. The state ofdependence in which he was placed, gave him anobvious interest in cultivating the goodwill ofthose, under whose authority he found himselfplaced ; and if he still retained any principleof honesty, it could scarcely fail to be invigoratedand developed under the encouragement that itwould find in the society with which he wassurrounded.sentence, the youngest began to cry. " Coward," said hiscompanion, with an air of triumph, " who ever cried becausehe had to set out upon the grand tour?" This fact wasmentioned to me by a gentleman who was witness to this scene,and was much struck with it.334 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.Thus it was in America. How is it in NewSouth Wales ? To receive the convicts upontheir landing, a set of brutes in human shape, aspecies of society beyond comparison lessfavourable to colonization than utter solitude.Few other inhabitants, but the very profligatesthemselves, who are sent by thousands, fromBritish goals, to be turned loose to mix with oneanother in this desert, together with the few taskmasterswho superintend their work in the openwilderness, and the military men who are sent outwiththem in large but still unequal numbers, tohelp keep within bounds the mischief they wouldotherwise be sure to occupy themselves with, whenthus let loose. Here then there were not, as inAmerica, any families to receive the convicts, anymeans of constantly separating them from eachother, no constant and steady inspection. Field-husbandryis, under this system, the principalemployment; hence general dispersion field-husbandrycarried on by individuals or heads offamilies, each occupying a distinct dwelling, theinterior of which is altogether out of the habitualreach of every inspecting eye. It is true that thePolice officers occasionally go their rounds tomaintain order and keep the convicts to their work ;but what is to expected from a system of inspectionat long intervals, and which is as disgustingto the inspectors as to the inspected. Can this beregarded as a sufficient check against sloth, gaming,drunkenness, incontinence, profaneness, quarrelling,improvidence, and the absence of all honourablefeeling. Immediately the back of theinspector is turned, all the disorder which hisactual presence had suspended, is renewed. Itmay easily be imagined how completely all controulmay be set at defiance by a set of men whoB.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 335have regularly organized among themselves asystem of complicity, and who make it a matter oftriumph and agreeable pastime to assist eachother in escaping from inspection.On this subject, the public have long been in thepossession of a very valuable document : it is acomplete history of the first sixteen years since theestablishment of this colony, which in respect offidelity possesses every title to confidence, andwhich states the events as they happened, in theform of a journal, accompanied with the necessarydetails. What gives the work the highest claimto confidence, is that the historiographer is also thepanegyrist, the professed panegyrist of the establishment: a character which, when accompanied, asin this instance, with that candour and thoseinternal marks of veracity, with which it is so rarefor it to be accompanied, renders the testimony, inthis point of view, more than doubly valuable.The general impression left by a perusal ofthis work, is one of sadness and disgust : it is ahistory of human nature in its most degraded anddepraved state an unmixt detail of crimes andpunishments. The men constantly engaged inconspiracies against the government, alwaysforming plans for deceiving and disobeying theirtask-masters, forming among themselves a societyof refractory and wily profligates a society ofwolves and foxes. The women everywhere else,the best part of humanity, prove in New SouthWales a remarkable exception to this generalrule. The late chief magistrate says " thewomen are worse than the men, and are generallyfound at the bottom of every infamous transactionthat is committed in the colony"* His workCollins, vol. II. p. 218,36 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.abounds with passages to the same effect. Ofsuch materials is it that the foundation of thecolony is formed. From such a stock, and undersuch auspices, is it that the rising generation is tobe produced.The historian has not confined himself to vagueimputations of general immorality and profligacy,but has particularized the acts of delinquency onwhich those imputations rest. The crimes thatare committed at New South Wales, in spite of thealertness of the government and the summaryadministration of justice, surpass, in the skill andcunning with which they are managed, everythingthat has been ever witnessed in this country :almost every page of his work contains the descriptionof offences against persons, or againstproperty, either of individuals or of the public.Gaming and drunkenness produce perpetualquarrels, which usually end in murder. Thecrime of incendiarism is there practised to anextent altogether unexampled in any other country.Churches, prisons, public and private property,are all alike subjected to the devouringelement, without any regard to the extent of theloss that may be occasioned, or the number oflives that maybe sacrificed. "When the publicgaol was set on fire," says the historian, " it will beread with horror, that at the time there wereconfined within the walls, twenty prisoners, mostof whom were loaded with irons, and who withdifficulty were snatched from the flames. Feelingfor each other was never imputed to these miscreants;and yet, if several were engaged in thecommission of a crime, they have seldom beenknown to betray their companions in iniquity"*Collins, vol. II. p. 197.B.II. CII.V. OF TRANSPORTATION. 337The bond of connection is not sympathy for eachother, but antipathy to the government, thecommon enemy. For the natives they manifestas little feeling, as towards each other. Spiteof the rigour of the law, these European savages,are guilty of the most wanton acts of barbaritytowards the natives of the country ; instead ofcultivating a good understanding with them, whichmight have been attended with many advantages,they have converted them into the most determinedenemies.So far from exhibiting any symptoms of reformation,the longer they are subjected to thediscipline of the colony, the worse they become.Whatever may be the degree of viciousness ascribedby the historian to the convicts during the continuanceof their term, they appear in his historyto be in a certain degree honest, sober, and orderly,in comparison with those whose term is expired,and who afterwards become settlers : they thenbecome the prime instigators of all the crimescommitted in the colony, and constitute the principalsource of the embarrassment to which thegovernment is subjected.In proof of this assertion, the historian furnishesa most satisfactory piece of evidence. During thefirst five years subsequent to the establishment ofthe colony, and when there were no convicts whoseterms had expired, the conduct of the convicts wasin general orderly, and such as to give hopes of adisposition to reformation; but in proportion as, bythe expiration of their respective terms, the numberof the emancipated colonists increased, themost ungovernable licentiousness was introduced :not only those that were thus recently emancipated,as if to make up for the time they had lost, abandonedthemselves to every species of excess, but338 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.they encouraged the natural viciousness of thosewho still remained in a state of bondage. Theconvicts finding among these independent settlers,who were their old companions and associates,receivers of stolen property, and protectors from thepunishments denounced by the law, always readyto receive them in their retreat from justice, and toconceal them from detection, became more insolentand refractory, anxiously waiting for the timewhen they also would be entitled to assume thisstate of savage independence.What possible means can be devised to neutralizethis perpetually increasing influx of vice. Allthe expedients that have hitherto been employedhave proved completely fruitless, and there wouldbe no difficulty in shewing that so they mustever be. Instruction, moral and religious, seemsalmost altogether vain : the very nature of thepopulation bids defiance to the establishment of aneffectual system of police, or to an uniform administrationof the laws : rewards were found asinefficient as goodwill in procuring evidence ;the enormous consumption of spirituous liquors,the principal cause of all the disorders in thecolony, has from local circumstances, hitherto beenfound altogether irrepressible. Under each of theseheads a few remarks may suffice.With respect to religious instruction, little couldbe expected from two or three chaplains for acolony, divided into eight or ten stations, each toappearance at too great a distance from the restto send auditors to any other. To minds sodisposed as those of the convicts, of what advantagewas the attendance on divine service for oneor two hours on one day in the week ? And withwhat profit could religious instruction be expectedto be received by men who were "made (as theB.V. C1I.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 339historian expresses it*) to attend divine service ?"To rid themselves of the occasional listlessnessthey were thus made to endure, the Church wasgot rid of by an incendiary plot. To punish them(if by accident another building fit for the purposehad not been already in existence) they were tohave been employed on the Sunday in the erectinganother building for the purpose. -\ To work onSunday they might be made, but will they ever bemade to lend an attentive ear and a docile heart toauthoritative instruction. Even the women, saysthe historian, were extremely remiss in their attendanceon divine service, and were never at a lossfor mendacious pretences for excusing themselves.In short, instead of being observed as a day dedicatedto religious duties, Sunday appears in thatcolony to have been distinguished only by the riotand debauchery with which it was marked : thosewho did not attend divine service, taking advantageof the absence of those who did, to plunder theirdwellings and destroy their crops.It has just been seen with how very sparing ahand, religious instruction for the Protestant partof the establishment was supplied. For thespiritual instruction of the Catholic part of thecolony, which, from the large importations madefrom Ireland must now have become very numerous,it does not appear that any provision whateverwas made. It is true, that in one of the importationsof convicts from Ireland, a priest of theCatholic persuasion, whose offence was sedition,was comprised): If, instead of a seditious clergyman,would not the expense have been well bes-col.II. p. 122. f Collins, II. p. 129.t Collins, II. p. 293.340 B.V, CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.towed in sending out a loyalist clergyman of thesame religious persuasion.*As to the police, it is necessarily in an extremedegree debilitated by the corrupt state of thesubordinate class of public functionaries. In apopulation that warranted the utmost distrust onthe part of the government, it was found necessaryto restrain the free intercourse between the severalparts of the colony. All persons, officers excepted,were forbidden to travel from one district of thesettlement to another without passports. Theseregulations proved, however, altogether nugatory :the constables whose duty it was to inspect thesepassports, f either from fear or corruption, neglectedto do their duty, whilst, as has been already mentioned,a most effectual bar to the preservation ofany well regulated system of police, was found inthose convicts whose terms had expired, and whowere ever ready to give protection and assistanceto the criminal and turbulent.With regard to all classes of offences committedin this colony, justice was paralyzed by a principlewhich ensured impunity, and which it seemsimpossible to eradicate. With the historian, whowas also Judge Advocate, it is a matter of perpetualcomplaint, that is was scarcely possibleto convict an offender who was not taken in theThere is a passage in Collins (II. p. 51.) highly characteristicof the light in which the securing the means of attendance,and thence attendance itself on divine worship, on the part ofthe convicts, was regarded by the constituted authorities.A church-clock having been brought to the settlement in " TheReliance," and no building fit for its reception having beensince erected, preparations were now making for constructinga tower fit for the purpose, to iv which might be added a church,whenever at a future day the increase of labourers mightenable the governor to direct such an edifice to be built.I Collins, II. p. 139.B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 341very act of committing an offence. Evidence wason almost all occasions altogether as inaccessible,as if there had been a combination and tacitagreement among the majority of the inhabitantsof the colony to paralyze the arm of justice, by arefusal to bear testimony. He speaks of fivemurders in one year,* (1796) which were leftunpunished, notwithstanding the strong presumptionswhich indicated the guilty parties, becausethe necessary witnesses would not come forward,even though extraordinary rewards were offered.One such fact is sufficient : it is superfluous tocite others of the same nature.The most prominent cause of this state ofabandoned profligacy, is the universal and immoderatepassion for spirituous liquors : it is theexciting cause which leads to every species of vicegaming, dissoluteness, depredation, and murderservants, soldiers, labourers, women, the youthof both sexes, prisoners and their gales, are allalike corrupted by it ; it was carried to such apitch, that numbers of the settlers were in thepractice of selling the whole of their crops, as soonas they were gathered, in order to purchase theirfavourite liquor. The attempts made from time totime by the government, to check this practice, haveproved altogether unavailing : the policy of the governmentupon this point appears not to have beenquite steady : sometimes it has allowed the tradein spirituous liquors, at other times it has been forbidden.But whatever may be the policy of the government,experience shows that from the diffusivenessof the population, as well as from other causes,no precautions within its power will ever diminishthe quantity of this liquid poison consumed in anyCollins, II. p. 4.342 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.part of the colony. The greater the population,and the more distant the stations from thereat ofgovernment, the more easy will it be carry onprivate distilleries, and to prevent them from being-detected.And even if the supply thus producedwere unequal to the demand, it would be impossibleto prevent smuggling on an extent of coast whichthe whole navy of England would be unequal toguard. If it were found impossible to restrain thisevil when the colony was confined to a singlestation, and a single harbour, can any bettersuccess be looked for now that the settlements arespread wide over the face of the country, when thereare numerous settlers constantly employed in themanufacture of this article, and every ship thatarrives is provided with an abundant supply, thesale of it being more certain and more profitablethan that of any other commodity.Such has been the state of the convict populationof this colony past reformation none futurereformation still more hopeless. We have perhapsdwelt too long upon this part of the subject: fortunatelythe topics which remain may be compressedinto a narrower compass.III. The third object or end of punishment isincapacitation ; taking from the delinquent thepower of committing the same crimesTransportation accomplished this object, withrelation to a certain place. The convict, whilst inNew South Wales, cannot commit crimes inEngland ; the distance between the two places in aconsiderable degree precludes his illegal return,and this is the sum of the advantage.Whilst the convict is at Botany Bay, he neednot be dreaded in England, but his characterremains the same, and the crimes which are mischievousin the mother country are mischievous inB.V.CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 343the colony we ought not, therefore, to attribute tothis punishment an advantage which it does notpossess. That an inhabitant of London shouldrejoice in the removal to a distance of a dangerouscharacter, is easily comprehended ; his particularinterest is touched. But a punishment ought notto meet the approbation of a legislature, which,without diminishing the number of crimes committed,only changes the place of their commission.The security, great as it may appear to be,against returns both legal and illegal, has not beenso effectual as might have been expected. Thenumber of convicts who left the colony betweenthe years 1790 and 1796, the accounts of whichare scattered over the whole of Collins work,amount in the whole to 166, of which, 89 consistedof those whose terms had expired, and 76of those whose terms had not expired. This is,however, very far from being the total amount ofeither description of those that had quitted thecolony with or without permission. Escapes arein various parts of the work mentioned as beingmade in clusters, and the numbers composing eachcluster not being stated, could not be carried tothe above account.The number of escapes will, most probably,increase as commerce extends, and as the convictsbecome more numerous, and consequently possessgreater facilities for escaping.IV. The fourth end or object of punishment isthe making compensation or satisfaction to the partyinjured.On this head there is but one word to be said.The system of transportation is altogether destituteof this quality. It is true that this objectionhas no weight, except in comparison with asystem of punishment in which provision is made344 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANS PORT ATI OX.out of the labour of the offender for the compensationto the party injured.V. The fifth end or object proper to be kept inview in a system of penal legislation, is the collateralobject of Economy.If it could be said of the system in question,that it possessed all the several qualities desirablein a plan of penal legislation, its being attendedwith a certain greater degree of expence wouldnot afford a very serious objection to it ; but inthis case this system, the most defective ir itself,is, at the same time, carried on at a mo ,t enormousexpence.Upon this subject the 28th Report of the Committeeof Finance contains the most accurate andminute information. From that Report it appears,that the total expence incurred during the ten oreleven first years of the establishment, ending inthe year 1798, amounted to 1,037,000/., whichsum being divided by the number of convicts, willbe found to amount to about 461. a-head. A possiblereduction is in that Report contemplated,which might in time cut down the expence toabout 371. per head. To this expence, however,must be added the value of each mans labour,since, if not considered as thrown away, thevalue ought to be added to the account of expence.Consider New South Wales as a large manufacturingestablishment; the master manufacturer,on balancing his accounts, would find himselfminus 46/. for every workman that he employed.What enhances the expence of this manufacturingestablishment beyond what it would be inthe mother country, are, 1, the expence incurredin conveying the workmen to a distance ofbetween two and three thousand leagues ; 2,the maintenance of the civil establishment .CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION. 345sitting of Governors, Judges, Inspectors, PoliceOfficers, &c. ; 3, the maintenance of a militaryestablishment, the sole object of which is topreserve subordination and peace in the colony ;4, the wide separation of the workmen, theiruntrustworthiness, their profligacy, favoured bythe local circumstances of the colony, and thetrifling value of the labour that can be extractedby compulsion from men who have no interest inthe produce of their labour ; 5, the high price ofall the tools and raw materials employed incarrying on the manufactory, which are broughtfrom Europe at the risk and expence of a longvoyage.If it be impossible to find a single clerk inManchester or Liverpool who would not havetaken all these circumstances into his considerationin making such a calculation as that in question,and if after, or without having made it, thereis not one man of common sense who would haveundertaken such a scheme, a necessary conclusionis, that the arithmetic of those who risk theirown property, is very different from that of thosewho speculate at the expence of the public.In addition to the evils above enumerated asattending the system of transportation to NewSouth Wales, the punishment thus inflicted isliable to be attended with various species ofaggravation, making so much clear addition to thepunishment pronounced by the legislator.When a punishment is denounced by thelegislature, it ought to be selected as the one bestadapted to the nature of the offence ; his willought to be that the punishment inflicted shouldbe such as he has directed; he regards it assufficient ; his will is that it should not be madeeither more lenient or more severe; he reckons346 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.that a certain punishment, when inflicted, producesa given effect, but that another punishment,if by accident coupled with the principal one,whether from negligence or interest on the part ofsubordinates, exceeding the intention of the law,is so much injustice, and being nugatory in theway of example, produces so much uncompensatedevil.The punishment of transportation, which, accordingto the intention of the legislator, isdesigned as a comparatively lenient punishment,and is rarely directed to exceed a term of fromseven to fourteen years, under the system inquestion is, in point of fact, frequently convertedinto capital punishment. What is the more to belamented is, that this monstrous aggravation will,in general, be found to fall almost exclusivelyupon the least robust and least noxious class ofoffenders those who, by their sensibility, formerhabits of life, sex and age, are least able to contendagainst the terrible visitation to which they areexposed during the course of a long and perilousvoyage. Upon this subject the facts are asauthentic as they are lamentable.In a period of above eight years and a half, viz :from the 8th of May 1787, to the 31st December1795, of five thousand one hundred andninety-six embarked, five hundred and twenty-twoperished in the course of the voyage; nor isthis all, the accounts being incomplete. Out oftwenty-eight vessels, in twenty three of which,the mortality just spoken of, is stated to havetaken place ; there are five in respect of which thenumber of deaths is not mentioned.*The mortality attendant upon these first voyages to NewSouth Wales appears greatly to have originated in negligence.B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.A voyage, however long it may be, does notnecessarily shorten human existence. CaptainCook went round the world and returned withoutthe loss of a single man. It necessarily follows,therefore, that a voyage which decimated those thatare sent upon it must be attended with some verypeculiar circumstances. In the present case, itis very clear that the mortality that thus prevailedarose partly from the state of the convicts, partlyfrom the discipline to which they were subjected.Allow them to come on deck, everything is tobe apprehended from their turbulent dispositions :confine them in the hold, and they contract themost dangerous diseases. If the merchant, whocontracts for their transportation, or the captainof the ship that is employed by him, happens tobe unfeeling and rapacious, the provisions arescanty and of a bad quality. If a single prisonerhappens to bring with him the seed of an infectiousdisorder, the contagion spreads over thewhole ship. A ship ( The Hillsborough) which,in the year 1799, was employed in the conveyanceof convicts, out of a population of 300 lost 101.*It was not, says Col. Collins, a neglect of any ofthe requisite precautions, but the gaol fever,which had been introduced by one of the prisoners,that caused this dreadful ravage.Whatever may be the precautions employed,by any single accident or act of negligence, death,under its most terrific forms, is at all times liableto be introduced into these floating prisons whichhave to traverse half the surface of the globe, withCargoes of convicts have in many latter instances been carriedout without a single death occurring.Coll. vol. II, p. 222.348 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.daily accumulating causes of destruction withinthem, before the diseased and dying can beseparated from those who, having escaped infection,will have to drag out a debilitated existencein a state of bondage and exile.Can the intention of the legislator be recognisedin these accumulated aggravations to the punishmentdenounced? Can he be said to be awareof what he is doing when he denounces a punishment,the infliction of which is withdrawn altogetherfrom his controul, which is subjected to amultiplicity of accidents the nature of which isdifferent from what it is pronounced to be andin its execution bears scarce any resemblance towhat he had the intention of inflicting? Justice,of which the most sacred attributes are certaintyprecision, which ought to weigh with the mostscrupulous nicety the evils which it distributes,becomes under the system in question a sort oflottery, the pains of which fall into the hands ofthose that are least deserving of them. Translatethis complication of chances and see what theresult will be " I sentence you," says the Judge,but to what I know not perhaps to storm andshipwrecks perhaps to infectious disordersperhaps to famine perhaps to be massacred bysavages perhaps to be devoured by wild beastsAway, take your chance, perish or prosper,suffer or enjoy ; I rid myself of the sight of you,the ship that bears you away saves me fromwitnessing your sufferings, I shall give myself nomore trouble about you."But it may perhaps be said that, howeverdeficient in a penal view, New South Walespossesses great political advantages: it is aninfant colony, the population will by degreesB.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.increase, the successively rising generations willbecome more enlightened and more moral, andafter the lapse of a certain number of centuries, itwill become a dependent settlement of the highestpolitical importance.The first answer to this is, if it be thought torequire any, that of all the expedients that couldhave been devised for founding a new colony inthis or in any other place, the most expensive andthe most hopeless, was the sending out as theembryo stock, a set of men of stigmatized characterand dissolute habits of life. If there be any onesituation more than another that requires patience,sobriety, industry, fortitude, intelligence, it is thatofa set of colonists transported to a distance from theirnative country, constantly exposed to all sorts of privations,who have every thing to create, and who, in anewly formed establishment, have to conciliate a setof savage and ferocious barbarians, justly dreadingan invasion on their lives and property. Even an oldestablished and well organized community wouldbe exposed to destruction, from an infusion ofvicious and profligate malefactors, if effectualremedies were riot employed to repress them :such characters are destitute of all qualities, bothmoral and physical, that are essential in theestablishing a colony, or that would enable them tosubdue the obstacles opposed by nature in its rudeand uncultivated state.Where colonization has succeeded, the characterof the infant population has been far different. Thefounders of the most successful colonies haveconsisted of a set of benevolent and pacific Quakers,of men of religious scruples who have transportedthemselves to another hemisphere, in order thatthey might enjoy undisturbed liberty of conscience ;350 B.V. CH.II. OF TRANSPORTATION.of poor and honest labourers accustomed to frugaland industrious habits.*That New South Wales has, since these papers were written,become a flourishing colony, is owing not so much to convicttransportation, but to the admission of free settlers. The evilsabove pointed out continue to exist, but their influence islessened by the infusion of honest and industrious settlers.The following quotation confirms the reasoning of MrBentham, and shows that the greater portion of the evils hepoints out, continue unabated. Ed.If convicts are still to be transported hither, the only chanceof their reformation consists in scattering them widely over thecountry, and giving them pastoral habits. Convict transportationis at best a bad system of colonization ; and GovernorMacquarrie, by his preference of the convict to the free, made itworse for the plantation, and totally inoperative as the penaltyof felony, or the penitentiary of vice.The evils and expense of the transportation system wouldcertainly be lessened by placing the convicts more in the serviceof farming and grazing settlers, out of the reach of the temptationsand evil communications of large towns, the establishmentof which was too much the policy of the late governor. Thesalutary life of a shepherd or a stockman, would gradually softenthe heart of the most hardened convict; but instead of this,Governor Macquarrie s system was to keep them congregated inbarracks, and employed, at a ration of a pound and a half ofmeat and the same quantity of flour per diem, upon showypublic buildings. Of wretches possessed of no better means ofreformation than these, it could not be expected that industriouscolonists should ever be made. When their period of transportationexpired, or was remitted by favour, they would thereforetake their grant of land and allowances for settling, and sellthem the next hour for spirits."Journal of an Excursion across the Blue Mountains of NewSouth Wales. Edited by Baron Fields, p. 457. Lord. 1825.3.51CHAPTER III.PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.THE plans of Mr Bentham upon this subjectare already before the public : for the purpose ofthe present work, it will be only necessary shortlyto explain the three fundamental ideas which helays down.I. A Circular, or ^h/gonaL Building, with cellson each story in the circumference; in the centre,a lodge for the Inspector, from which he may seeall the prisoners without being himself seen, andfrom whence he may issue all his directions, withoutbeing obliged to quit his post.II. Management by Contract. The contractorundertaking the whole concern at a certain pricefor each prisoner, reserving to himself the disposalof all the profit which may arise from theirlabours, the species of which is left to his choice.Under this system, the interest of the Governoris, as far as possible, identified with his duty.The more orderly and industrious the prisoners,the greater the amount of his profits. He will,therefore, teach them the most profitable trades,and give them such portion of the profits as shallexcite them to labour. He unites in himself tfyecharacters of Magistrate, Inspector, Head of aManufactory, and of a family ; and is urged on bythe strongest motives faithfully to discharge allthese duties.352 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.III. Responsibility of the Manager. He is boundto assure the lives of his prisoners. A calculationis made of the average number of deaths in theyear, among the mixed multitude committed tohis care, and a certain sum is allowed to him foreach ; but at the end of the year, he is requiredto pay a similar sum for everyone lost by death orescape. He is, therefore, constituted the assurerof the lives and safe custody of his prisoners ;but to assure their lives is, at the same time, tosecure the multitude of cares and attentions, onwhich their health and well-being depend.Publicity is the effectual preservative againstabuses under the present system, prisons arecovered with an impenetrable veil ; the Panoplycon, on the contrary, would a . , so to speak, transparent.Accessible at - all hours, to properlyauthorised Magistrates ; accessible to everybody,at properly regulated hours, or days. The spectator,introduced into the central lodge, wouldbehold the whole of the interior, and would be awitness to the detention of the prisoners, and i*judge of their condition.Some individuals, pretending to a high degree ofsensibility, have considered this continual inspection,which constitutes the peculiar merit of MrBentham s plan, as objectionable. It has appearedto them as a restraint more terrible than any othertyranny : they have depicted an establishment ofthis kind as a place of torment. In so doing,these men of sensibility have forgotten the stateof most other prisons, in which the prisonersheaped together, can enjoy tranquillity neitherday nor night. They forget, that under this systemof continual inspection, a greater degree ofliberty and ease can be allowed, that chains andshackles may be suppressed, that the prisonersB.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 353may be allowed to associate in small companies,that all quarrels, tumults, and noise, bitter sourcesof vexation, will be prevented ; that the prisonerswill be protected against the caprices of theirgales, and the brutality of their companions ;whilst those frequent and cruel instances of neglectwhich have occurred, will be prevented by thefacility of appeal which will be afforded to theprincipal authority. These real advantages areoverlooked by a fantastic sensibility which neverreasons.Let us suppose a prison established upon thisplan ; and then observe in what manner it contributesto the several ends of punishment.FIRST END Example.It would be placed in the neighbourhood of themetropolis, where the greatest number of personsare collected together, and especially of thosewho require to be reminded, by penal exhibitions,of the consequences of crime. The appearanceof the building, the singularity of its shape, thewalls and ditches by which it is surrounded, theguards stationed at its gates, would all excite ideasof restraint and punishment, whilst the facilitywhich would be given to admission, would scarcelyfail to attract a mu-maude of visitors and whatwould they see? a set of persons deprived ofliberty which they have misused ; compelled toengage in labour, which was formerly their aversion,and restrained from riot and intemperance, inwhich they formerly delighted ; the whole of themclothed in a particular dress, indicating the infamyof their crimes. What scene could be more instructiveto the great proportion of the spectators?What a source of conversation, of allusion, ofdomestic instruction. How naturally would theA A354 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.aspect of this prison lead to a comparison betweenthe labour of the free man and the prisoner,between the enjoyments of the innocent and theprivations of the criminal. And, at the same time,the real punishment would be less than the apparent: the spectators, who would have only amomentary view of this doleful spectacle, wouldnot perceive all the circumstances which wouldeffectively soften the rigours of this prison. Thepunishment would be visible, and the imaginationwould exaggerate its amount, its relaxations wouldbe out of sight, no portion of the suffering inflictedwould be lost. The greater number even of theprisoners, being taken from the class of unfortunateand suffering individuals, would be in a state ofcomfort whilst ennui, the scourge of ordinaryprisons, would be banished.SECOND OBJECT Reformation.Idleness, intemperance, and vicious connections,are the three principal causes of corruption amongthe poor ; when habits of this nature have becometo such a degree inveterate, as to surmount thetutelary motives, and to lead to the commission ofcrimes, no hope of reformation can be entertainedbut by a new course of education, an educationthat shall place the patient in a situation in whichhe will find it impossible to gratify his vicious propensities,and where every surrounding object willtend to give birth to habits and inclinations of a ^nature altogether opposite. The principal instrumentwhich can be employed on this occasion is,perpetual superintendence. Delinquents are apeculiar race of beings, who require unremittedinspection. Their weakness consists in yieldingto the seductions of the passing moment. Theirminds are weak and disordered, and though their15. V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 355disease is neither so clearly marked nor so incurableas that of ideots and lunatics, like these, theyrequire to be kept under restraints, and they cannot,without danger, be left to themselves.Under the safeguard of this continual inspection,without which, success is not to be expected, thePenitentiary House described, includes all thecauses which are calculated to destroy the seedsof vice, and to rear those of virtue.I. Labour. It is admitted that constraint,instead of inspiring a taste for labour, is calculatedto augment the aversion to it. It must, however,be recollected, that in this case, labour is the onlyresource against ennui ; that being imposed uponall, it will be encouraged by example, and renderedmore agreeable by being carried on in thecompany of others ; it will be followed by immediatereward, and the individual being allowed ashare in the profits, it will lose the character ofservitude, by his being rendered, in measure, apartner in the concern. Those who formerlyunderstood no lucrative business, will, in this newcourse of education, obtain new faculties and newenjoyments; and when they shall be set free, willhave learned a trade, the profits cf which aregreater than those of fraud and rapine.II. Temperance. We have already had occasionto show that nearly all the crimes committed atBotany Bay, either originate or are increased bythe use of spirituous liquors, and that it is impossibleto prevent their use. Here the evil isarrested in its source, it. will not be possible tosmuggle in a drop of this poison transgressionswill therefore be impossible. Man yields tonecessity difficulties may stimulate his desires,but an absolute impossibility of satisfying them,destroys them when they are not supported by356 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.long established habits. There is much humanityin a strict rule, which prevents not only faults andchastisements, but temptations also.III. Separation into classes. The Adoption isthe only practicable plan which admits of the prisonersbeing divided into little societies, in suchmanner as to separate those whose vicious propensitiesare most contagious. These associationscan hardly fail to afford opportunities for the performanceof reciprocal services, for the exercise ofthe affections, and the formation of habits favourableto reformation. The relation of master andscholar will gradually be formed among them ;opportunities will thus be given for bestowingrewards for instruction ; for exciting emulation inlearning, and the creation of a sentiment of honourand self-esteem, which will be among the firstfruitsof application. Ideas of improvement andlawful gains will, by degrees, supplant those oflicentiousness and fraudulent acquisition. Allthese advantages arise out of the very nature ofthe establishment.Why should not unmarried prisoners be allowedto inter-marry. It would operate as a powerfulspur to those who aimed at attaining this reward,which should only be bestowed on account oforderly conduct and industry.These little societies present an additional security,arising from their mutual responsibility. Itis both just and natural to say to them, " You livetogether, you act together, you were able to haveprevented this crime, and if you have not so done,you are accomplices in it." Thus the prisonerswould be converted into guardians and inspectorsof each other. Each cell would be interested inthe good conduct of every one of its members.If any one of them should be distinguished for itsB.V. C1I.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 357good order, some distinction might be bestowedupon it, which should be visible to all. By suchmeans, a feeling of honour might be excited evenin the abode of ignominy.IV. Instruction. Indigence and ignorance arethe parents of crime. The instruction of thoseprisoners, who are not too old to learn, confersupon them many benefits at once ; it affords greatassistance in changing the habits of the mind, andelevating them, in their own estimation, from theclass of beings who are degraslod on account ofthe inferiority of their education Different studiesmay usefully fill up the intervals of time, whenmechanical operations are suspended ; both prudenceand humanity dictating the occupation ofthose intervals, instead of abandoning to themselvesminds to whom idleness is a burthendifficult to bear. But the object is much moreimportant, especially with regard to young offenders,who form the largest proportion of the whole.che prison should be their school, in whichshould learn those habits, which should preventtheir ever entering it again.The services of religion ought to be renderedattractive, in order that they may be efficacious.They may be performed in the centre of the building,without the prisoners quitting their cells.The central lodge may be opened for the admissionof the public, the worship adapted to the natureof the establishment, may be accompanied withsolemn music to add to its solemnity. The Chaplainengaged in its performance would not be astranger to the prisoners ; his instructions shouldbe adapted to the wants of those to whom theyare addressed ; he would be known to them astheir daily benefactor, who watches over the progressof their amendment ; who is the interpreter358 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.of their wishes, and their witness before theirsuperiors. As their protector and instructor, as afriend who consoles and who enlightens them, heunites all the titles which can render him an objectof respect and affection. How many sensible andvirtuous men would seek a situation which presents,to a religious mind, opportunities for conquestsmore interesting than the savage regions ofAfrica and Canada.There is, at all times, great reason for distrustingthe reformat of criminals. Experience toooften justifies the maxim of the poet,L honneur est commune ile escarpment sans bords :On n y pent plus rentrer des qu on en est dehors."But those who are most distrustful and incredulousof good, must acknowledge at least, thatthere is a great difference to be made in thisrespect, on account of the age of the delinquentsand the nature of their offences ; youth may bemoulded like soft wax, whilst advanced age willnot yield to new impressions. Many crimes ainot deeply rooted in the heart, but spring up therefromseduction, example, and above all, indigenceand hunger. Some are sudden acts of vengeance,which do not imply habitual perversity. Thesedistinctions are just and not controverted, it mustalso be admitted, that the plan we have describedpresents the most efficacious means for the amendmentof those who have preserved some remainsof honest principle.THIRD OBJECT Suppression of power to injure.Whatever may be its effects in producing internalreformation and correcting the will. TheAdoption unites all the conditions requisite forthe prevention of the commission of new offences.B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 359Under this head, the prisoners may be consideredat two periods the period of their imprisonment; the period posterior to their liberation.During the first, suppose them as wicked as youwill, what crimes can they commit whilst underuninterrupted inspection, divided by cells at alltimes sufficiently strong to resist a revolt, unableto unite or to conspire without being seen; responsiblethe one for the other ; deprived of all communicationwith the exterior ; deprived of allintoxicating liquors (those stimulants to dangerousenterprises) ; and in the hand of a governor whocould immediately isolate the dangerous individual.The simple enumeration of these circumstancesinspires a feeling of perfect security. When werecal the picture of Botany Bay, the contrastbecomes striking as it can be rendered.The prevention of crimes on the part of delinquentprisoners, is also in proportion to the difficultyof their escape ; and what system affords inthis respect a security comparable to that of theAdoption.With respect to discharged prisoners, the onlyabsolute guarantee is in their reformation.Independently of this happy effect, which maybeexpected in this plan more than upon anyother, the liberated prisoners would, for the mostpart, have acquired, by the savings made for themout of their part of the profit of their labour, astock which will secure them from the immediatetemptations of want, and give them time to availthemselves of those resources of industry, whichthey have acquired during their captivity.But this is not all. I have reserved for thisChapter the mention of an ingenious plan, whichthe author of the Adoption has proposed as a360 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.supplement to this scheme of punishment. Hehas paid particular attention to the dangerous andcritical situation of discharged prisoners, when reenteringthe world after a detention, perhaps, formany years : they have no friends to receive them ;without reputation to recommend them ; withcharacters open to suspicion ; and many times,perhaps, in the first transports of joy for recoveredliberty, as little qualified to use it with discretion,as the slaves who have broken their fetters. Bythese considerations, the author was led to theidea of an auxiliary establishment, into which thedischarged prisoners might be admitted when theyleave the Adoption, and be allowed to continuefor a longer or shorter period, according to thenature of their crimes, and their previous conduct.The details of the plan would be foreign to thepresent subject. It must suffice to say, that inthis privileged asylum, they would have differentdegrees of liberty, the choice of their occupations,the entire profit of their labour, with fixed andmoderate charges for their board and lodging, andthe right of going and returning, on leaving a certainsum as a security ; they would wear no prisoners uniform, no humiliating badge. Thegreater number, in the first moment of their embarrassment,whilst they have no certain object inview, would, themselves, choose a retreat so suitableto their situation. This transient sojourn,this noviciate, would serve to conduct them bydegrees to their entire liberty ; it would be an intermediatestate between captivity and independence,and afford a proof of the sincerity of their amendment.It would afford a just precaution againstindividuals in whom an immediate and absoluteconfidence could not be reposed without danger.B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 361FOURTH OBJECT Compensation to the party injured.In most systems of jurisprudence, when a delinquenthas been corporally punished, justice isthought to have been satisfied ; it is not in generalrequired that he should make compensation to theparty injured.It is true that, in the greater number of cases,compensation could not be exacted of him. Delinquentsare commonly of the poorer class, ex nihil,nihiljit.If they are idle during their imprisonment, farfrom being able to render satisfaction, they constitutea charge upon society.If they are condemned to public works, theseworks, rarely sufficiently lucrative to cover theexpense of undertaking them, cannot furnish anysurplus.It is only in a plan like the Panopticon,Jn which,by the combination of labour and economy in theadministration, it is possible to obtain a profitsufficiently great to offer at least some portion ofindemnity to the parties injured Mr Benthamhad made engagements upon this head in his contractwith the ministers. In the prisons of Philadelphia,they levy upon the portion of profit allowedto the prisoner, the expenses of his detectionand prosecution. One step more, and they willgrant indemnity to the parties injured.FIFTH OBJECT Economy.To say that of two plans of equal merit, the mosteconomical ought to be preferred, is to advance aproposition which must appear trivial to all thosewho do not know that the expense of an enterprise isoften its secret recommendation, and that economyis a virtue against which there exists a generalconspiracy.362 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.In the contract for the Adoption, one thousandconvicts were to have cost the state 121. per head,without including the expense of constructing theprison, which was estimated at 12,000/. and theground at 10,000/., upon which reckoning interestat 51. per cent., 11. 10s. ought to be added for theannual expense of each, making the total expenseof each individual, 13/. 10*. per annum.It should be recollected that at this time theaverage expense of each convict in New Holland,was 371. per annum, nearly three times as much.Besides the author of the Adoption assuredI. An indemnity to the parties injured.II. He allowed a fourth part of the profits oftheir labour to the prisoners.III. He was to make a future reduction in theexpense to government.A new undertaking like that of the Adoption,intended to embrace many branches of industry,would not yield its greatest profits at first ; it wouldbe expensive at first and only become profitable bydegrees. Time would be required for establishingits manufactories, and for the cultivation of thegrounds applicable to the support of the establishment; for forming its pupils, and regulating theirhabits, in a word bringing to perfection the wholeeconomy of its system. Mr Bentham had expresslystipulated for the publicity of his accounts;and if the advantages, as was expected, had becomeconsiderable, the government would have beenenabled to take advantage of them in obtainingmore favourable terms in its subsequent contracts.Mr Bentham reckoned, from the calculations hehad made, and respecting which he had consultedexperienced persons, that after a short time theconvicts would cost the government nothing.Laying aside everything hypothetical, it is clearB.V. CH.1II. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 363that a Penitentiary at home ought to be less expensivethan a colonial establishment. The reasonsfor this opinion have been given whenspeaking of transportation to Botany Bay.I have shewn the excellence of this plan with7~reference to all the ends of punishment, it remainsto be observed that it attains its object withoutproducing any of those collateral inconvenienceswhich abound in colonial transportation. Thereis no prolonged sojourn in the hulks. none of thedangers of a long sea voyage no promiscuousintercourse of prisoners no contagious sicknessno danger of famine no warfare with the savagenatives no rebellions no abuse of power by thepersons in authority in short an entire absenceof the accidental and accessory evils, of whichevery page of the history of the penal colonyaffords an example. What an immense economyin the employment of punishment. It will nolonger be dissipated and lost upon barren rocks,and amid far distant deserts, it will always preservethe nature of legal punishment; of just andmerited suffering, without being converted intoevils of every description which excite only pity.The whole of it will be seen. It will all be useful;it will not depend upon chance ; its executionwill not be abandoned to subordinate and mercenaryhands the legislator who appoints it mayincessantly watch over its administration.The success which may be obtained from awell regulated Penitentiary, is no longer a simpleprobability founded upon reasoning. The trialhas been made ; it has succeeded even beyondwhat has been hoped. The Quakers of Pennsylvaniahave the honour of making the attempt; it is oneof the most beauteous ornaments of the crown ofhumanity which distinguishes them among all364 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.other societies of Christians. They had a longtimeto struggle with the ordinary obstacles ofprejudice and indifference on the part of thepublic the routine of the tribunals, and repulsiveincredulity of frigid reasoners.The Penitentiary house at Philadelphia, is describednot only in the official reports of its governor,but also in the accounts of two disinterestedobservers, whose agreement is the more striking,as they brought to its examination neither thetfsame prejudices nor views the one was a Frenchman,the Duke de Harcourt, well acquaintedwith the arrangements of hospitals and prisonsother an Englishman, Captain Turnbull,more occupied with maritime affairs than politicsor jurisprudence.Both of them represent the interior of thisprison as a scene of peaceful and regular activity.Hauteur and rigour are not displayed on the partof the gales, nor insolence nor baseness on thepart of the prisoners. Their language is gentle, aharsh expression is not permitted. If any fault iscommitted, the punishment is solitary confinement,and the registration of the fault in a book, in whichevery one has an account opened as well for goodas for evil. Health, decency, and propriety reignthroughout. There is nothing to offend the mostdelicate of the senses ; no noise, no boisteroussongs nor tumultuous conversation. Every oneengaged with his own work, fears to interrupt thelabours of others. This external peace is maintainedas favourable to reflection and labour, andwell calculated to prevent that state of irritation,so common elsewhere among prisoners and theirkeepers.I was surprised" said Captain Turnbull, " atfinding a woman exercising the functions ofB.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY. 3G5goaler ; this circumstance having excited mycuriosity, I was informed that the husband havingfilled the same situation before her, amidst theattentions he was paying to his daughter, he wasseized with the yellow fever and died, leaving theprisoners to regret that they had lost a friend andprotector. In consideration of his services, hiswidow was chosen to succeed him. She has dischargedall the duties with equal attention andhumanity."Where shall we find similar traits in the registersof a prison. They call up the pictures of ci futuregolden age depicted by a prophet, when " thewolf shall lie down with the lamb, and a littlechild shall lead them."I cannot refuse to transcribe two other facts,which do not stand in need of any commentary :During the yellow fever in 1793, there was muchdifficulty in obtaining nurses for the sick in thehospitals at Bush Hill. Recourse was had to theprison. The question was asked, the danger of theservice was explained to the convicts, as manyoffered themselves as were wanted. They dischargedtheir duties faithfully till the conclusion ofthat tragic scene, and none of them demanded anywages till the period of their discharge."The females gave another proof of good conductduring the course of the contagion. They wererequested to give up their bedsteads for the use ofthe hospital they willingly offered their bedsalso.Oh Virtue! where wilt thou hide thy self, exclaimedthe philosopher, upon witnessing an act of probityon the part of a beggar. Would he have beenless surprised at this act of heroic benevolence inacriminal prison ?Had this good conduct of the prisoners been366 B.V. CH.III. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.only a simple suspension of their vices and crimes,it would have been a great point gained ; but itextended much further.Of all the criminals who have been foundguilty," says Turnbull, "there has not been fivein each hundred, who have been in the prisonbefore. 5At New York, although the result has not beenso favourable, it exhibits the good effects of thesystem. "During the five years, ending in 1801,"says Mr Eddy, the principal governor of the Penitentiary,in the account rendered to his fellow-citizens,"of three hundred and forty-nineprisoners who have been set at liberty at the expirationof their sentences, or by pardons, twenty-nineonly have been convicted of new offences ;and of this twenty-nine, sixteen were foreigners.Of eighty-six pardoned, eight have been apprehendedfor new offences ; and of this eight, fivewere foreignersIt must, however, be remembered, that we mayguard against exaggeration : that of these liberatedprisoners, many may have expatriated themselves,and committed crimes in the neighbouring-states,being unwilling to expose themselves tothe austere imprisonment of New York or Philadelphia; for it is a fact, that the risk of death isless frightful to men of this temper, than laboriouscaptivity.The success of these establishments is, withoutdoubt, owing in great measure to the enlightenedzeal of their founders and inspectors ; but it haspermanent causes in the sobriety and industryestablished, and the rewards bestowed for goodconduct.The rule which has ensured sobriety, has beenthe entire exclusion of strong liquors no fermentedB.V.CH.III. PANOPTICON Penitentiary. 367liquor is allowed, not even small beer. It hasbeen found more easy to insure abstinence thanmoderation. Experience has proved that thestimulus of strong liquors has only a transitoryeffect, and that an abundant and simple nourishment,with water for the only drink, fits men forthe performance of continued labours. Many ofthose who entered the prison of New York withconstitutions enfeebled by intemperance anddebauchery, have regained, in a short time, underthis regime, their health and vigour.The Duke de Harcourt and Captain Turnbullhave entered into more precise details. We learnfrom them, that since the adoption of this system,the charge for medicines, which amounted annuallyto more than twelve hundred dollars, has beenreduced to one hundred and sixty. This factaffords a still stronger proof of the salubrity of thisprison.This exposition, in which I have omitted manyfavourable circumstances, without suppressinganything of a contrary nature, is sufficient to showthe superiority of Penitentiaries over the systemof transportation. If the results have been soadvantageous in America, why should they be lessso in England? The nature of man is uniform.Criminals are not more obstinate in the one placethan the other. The motives which may be employedare equally powerful. The new plan proposedby the author of the Adoption, presentsa sensible improvement upon the Americanmethods the inspection is more complete theinstruction more extended escape more difficult ;publicity is increased in every respect ; the distributionof the prisoners, by means of cells andclasses, obviates the inconvenient associationwhich subsists in the Penitentiary at Philadelphia.368 B.V. CH.1II. PANOPTICON PENITENTIARY.But what is worth more than all the rest, is, thatthe responsibility of the governor in the Panoplycon system is connected with his personal interestin such manner, that he cannot neglect one of hisduties, without being the first to suffer; whilst allthe good he does to his prisoners redounds to hisown advantage. Religion and humanity animatedthe founders of the American Penitentiaries : willthese generous principles be less powerful whenunited with the interests of reputation and fortune?the two grand securities of every public establishmentthe only ones upon which a politician canconstantly rely the only ones whose operation isnot subject to relaxation the only ones whichalways being in accordance with virtue, mayperform its part, and even replace it when it iswanting.CHAPTER IV.FELONY.FELONY is a word of which the significationseems to have undergone various revolutions. Itseems at first to have been vaguely applied to avery extensive mode of delinquency, or rather,for delinquency in general : at a time when thelaws scarce knew of any other species of delinquencycognizable by fixed rules, than the breachof a political engagement, and when all politicalengagements were comprised in one, that of feudalobligation. Upon feudal principles, everythingthat was possessed by a subject, and was consideredas a permanent source of property andpower, was considered as a gift, by the acceptanceof which, the acquired contracted a loose andindefinite kind of engagement, the nature of whichwas never accurately explained, but was understoodto be to this effect: that the acceptor shouldrender certain stipulated services to the donor, andshould in general, refrain from everything that wasprejudicial to his interests. It was this principleof subjection, in its nature rather moral thanpolitical, which at the first partition of conqueredcountries, bound the different ranks of men, bywhatever names distinguished, to each other, asthe Barons to the Prince, the Knights to theBarons, and the Peasants to the Knights. If thenthe acceptor failed in any of these points, if inu B370 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.any one of his steps he fell from the line whichhad been traced for him, and which at that timewas the only line of duty, he was not such a manas his benefactor took him for, the motive for thebenefaction ceased. He lost his fief, the onlysource of his political importance, and with it allthat was worth living for. He was thrust downamong the ignoble and defenceless crowd of needyretainers, whose persons and precarious propertieswere subject to the arbitrary disposal of the handthat fed them. So striking and impressive a figuredid such a catastrophe make in the imaginationsof men, that the punishment of death, when, incourse of time, it came in various instances to besuperadded to the other, showed itself only in thelight of an appendage.* It came in by custom,rather than by any regular and positive institution :it seemed to follow rather as a natural effect ofthe impotence to which the inferior was reduced,than in consequence of any regular exertion of thepublic will of the community.This seems to have been the aspect of the timesat the first dawning of the feudal polity ; but itwas impossible things should long remain in sounsettled a state. It is in such times, however,that we are to look for the origin of a word, whichsometimes as the name of a crime, sometimes asapunishment, is to be met with in the earliestmemorials that are extant of the feudal law.Some etymologists, to show they understoodGreek, have derived it from the Greek : if theyhad happened to have understood Arabic, theywould have derived it from the Arabic. SirEdward Coke, knowing nothing of Greek, buthaving a little stock of Latin learning, which heBlackest. Com. 95.B.V. CII.IV. - FELONY. 371loses no opportunity of displaying, derives it fromfcl, gall. Seaman, who has the good sense toperceive that the origin of an old northern word isto be looked for in an old northern language,rejecting the Greek, and saying nothing of theLatin, proposes various etymologies. Accordingto one of them, it is derived from two words, fee,which, in ancient Anglo-saxon had, and in modernEnglish has, a meaning which approaches to that ofproperty or money ; and Ion, which in modern German,he says, means price : fee Ion is thereforepretium feuds. This etymology, the author of theCommentaries adopts, and justifies by observing,that it is a common phrase to say, such an act is asmuch as your life or estate is worth. But felony, inmixed Latin, felon, is a word that imports action.I should therefore rather be inclined to derive itfrom some verb, than from two substantives, whichwhen put together, and declined in the mostconvenient manner, import not any such meaning.The verb to fall, as well as to fail, which probablywas in its origin the same as the other, byan obvious enough metaphysical extension, is wellknown to have acquired the signification of tooffend ; the same figure is adopted in the French,and probably in every other language.*In Anglo-saxon there is such a word as feat Ian, Ifthe evident root of the English word now in use.We say, he fell, as well as he swerved from the line ofduty : he fell from his allegiance. The original sin of man iscalled the fall of man. Lord Clarendon says, somewhere, hefell from his duty and all his former friends. Let him whostandeth, says the Gospel, take heed lest he fall. In EcclesiasticalJurisprudence, a heretic relapsed, is one who, havingonce been convicted of heresy, falls into the same offence asecond time.t An is nothing but the common termination of the infinitivemood.372 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.In German, there is such a word asfaellen, whichhas the same signification. This derivation therefore,which is one of Seaman s, is what seems tobe the most natural. So much for the origin ofthe word : not that it is of any consequencewhence it came, so it were but gone.As the rigours of the feudal polity were relaxed,and fiefs became permanent and descendible, theresumption of the fief upon every instance of trivialdelinquency, became less and less of course. Afeudatory might commit an offence that was not afelony. On the other hand, it was found too, thatfor many offences the mere resumption of the feudwas not, by any means, a sufficient punishment ;for a man might hold different feuds of as manydifferent persons. The Sovereign, too, interposedhis claim on behalf of himself and the whole community,and exacted punishments for offenceswhich, to the immediate Lord of the feudatory,might happen not to be obnoxious. In this way,for various offences, pecuniary and corporal punishments,in various degrees, and even death itself,came in some instances to be substituted ; inothers, to be superadded by positive laws to thatoriginal indiscriminating punishment, which usedat first to follow from almost every offence. Thatpunishment remained still inseparably annexed toall those offences which were marked by thehighest degree of corporal punishment, the punishmentof death : partly with a view of giving theLord an opportunity of ridding himself of a raceof vassals, tainted by an hereditary stain ; partly,in order to complete the destruction of the delinquentspolitical as well as natural existence. Thepunishment of forfeiture, being the original punishment,still continued to give denomination to thecomplex mass of punishment of which it nowB.V. CH.1V. FELONY. 373constituted but a part. The word felony nowcame to signify a punishment : viz. the complexmode of punishment of which that simple modeof punishment, which anciently stood annexed toevery delinquency a feudatory could incur, was amain ingredient.At this period of its history, when the above wasits signification, the word felony was as a part of theNorman Jurisprudence imported into this countryby the Norman conquerors ; for among the Saxonsthere are no traces of its having been in use. Atthis period it stood annexed only to a few crimes ofthe grossest nature : of a nature, the fittest to strikethe imagination of rude and unreflecting minds,and these not very heterogeneous. Theft, robbery,devastation when committed by the ruinous instrumentof fire, or upon the whole face of a countrywith an armed force; these and homicide, the naturalconsequences of such enterprizes, or of thespirit of hostility which dictated them, were includedby it. At this time, the import of the wordfelony was not either as the name of a punishment,or as the name of an offence, as yet immeasurablyextensive. But lawyers, by various subtleties,went on adding to the mass of punishment, stillkeeping to the same name. At the same time,legislators, compelled by various exigencies, wenton adding to the list of offences, punishable bythe punishment of that name ; till at length itbecame the name not of one, but of an incomprehensibleheap of punishments ; nor of one offenceonly, but of as many sorts of offences almost ascan be conceived. Tell me now that a man hascommitted a felony, I am not a whit the nearerknowing what is his offence : all I can possiblylearn from it is, what he is to suffer. He mayhave committed an offence against individuals,374 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.against a neighbourhood, or against the state.Under any natural principle of arrangement, uponany other than that which is governed by the mereaccidental and mutable circumstance of punishment,it may be an offence of any class, andalmost of every order of each class. The delinquentsare all huddled together under one name,and pelted with an indiscriminating volley ofincongruous, and many of them, unavailingpunishments.Felony, considered as a complex mode of punishment,stands at present divided into two kinds :the one styled Felony without benefit of Clergy, orina shorter way, Felony without Clergy, or as capitalpunishment is one ingredient in it, CapitalFelony; the other, Felony within benefit of Clergy,Felony within Clergy, or Chargeable Felony. Thefirst may be styled the greater ; the latter, thelesser felony. There are other punishments towhich these are more analogous in quality, as wellas in magnitude, than the one of them is to theother such is the confusion introduced by a blindpractice, and as the consequence of that practice,an inapposite and ill-digested nomenclature.How punishments so widely different came tobe characterized in the first place by the samegeneric name, and thence by specific names, thusuncouth and inexpressive, shall be explained byand by, after we have analysed and laid open thecontents of the greater felony, of which the otheris but an off-set, detached from the main root.HISTORY OF THE BENEFIT OF CLERGY.The Christian religion, ere yet it had gainedany settled footing in the state, had given birth toan order of men, who laid claim to a large andB.V. CH.IV. FELONY. 375indefinite share in the disposal of that remote, butundress mass of pains and pleasures, which itwas one mam business of that religion to announcesclaim, m proportion as it was acquiesced inive them power: for what is power over menthefaculty of contributing in some way or1 to their happiness or misery? This poweri proportion as they obtained it, it became theirendeavour to convert, (as it is in the nature of manto endeavour to convert all power) into a means ofInterest ? **? " ^ ^ interest F ^> theinterest as opposed ^ her which \ ? vas a privatecommunity at large ^ re P^ 1 ^ one of theof that order. In this sys 6 ^ l t | ie ., mdl ^ dealsfew perhaps had their eyes open ;Dirt ma?fy marc aprobably acted under the sincere persuasion, thatthe advancement of their order above that ofothers, was beneficial to the community at large.This power, in its progress to those ends, wouldnaturally seek the depression, and by degrees theoverthrow of the political power, as of any otherthat opposed it. These operations, carried on byan indefinite multitude of persons, but all tendingto the same end, wore the appearance of beingcarried on in concert, as if a formal plan had beenproposed and unanimously embraced by the wholeClergy, to subdue the whole body of the Laity :whereas, in fact, no such plan was ever universallyconcerted and avowed, as in truth, there needednone. The means were obvious, the end was oneand the same. There was no fear of clashing.Each succeeding operator took up the work wherehis predecessor had left off, and carried it on justso far as interest prompted and opportunityallowed.In pursuance of this universal plan, not B.V. CH.1V. FELONY.certe, but surer than if it had been the result ofconcert, were those exemptions laid claim to which,by a long and whimsical concatenation of causesand effects, were the means of breaking down thepunishment of felony into the two species of itthat now subsist.The persons of these favoured mortals, honouredas they pretended they were by a more immediateintercourse with the divinity, and employed asthey were incessantly in managing the most important,and indeed, only important concerns of mankind,were of course to be accounted sacred ; aword of loose and therefore the more convenientsignification, importing at bottom, nothing morethan that the subject to which it was attributed,was or was not to be accounted an object of distantawe and terror. They were therefore not to bejudged by profane judgments, sentenced by profanemouths, or touched, in any manner that wasunpleasant to them, by profane hands. The placeswherein that mysterious intercourse was carriedon, imbibed the essence of this mysterious quality.Stones when put together in a certain form becamesacred too. Earth, within a certain distance roundaboutthose stones, became sacred too. Hencethe privilege of sanctuary. In short, the wholeof the material as well as intellectual globe becamedivided into sacred and profane ; of which, somuch as was sacred was either composed of themselves,or become subjected to their power. Therest of it lay destitute of these invaluable privileges,and as the name imports, tainted with anote of infamy.I pass rapidly over the progress of their claimof exemption from profane judicature : the readerwill find it ably and elegantly delineated in SirW. Blackstone s Commentaries.13. V. CH.1V. FELONY. 37?As to the causes, those which come under thedenomination of felonies, are the only ones withwhich at present we have to do. Confining ourconsideration therefore to these causes ; as to persons,it was first claimed, one may suppose, forthose of their own order, by degrees, for as manyas they should think fit for that particular purposeto recognise as belonging to that order. Bydegrees, the patience of profane judges was putto such a stretch, that it could hold no longer ;and they seem to have been provoked to a generaldisallowance of those exceptions which had swelledtill they had swallowed up in a manner the wholerule. This sudden and violent reformation, wearingthe appearance of an abuse, the clergy hadinfluence enough in the legislature to procure anAct* to put a stop to it. By this Act it was provided,that all manner of Clerks, as well secularas religious, which shall be from henceforth convictbefore the secular Justices, for any treasonsor felonies touching other persons than the Kinghimself, or his Royal Majesty, shall from henceforthfreely have and enjoy the privilege of HolyChurch, and shall be, without any impeachmentor delay, delivered to the Ordinaries ]: demandingthem.This Statute, one should have thought, wouldhave been sufficiently explicit on the one hand, tosecure the exemption to all persons in clericalorders, so, on the other hand, to exclude all personsnot possessed of that qualification. To provea person entitled to the exemption, the obviousand only conclusive evidence was, the instrumentof ordination. But the different ranks of persons25 Edw III. Stat. 3, c. 4.f It should be hindrance: the French original is empeschcmcnt.t Meaning the Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical superior.378 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.who were all comprised under the common nameof Clerks, and as such, partook more or less ofthe sacred character, were numerous : and someof these seem to have been admitted to their officeswithout any written instrument of ordination.Whether this omission was continued on purposeto let in a looser method of evidence, or whetherit was accidental, so it is that the clergy had theaddress to get the production of that written evidencedispensed with. In the room of it, theyhad the address to prevail on the courts to admitof another criterion, which, ridiculous as it mayseem at this time of day, was not then altogetherso incompetent. " Orders," they said, or mighthave said, "may be forged, or may be fabricatedfor the purpose ; but as a proof that the manreally is of our sacred order, you shall have aproof that can neither be forged nor fabricated ;he shall read as we do." The book was probablyat first a Latin book : the Bible or some otherbook made use of in Church service. At thattime, few who were not clergymen could read atall, and still fewer could read Latin. And theJudges, if they happened to see through the cheat,might in some instances, perhaps, not be sorry toconnive at it, in favour of a man possessed of sorare and valuable a qualification. But one bookwas easily substituted for another : a man mighteasily be tutored so as to get by rote a small partof a particular book ; and as society advanced tomaturity, learning became more and more diffused.We need not wonder therefore, if by the time ofHenry Vllth, it was found that as many laymen asdivines were admitted to the ecclesiastical privilege.I should suppose a great many more, forthere is something in the ecclesiastical function,that in the worst of times will render them lessB.V. CH.IV. FELONY. 379liable than others of the same rank and fortune,to fall into open and palpable enormities. AStatute therefore* was made to apply a remedyto this abuse ; and what would one imagine wasthat remedy? To oblige persons, claiming thebenefit of Clergy, to produce their orders ? No ;but to provide, that persons claiming it, and notbeing in orders, should not be allowed it morethan once ; and that all persons who had oncebeen allowed it, should have a mark set uponthem, whereby they might be known. Real Clergymen,Clergymen who had orders to produce,were by an express provision of the Statute, entitledto claim it toties quotes, as often as they shouldhave need, which privilege they have still.When a felon was admitted to his clergy, hewas not absolutely set free, but delivered to theOrdinary. The great point then was, if we maybelieve Lay Judges, who it is to be confessed arenot altogether disinterested witnesses, to provehim innocent, for this tended to discredit the profanetribunal. This business of proving him innocent,was called his purgation. If this wereimpracticable, he was put to penance: that-is,subjected to such corporal punishment as theOrdinary thought proper to inflict upon him,which we may imagine, was not very severe.Thus it was that the clergy contrived to bind eventhe most stubborn spirits under the yoke of theirdominion ; the honest and credulous by theirfears ; the profligate, though incredulous, by theirhopes.Circumstances, however, are not wanting, whichtend pretty strongly to make it probable, thatwhen once a man got into the hands of the clergy,4 Hen. VII. c. 13.380 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.he almost always stood the purging, and provedinnocent ; and it is what the Lay Judges seem tohave taken for granted would be the case of course.When therefore they made a point of making theoffender suffer the train of punishments that stoodannexed to acknowledged guilt, (death excepted,which was too much for them to attempt) theyknew no other way of compassing it, than byinsisting on his not Hoeing admitted to make purgation.These punishments, the imprisonmentexcepted, consisted altogether of forfeitures andcivil disabilities; penalties with which the EcclesiasticalSuperior had nothing to do, and which itlay altogether within the province of the TemporalJudge to enforce. One should have thought thenit would have been a much less apparent stretchof authority in the latter, to give effect to the proceedingsof his own judicature, than to lay arestraint on the Ecclesiastical Judge in the exerciseof what was acknowledged to be his. But itwere too much to expect anything like consistencyin the proceedings of those rude ages. The wholecontest between the Temporal Judge and the Spiritualwas, an irregular scramble, the result of whichwas perpetually varying, according to the temperof individuals and the circumstances of the time.By the time of Queen Elizabeth it cameto be generally understood that purgation, whichoriginally meant trial, was synonymous to acquittal.*This is so true, that when by a Statute ofIt is amusing enough to observe the continual strugglebetween the Spiritual and the Carnal Judge, as described inSandford, title Clergy. It seems to have been a continualgame of leap-frog, in which sometimes spirit, sometimes fleshwas uppermost, (a)A man, however, was not always so very kindly dealt with:(a) Tale of a Tub.B.V. CH.IV. FELONY. 381that reign,* purgation came to be abolished, thelegislature, instead of appointing a trial, appointedpunishment. Persons claiming the benefit ofClergy, instead of being delivered to the Ordinaryto make purgation, were now, after being burnt inthe hand, to be forthwith delivered out of prison,unless the Temporal Judge should think proper tosentence them to imprisonment, which he was nowfor the first time empowered to do for any timenot exceeding a year.It will here be asked what was done with thepecuniary punishments, the forfeitures, the corruptionof blood, and the disabilities? The answeris, nothing at all they were never thought of.However, by one means or other, there is now anend of them. The legislator neither then norsince has ever opened his mouth upon the subject.But the Judge, drawing an argument from thatsilence, has opened his and construed them away.This bold interpretation is a farther proof howentirely the ideas of purgation had become identifiedwith that of acquittal. When a man wasadmitted to make purgation, he was acquitted :he fared better or worse, according as he happened to be infavour with the Church. If they happened not to like him,although he had not been tried when delivered to them, theywould not admit him to his purgation, but kept him in harddurance without trial. The Temporal Courts were then obligedto drive them on to trial. (a) If he was a favourite, althoughconvicted, no guest could be better entertained : they used tocram him at both ends. This, a good Archbishop admits,who, being driven by the Parliament to make an ordinance toremedy this mischief, appoints, that in certain cases, they shallbe dieted in a manner he prescribes ; speaking all the whilein much worse terms of the Lay Judges than of the malefactors,who met with this reception from their friends.18 Elis. c.7.(a) Sandford Clergy, c. 48. Breton.382 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.by that means he was discharged from these pecuniarypenalties. Now then that the legislaturehas appointed that in the room of going free, thedelinquent may now be punished by a slightpunishment, and that not of course, but only incasethe Judges should think fit to order it of theirown accord, we cannot, said the Judges, supposethat it meant to subject him to a set of punishmentsso much severer than those it has named.Therefore, as to all but these, coming in place ofan acquittal, we must look upon it as a pardon.Having by this chain of reasoning got hold of theword pardon, they went on applying it to otherpurposes in a very absurd manner; but as we havealready had occasion to observe, with a beneficialeffect.One would imagine that being to suffer nothing(what has been mentioned only excepted), first,because he was acquitted, next, because he waspardoned, there was an end of all pecuniarypenalties, of the one species of forfeiture as wellas the other. This, however, neither was nor isthe case. A man did then and does still continuesubject to the forfeiture of his personal estate.The reason of this is of true legal texture, andaltogether characteristic of ancient jurisprudence.Forfeiture of real estate is not to take place tillafter judgment; forfeiture of personal estate,without the least shadow of a reason for the difference,is to take place before judgment : to wit,upon conviction. Now, ever since the days ofHenry Vlth, it has not been the way to admit aman to plead his Clergy till after conviction.Now, then, if a man comes and pleads his Clergy,whatever goods he had the King has got them.This being the case, having had your Clergy, youare innocent, or, what comes to the same thing,B.V. CH.IV. FELONY. 383you are forgiven. All this is very true ; but asto your money, the King, you hear, has got it,and when the King has got hold of a man s money,with title or without title, such is his royal nature,he cannot bear to part with it. For the King cando no man wrong, and the Law is the quintessenceof reason. To make all this clear, let it be observed,there is a kind of electrical virtue in royalfingers, which attracts to it light substances, suchas the moveables and reputed moveables of othermen ; there is, moreover, a certain glutinous orviscous quality, which detains them when theyare got there.Such are the grounds upon which the forfeitureof personal estate, in cases of clergyable felony,still continues to subsist.This Act gave the finishing stroke to the abusivejurisdiction of the Clergy. The still moreabusive exemption remained still, but so changedand depreciated by a lavish participation of it withthe laity, that its pristine dignity and value wasalmost entirely obliterated. By the turn they hadgiven to it, it was originally an instrument of unlimiteddominion over others ; it was now sunkinto a bare protection, and that no longer anexclusive one for themselves.At last, came the Statute of Queen Ann,* whichgives the benefit of Clergy to all men whatsoever,whether they can read or cannot. This, togetherwith a Statute of the preceding reign, t which hadalready given the same benefit to all women, gavequite a new import to the phrase. In words, itconfirmed and extended the abusive privilege ; inreality, it abolished it. It put the illiterate altogetherupon a footing with the literate ; providing,5 Ann. c. 6. f 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9.384 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.at the same time, that in the case of the offencesto which it extended, both classes alike shouldsuffer, not the punishment which the unprivileged,but that which the privileged had been used tosuffer before.Since then, to allow the benefit of Clergy toany offence, is to punish all persons who shallhave committed that offence, in the same manneras lettered persons were punished before. It isto punish in a certain manner all persons for thatoffence. To take away this benefit is to punishin a certain other manner, much more severe, allpersons for that offence. The difference betweenthe having it and the taking it away, is now thedifference between a greater and a lesser degreeof punishment. The difference formerly was theallowing, or not allowing, an oppressive andirrational exemption.But these entangled and crooked operationshave been attended with a variety of mischiefs,which are not by any means-cured as yet, and ofwhich scarce anything less than a total revision ofthe Criminal Law can work a total cure. Such aveil of darkness, such a cob web work of sophistry,has been thrown over the face of Penal Jurisprudence,that its lineaments can scarcely be laidopen to public view but with great difficulty, andwith perpetual danger of mischief.Of the mischief and confusion that has thusbeen produced, I will mention one instance, whichwill probably be thought enough.In a statute of Henry Vlllth,* by a strangecaprice of the legislature, the benefit of Clergywas taken away in the lump from all offenceswhatever, which should happen to be committed28 Hen. VIII. c. 15.B . V . 1 1 1 1 V .- F K LO N Y . 385on the high seas. He might as well have said, orinsuch a county, or by men whose hair should beof such a colour. In point of expediency, of a provisionlike this, one knows not what to make.Considered with reference to other parts of thelegal system, it is reasonable, as doing somethingtowards abolishing an unreasonable distinction.Considered in the same point of view, it is unreasonable,as making that abolition no more than apartial one, and grounding it, as far as it went, ona circumstance totally unconnected with the mischievousnessof the offence. Considered by itself,it is again unreasonable, as tending to subject tothe punishment of death for a great many offences,a great many persons for whom a less punishmentmight suffice.In point of fact, however, what the legislaturemeant by it, is clear enough : he meant, thatall men, without exception, privileged persons aswell as others, should sutler death and so forth,who should be guilty of any kind of felonies uponthe high seas, instead of their being made, someof them, to sutler death, others a punishmentbeyond comparison less severe. Would any oneimagine what has been the effect of this provision?The effect of it has been, that these privilegedpersons, instead of suffering death, have sufferedno punishment at all. Yes, absolutely no punishment; not even that slight degree of punishmentto which they before were subject. Now the caseis, that at present, if one may be indulged in asolecism established by the legislature, all personsare privileged. So that now, all persons who maythink proper to commit chargeable felonies on thehigh seas, are absolutely dis punishable. Thissituation of things, in itself, is not altogether as itought to be ; but the means whereby it has beenc c386 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.brought about, are still worse. When a man isindicted of a chargeable offence within that jurisdiction,let his guilt be ever so plainly proved, theconstant course is, for the Judge to direct the Juryto acquit him.* The man is proved to be guiltyin such a manner, that no one can make a doubtabout it. No matter; the Judges direct the Juryto say upon their oaths that he is not guilty.In the Ecclesiastical tribunal, we have abovebeen speaking of, things were so ordered, thataccording to the author of the Commentaries,"felonious clerks" were not constantly, butalmost constantly" acquitted. I do beseech thereader to turn to that book, and observe in whatenergetic terms (partly his own, partly adoptingwhat had been said on the same subject by JudgeHobart) the learned author has chosen to speak ofthis unjustifiable practice. f "Vast complicationof perjury and subornation of perjury solemnfarce mock trial good Bishop scene of wickednessscandalous prostitution of oaths and formsof justice vain and impious ceremony mostabandoned perjury." Such are the terms he uses,to the reader it is left to make an application ofthem.FELONY WITHOUT BENEFIT OF CLERGY.As to felony without benefit of Clergy, I will,in the first place, state the ingredients of whichthis mode of punishment is compounded.Of punishments included under the title offelony without benefit of Clergy, we must distinguish,in the first place, such as are made to bear4 Comm. c. 28. Foster, 288. Moor, 756. f Ib.B.V.CU.IV. rtLONY. 387upon the proper object punishments in personampropria and in the second place, such as arethrown upon the innocent, punishments in personalityalicnaui.Of punishments in personam propria it includesthe following :I. A total forfeiture of goods and chattels,whether in possession or in action at the time ofthe forfeiture taking place. It is a sweepingpunishment of the pecuniary kind. It takes placeimmediately upon conviction : that is, upon aman s being found guilty, and does not wait forjudgment, that is, for sentence being pronouncedupon him.II. Forfeiture of lands and tenements. Thisalso is a sweeping punishment of the pecuniarykind. It does not take place till after judgment.This and the other forfeiture between them includethe whole of a man s property, whether in possessionor in action at the time of the forfeiture takingOplace. If he does not lose it by the one, he losesit by the other.III. The corporal punishment of imprisonmenttill such time as the conclusive punishment is executedupon him. The length of it depends partlyon the Judge, partly on the King.IV. The disability to bring any kind of suit.This operates as a punishment in such cases onlyin which a long interval, as sometimes happens,intervenes between the sentence and the actualinfliction of the ultimate punishment.V. The corporal punishment of death : viz.simple death by hanging. As this punishment ingeneral puts a speedy period to all the rest, thedwelling upon the effect of any other, is whatmay, at first sight, appear useless ; but this is notabsolutely the case. For the execution of this388 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.punishment may, at the pleasure of the King, besuspended for any length of time ; and in someinstances, has actually been suspended for manyyears.*Thus much for punishment in propria personam.Punishments in aliena personam included underit, are the following ; some of them are instancesof transitive, others of merely random punishment.I. His heirs general, that is, that person or personsof his kindred, who stand next to him, andso to one another in the order of succession to realproperty unentailed, forfeit all property of thatdenomination which he had enjoyed, and whichwithout an express appointment of his to the contrary,they would have been entitled to from him.This results as a consequence of the doctrine ofcorruption of blood. This is an instant forfeiture:it is a sweeping punishment of the pecuniary kindupon the heir. It may amount to a forfeiture totalor partial of all the immoveable property the heirwould be worth, or to no forfeiture at all. If, previouslyto the commission of the offence theoffender had settled upon his heir apparent thewhole or any part of what property he had of thekind in question, this the heir will not be deprivedof.II. His heir, as before, forfeits his hope of successionto all such real property as he must maketitle to through the delinquent, as standing beforehim in the order of consanguinity to the personlast seised. This is a remote contingent forfeiture.Another pecuniary punishment of the sweepingSir Walter Raleigh was kept for many years with the halterabout his neck : he had the command given him of an expedition; went to America, where he committed piracies on theSpaniards; came back again ; and was hanged at last for theoriginal offence.B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.kind. Iii this the uncertainty is still greater thanin the former case.III. Any creditors of his who have had realsecurity for their debts, forfeit such security, incaseof its having been granted to them subsequentlyto the time of the offence committed.This, where it takes place, is a fixed punishmentof the pecuniary kind. It is uncertain as to theperson, but if there be a person on whom it falls,it is certain as to the event.IV. Any persons who may have purchased anypart of his real property, forfeit such property, incaseof this purchase having been made by themsubsequently to the time of the offence. This,again, is a fixed punishment of the pecuniarykind. It is uncertain whether it shall fall uponany person, because it is uncertain whether therebe a person so circumstanced, but if there be, itis certain as to the event of its falling.V. Any persons who hold lands or tenements ofhim under a rent, are obliged to pay over again tothe person on whom the forfeiture devolves, whateverthey may have paid to the delinquent subsequentlyto the time of the offence.These four last denominations of person aremade to suffer in virtue of the doctrine of back-relation.According to legal notions, it is thedelinquent that suffers, by the forfeiture beingmade to relate back to the time of the offence : asif it were a new suffering to a man to be made tohave parted with what he had already parted withof his own accord. In plain English, it is thepeople themselves the tenants, purchasers, andcreditors that suffer. It is they who forfeit, andnot he.Again, by virtue of the forfeiture of what is390 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.called his personal property, the following denominationsof persons are made to surfer :I. His wife : by being deprived of whatevershe would have been entitled to under his will, orunder the law of distributions.II. His children, or others next of kin : by losingwhat they might, in the same manner, have becomeentitled to.III. His creditors : by losing all claim uponhis personal estate. By this forfeiture, added towhat takes place in the case of real estate, all hiscreditors whatever are defrauded ; such only exceptedas may have been fortunate enough to haveobtained a real security previous to the commissionof the offence.We now come to Felony within Clergy. Themass of punishments included within this title,are much less various as well as less severe.Of punishments in propria personam, it includesonly the first and third of those which are includedunder the other species of felony.In the room of the 5th and last punishment, thepunishment of death, there is one that takes place,or rather is said to take place, of course. I mean,marking in the hand :* others there are, which,besides the former, take place optionally, at thediscretion of the Judge: conjunctively, withrespect to the three former; disjunctively, withrespect to one another.This punishment of marking, is now become afarce. It is supposed to be inflicted in open court,immediately after the convict, in order to exempthimself from the punishment of the other felony,has been made: if a woman, to plead the statute;4 Hen. VII. c. 13.B.V. CH.IV. FELONY. 391if a man, to tell the solemn lie that he is a clerk.The mark to be inflicted is, according to the statute,to be the letter T-, unless the offence be murder,in which case it is to be an M ; murder, atthat time, not as yet having been taken out of thebenefit of Clergy ; as it has, however, since, themark ought now to be that of a T in all cases.The part to be marked is the brawn of the leftthumb, so that if a man happens to have lost hisleft thumb, he cannot be marked at all ; or, ifafterwards he chooses to cut it off, he may preventits answering the purpose it was meant to answer,that of distinguishing him from other men.The instrument originally employed was a heatediron with a stamp upon it of the shape of the letterto be marked. To the Judges of that time, thiswas the only expedient that occurred for markingupon the human skin, such a mark as should beindelible. At present the practice is to apply theiron, but it is always cold : this is what is calledburning with a cold iron ; that is burning with aniron that does not burn; in consequence no markat all is made. The Judge presides at this solemnfarce ; by no one is it complained of ; by many, itis approved ; it is mildness, humanity : it is truethat the law is eluded, and turned into ridicule :but the Judge spares himself the pain of hearing thecries of a man, to whose flesh a red hot iron isapplied. It may be asked, why do not the Judgespropose that the law should be made conformableto the practice ? I cannot tell.The Judge that first disregarded the Statutewas guilty of the assumption of illegal power : hewho should now have the courage to obey it, mightnow affix the prescribed mark without putting thedelinquent to any considerable pain.*The statute directs that the convict shall be " marked :" the392 H.V.C.1V. Felony.The other punishment, which in all cases offelony within Clergy, may, at the discretion of theJudge, be superadded or not to those which wehave seen, are those of imprisonment and transportation.For the second offence of a chargeable felony,capital felony is the punishment.*Clerks in orders are alone exempted r|~ peersare not : women are expressly subjected to it.It is certainly a distinction highly honourable to theclergy that they may go on pilfering, while otherpeople are hanged for it.Why a man having been punished for one act ofdelinquency, should be punished more thanordinarily for a second act of the same species ofdelinquency, or even for any other offence of thesame species of delinquency, there is at least anobvious, if not a conclusive reason. But whywhen a nan has been punished by a certain modeof punishment, and then commits an offence asdifferent as any offence can be from the former,the punishment for this second offence is, becauseit happens to be the same with that for the first,to be changed into a punishment altogetherdifferent, and beyond comparison more penal, iswhat it will not, I believe, be easy to say. Is itbecause the first mode of punishment having beentried upon a man, the next above it, in point ofseverity, is that of capital felony ? That is not themode of marking is left altogether to the Judge. The author ofthe Commentaries (4 Comm. p. 367, ed. 1809) " burnt with ahot iron." It is plain by this that he had never read the statute :for the statute, which is a very short one, says not a syllableabout burning, or about a hot iron.4 Hen. Vllth, c. 13.f By 4 Hen. Vllth, c. 13. repealed in effect quo ad hoc, by28 Hen. Vllth, c. 1, and 32 Hen. VHIth, c. 3 : and revived ineffect quoad hoc by 1 Ed. Vltli, c. 12. p. 10.13. V. C.IV. FELONY. 393case : for praemunire is greatly more penal thanchargeable felony. I mention this as being impossibleto justify, not as being difficult to accountibr, since nothing better could consistently beexpected from the discernment of those early times.There is one thing which a chargeable felon doesnot forfeit, and which every other delinquent wouldforfeit for the most venial peccadillo and that isreputation. I mean that special share of negativereputation which consistsinaman snotbeinglookedupon as having been guilty of such an offence.This share of reputation, the law, in the singleinstance of chargeable felony, protects a delinquent,in so far forth as it is in the power of law, by bruteviolence, to counteract the force of the most rationaland salutary propensities. If a man has stolentwelve-pence, and been convicted of it, call him athief and welcome. But if he had stolen buteleven-pence-halfpenny, and been convicted of it,and punished as a felon, call him a thief and the lawwill punish you. This has been solemnly adjudged.I say convicted and punished as a felon : for if hehas not been convicted of it, in virtue of the generalrule in case of verbal defamation, you may call himso if you can prove it ; but when the law, by asolemn and exemplary act has put the matter outof doubt, then you must not mention it. Wouldany one suspect the reason ? It is because thestatute which allows the benefit of clergy operatesas a pardon. It has the virtue to make that not tohave been done which has been done : and it wasaccordingly observed, that a man could no morecall another thief who had been punished for it inthis way (thief say they in the present time) than sayhe hath a shameful disease when he had had it, andhas been cured of it.*Hobart 81.394 B.V. CH.IV. FELONY.It is there also said, with somewhat more colourof reason, though in despite of the last mentionedrule, " that there is no necessity or use of slanderouswords to be allowed to ignorants," and thatthough the arresting of a pardoned felon, by onewho knows not of the pardon, may be justifiable,because this is in " advancement of justice ; yet soitis not to call him thief, because that is neithernecessary, nor advanced nor tends to justice." Hewho said this knew not, or did not choose to know,how mighty is the force and how salutary theinfluence of the moral sanction : how much it contributesto support, and in what a number of importantinstances it serves to control the caprices andsupply the defects of the political. It was perhapsSir Edward Coke : a man who from principle wasa determined enemy, though from ill humour, uponoccasion an inconsistent and unsteady friend topolitical liberty : who in his favourite case, delibels famosit, has destroyed, as far as was in hispower to destroy, the safeguard of all other liberties,that of the press : proscribing all criticism of publicacts ; silencing all history ; and vying in the extentof his anathemas with the extravagance of the mostjealous of the Roman Emperors.CHAPTER V.OF PH.EMUNIUE.THE punishment of Prsemunire* consists in thebeing " put out of the King s protection," and,in the forfeiture of lands and tenements, goodsand chattels ; " but such is the uncertainty ofEnglish law, that some add to the above, imprisonmentduring the King s pleasure, and others sayfor life. Sir Edward Coke is for adding loss ofcredibility ; he might as well have added loss ofears ; but I do not find that this conceit has beentaken up by anybody else.The offences to which this punishment has beenapplied, are as heterogenous as any that can beimagined. The offence to which it was first applied,was an offence against Government; sincethat, besides a multitude of other offences againstGovernment, it has been applied to various offencesagainst the property, against the personal libertyof individuals, and against trade If1 This word, from being the name of nothing at all, firstbecame the name of a writ, then the name of a punishment,and from thence, as was natural, the name of an offence : towit, of as many offences as were punishable by that punishment.t See a list of these offences in Blackstone s Commentaries.So difficult is it for anyone to ascertain what the law is upon anysubject, that though this punishment was adopted in the Regency,Act 5 Geo. III. c. 27. which was passed many yearsbefore the 4th vol. of the Commentaries was printed. This Actwas not enumerated in that list.B.V. CH.V. OF PR^MUNIRE.What it is that in such a variety of laws shouldhave tempted the legislature, instead of the knownand ordinary names of punishment, to devise anew and unexpressive name to which no meaningwhatever could be annexed, without rummagingover a confused parcel of old French statutes, isnot easy to assign. There is nothing gained by itin any way, not in point of brevity, for in one ofthe statutes in which it is described with the mostconciseness, I find more words are taken up bythis uncouth description, than would be by theplain one : there is nothing gained by it in pointof precision, for the word has no significationwhatever, but by reference to the words of theold statute, and consequently cannot be moreprecise than they are.The only recommendation I can find for it is,that it is a Latin word: added to the notion, perhaps,that, as being less intelligible than mostother names of punishments, it might be moretremendous.If this has been the design, it has been in somemeasure answered terrible indeed is the name ofPrsemunire. It is become a kind of bug-bear, inwhich shape it has descended even among thelowest mob. It is used as synonymous with ascrape : not that the sort of persons last mentionedhave any much clearer idea of the particular sortof scrape, than those have who bring others into itby solemn acts of legislation.CHAPTER VI.OUTLAWRY,THE punishment known in practice by the nameof Outlawry, consists of the following ingredients:I. Forensic disability, which may be calledsimple outlawry.II. Forfeiture of personal estate.III. Forfeiture of the growing profits of thereal estate.IV. Imprisonment, c.This is the punishment inflicted for the offenceof absconding from justice in all cases, exceptwhere the punishment for the principal offenceamounts to felony : in this case, a man againstwhom a sentence of outlawry is pronounced, ispunished as if he had been convicted of the principaloffence.As the offence of absconding is a chronicaloffence, the punishment applied to it should be achronical punishment, such an one as being madeto cease upon the cessation of the offence, mayoperate only as an instrument of compulsion. Allthese punishments are capable of being made so ;but none are so upon the face of them. Nonewere so originally. They are by this time, however,rendered so in great measure by modernpractice, which has corrected the inordinate severityof the original institution.This punishment applies in most cases, but not398 B.V. CH.VI. OUTLAWRY*.in all cases : in all cases where the prosecution forthe original offence was in the criminal form, thatis, in other words, in all criminal suits : it appliesin most, but not in all civil suits. In the samecivil suit, it applies or does not apply, accordingas the suit happens to be commenced before onecourt or another. In the same suit, and thatcarried on in the same court, it does or does notapply according as the suit happens to have beencommenced by one kind of jargon or another. Allthis without the least relation to the merits.The punishment of forensic disabilities is appliedto a multitude of offences : namely, to all thosewhich are punished either by capital felony, orpraemunire, or excommunication. In felony, it isuseless, because the effect of it is merged in thepunishment of death ; in praemunire, it is justifiable,in as far as the punishment of total and perpetualimpoverishment, is an eligible mode ofpunishment, for of this it makes a necessary part.In excommunication, it is ineligible, on account ofits inequality. To make it answer in an equablemanner the purpose of impoverishment, is impracticable,for want of the punishment of forfeiture,of which it can come in only as an appendage.Taking it by itself, and laying aside what isnecessary to make it answer the purpose of impoverishment,it is superfluous when added to thepunishment of imprisonment.Whatever may be the offences cognizable in theEcclesiastical Court, either corporal punishmentis enough for them without pecuniary, or it is not.If it be enough, simple outlawry in addition to itis too much ; if not, it is too little. All this isupon the supposition that the delinquent is forthcomingfor the purpose of undergoing imprisonment.When a man absconds and has no property inB.V. CII.VI. OUTLAWRY. 399possession, or none that is sufficient to answer thedemand upon him, in this case, and in this only,the punishment of simple outlawry is expedient.Why ? not because it is eligible in itself, butbecause it is the only one the case admits of.When a man has no visible property in his owncountry, and has made his escape into another,generally speaking, his own country has no holdof him. This may happen, suppose in nine instancesout of ten ; but in the tenth, it may happenthat he may have a debt due to him, which he maywant the assistance of the laws of his own countryto recover. If this debt be more in value to himthan what is equivalent to the punishment he wouldbe likely to suffer for the original offence whichmade him fly, he will return and submit to justice.The punishment of simple outlawry in this casewill answer its purpose. It is eligible, therefore, inthis case, because it has some chance of compassingits end, and no other punishment has any.*An anecdote given us by Selden, in his Table Talk, (a)may serve very well to illustrate the influence this mode ofpunishment may have over a man who is out of the reach ofevery other. In the reign of James 1st, an English merchanthad a demand upon the King of Spain, which he could not getthe King to satisfy. The merchant had already brought hisaction, and Selden, wh o was his Counsel, advised him to proceedto Outlawry. Writ after writ was sent to the Sheriff totake his Majesty, and have his body before the Justices at Westminster.His Majesty was not to be found. Great outcry, asis usual, was made after him upon this in sundry ale-houses.His Majesty did not happen to be at any of the ale-houses. Hewas accordingly proclaimed an outlaw ; and a wolf s head, indueform of law, was clapt upon his shoulders, (6) so that anybodymight lay hold of him, and put him into jail, that had a() Title Law.(b) Caput Luplnum. C. List. 128.1). Lamb. Leg. T, ch. 138. Flea.L. 1. c.27. Bract. L. 5. Jbl.421. Brett. fol.20. Mirror, c. 4. DefaultsPunishable.400 B.V. CH.VI. OUTLAWRY.ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OFFORFEITURE OF PROTECTION.To this mode of punishment, the objection ofinequality applies with peculiar force. The fundout of which a man who has a fund of his ownsubsists, is either his labour, or his property. Ifhe has property, it consists either in immoveables,or in moveables. If in immoveables, it is eitherin his own hands, or in those of other persons ; ifin moveables, it is either in public hands, or inprivate : if in private, either in his own hands, orinthose of other persons.A man who subsists by his labour, is in generalscarcely at all affected by this punishment. Hereceives his pay, if not before he does his work, atleast as soon as a small quantity of it is done.A man whose fund of subsistence consists inimmoveable property, is very little affected by thispunishment, if that property is in his own hands.The utmost inconvenience it can subject him to, isthe obliging him to deal for ready money. If hisproperty is in the funds, he is not at all affected .There seems no reason to suppose that those whohave the management of those funds, would refusea man his dividend on the ground of any such disability.They would have no interest in such arefusal ; and the importance of keeping publicmind for it. (a) The case was, his Majesty happened at thattime to have demands upon several merchants in England, forwhich demands, so long as he continued under judgment ofoutlawry, he could not have his remedy. Upon this consideration,his Ambassador, Gondamar, submitted and paid the money;upon which, the wolf s head was taken off, and the King s headput in its place.(a) Antiently, when a man had a wolf s head upon his shoulders, he might bekilled by anybody. Eut this was altered in Edw. III. s time. Ste C. Lilt.B.V. CII.VI. OUTLAWRY. 4()1credit, would probably be a sufficient motive tokeep them in this instance from departing from thegeneral engagement.If a man s property consists in moveable propertywhich is in his own hands, for instance,stock in trade, it affects him indeed, but not verydeeply. The utmost it can do, is to oblige him todeal for ready money : to preclude him from sellingupon credit. It does not preclude him frombuying upon credit, since, though others are notamenable to him, he is to others.It is only where a man s property consists incredits : for example, in immoveables in the handsof a tenant, in a sum due for goods sold on creditorin money, out upon security, that it can affecthim very deeply. Of such a man it may be theutter ruin.In this case, whether a man suffers to theextreme amount, or whether he suffers at all,depends upon what ? upon the moral honesty ofthose he happens to have to do with.There are two circumstances therefore, on whichthe quantum of this mode of punishment depends:1st, the nature of the fund from whence he drawshis subsistence ; 2nd, the moral honesty of thepeople he happens to have to do with. But neitherof these circumstances is any ways connectedwith the degree of criminality of any offence forwhich a man can be thus punished. Of two men,both guilty, and that in the same degree, one mayberuined, the other not at all affected. Thegreater punishment is as likely to fall upon thelesser offender, as upon the greater : the lesserupon the greater offender, as upon the lesser.Another objection applies to this mode of punishmenton the score of immorality. The punishmentbeing of a pecuniary nature, there is a profitD D402 B.V. CH.VI. OUTLAWRY.arising out of it, which accordingly is to be disposedof in favour of somebody. And in whosefavour is it disposed of? in favour of anyone, who,having contracted an engagement with the delinquent,can, for the sake of lucre, be brought tobreak it.It may be said, that the engagement being bythe supposition rendered void, there is no harm inits being broken. True, it is void, as far as concernsthe political sanction, but it is not void bythe moral. All that the law does is not to compelhim to perform it ; but the interests of societyrequire, and accordingly so does the moral sanctionrequire, that a man should be ready to performhis engagement, although the law should not compelhim. If a man can be brought in this way tobreak his engagement, it is a sign that the powerof money over him is greater than that of themoral sanction. He is therefore what is properlytermed an immoral man ; and it is the law thateither has begotten in him that evil quality, or atleast, has fostered it.The dispensations, therefore, of the politicalsanction, are, in this case, set at variance withthose which are and ought to be those of themoral sanction. It invites men to pursue a modeof conduct which the moral sanction, in conformityto the dictates of utility, forbids.CHAPTER VII.EXCOMMUNICATION.VARIOUS and manifold are the evils which thepunishment of excommunication inflicts, or proposesto inflict : various are the sources fromwhence they flow. It does not confine itself tothe political sanction : it calls in, or makes as ifit would call in, the two others to its assistance.Of Excommunication, there are two species, ordegrees : the greater and the lesser. The greatercontains all that the lesser does, and somethingmore. I will first then give an account of thosethat are contained in the lesser, and then takenotice of those that are peculiar to the other.Those contained in the lesser are as follows:I. Imprisonment, the time unlimited, dependingon the good pleasure of the Judge : the severityof it is determined by the circumstance of its beingin the Common Jail.II. Penance, as a condition to the terminationof the other punishment. By penance is meant,a corporal punishment of the ignominious kind.The particular manner of inflicting it shall be consideredhereafter.III. In lieu of the penance, commutationmoney. The quantum of it is not limited in adirect manner, but is in an indirect manner ; itcannot be more than a man chooses to give, inorder to avoid the corporal penance.404 B.V. CM. VII. EXCOMMUNICATION.These two last are accidental ingredients in thiscomplex mass of punishment. Their infliction oromission depends, in some measure, upon the willof the prosecutor. Those which follow, areinseparable.IV. Disability to sue, either in a court of lawor equity. This is a punishment of a pecuniarynature, contingent in its nature, and uncertain asto time.V. Disability of acting as an Advocate,* or asan Attorney, or Procurator, for another : j- that is,I suppose, in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and not inany other. This is a punishment of the class ofthose that affect a man s condition ; in the presentinstance, it affects a man chiefly on a pecuniaryaccount.VI. Disability of acting as a Juryman. JVII. Disability of being presented to an Ecclesiasticalbenefice : of this, the same account maybegiven as of the last disability but one.VIII. Disability of bringing a suit, or action,as an executor. || This is a punishment in alienapersonam: affecting those who have a beneficialinterest under the will.IX. Incapacity of being constituted or continuedan administrator, or at least, danger of beingsubjected to that disability.X. Disability of being a witness. This, likewise,is another punishment in aliena personam,affecting those persons to whom this evidence, ifgiven, would be beneficial in respect of their lives,fortunes, liberties, and every other possession thatis in the protection of the law.Gibs. 1050. Gibs. 1050.t 2 Bacon s Ab. 674. || God. O. L. 37, 8.t 3 Blackest. Com. 101B.V. CH.VII. EXCOMMUNICATION. 405XI. The being looked upon as a heathen and apublican. This, I suppose, is meant as a sort ofinfamy.*XII. Exclusion from all churches : this is aspecies of personal restraint, that involves in itconsequences that belong to the religious sanction.XIII. Exclusion from the benefit of the burialservice. I do not know under what class to rankthis punishment : I do not very precisely knowwhat benefit it is to a man after he is dead, to havethe service read over his body : if it be anything,it belongs to the religious sanction.XIV. Exclusion from the benefit of the sacramentsof Baptism and the Lord s Supper. Thisbelongs altogether to the religious sanction.So much for the lesser excommunication. Thegreater adds two other circumstances to thecatalogue :I. Exclusion from the commerce and communion ofthe faithfulII. Disability of making a Will This is a punishmentthat affects the power of the party : viz.in the present case, the investiture power perform -able in a particular manner, with respect to theownership of such property, as he shall die entitledto. In as far as the power of making a willincludes that of appointing a Guardian to a child,as also that of an Executor to manage the propertyof a person, of whom the party in questionwas executor : it is a punishment in aliena personam.The child may suffer for want of a properGuardian. The persons interested in the effectsof the first testator may suffer for want of a properperson to manage those effects.Burn, Penance, 6. \ Swine. 109. God. Oil. 37.t I.onderb. 26fi.406 13. V. CH.VII. EXCOMMUNICATION.This is the mode, and the only mode of punishmentinflicted by those Courts that go by thename of Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual Courts. Thisthey are forced to make serve for all occasions ;they have neither less nor greater : it is the onlypunishment they have. When this punishment ispronounced, they have exhausted their wholePenal Code. If its brevity be its recommendation,it must be confessed that it has no other.Let us consider a little more particularly, thepunishments of which it is composed. Of imprisonment,nothing in particular need be said atpresent.The punishment of penance demands moreattention. It consists in the penitent being exposedbare-headed and bare-legged, with a white sheetwrapped round the body, either in the parishchurch, or in the cathedral, or in the public market,*there to pronounce a certain form of wordscontaining the confession of his crime. This, ashas been already observed, is a corporal punishmentof the ignominious kind, and might, if definedwith precision, be employed with the same advantageas are other punishments of that description.The time at which it should take place, and theduration of the penance, ought to be determined,but there is nothing fixed with regard to them, sothat it may continue for several hours, or only foran instant. It may take place before a crowd ofspectators, or in the most absolute solitude.Besides this, there is a vast difference betweenthe parish church of a village, and the cathedralof a great city, or the public market of a district.The larger or smaller concourse of spectators willrender the punishment more or less severe.Godolphin. Appendix, 18. Burn, tit. Penance.B.V. CH.VJI. EXCOMMUNICATION. 407The penitent ought to pronounce a formula containingan acknowledgment of his crime ; a differentformula ought therefore to be provided forevery crime by law. This formula may be pronouncedeither distinctly or indistinctly a mancan hardly be expected, willingly, to proclaim hisown shame. It would therefore be proper that heshould only be required to repeat the words, whichshould be clearly and distinctly pronounced by anofficer of Justice, as is practised with respect tothe administration of oaths. Certain persons,also, should be nominated to preside over the ceremony,and ascertain that everything is doneaccording to law.Till these points are regulated, this mode ofpunishment, though good in itself, will always besubject, as it is at present, to the greatest abuses.It will be executed with inequality, and capriciously,according to the condition of the individuals,rather than according to their crimes, andaccording as the character of the Judge is moreor less severe.Penance is the punishment usually imposed,says Dr Burn, " in the case of incest or incontinency,"these two offences are classed togetherby the ecclesiastical compiler, and opposed towhat he calls smaller offences and scandals.When we consider how far these two first offencesare removed from one another, one is astonished tosee them classed together, and visited with thesame punishment. Far be it from me to treatlightly the exposure of innocence to infamy, thedisturbance of domestic felicity, or to degrade thechaste raptures of the marriage bed to a level withthe bought smiles of harlots. But there aredegrees in guilt, which I see not why it should bemeritorious to confound.408 B.V. CH.V1I. EXCOMMUNICATION.It is not often that we hear of this punishmentbeing put in practice : examples of it were morefrequent in former times, but now it is most commonlycommuted for by the payment of a sum ofmoney.II. As to the different legal incapacities whichform part of this punishment, the objections towhich they are liable have been pointed out elsewhere.(See Book IV. Misplaced PunishmentsIII. Part of the punishment consists in thedelinquent s being looked upon, if men think fitto look upon him in that light, as a heathen and apublican.To try the effect of generals, the only way isto apply them to particulars. A. is not willing, ornot able, to pay his Proctor s, or another man sProctor s fees. He is in consequence excommunicated.Amongst his other punishments, he is tobe looked upon as a heathen or a publican, that is,as being such a sort of man as Socrates, Cato,Titus, Marcus Antoninus, a collector of taxes, oraLord of the Treasury. The heaping of hardnames upon a man might, at one time, have beendeemed a punishment, but such legal trifling nowa-days, serves only to render the Jaws ridiculous.IV. Exclusion from the churches. In our daysan exclusion of this sort shows rather oddly underthe guise of punishment. The great difficulty isnow not to keep people out of the churches, but toget them in. The punishment, however, was notill designed, if it were intended to increase thedesire of attending there, by forbidding it. Thegeneral effect of every prohibition being, to givebirth to a desire to infringe it. It affords a presumption,that what is prohibited is in itself desirable,or at least, desirable in the opinion of thelegislator, or he would not have prohibited it :li.V. Cheval. EXCOMMUNICATION . 409such is the natural supposition when the interdictionrelates to an unknown object ; but even whenit relates to an object which has been tried, andneglected from distaste, the prohibition gives to itanother aspect. The attention is directed to thepossible advantages of the act : having begun tothink of them, the individual fancies he perceivesthem, and goes on to exaggerate their value ; oncomparing his situation with that of those whoenjoy this liberty, he experiences a feeling ofinferiority ; and by degrees, a most intense desireoften succeeds to the greatest indifference.Those who are forward to refer the propensityto transgress a prohibition of any kind to an unaccountableperversity, and unnatural corruption inhumannature, as if it were not reconcilable tothe known dominion of the ideas of pain and pleasureover the human mind, do an injustice to man snature, in favour of their own indolence. Man,according to these superficial moralists, is a compoundof inconsistencies : everything in him is anobject of wonder everything happens contraryto what they would expect ; strangers to the fewsimple principles which govern human nature, theaccount they give of everything is, that it isunaccountable.With respect to those parts of the punishmentof excommunication which belong to the religioussanction, such as exclusion from the sacraments,their most striking imperfection is, their extremeinequality: their penal effect depends on the beliefand sensibility of the individuals. The blowwhich would produce torments of agony in oneperson, will only cause the skin of another totingle. There is no proportion in these punishments,and nothing exemplary : those who suffer,languish in secrecy and silence ; those who do not410 B.V. CH.V1I. EXCOMMUNICATION.suffer, make a jest and a laughing stock of the lawin public. They are punishments which are thrownat hazard among a crowd of offenders, withoutcare whether they produce any effect or none.I speak of these punishments with referenceonly to the present life; for who is there thatsupposes that a sentence of excommunication cancarry with it any penal consequences in a futurestate. For what man, reasoning without prejudice,can believe that God hath committed soterrible a power to beings so feeble and so imperfect,or that the Divine justice could bind itself toexecute the decrees of blind humanity ; that itcould allow itself to be commanded to punishotherwise than it would have punished of itself.A truth so evident could only have been lost sightof by an abasement, which could only have beenprepared by ages of ignorance.*These observations might be much more extended, withreference to the details of Ecclesiastical Judicature, but thesubject would not be of general interest. The foregoing observationsmay therefore suffice with respect to these laws, whichare so generally condemned, and may serve to show the necessityfor their formal abolition.RATIONALE OF PUNISHMENT.BOOK VI.MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS.CHxYPTER I.CHOICE OF PUNISHMENTS LATITUDE TO BE ALLOWEDTO THE JUDGES.THE legislator ought, as much as possible, todetermine everything relating to punishments,for two reasons : that they may be certain, andimpartial.I. The more completely the scale of punishmentsis rendered certain, the more completely allthe members of the community are enabled toknow what to expect. It is the fear of punishmentin so far as it is known, which prevents the commissionof crime. An uncertain punishment willtherefore be uncertain in its effects since, wherethere is a possibility to escape, escape will behoped for.II. The legislator is necessarily unacquaintedwith the individuals who will undergo the punishmenthe appoints ; he cannot, therefore, be412 B.VI. CH.I. CHOICE OF PUNISHMENTS.governed by feelings of personal antipathy orregard. He is impartial, or at least, appears to beso. A Judge, on the contrary, only pronouncingupon a particular case, is exposed to favourableor unfavourable prejudices, or at least, to the suspicionof such, which almost equally shake thepublic confidence.If an unlimited latitude be allowed to Judgesin apportioning punishments, their functions willbe rendered too arduous : they will always beafraid either of being too indulgent or too severe.It may also happen, that being able to diminishthe punishment at discretion, they may becomeless exact in requiring proof, than if they had topronounce a fixed punishment. A slight probabilitymay appear sufficient to justify a punishmentwhich they may lessen at pleasure.There may, however, often arise, either withregard to the offences themselves or the personof the delinquent, unforeseen and particular circumstances,which would be productive of greatinconveniences, if the laws were altogether inflexible.It is therefore proper to allow a certainlatitude to the Judge, not of increasing, but ofdiminishing a punishment, in those cases in whichit may be fairly presumed, that one individual isless dangerous, or more responsible than another,since, as has been before observed, the samenominal punishment is not always the same realpunishment. Some individuals, by reason of theireducation, family connections, and condition in theworld, presenting, if we may so speak, a greatersurface for punishment to act upon.Other circumstances may render it expedient tochange the kind of punishment ; that which has beendirected by the law may be incapable of application,or it may be less suitable in other respects.B.V1. CH.I. LATITUDE ALLOWED TO JUDGES. 413But whenever this discretionary power is exercisedby a Judge, he ought to declare the reasonswhich have determined him.Such are the principles. The details of thissubject belong to the Penal Code, and to theLegislative Instructions to the Tribunals.CHAPTER II.OF SUBSIDIARY PUNISHMENTS.OF all the punishments which can be appointedby the law, there is none but what, from oneaccident or other, is liable to fail. It is obviousthat against such an event it becomes the law, inevery case, to make provision. Such a failuremay arise from either of two causes : unwillingness,that is, want of will to bear the punishment;or inability, that is, want of power.The first cause, if no steps were taken to controlit, would naturally occasion the failure of allpunishments, the execution of which is dependantupon the will of the party to be punished. This,among corporal punishments, is the case with allsuch as are either active or restrictive, one caseof restrictive punishment excepted, that, to wit,in which the restraint is produced by physicalmeans.To give efficacy, therefore, to the mandate, ofwhich any of these punishments is intended as thesanction, it is absolutely necessary that some furtherpunishment should be appointed to back itthrough the whole of its continuance. In the firstinstance, this bathing, or subsidiary punishment,as it may be called, may be taken from those twoclasses, as well as from the other; and so throughany number of instances, one behind another. Apunishment of the active kind, for instance, mightB.VI .CH.II. OF SUBSIDIARY PUNISHMENTS. 415be backed by quasi-imprisonment ; that again bybanishment ; or any one of those punishments, foracertain term, by the same, or another, (kind ofpunishment) for a further term. Ultimately, however,every such series must be terminated bysome punishment that may be inflicted withoutthe concurrence of the party s will ; that is, bysome punishment of the passive kind ; or if of therestrictive kind, by such restraint as is compassedby physical means.Even such punishments, to the execution ofwhich (so the party be forthcoming) the concurrenceof the party is not essentially necessary,may fail from his want of power, or in other words,from his inability to sustain them. This is thecase with all corporal punishments not capital,that affect any parts of the body that are notessential to life. It is the case, therefore, withsimply afflictive punishments, and with discolour-ment,disfigurement, disablement, and mutilation,in as far as they affect any of the parts just spokenof. It is also the case with forfeitures of all kinds.The only punishments therefore that are sure, andrequire no others to be subjoined to them, are theabove-mentioned corporal punishments, in thecases where the parts they affect are such as areessential to life ; imprisonment, and such punishments,by which life itself is taken away.Even these, like any others, may come to failby the want of will, (in the party to sustain them)to wit, by his not choosing to be forthcoming,which is a cause of failure common to all punishments; but then this cause does not necessarilyproduce its effect : it does not render the punishmentof the man necessarily dependent upon hiswill, for he may be taken and punished in spite of416 B.VI. CH.II. OF SUBSIDIARY PUNISHMENTS.his wishes and endeavours to prevent it ; which,when a man does suffer any of these punishments,especially death, and those other acute and heavypunishments, is generally the case. In this case,the only resource is in forfeitures, upon the contingencyof a man s having anything to forfeit, thatis, within the reach of justice, or in the punishmentof those whose feelings are connected withhis own by sympathy, as in punishments in alienapersonam.From the differences above-remarked respectingthe cause of failure in the punishment first designed,results a difference in what ought to be the quantityof the subsidiary punishment, concerningwhich we may lay down the following rules :Rule I. Where inability is manifestly the onlycause of failure, the subsidiary punishment should beneither greater nor less than that which was firstdesigned. For no reason can be given why it shouldbe either less or greater.Rule II. Where want of will is manifestly the onlycause of failure, the subsidiary punishment ought tobe greater than that which was First designed. Forthe punishment first designed is that which by thesupposition is thought the best : to determine thedelinquent then to submit to this, in preference tothe other, there is but one way, which is, to makethat other punishment the greater.Rule III. When the cause of failure may be wantof power, or want of will, as it may happen, and itcannot be known which, the subsidiary punishmentought to be greater than the punishment first designed,but not so much greater as in the case last mentioned.This is apt to be the case with pecuniary forfeitures.If, however, it can be ascertained which ofthese is the cause, it ought always to be done,B.V1.C11.1I. OF subsidiary Punishments. 417otherwise, on the one hand, he who fails from mereinability-will be punished more than there isoccasion ; and he who fails wilfully, not enough.When a man fails wilfully to submit to thepunishment first designed for him, such a failuremay be considered in the light of an offence.Viewing it in this light, \ve shall immediately seethepropriety of the following rule."Rule IV. The subsidiary punishment ought to bemade the greater, the easier it is for the delinquent toavoid the punishment First designed (without beingdetected and made amenable). For the punishment,to be efficacious, must always be greater than thetemptation to the offence ; and the temptation tothe offence is the greater, the greater is the uncertaintyof that punishment which is the motive thatweighs against the profit of the offence.Imprisonment is the most convenient and naturalkind of subsidiary punishment, in cases vvheie theoffender cannot or will not submit to a pecuniarypunishment. A circumstance that renders thesetwo modes of punishment particularly apt forbeing substituted to each other, is their divisibility :they admit of every degree that can be desired.Simple afflictive punishments, on account ofthe infamy they involve, cannot in general be eligiblyemployed as substitutes for pecuniarypunishments.In case of violation of boundaries of local confinement,the most eligible substitute is imprisonment.A single act of transgression may be takeni "as a sufficient warning that the penal mandate isnot meant to be regarded.Laborious punishments require an uninterruptedtrain of attention, in order to compel the delinquentto submit to them. A constant supply ofE418 B.VI.CH.II. OF SUBSIDIARY PUNISHMENTS.fresh motives is required : to produce the desiredeffect, it is necessary therefore that these motivesshould be drawn from a stock of punishment thatis susceptible of minute division, and capable ofbeing applied at the moment it is wanted. Thus,whenever an Inspector is appointed in a House ofCorrection in which the individuals confined areemployed in hard labour, power is tacitly given tohim to inflict personal correction. The infamy bywhich it is accompanied, is not an objection :because, by the principal punishment the penallabour an equal degree of infamy is produced.We have already observed, that to pecuniarypunishment, in case of inability on the part of thepatient, ought to be substituted imprisonment.But by what standard are we to estimate a sumof money by a sum of imprisonment for whatdebt, or part of a debt, is each day s imprisonmentto be reckoned as an equivalent ?Let us say that the amount of the debt struckoff by each day s imprisonment shall be equal towhat each day the patient might have earned, hadhe remained in a state of liberty. The dailyincome of a mechanic, sailor, soldier, artist,labourer, servant, may be calculated according tothe wages of persons employed in the same profession.The daily income of a farmer may be estimatedaccording to the 365th part of the rent of his farm.If, besides his farm, he is engaged in any otherline of business, the daily benefit arising from thatbusiness must be added to the income arising fromhis farm.The revenue of a man who is not engaged inany business, or is not a manufacturer, may becalculated as being eight times the rent of his8.VI.CH.II. OF SUBSIDIARY PUNISHMENTS. 419house. If he is a manufacturer, at four times therent of his house. If he is engaged in trade, atsix times that rent.The revenue of a man that boards and lodges inthe house of another, may be estimated at doublethe sum that he so pays. If he lodges only, atfour times that sum. If he is supported gratuitouslyin the house of a relation, as equal to thevalue of his board and lodging.*The points that then required to be determined,are the three following :I. The income being given, what portion of thedebt shall be considered as being abolished, byimprisonment of a certain duration ?II. From what period anterior to the contractingof the debt, ought the value of the income tobe estimated ?III. What proofs ought to be required by whichto fix the amount of the income in question ? Itwould be the interest of the debtor to make itappear as great as possible. During the examination,the creditor ought to be present, and to beatliberty, either by himself or his counsel, toexamine the defaulter.The more exalted a man s rank, the greater ingeneral are his annual outgoings ; the greater,consequently, ought to be the debt abolished by agiven period of imprisonment.Example.Per Day.Per Year.debt discharged by )seven years >imprisonment. }s. d.109 11Labourer.. ds d.15 13Ensign,66 18 4debt discharged by~|a year s >imprisonment. J66 18 4420 B.VI. CH.II. OF SUBSIDIARY PUNISHMENTS.I confine myself then to the laying down theprinciples upon which the calculation may bemade : the details of their application belong moreproperly to the Penal Code than to a work onpunishment.CHAPTER III.OF SURETY FOR GOOD CONDUCT.THE obligation of finding sureties for good conductis an expedient, the utility of which appearsmore problematical in proportion as it is examinedmore nearly. A condition which is essential toitis, that there be an ulterior punishment destinedto replace this obligation, in case its fulfilment isfound impossible. This subsidiary punishment isordinarily imprisonment, this imprisonment isordinarily indefinite as to its duration : it may beperpetual, and it is natural that it should be so.Does the accused find himself without friendsready to risk their security upon his good conduct?Imprisonment, and the ignominy that accompaniesit, are means little proper for enabling him to findfriends so devoted.Suppose that he finds them ; what happensthen ? To a properly seated punishment, a vicariouspunishment is added, a punishment to beborne by the innocent for the guilty. In thenature of things, any punishment might be equallywell employed for this purpose. By custom,pecuniary punishment only is employed in thefirst instance, which, however, changes into imprisonment,in case of instability, according to ageneral rule. It is not, however, natural, that aman, especially a man who, by the supposition,has given proofs of misconduct, should find friends422 B.VI.CH.III. OF SURETY FOR GOOD CONDUCT.who will expose themselves to be punished foractions over which they have no power, unless hehave wherewith to indemnify them for bearingthis pecuniary punishment. Does he find themin this case ? Then this expedient is useless ; itwould have been quite as well to have fixed theamount upon him directly. In order that thisexpedient may have an efficacy of its own, it willbe necessary to limit its use to the case in whichthe incapacity of the accused to furnish this indemnityis known. Does he, after this, find any personssufficiently generous thus to expose themselvesfor him ? It is, without doubt, something gainedin point of security, but it is a security very dearlybought. In all other cases, this expedientresolves itself into a question of account.The support which the law receives from thisexpedient, springs from two sources : it operatesas an additional punishment, whereby the will ofthe accused is influenced ; this punishment, consistingin the remorse which a generous mindwould feel in seeing friends, who had devotedthemselves for him, plunged into misfortune byhis ingratitude. It is also an expedient wherebyhe is attacked upon the side of power: his suretiesbecome guards, whom the danger to which theyare exposed induces to watch over his conduct.But will he, whom the fear of punishment tobe inflicted upon himself has been found insufficientto restrain, be restrained by the fear of aless punishment to be inflicted upon another ?Those passions which have stifled the voice ofprudence, will they obey those of generosity andgratitude ? they may obey it, but that they willnot obey it is, I think, most natural ; but if thisis so, it is a very costly expedient. In the majorityof cases, instead of insuring the good of .OF SURETY FOR GOOD CONDUCT. 423mention, it will produce the evil of punishmentof punishment borne by the innocent.Whilst, as to this guard, it is a security muchmore verbal than real it would be a very weaksecurity, even if the individuals were his companions,and lived under the same roof with him atall times. But it is not among such as these thatsureties are selected : they are, under the Englishlaw, required to be householders, having separateestablishments. Is it then possible, that the passionwhich, by the supposition, had broken throughthe united restraints of prudence, gratitude, andhonour, should be restrained by so loose a band.Besides this, is it natural that the extremes ofconfidence and mistrust should be united in thesame person.The bitterness of this punishment, to which theinnocent are made to expose themselves, is nottaken away by calling the exposure voluntary.This willingness is owing only to the constraintwhich the consideration of his friend being sent,or about to be sent, to prison for life, brings withit. It is a willingness produced by torture.In conclusion, suretyship is a resource whichought not to be resorted to without very evidentnecessity, if it were unattended with any otherinconvenience than this, of exposing the virtue ofindividuals to these combats, which, in a momentof weakness, may give birth to a remorse, whichshall end only with life.This expedient is much employed under theEnglish law ; but custom has caused it to existonly in connexion with judicial commotion. Acertain fine is determined on, the accused is madeto say, I consent to the payment of this fine, if Icommit a certain offence. One or more suretiesare made each to say, I consent on the same B.VI.CH.I1I. OF SURETY FOR GOOD CONDUCT,edition to owe the same, or a part of the same sum.In this manner, as if an inevitable punishmentrequired an extorted consent to its infliction, theaccused himself is made to contract an engagement,which, if it is not always ridiculous, it is thatit is sometimes unjust. Implying a claim uponhis property, it serves to rob his creditors of theirjust rights to payment of debts contracted betweenthe period of the engagement and the contractingof the debt.Of this ill-contrived compound mischief, whatare the effects in practice ? very commonly, none.This formality is complied with, as so many othersare complied with, without thinking of what itmeans, partly from duty, and partly from habit.Sometimes it may be useful, because it alwaysincludes admonition, and sometimes threatening,according to the proportion between the finethreatened, and the punishment which would havehad place without it ; sometimes for want ofsureties it may be believed that the accused himselfmay go to prison ; sometimes, after havingfound them, it may equally be believed that theymay incur the fine, and that they pay it, or go toprison, with or without him. Do these misfortunesfrequently happen ? I know not. How canI know ? This is one of those thousand things onwhich everybody ought to be instructed, and ofwhich no one can find an opportunity of learningthe truth.CHAPTER IV.DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.Section I. Of Pardon.IT is necessary to increase the magnitude of apunishment in proportion as it is wanting in certainty.The less certain your punishments are,the more severe they must be ; the more certainyour punishments are, the more you may reducetheir severity.What shall we then say of a power expresslyestablished for rendering them uncertain ? I meanthe power of pardoning : it has cruelty for itscause, it has cruelty for its effect.Among nations, as among individuals, thegovernment of the passions precedes that of reason.The object of primitive punishments was,to assuage the rage of their authors. Of this thereare two proofs : the first is drawn from the multitudeof cases in which the most severe punishmentshave been lavished upon actions whichhave but a slightly hurtful influence upon thehappiness of individuals or society, and withrespect to which such evil influence was not soughtto be established, till long after these punishmentswere appointed of this kind are the punishmentsdirected against heresy. The second is drawnfrom the praises lavished upon clemency : forwhilst the effect of an offence is only to enragethe Sovereign, there is merit in his abstaining from426 B.VI. CII.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.punishing it. There is utility in his so doing, forbya privation which is borne by him alone, hespares the infliction of terrible evils upon a multitudeof persons. In this consists the difficulty,for it is difficult to a man accustomed to follow thebent of his inclinations to restrain them. Supposethe effect of a crime is to interrupt his ease,and the effect of the punishment is to repress thiscrime ; to abstain from the application of thispunishment is a treason of which the most pardonablesources are feebleness or folly. To praisethe clemency of the Sovereign upon this supposition,is to praise the surgeon, who allows, hispatient to perish by not cutting off a gangrenedfinger. Among Sovereigns, therefore, withoutcruelty, the use of unmerited pardons could nottake place : the reason is, an enlightened love ofthe public welfare does not engage him in undoingwith one hand what he had done with the other.If the punishments have not had for the cause oftheir establishment cruelty towards individuals, itis cruelty towards the public to render them useless,to violate his promise, the engagement whichhe has made to the laws to put them in execution.I speak here of gratuitous pardons, such as allpardons have hitherto been. There are cases inwhich the power of pardoning is not only useful,but necessary. In all these cases, if the punishmentwere inflicted, the evil produced wouldexceed the good, and in some cases, almost infinitely.If the legislator could have known thatcertain individual cases would or would not beincluded in the general case in which he wouldhave wished that the punishment should cease, hewould act unwisely were he to rely upon anyother person for its cessation. For why shouldhe give to another a power to frustrate his designs?B. VI. CH. IV. DEFEAZAXCE OF PUNISHMENT. 427But he does not possess this knowledge, unless inquality of legislator, he acts also in that of a prophet.It follows, therefore, that he must relyupon some other.In English law, one method by which the lawgives to a party injured, or rather, to every prosecutor,a partial power of pardon, consists in givinghim the choice of the kind of action which he willcommence. On this, or on the difference betweenthe actions, depends a difference between thepunishments so far as the happening of this differenceis concerned, the lot of the offenderdepends not on the gravity of his offence, but onsome other foreign circumstances, such as thedegree of the ill-will of the party injured, or otherprosecutor, or of the knowledge of his legal advisers.The Judge is a puppet in the hands of anyprosecutor, which he can cause to move at hispleasure and caprice.There are many persons, as we have seen, whoexercise the power of pardoning ; there are manyothers who possess it who are not observed.Among the latter class may be placed thosewho have the power of placing nullities in thecourse of procedure. In England, an attorney,or his clerk, any copying clerk at eighteen penceor two shillings per day, may grant or sell impunityto whomsoever it seems them good.If the individual injured can directly, or indirectly,put an end to a criminal process, otherwisethan by the punishment before the judgment hasbeen pronounced, and in case of conviction, executed,he enjoys in effect this right of pardoning.The right of remission is then one branch of thepower of pardoning. When the interest of thepublic requires that the punishment should takeplace, the individual injured ought not to enjoy428 B.VI.CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.this right ; when this interest does not require it,he may enjoy it.This power may be allowed in all cases, whenthe offence on which it operates, being foundedonly in a private quarrel, does not spread anyalarm through society, or at least does not spreadany alarm which the conduct of the parties doesnot destroy.But in the case of corporal injuries, how triflingsoever, and especially in the case of injuries accompaniedwith insult, this remission ought not tobe allowed without the knowledge of the Judge,otherwise the weakness and good-nature of someminds would serve to draw down upon them vexationfrom hardened oppressors.Homicide is a case in which the power of remissionought not to be allowed to any one in particular.It would, in effect, be to grant to him anarbitrary power over the life of those whose deathhe might thus pardon ; he might boldly employany assassin, by exercising in favour of thatassassin his power of pardoning.If to grant to any one whatsoever, the power oftaking away a reward offered by the legislatorwould be regarded as an absurdity, to grant thepower of taking away a punishment in the oppositecase, with the reserve of specific exceptions,would be a more terrible absurdity.This absurdity is not found in the system ofrewards : no person proposes to take away areward after the legislator has offered it ; the nullities,however, allowed in prosecutions, when hehas appointed a reward for offenders, operates tothis effect in the case of punishment.The frequency of capital punishment is one ofthe most probable causes of the popularity ofpardons.B.VJ.CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT. 429In England, it may therefore admit of debate,whether the legislature has done most evil byappointing so many capital punishments, or theSovereign, by exercising his power of remittingthem.The essence of this power is, to act by caprice.The King, as it is falsely said, the Deputy of theKing, as it ought to have been said, does not actjudicially ; he does not act from a knowledge ofthe matter ; he has not the power of doing so ;he has not even the power of compelling theattendance of witnesses. Is a lie told before thispowerless despot? it is an unpunishable lie.The power of pardoning is often said to be oneof the brightest jewels in the Royal Crown : it isburdensome as it is bright, not only to those whosubmit to the Crown, but still more so to him alsowho wears it.Many cases have occurred in England in whichthe counsellors of the Crown have, from more orless praiseworthy motives, made use of this lawfuldespotism of the King, to soften the tyrannyof the laws. Never was power so undoubtedlylegal, though undue, employed for a mere legitimatepurpose, the result, however, has been,not that the Minister has been applauded as hedeserved, but he has become the object of clamour,libels, and threats. The most correct and legitimateexercise of the powers impoliticly attachedto his character, has only served to draw downupon the King that treatment which a tyrantwould have merited.How much discontent and fear would have beenspared, if a right, legally abusive, had given placeto an enlightened and well ordered law.430 B.VI.CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.SECTION II. By length of time.Ought punishment in any cases, and in what,to be defeasible by length of time ? By the time,I mean, that has elapsed since the commission ofthe offence.At first view, the answer seems to be clearly inthe negative. For what, it may be said, has thecircumstance of the length of time to do with thedemand there is for punishment ?Upon a nearer view, however, it will be found,that the utility of prescription in certain cases ismaintainable by specious, at least, if not conclusive,arguments.As a foundation for these arguments, it must beadmitted, that if in any case the suffering of thedelinquent is not necessary for the attainment ofthe ends of punishment, the punishment ought notto be inflicted.This being premised, it should seem, that in aview to one of the ends of punishment, to wit,reformation, the execution of it after a certainlength of time, is not necessary. A certain numberof years, suppose ten, has elapsed since hecommitted the offence : now then, in all this time,either he has committed similar offences, or he hasnot. If he has not, he has reformed himself, andthe purpose of the law has been answered withoutpunishment ; if he has, he has been punished forsubsequent offences, and the discipline he stoodin need of, has been already administered to him,at a time when he stood more in need of it thanhe can be supposed to stand at present.Thus stands the argument upon the ground ofReformation : but of the facts alleged, one, itmust be confessed, is rather problematical. If aman commit an offence, and is forthcoming tenB.VI. CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT. 431years afterwards, it is by no means clear, from hisnot having been punished for any similar offences,that he has not committed any. In the samemanner that he escaped detection or prosecutionfor the first, he may have escaped detection orprosecution for any number of other similar offences.The difficulty of detection, the death of witnesses,the subtleties of procedure, are circumstancesthat afford ample grounds for disputing theforce of the inference, from his not having incurredpunishment to his not having deserved it.*Upon the ground of example, there is still lessto be said in favour of prescription. If the prescriptionis not to take place till at the end of along period, as ten years (the number above takenfor an example), it will not contribute, in anyassignable degree, to lessen the apparent value ofthe punishment. When a man meditates a crime,his great fear is the being detected and apprehendedimmediately almost upon the commission of it.The taking away the danger that would await himat the end of ten years, will add very little to hissecurity. fWhen a crime has been committed, either theperson only who committed it may remainunknown, or the face itself as well as the person.If either be unknown, it is plain no prosecutionAny one who is at ail conversant with anecdotes of notoriouscriminals must have observed, that nothing is more commonin this country than for a man to be guilty of twenty, thirty, orforty thefts or robberies, before punishment overtakes him.f Mr Bentham does not appear to have carried on his examinationof this subject in respect to the other ends of punishment.Ed.I Under the name of the fact, I would here include suchand so many circumstances as are necessary to make the actin question come under the denomination of some crime.432 B.VI. CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.can have been set on foot. If both be known,then either a prosecution may have been set onfoot, or not. It is only in case of there being noprosecution, that prescription has ever beenallowed. The rule is, that a man shall not be prosecutedafter that interval has elapsed, not that ifhe has been prosecuted and convicted, he shallnot suffer.The apprehension of danger commences atthe time of the discovery. Persons who are aboutthe criminal now understand that they have amongthem a thief, a robber, or a murderer : this cannotbut give them some alarm. If no punishment atall is to be inflicted on him, if he is suffered to goonand live where he did before, how is this alarmto be quieted.In crimes the object of which is a pecuniaryprofit, prescription ought not in any case to operateso as to protect the delinquent in the enjoymentof his ill-gotten acquisition.Neither ought it not to operate in such manneras to leave innocent persons exposed to suffer fromtheir terror or abhorrence of the criminal.There are also certain crimes, in respect ofwhich prescription ought not to be adopted in anycase. Such are three species of homicide : viz.homicide for lucre, through wantonness, or frompremeditated resentment ; incendiarism ; and theoffence of sinking a vessel manned, or of laying acountry under water. The mischief of crimes ofthese kinds is so great, that it seems paying toogreat a regard to the interests of the criminal, toadopt a rule that may contribute, though in everso small a degree, to lessen the apparent certaintyof the punishment ; and the horror or terror, a factof any of those kinds inspires when discovered, is15. VI. Cll.1V. DEFEASANCE OF PUNISHMENT. 433so great, that that circumstance alone seems enoughto overweigh any good that could be gained by it.What is the good in view in prescription ? It isthe interest of one single person that is in question: the delinquent. The sparing of that singleperson from a suffering which it is supposed itmay, in the case in which it is proposed the prescriptionshould take place, not be necessary, atleast not so necessary as formerly to the purposesof punishment to inflict. Now, when it is a crimeby which men are exposed to suffer in their individualcapacities, it can scarcely be detected, but amultitude of persons must begin to suffer: to wit,by the apprehension of his committing other suchcrimes in future, of which they may chance to betheobjects ; and this suffering of theirs will continue,till he be manifestly disabled to hurt them :the least penal method of doing which, is to sendhim out of the way.Upon this slight examination, we perceive thatthe utility of prescription will vary greatly inrespect of different offences. To discuss this topiccompletely, it would be necessary, therefore, toconsider it with a view to the several sorts of offences.To do this fully, belongs not to our presentsubject all we can do in this place is, to offer afew general hints, just to put us in the way, andto serve as a clew to indicate the principal pointsupon which the enquiry ought to turn.Whether a given person, detected after such alength of time, of a crime of the sort in question,is or is not an object of terror to those around him,is a question that can be answered only by a particularenquiry : it is a matter, therefore, thatought rather to be committed to the Magistratewho has the power of pardoning, than to be providedfor by a general law.r F434 B.VI. CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.SECTION III. By death of parties.In pursuit of (the means of making) compensation,the business of punishment is apt to be overlooked.When one man, the party injured, ispresented with what another man, the injurer, ismade to pay, men are apt to take it for granted,and at first asking, would be apt to answer, thatthere is no punishment in the case. They imagine,but hastily and erroneously, that the only personwho has suffered by the offence, is that party whois the immediate object of the injury. If thenthat person, by an operation of law, be made toenjoy as much as by the offence he had been madeto suffer, they conclude (and justly enough werethe foundation true) that everything is set to rights,and that the law has nothing more to do. Thepain which the offender is made to suffer by beingmade to give up what the party injured is madeto enjoy, they do not look upon in the light ofpunishment. They look upon it as a circumstanceresulting, accidentally and unintentionally, out ofthe operation by which an indemnification is producedto the injured party, so that it would bebut so much the better if that pain could be altogetherspared ; and it is for want of being able tosave it, that it is suffered to exist. In short, soentirely is the idea of punishment lost in that ofcompensation, that a law which appoints the latteris not understood to appoint the former, is notlooked upon as a penal law.Punish, however, it must a penal law in onesense of the word, it must be, if it is to have anyeffect at all in preventing the practice which isproductive of the mischief it means to cure ; andit is by punishing that it does more good than byB.VI.CH.IV. DEFEAZAXCE OF PUNISHMENT. 435indemnifying. For of the two ends, preventionand compensation, the former, as has been proved,is by much the most important.This neglect, however, of the principal end oflaws made in restraint of private injuries, has notbeen attended with all the ill consequences thatmight at first sight be imagined. The indemnificationbeing made to come out of the pocket ofthe aggressor, has produced the punishment ofcourse. Now, under the laws of most nations, inmostinstances of acknowledged injuries, indemnificationhas been exacted, and by that means,in most cases, it has happened that punishmenthas been applied. Yet not in all : because compensationhas been made defeasible by contingencies; I say in most, but it has not in all : forthere are two events by which in all these casesindemnification is rendered not necessary in sogreat a degree as it was before, and, as it mayappear upon a superficial glance, not necessary atall. In effect, upon the happening of either ofthese two events, under most laws, and particularlyunder our own, the obligation of making compensationhas been cancelled. At the same timecompensation being the only object in view, thisbeing taken away, punishment has of coursedropped along with it. But in these cases, as Ihope soon to make appear, howsoever it maystand with compensation, the demand for punishmenthas not been lessened by either of the eventsin question.These are, 1st, the death of the injurer; 2dly,the death of the party injured.I. The death of the injurer has been deemed totake away the occasion for indemnification. Thereason that occurs is, that there is nobody to giveit. Had he continued alive, he ought to have436 B.VI.CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.given it, doubtless ; but as he is gone, who oughtthen ? Why one person rather than another ?To answer these questions at large, we mustmake a distinction according to the nature of theoffence. The offence is either attended with atransferable profit, a fruit transmissible to therepresentatives of the offender, or not. In the firstcase, the obligation of making compensation oughtclearly to devolve on the representative on thescore of punishment, if on no other. In the lattercase, there would still be one use in its being madeto devolve on the representative, as far as the possessionshe inherits from the party deceased extend,though not so great a use as in the former case.Where the profit of a transgression is transmissibleto a representative, the obligation ofrestoring the amount of it ought likewise to devolveon him ; if not, the punishment would not, in thecase in question, be equal to the profit : in fact,there would be no punishment at all, no motivefor the party under temptation to abstain from it.It may occur for the first moment (but it will soonappear to be otherwise) that neither will there incontemplation of this case be any temptation : forif the injurer thinks himself about to die, therewill be an end of the profit of the injury. Butthis is not the case : should he be made to lose itever so soon himself, he may transmit it to thosewho are dear to him, so that the pleasure of sympathy,grounded on the contemplation of theirenjoyment, is a clear force that acts without control,and impels him to transgression. Besidesthis, the delays and uncertainty of justice add stillto the force of the temptation. If he can contriveto spin out the suit so long as ha lives, the wholebusiness from beginning to end is clear gain to him.II. Even though the profit of a transgression be13. VI. CH. IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT. 437not of such a nature as to be transmissible to arepresentative, there seems still to be a reasonwhy the obligation of making amends ought todevolve on the representatives, as far as they haveassets.* Such an arrangement would be eligible,as well on account of punishment as of compensation.On account of compensation, for the followingreasons : the mischief of the transgression is aburthen that must be borne by somebody : therepresentative and the party injured are equallyinnocent in this respect, they stand upon a par ;but the representative would suffer less under thesame burthen than the party injured, as we shallpresently perceive. From the moment when theinjury was conceived, the party injured, in virtueof the known disposition of the law in his favour,entertained expectations of receiving amends. Ifthese expectations are disappointed by a suddenand unforeseen event, like that of the delinquent sdeath, a shock is felt by the party injured, suchas he would feel at the sudden loss of anything ofwhich he was in possession. The eventual representativeentertained no such determinate expectations.What expectation he could entertain inthe life-time of his predecessor, respected only theclear surplus of his fortune ; what should remainof it after the deduction of all charges that mightbe brought upon it by his misfortunes, his follies,or his crimes.On account of punishment, for the followingreason : the punishment of the delinquent in hisown person, is a punishment which fails upon hisdeath. The burthen thrown upon those who areAssets : Effects descending to them from the ancestor, andliable to alienation.438 B.VI. CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.dear to him, extends his punishment, as it were,beyond the grave. Their suffering, it is true, will,for the reasons above given, not be very considerable; but this is what the bulk of mankind are notapt to consider. It will be apt therefore, in general,to appear to him in the light of punishment,and will contribute to impose a restraint on himin a case in which, otherwise, there would be none.Nor will this advantage, in point of punishment,be charged with that expense, which renders punishmentsin aliena personam generally ineligible : forwhen the burthen is made to rest on the representativewho has assets, there is less suffering, as wehave shown, upon the whole, than if it were torest upon any other person.The law of England on this head is full ofabsurdity and caprice. The following are theinstances in which (the heir is permitted to enrichhimself by the wrongdoing of his ancestor) a manis permitted to enrich his heir with the profit ofhis crimes.* By the wrongful taking and withholdingof any kind of moveables, while, if it hadbeen by only withholding money due, the heir musthave refunded. By the waste committed onimmoveables, in which he has only a temporaryinterest. f By selling a prisoner for debt hisliberty. By embezzling property entrusted toIn all these points, I depend upon the authority of Comyn sDigest, I 262, 263.f A person whom I know, having the immediate reversion ofan estate, part in houses, part in land, rented the land of a personwho had the life-interest in both. The life-owner lettingthe houses go to ruin, the reversionary, to indemnify himself,stopt the rent of the land. The life-owner died without repairingthe houses, as he was bound : the consequence was, thatthe reversioner, (as he was advised, to his great surprise) thoughobliged to pay his rent, lost his remedy for the waste.B.VI.CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT. 439him by will : though, if he had not broken anysuch confidence, but had intruded himself into themanagement of the dead man s property withoutwarrant, the heir must have refunded ; in short,by any kind of injurious proceeding, where thecompensation, instead of being left to the discretionof a Jury, is thought fit to be increased andliquidated by a positive regulation.The death of the party injured is another eventupon which the obligation of making amends isvery commonly made to cease ; but with full aslittle reason, it should seem, as in the former case.The death of the party in question is a contingencywhich does not at all lessen the demand there isfor punishment. For compensation, indeed, thedemand is not altogether so strong in this case, asin the former : the person who was the immediateobject of the injury, entertained a prospect ofreaping, in present, the whole profit of a compensationhe expected to be adjudged to him; hisrepresentative did not, during the life-time of theprincipal, entertain so fixed a prospect : he, however,entertained a full prospect of some compensationto be made to his principal ; and he entertaineda prospect of a part, at least, of thatcompensation devolving upon himself, subject tothe contingencies to which his general expectationsfrom the principal were exposed. This expectationis more than any one else was in situationto entertain, so that there is a better reason whyhe should reap the profit of the punishment, thanwhy any one else should.The law of England has been more liberal inthe remedies it has given to the heir of the partyinjured, than in those which it has given againstthe heir of a wrong-doer. It gives it to the heir inall cases, as it should seem, of injuries done to the440 B.VI. CH.IV. DEFEAZANCE OF PUNISHMENT.property of the ancestor. It denies it however inthe case of injuries to the person,* be they everso atrocious ; and probably, in the case of injuriesto the reputation. This omission leaves anopen door to the most crying evils. Age and infirmity,which ought, if any difference bemade, to receive a more signal protection from thelaw, than the opposite conditions of life, areexposed more particularly to oppression. Thenearer a man is to his grave, the greater is theprobability that he may be injured with impunity,since, if the prosecution can be staved off duringhis life, the remedy is gone.f The remedy, by acriminal prosecution, is but an inadequate succedaneum.It extends not to injuries done to theperson through negligence, nor to all injuries tothe reputation : it. is defeasible by the arbitrarypleasure and irresponsible act of a servant ofthe Crown : it operates only in the way of punishment,affording no compensation to the heir.After so many instances where no satisfactionis exigible from the heir for transgressions, bywhich he profits, no one will wonder to find himstanding exempt from that obligation in the case1 Comyns s Dig. 261-t A man may be kept in gaol, and his fortune ruined by it;and if he die under the imprisonment, his family are withoutremedy. In some cases, the wrong-doer may not even bepunishable tty a criminal prosecution ; or he may be maltreatedin such a manner, as to contract a lingering distemper, such asdoes not follow from the injurious treatment with sufficientspeed and certainty to bring it within the crime of murder. Ifthe prosecution can but be staved oft till he dies, his family arewithout remedy. Many years ago, a butcher was committed toNewgate, at a time when the gaol distemper was raging in thatprison, upon a false and malicious charge of theft. He diedthere, leaving a large distressed family, who were altogetherwithout remedy for this atrocious injury.B.VI.CH.IV. DEFEAZAXCE OF PUNISHMENT. 441of such injuries as, being inflicted commonly, notfrom rapacious, but merely vindictive motives, arenot commonly attended with any pecuniary profit.Such are those done to the person, or to the reputation,or in the way of mere destruction to theproperty. So accordingly stands the law.*Though there are none of them by which theinjurer may not, in a multitude of cases, drawindirectly a pecuniary profit : for instance, in thecase of a rivalry in manufactures, where one mandestroys the manufactory of his more successfulrival.y I rest still on the authority of Comyns, except in the caseof injuries to reputation, in which I conclude from analogy,Comyns being silent.THE END.LONDON:PRINTED BY C. AND W. REYNELL, 45, BROAD STREET, GOt Dew SQUARE.ERRATA.p. 90, line 5, for mark read mask96, 23, Hanare Hanau98, 11, on in29, mutilation mutilations137, 17, falls fell142, 38, arbem uibem145, 23, tho the166, 6, fixed forced173, 20, head hand188, 20, cause excuse192, 29, as is248, 15, on arguments an argument252, 28, corporal corporeal272, 34, door slave307, 10, these this358, 22, is would be110, 18, insert a169, 3, the214, 28, it348, 17, andThe Sections in Book IV. are incorrectly numbered : the reader is requestedto make the numbers correspond with the Table of Contents.