VOL. II.PRACTICE OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCE.Doxology;OR,THE SCIENCE OF MORALITY:IN WHICH THE Harmony AND CO-INCIDENCE OFDUTY AND Self-interest,VIRTUE AND FELICITY,PRUDENCE AND BENEVOLENCE,ARE EXPLAINED, EXEMPLIFIED, AND APPLIED TO THE BUSINESS OF LIFE.From the MSS. of JEREMY BENTHAM.ARRANGED AND EDITED BYJOHN Bowing.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. II.LONDON:Hangman, Trees, ORME, BROWNE, GREEN, AND Hangman.EDINBURGH:WILLIAM TAIT.1834.V. 2aCONTENTS.— PART II,PRACTICE OF VIRTUE.PAGEPreface.vii to XIntroduction.1 —26CHAPTER I.General Statement27 80CHAPTER II.Self-regarding Prudence81 — 131CHAPTER III.Extra-regarding Prudence132 — 188CHAPTER IV.Negative Efficient Benevolence189 — 258CHAPTER V.Positive Efficient Benevolence259 — 304CHAPTER VI.Conclusion.305 — 319PREFACE.It is not presumed that this Volume containsrules for every probable or possible contingencyin which the inquirer may seek for the applicationof the Deontological code. But the principlesbeing laid down, and so many incidentsoffered for their explanation and illustration, thereader may be safely left for himself to gathertogether such circumstances as his observationmay furnish, in order to submit them to thosetests with which he is here supplied. In doingthis, he will forward the views of that wise andbenevolent Philosopher to whom these pagesowe their birth. * I hope,' he says in one of hismemoranda, * that the care of others, calling inthe experience of their friends and acquaintance,will record all those cases which demandVOL. II. bVJU PREFACE.the application of the sound principles of morality; that they will solve them by right rules,and give the reasons for the solution.' Observation,he was accustomed to say, would erelong,condense the marrow of morality into afew simple rules, that would become the VadeMecum of every body, and be ready on everyoccasion to apply to every demand. They willbe pasted, he remarked, on the back of analmanac, which now loses part of its valueevery day, and soon is rendered worthless bythe lapse of time ; but the moral side, whilerecording principles that are immutable, willremain as fresh, as true, as useful as ever.And, in elucidation of our Author's purpose,I can find nothing more characteristic, nothingmore emphatic, than his own words : —I have taken the principle of utility for myguide. I will follow wheresoever it leads me.No prejudices shall force me to quit the road.No interest shall seduce me. No superstitionsshall appal me. Addressing myself to a freeand enlightened nation, what have I to fear ?PREFACE. IXI will make the augmentation of the general felicity,which is the object, which is the motive*of my inquiry, so plainly my purpose, thatthose who would persuade men to the contrary,shall not be able. How shall this be ? Byopening my breast, by casting my offerings atthe feet of the public without reserve. I writenot to an Athenian mob, nor to a fanatic rabble.I write to many who, were my merit ever somany times greater than I can hope, would beworthy to be my judges !'There are, properly speaking, but two partiesin morals or politics, and in religion. The one isfor the unlimited exercise of reason ; the otheris against it. I profess myself of the former : Ihold myself to be more in communion with —I feel myself more cordially disposed towards —those who agree with me in that one point, thanwith those who, disagreeing with me in that,agree with me in every other. These, with respectto each other, are the two grand heresies :the others are but schisms.The materials out of which this volume hasX PREFACE.been put together, are, for the most part, disjointedfragments, written on small scraps ofpaper, on the spur of the moment, at timesremote from one another, and delivered into myhands without order or arrangement of anysort. J. Bo.INTRODUCTION.The purpose of this volume is, to bring theDeontological system of morality into practicaluse ; to give to opinion the power of operation.Having laid down a rule of conduct, it isintended to show its applicability to the dailyconcerns of life, and its aptitude for the creationof human happiness and the diminutionof human misery.The theory of the social science has beenlargely developed in the volume dedicated tothe topic. With a view to the better understandingand greater usefulness of the Genealogicallaw, it appears desirable to revert,even though briefly, to the principles which itwas our object to establish, in order that theymay be at hand for use, as the various casesfor abstention and action present themselves.The value of the philosophical instrument weillVOL. II. B2 INTRODUCTION.not, it is believed, be lessened in the estimateeither of wisdom or of virtue, when that instrumentis seen busied in its moral work. Thepresent portion of our labor will be to theintelligent moralist what reports of cases adjudged,or set down for judgment, are to theinquiring jurisconsult; and if it be found thatour legislation leads in all cases to satisfactory-decisions,a tolerable evidence will be given ofthe excellence of the code recommended.Laws — in England the law of parliament andthe common law — take a considerable portionof human actions under their cognizance.Wherever the sufferings inflicted by misconductare so great as to affect the persons orproperty of the community on a large scaleof mischievousness, penal visitation comes withits punishments : where actions are supposed tobe beneficial over so large an extent as todemand the attention of the legislative or administrativeauthorities, public recompense isbrought to reward them. Beyond these limitsvast masses of enjoyment and suffering areproduced by human conduct, and here is theINTRODUCTION. 3province of morality. Its directions and itssanctions become a sort of factitious law. Thosedirections are of course dependent on the sanctionsto which they appeal ; and it is only bybringing the behaviour of men under the operationof those sanctions that the moralist, orthe divine, or the legislator, can have anysuccess or influence.These sanctions deal out their pains andpleasures, their rewards and punishments ; andthey emanate from the following sources : — •1. The pathological, which include the physicaland psychological, or the pleasures andpains of a corporeal character.2. The social or sympathetic, which growimmediately out of a man's domestic and socialrelations.3. The moral or popular, which are theexpression of public opinion.4. The political, which comprise the legaland administrative ; the whole of which belongto jurisprudential rather than moral ethics.6. The religious sanctions, which belong tothe ecclesiastical teacher.4 INTRODUCTION.With the two last of these the Deontologisthas little concern. They are the instrumentsof the legislator and the divine.There are, as has been repeated, two granddivisions in a man's sphere of conduct; one concernshimself, and the other concerns all besides: these involve personal and extra-personalconsiderations. All actions that regard himself,and which are not indifferent, are either prudentor imprudent. All actions that regard others,and which are not indifferent, are either beneficentor maleficent. Hence virtue and vice —all virtues and all vices — belong either to individualor social relations. Virtue, if individual,is prudential ; if social, it is benevolent : andthus all the virtues are modifications eitherof prudence or benevolence. Not that all prudenceis virtue : for it is prudent to exercisethe ordinary functions of nature ; but virtue isfound where the temptation to a present enjoymentis sacrificed to a greater future enjoyment;not that all benevolence is virtue, for benevolencemay encourage both vice and misery;but in order to be efficient, it must operateINTRODUCTION.to the diminution or extinction of both. Thefoundation of all virtue is individual happiness,the pursuit of which is necessary to the veryexistence of the human race, — the pursuit ofwhich is necessary to the existence of virtue,and the judicious pursuit of which is the trueand sole resource for the extension of virtueand consequent felicity.In the search after this felicity, with whomhas man to do ? He has to do with himself inthose proceedings in which others are not concerned; with himself in those proceedings inwhich others are concerned ; and with othersin those proceedings in which either himself orthey are concerned. Within these limits comeall questions of duty, and in consequence allquestions of virtue. And into these divisionsall investigations as to morality must bebrought.The first inquiry, then, should be directedto that conduct which concerns the individualalone, and which has no influence upon thepains or pleasures of others ; that is to say,the purely self-regarding. Where the influence6 INTRODUCTION.of conduct does not reach beyond the individual,— where his thoughts, or tastes, or actionsdo not affect others, — his line of duty is plainlymarked. He must provide for his own personalenjoyment, weighing one pleasure againstanother, taking into account all correspondingpains, and then draw that balance of happinesswhich will best stand the test of thought andof time. As to his bodily acts, he will haveto weigh the consequence of each ; the sufferinggrowing out of pleasure, the pleasure attendantupon privation. As to his mental acts,he will have to take care that present pleasurablethoughts do not bring with them futurepreponderant sufferings : in retrospectivethoughts, it will become him to dwell onlyon such as leave a profit to happiness; andin his thoughts for futurity, whether requiringor not requiring action, it will be his wisdomto avoid anticipations likely to be disappointed,or such as, when the accounts are closed, willgive a loss of pleasure. So, in the expectationshe may form, let him not add to possible futurethe more pernicious influence of positive preyINTRODUCTION. 7sent evil ; let him not create a misery now,which perhaps may never have an existencehereafter.In those relations with others where a man'sown happiness is involved, those relationswhich may be deemed of extra-regarding prudence,Deontology will teach him to apply thesame happiness-producing and misery-avoidingrules of conduct, and to watch the flux andreflux of his deportment towards others on hisown individual well-being. For until a man'sintercourse with other men can be shown tohave some connection with his own felicity,it will be in vain to talk with him as to theconduct he should pursue towards them. Hisbenevolence will be the reaction of benefitsreceived or anticipated. Deontology will instructhim as to the course he should pursuetowards men in general, and show him howhis proceedings should be modified by all thosecircumstances in his social relations, M^hichdemand his special regard. It will trace outfor him those peculiar duties which, as equal,inferior, or superior, are demanded from him.8 INTRODUCTION.with a reference to his own individual interests.It will guide him in his connection with thosewho are habitually or frequently in contactwith him, as well as with those whom accidentmay throw in his way — friends, fellow-countrymen,strangers — towards each will itassist him to measure out that portion of prudentialsympathy which will, on the whole,lead to the greatest ultimate sum of good."Where the powers of benevolence come intooperation. Deontology will be near with herbeneficent instructions. In one hand she holdsa bridle, to check the tendency to inflict pain ;in the other a spur, to impel the dispositionto communicate pleasure. She puts her vetoupon the will that would hurt ; she offers herrecompense to that which would serve. Uponthe lips whose discourse would annoy, withoutsome preponderant good to the hearer or tosociety, she puts the finger of silence : to thelanguage that would communicate enjoyment,without any preponderant evil either to thespeaker or the listener, she gives expression.The written effusions which vex and tormentINTRODUCTION.and irritate, but bring with them no decidedresult of benefit, she claims to censure andto suppress. Where valuable truth and knowledgeare communicated, where misconduct isexposed, whose exposure is predominantly useful,where mischief is to be prevented, wheregood is to be effected, — in all cases whereina word, there results to the world a greaterportion of good than of evil, she interferes withher imprimatur.And the same rules she applies to actions.She arrests the hand that would inflict pain,unless for the prevention of a greater pain.She counsels the transfer of every species ofhappiness to others, except where that transferleads to a sacrifice of happiness greater thanthe happiness conferred. In her eyes happinessis a treasure of such value, and interest, andimportance, that she would not willingly losethe smallest portion of it. She watches it inall its wanderings, and would fain bring it backto every bosom from whence it has escaped.If Deontology issue her cautions, it is solelyin the spirit of maternal kindness. If she ever10 INTRODUCTION.frown, in order to deter from misconduct, it is(if she succeed in checking the error) onlythat she may recompense its correction withsmiles.The elements of pain and pleasure give tothe Deontolosfist instruments sufficient for hiswork. * Give me matter and motion,' saidDescartes, * and I will make a physical world.'Give me,' may the Utilitarian teacher exclaim,— * give me the human sensibilities —joyand grief, pain and pleasure — and I will createa moral world. I will produce not only justice,but generosity, patriotism, philanthropy,and the long and illustrious train of sublimeand amiable virtues, purified and exalted.'But, it may be said, * Your principle of utilityis useless; it will not excite to virtuous action,it will not restrain from vicious.' If it willnot, there is no help for it ; no other principlewill stand in its stead, no other principle hasso many elements for encouragement to goodand discouragement to evil. Will clamoringabout * ought,' and ' ought not,^ that perpetualpetitio principii — will pronouncing theINTRODUCTION. 11words, bourn, hofiestuf?i, utile, decorum, domore ? What motives can be furnished by anyother system — what motives which are notborrowed from this ? Men may wear out theair with sonorous and unmeaning words ; thosewords will not act upon the mind ; nothing willact upon it but the apprehensions of pleasureand pain.If, indeed, there could be conceived such athing as virtue which would contribute nothingto the happiness of mankind, or vice whichshould contribute nothing to its misery, whatpossible motive could there be for embracingthe one and avoiding the other? From manthere could be none, as, by the supposition,he is uninterested in the matter : from Godthere can be none : a being all-sufficient andall-benevolent, who himself, placed beyond thereach of the effects of human actions, mustestimate them only by their result, and whosebenevolence can have no conceivable objectbut that very happiness for which sound moralitystrives.12 INTRODUCTION.Stand up tremblingly, then, and avow thatwhat is called the duty to oneself is but prudence; and what is called duty to others iseffective benevolence ; and that all other dutiesand virtues are resolvable into these. For thatGod willet the happiness of his creatures isindisputable, and has made it impossible thatthey should not endeavour to obtain it. Tothis end he has given them every faculty theypossess, and to no other end.It is absurd in reasoning, and dangerous inmorals, to represent the Divine Being as havingpurposes to accomplish which are opposed toall the tendencies of our nature, he himselfhaving created those tendencies.To suppose that a man can act without amotive, much less against a motive operatingsingly, is to suppose an effect without andagainst a cause.To suppose the Deity to require it, is tosuppose a contradiction in terms, — that hecommands us to do what he has rendered itimpossible for us to do — that his will is opposedINTRODUCTION. 13to his will — his purpose to his purpose — in aword, that in the same breath he forbids andcommands the same action. The impulses ofthe principles of our nature are his undoubtedvoice — a voice heard in all bosoms, and to whichall bosoms respond.Be it owned, however, that in too many casesthe discussion of the grounds of morality iscarried on in a way little likely to advance itscause. * Your motives are bad,' says the unbelieverto the orthodox ; * you are interested indeceit — you merely support the craft by whichyou get your bread.' * And you,' retorts theorthodox, ' are influenced only by the love ofparadox — the pride of singularity ; if not bywhat is worse, — a determination to cut upreligion by the roots — to do it all the mischiefyou can. Yours is a universal malice ; anodium generis humani.' In such recriminations,in such estimate of motives, the unbeliever isseldom right, the orthodox never.When moral teachers wander beyond thelimits of experience, when, guided by otherconsiderations than those of happiness and14 INTRODUCTION.misery, they adventure upon a trackless wasteleading no man can say whither.How can we reason but from what we know VAnd the intrusion of the Divine Being, not asheis known to us, but as he is feigned orfancied by those who would make his attributessubservient to their theories, only makes theirdogmatism more offensive. The happiness ofmankind is too precious a possession to besacrificed to any system. The felicity of afuture state as a recompense for virtue, cannever have been intended by a beneficent beingto be employed for introducing false standardsof virtue. In truth, if moralists are to disposeof a state of things unknown to them, theymay as well advocate one system as another ;if they are to have a licence for coining suppositions,what is to prevent any extravagance?If the benevolence of God is to be cramped, orbent, or tortured, to become the servant of theirmalevolence, what hastings, whippings, macerations,what deplorable caprices of a westernmonk or an eastern fakir, may not be proved tobe a merit or a duty !Introduction. 16Sad must be the fate of religion, if it beplaced in hostile array against morality ; for noreligion can be reconciled to reason but onevidence that it is calculated to strengthen,and not to dissolve the moral ties. And whatcan be so extensive an appeal as that which ismade to every man's bosom ? How could Goddeclare himself in a manner less liable to bemisunderstood, than by those infallible, inextinguishable,universal sentiments, that he hasimplanted within us ? What words could speakso strongly as the omnipresent fact, that to willour own present happiness is the essence of ournature: and who made our nature what it is?our fresejil happiness, be it repeated ; becauseit is only by being linked with the presentthat ideas of futurity can reach us at all.And on this basis, that man endeavors toprocure his own felicity, shall we build ouredifice without fear of its falling.For of a truth, that fact is subject to no dispute,it is evident beyond the reach of doubt,it is paramount to all principles of reasoning,and forcible beyond all possibility of resistsIntroduction.once. And let not the mind be led astray byany distinctions drawn between pleasures andhappiness. Happiness is the aggregate of whichpleasures are the component parts.Happiness without pleasures is a chimera anda contradiction ; it is a million without any units,a square yard in which there shall be no inches,a bag of guineas without an atom of gold.Be it understood that, in endeavouring toapply the Deontological code of morals to thebusiness of life, in seeking to displace all thosetheories which have not happiness for their endand reason for their instrument, the only wishto be preceptive is in so far as utility can becalled into operation. To drive out the of another, by an ipse-dixitism of hisown, is no part of the business of theDeontologist,and with no ipse-dixitism has he so irreconcilablea quarrel as with that of asceticism. Otherprinciples may or may not be wrong : sentimentalism,which sometimes leads astray, may alsosometimes conduct into the paths of benevolence,without wandering so far from those ofprudence as to make that benevolence penis17pious, but the ascetic principle must be wrong;wrong whenever it is in action. It exclaims,as Satan did — * Evil be thou my good ;' and turnsupside down all virtues in endeavouring to shiftthem from their true foundation — happiness.In fact, asceticism is the natural growth of abarbarous and superstitious age ; it is therepresentation of a principle which woulddespotism over other men, by making dutysomething different from that to which interestpoints. The standard of happiness being inevery man's bosom, his pains and pleasuresbeing his own, and their value best estimatedby himself, it is clear that, in order to obtainauthority over him ; in order to legislate not forhis interest, but for the interests of the legislator,some other influence than that of his own emotionsmust be appealed to. Hence the pretensionto set up authority against reason andexperience ; hence the disposition and determinationto exalt the past at the expense of thepresent ; to laud up a Golden Age when knowledgewas in its cradle, and to put forward theGolden mean' as the true test of virtue. ' MediaII. c18 INTRODUCTION.ocrity,' said the ancients ; * Between extremesre-echo the moderns : — useless and delusivephrases, well fitted to keep the mind and theaffections from their safest and most judiciousdirection. Then again, refining upon refinement,dividing the indivisible, moralists haveintroduced a class of virtues, which are notquite virtues, called half virtues or semi-virtues.Examine them closely, exhaust them of theprudence and the benevolent beneficence thatare in them, the rest is worthlessness, and theparade of it foppery and folly.The omnipresence of the self-regarding affection,and its intimate union with the social, arethe bases of all genuine morality. That in thehuman character certain dissocial affectionsshould exist, so far from being injurious to theinterests of virtue, is one of the greatest securitiesfor virtue. The social affections are theinstruments by which pleasure is communicatedto others ; the dissocial are those by which thesocial are kept in check when a greater sacrificeis proposed to be made to beneficence thanprudence warrants ; in other words, when lessINTRODUCTION". 19happiness is to be gained by others than is lostby ourselves. But with the term dissocial let noidea of antipathy be connected. Hatred, anger,indignation, or any such passions will ratherbewilder and blind than serve the moralist inhis investigations into the causes of vices, or theirappropriate cures. The law-giver should be nomore impassioned than the geometrician. Theyare both solving problems by sober calculation.The Deontologist is but an arithmetician whosecyphers are pains and pleasures ; his scienceis that of addition, subtraction, multiplication,and division. And certainly the result ofhis labors will be far more facilitated by thequiet influence of composed thought, than byimaginative wanderings, or passionate sallies.It may perhaps assist the understanding andrecollection of the subject, if the Deontologicalprinciples be arranged under a few heads,taking the shape of axioms.Happiness may be defined to be the possessionof pleasures with the absence of pains, orthe possession of a preponderant amount ofpleasure over pain.20 INTRODUCTION.Good and evil, when resolved into theirelements, are composed of pleasures and pains.These pleasures and pains may be eithernegative or positive, growing out of the absenceof the one, or the presence of the other.The possession of a pleasure, or the absenceof a menaced pain, is good.The presence of a pain, or the absence of apromised pleasure, is evil.A positive good is the possession, or the expectationof a pleasure. A negative good is theexemption, or the cause of exemption from a pain.Sensations are of two sorts; those accompaniedby pleasure or by pain, and those whichare unaccompanied by either. It is only onthose which produce pain and pleasure, thatmotives or sanctions can be brought to operate.The value of a pleasure, separately considered,depends on its intensity, duration, and extent.On those qualities its importance to societyturns; or in other words, its power of addingto the sum of individual and of general happiness.The magnitude of a pleasure depends on itsintensity and duration.INTRODUCTION. 21The extent of a pleasure depends on thenumber of persons who enjoy it.And the same laws apply to pains.The magnitude of a pleasure or a pain, in anyoneof its qualities, may compensate or overbalanceits deficiency in any other.A pleasure or a pain may be fruitful or barren.A pleasure may be fruitful in pleasures or inpains, — fruitful in pleasures like their parent, orinpleasures of another character ; it may befruitful also in pains, and in the same manner apain may be fruitful in pains and pleasures.Where pains and pleasures are barren, thecalculation of interest is easy. The task of themoralist becomes more complicated, whenpains and pleasures produce fruits unlike themselves.A pleasure or a pain may be derived eitherfrom another pleasure or pain, or by the actwhich produces that other pleasure or pain. Ifthe act be the source of the derived pleasure orpain, it is the act that is fruitful ; if it be thepleasure that produces the secondary pleasure orpain, the fecundity is in the pleasure.22 INTRODUCTION.The pleasure that is produced by the contemplationof the pleasure enjoyed by another, is apleasure of sympathy*The pain that is suffered by the contemplationof the pain experienced by another, is a pain ofsympathy.The pleasure enjoyed by the contemplation ofthe pain suffered by another, is a pleasure ofantipathy.The pain suffered by the contemplation of thepleasure enjoyed by another, is a pain ofantipathy.The benevolence of a man must be measuredby the number of beings out of whose painsand pleasures he draws his own pleasures andpains of sympathy.The virtues of a man must be measured by thenumber of persons whose happiness he seeks topromote; that is, the greatest portion andhappiness to each, taking into amount thesacrifice which he knowingly makes of his ownhappiness.When the amounts of pleasures and pains arebalanced, the balance of pleasure is the evidenceINTRODUCTION. 23of virtue, the balance of pain the evidence ofvice.Beyond, and exclusive of these balances ofpains and pleasures, the words virtue and viceare emptiness and folly.Not that the quantity of happiness determinesthe quantity of virtue, there being much happinesswith which virtue has nothing whatever todo.Virtue implies the presence of a difficulty,the presence of fruitfulness too as to pains andpleasures. The greater the sacrifice, the greaterthe difficulty.The sources of happiness by which theindividual is preserved, which sources, too,provide the greatest portion of happiness, areindependent of the exercise of virtue. Theymay be called acts of well-doing, of beneficence,according to the strictest meaning of the words,but they are not acts of benevolence.In fine, it would be a self-contradiction tosay, that an act which produced a balance ofsuffering could be a virtue, as it would be todeclare, that an act producing a balance ofenjoyment could be a vice.24 INTRODUCTION.For the want of a standard to apply to conduct,the strangest errors and mistakes havebeen made : paradoxes one after another haveintruded themselves into common use, and haveserved to * darken counsels by words withoutknowledge.' The vessel of public felicity hasbeen beaten about on the ocean of vague uncertainty,without a helmsman or a rudder.Books have been printed, whose authors, hadthey but attached distinct ideas to the phraseologythey employed, would have rendered valuableservice to the cause of truth and virtue.When Mandeville put forward his theory, thatprivate vices are public benefits, he did not perceivethat the erroneous application of the termsvice and virtue was the source of the confusionwhich enabled him to advocate a seeming contradiction.For if what is called virtue producea diminution of happiness, and if vice, beingthe opposite of virtue, have a contrary effect, itis clear that virtue is the evil and vice the good,and that the principle which he advocates ismerely the greatest-happiness principle under acloud. If a private vice be on the whole in-INTllOUUCTIOX. 25instrumental in producing a result of felicity tothe community, all that can be said is, that thevice has been christened by an erroneous andmistaken name. True it is that utility willtransfer many actions to the score of vice, wliicliunenlightened opinion has honored as virtues,and will give to qualities, which have been frequentlycalled vices, some name of indifference,or even of approval. But the utilitarian scalevibrates only between good and evil — pain andpleasure — other elements count for nothing inthe balance, let them be called by names aspompous as they may.That a system of morality adapted to thegrowing intelligence of man should not havecome down to us from remote time, is not to bewondered at. Even in the knowledge of materialobjects, antiquity had made small progress.In the knowledge of the functions of the humanmind, in intellectual physiology, there was noprogress at all. Ancient learning is the warehouseof wit, the treasury of superficial resemblances.Modern learning — science foundedon experiment and observation — is the mine26 INTRODUCTION.whence materials for future progress are to beextracted. There only can those combinationsbe sought which constitute improvements ; thereonly will those discoveries be made, out of whichtheory rears its magnificent deductions. Oneafter another, the different branches of practicalphilosophy are drawn into the regions of scientificarrangement. It is not Homer, nor Horace,nor Virgil, nor Tibullus — it is not all the furnitureof a whole Christ Church library that willhelp ethical science either to a nomenclature, orananalysis. Neither virtues nor vices can findtheir appropriate places, or exercise their trueinfluences, until the test is found which is todivide them into the elements of pain and pleasure.The science of morals is but the gatheringup of the sensations of suffering and enjoyment,and arranging them under their differentheads of vice and virtue. Every moral law isan integrant and harmonious part of the greatmoral code, descending from and traceable tothe two master principles of all virtuous conduct— Prudence and Benevolence.GENERAL STATEMENT. llCHAPTER I.GENERAL STATEMENT.The object of Deontology is to instruct theinquirer in the management of the affections,so that they may be made most subservient tohis own well-being. He has pains and pleasuresof lies own with which the world has noconcern ; he has pains and pleasures which dependon his intercourse with mankind ; and it isin both these relations to give pleasure such adirection as that it may be the progenitor ofother pleasures, and to give pain such a directionthat, if possible, it may be made a sourceof pleasure, or at all events, that it may bemade as light and as bearable and as transitoryas possible, — that the Deontological moralistpours out his instructions.Abstractedly they may be reduced to a singleinquiry. At what cost of future pain or sacrificeof future pleasure is a present pleasure purchased? What repayment of future pleasuremay be anticipated for a present pain ? Out ofthis examination morality must be developed.Temptation is the present pleasure— punishesDoxology.ment is the future pain ; sacrifice is the presentpain— enjoyment is the future recompense. Thequestions of virtue and vice are, for the mostpart, reduced to the weighing that which is,against that which will be. The virtuous manhas a store of happiness in coming time, thevicious man has prodigally spent his revenuesof happiness. To-day the vicious man seemsto have a balance of pleasure in his favor ; tomorrowthe balance will be adjusted, and theday after it will be ascertained to be wholly infavor of the virtuous man. Vice is a spendthrift,flinging away what is far better than wealth, orhealth, or youth, or beauty — namely, happiness:because all of these without happiness are oflittle value. Virtue is a prudent economist thatgets back all her outlay with interest.The duty of the Deontological teacher cannotbe better discharged than when he, watchingthe occasion of calm and quiet thought, treasuresup in his own mind, or conveys to themind of others, those instructions which may beturned to account in the tranquil or passionatehour. The time for planting truth is whenthere is freedom from excitation. Truths soplanted may in the moment of excitation putforth their salutary power. Occasions therewill be when the affections seem peculiarly attunedto the influences of virtuous suggestion.GENERAL STATEMENT. 29There are hours of sunshine, hours of happiness,which dispose us to the reception of prudentand generous impulses. It is then that theword appropriately spoken — the Deontologicallaw felicitously put forward — may make its indelibleimpression, and become a practical andefficient monitor, when impulses, either imprudentor maleficent, would lead astray. For, tobring passion into the regions of virtue, so thatvirtue may assume the sovereignty, or with similarsuccess to conduct virtue into the regions ofpassion, is the highest triumph of morality ; atriumph which can only be secured by the provisionalforesight that lays in its stores of usefulprecepts with anticipating care. It is notamidst the hurly-burly of exciting temptationsthat we can safely look around us for motivesto check their promptings. Let the rules begathered up, let the motives be fixed within us,while the temptations are absent, and it is thus,and thus only, that when the temptations arepresent, we shall find the arguments at handfor resisting them.In the still hour when passion is at rest,Gather up stores of wisdom in thy breast;So when the storms awake, and in the dinImprudence or malevolence to sinWould tempt thy frailty — thoughts of wisdom stor'dShall check the passion, ere its tides are pour'd.A pebble turns the streamlet, whose proud swayUnbridled sweeps the granite rocks away.30 Doxology.The principle of utility, or rather the greatest-happinessprinciple, has this advantage overevery other — that, whenever the divergences ofopinion, which recognize another standard, domeet, it is in the field of utility. If there beany point of union or harmony between them,it is exhibited there. Even where men agreeto recognise a certain authority, a text, a law,for example, it will be found far more difficultto induce them to coincide as to its interpretation,than as to the decision of a question whichis submitted to the Deontological law. Let thearticles of a code (dependent on authority, andremoved from the application of the utilitariantests), or let the various texts of a volume onmorality be appealed to on any occasion as thestandard of rectitude, and it will be seen thatthose who recognise the authority of the codeor the text-book, will be far less unanimous intheir suffrages, than would be the same numberof persons who, making utility their standard,should be referred to for their decision on thecase in point.Under the influence of the blind, instinctiveimpulse, people have, in truth, from the beginningof the world, been in the habit of consultingthe greatest-happiness principle, andwhenever they have acted reasonably, that principlehas been their guide. They have beenled by it, without being aware of its existence :GENERAL STATEMENT. 31as, in a clouded day, men walk in the lightwithout tracing the brightness to the uprising ofthe sun. Helvetia is the first moralist whoturned with steady eye to the utilitarian principle.He saw its radiance and its power, andreasoned under its influence.The general principle has been again andagain referred to. Morality is the art of maximizinghappiness : it gives the code of laws bywhich that conduct is suggested whose resultwill, the whole of human existence being takeninto account, leave the greatest quantity offelicity.Now the greatest quantity of felicity mustdepend on the means, or sources, or instrumentsby which the causes of happiness are produced,and the causes of unhappiness avoided.In so far as these causes are accessible toman,and are under the influence of his will,and become the rule of his conduct for the productionof happiness, that conduct may be designatedby one word, virtue; — in so far asundersimilar circumstances, they lead toconduct generating a result of unhappiness, thatconduct is designated by a word of an oppositecharacter, namely, vice.Hence nothing that is called virtue is entitledto the name, unless, and in so far as, it is contributoryto happiness ; the happiness of the32 Doxology.agent himself, or of some other being. Andnothing that is called vice is properly designated,unless, and in so far as, it is productiveof unhappiness.The sources of happiness are physical or intellectual: it is with the physical sources thatthe moralist has principally to do. The cultivationof the mind — the creation of pleasurefrom the purely mental faculties — belongs toanother department of instruction.Now, every person being for his own happinessprincipally dependent on his own conduct,his conduct towards himself and his conducttowards others, in all those relations in whichhe exercises any influence upon their happiness,it remains to give this theory of morals its practicalvalue, by applying it to the circumstancesof life; and thus, to group human actionsinto the two classes so often pointed at — thetwo grand departments of prudence and benevolence.It may at first appear, that the considerationsof benevolence are intitled to take precedenceof those of prudence, inasmuch as the field ofaction for prudence is narrow and individual, —that for benevolence is social, vast, universal.But prudence must have the pre-eminence ; forthough it regards but one individual, that individualis the man himself — that individual isGENERAL STATEMENT. 33the man over whose actions an influence can beexercised which cannot be exercised over theactions of any other man or men. Of his ownwill a man has the disposal, but he cannotemploy more than a limited authority over thewill of others. And could he do this, the self-regarding,the prudential affections, are morenecessary to the existence, and thence to thehappiness of man, than the sympathising canbe ; — to every man more necessary, and thereforeto the whole of the human race. The subject,too, is more simple, and easy to be developed —to begin with one being, ere the connection ofthat one being with others is traced. Hence itis natural to trace the influence of his conductupon his own happiness, where the welfare ofno other person is concerned ; to proceed thento consider what are the laws of prudence wherethe welfare of others is involved ; and then toproceed to the wider branch of the subject — tothe consideration of the laws of effective benevolence.A stigma has too frequently been attached tothe self-regarding considerations ; because intheir erroneous calculations they have sometimesbeen allowed to invade and do mischief in theregions of benevolence ; because to them thebeneficent sympathies have been sometimessacrificed ; and an erroneous estimate of whatVOL. II. D34 Doxology.human nature might become, if the social wereallowed preponderance over the selfish principle,has often led men to fancy that there are analogiesteaching and justifying the uncalculatingsacrifice of self. Beasts herd together, it is said,beasts of the same sex, who have no wants tosatisfy by means of intercommunication, nomotive but in the abstract gregarious instinct.Hence it is argued, that man seeks society forits own sake, from an irresistible social tendency,which has nothing to do with the enjoymentshe derives from it. But the assumption maywell be doubted. The search for food, the defenceagainst common enemies are, it is believed,the principal motives (and these undoubtedlyself regarding ones), which determine thecongregation of animals together. Where thesame sort of wants and the same sort of dangersexist, there is the bond the strongest : and asimilarity of wants and dangers often determinesthe association of animals of different species.Those animals which derive no assistance fromtheir fellows, either for the supply of their necessitiesor for their security from molestation ;those, the precariousness and scantiness of whosesubsistence create on the contrary an oppositionof interests, — as, for example, the largerbeasts of prey, such as lions, tigers, &c., — do notassociate even among themselves ; and if theGENERAL STATEMENT. 35case is otherwise in those of inferior strength,as wolves, it may safely be attributed to theirinability singly to master the animals which aretheir most usual prey. They feed upon horsesand oxen, which are stronger than themselves ;or sheep, which are watched and guarded bymen, their proprietors. The fox is a beast ofprey, and not usually a gregarious one, but hisprey is poultry, and animals weaker than himself,— his interests being solitary rather thansocial, his character and condition are solitary.Prudence thus divides itself into two classes ;the prudence which regards ourselves, the insulatedprudence, where no interests but thoseof the agent are at stake, and the prudencewhich has reference to others, where the interestsof others are at stake : for though aman's happiness is naturally and necessarily hisprimary and ultimate object, yet that happinessis so dependent on the conduct of others towardshim, as to make the regulation and directionof the conduct of others towards him anobject of his prudential care.Hence grows the association of prudence withbenevolence, and hence the necessity of ascertainingthe dictates of effective benevolence,even with a view to the interests of prudencealone.L36 Doxology.Effective benevolence, again, both in its negativeshape, where a man refrains from doingthat which may injure others, or in its positiveshape, where a man confers pleasure uponothers, is of two classes ; either practicablewithout self-sacrifice, or requiring self-sacrificefor its exercise.But for the application of these principles topractice, inasmuch as they bear upon all theconcerns of existence, on every event of everydayof every man's life, and as these events areinfinitely varied in their character, it is obviousthat nothing more can be done, than to laydown general rules, and to point out some casesfor their exemplification. Such cases will becomelike lamps illumining a sphere far beyondtheir own little flame. And the whole moraledifice is one of unity, simplicity, and symmetry: each part enabling the inquirer to comprehendthe rest — any fragment of it will give thecharacter, the measure of the whole. Takenout of the circle of dogmatism and vagueness,the moral code is perfectly harmonious, consistingof very few articles ; but these are applicableto every possible case, and resolve everydebateable question.In self-love there is a foundation for universalbenevolence ; there is none for universal malice.General STATEMENT. 37And this is in itself evidence of the unionbetween the interest of the individual and thatof mankind.In the universal desire to obtain the goodopinion of others there is also security for thissame union. No man is deaf to expressions ofapprobation and esteem. They are sources ofsatisfaction to all. For suppose smiles andpraises were accompanied with the rod, and thaton the contrary frowns and reproaches broughtwith them valuable gifts, who would not shun thesmile and desire the frown ? The appetite forcensure would supersede that for praise; frownswould diffuse the alacrity that now accompaniessmiles, and smiles be the harbinger ofgloom. The desire of praise is in fact interwovenamong our earliest sensibilities ; so earlythat no man recollects a period when it did notexist in his mind; nor docs it require the piercingeye and attentive searching of the philosopherto call into view a principle which is sointervened with the very ground-work of ournature. Existing in every man thus early,strengthened by repeated, by habitual exercise,this desire of approbation becomes indissolublyand intimately united with our physical wants:it is so associated that it can hardly be detachedfrom the idea of a personal pleasure. Praise mayindeed appear to be desired for itself, but the$8 Doxology.desire is so connected with the self-regardingprinciple that to separate them is impossible.The process by which benevolence is generatedis a beautiful one, and by it virtue is associatedwith felicity. A child receives praises andmarks of affection when at command it ceasescrying, or takes physic, or lays down a forbiddenobject which it had seized. Its earliestsacrifices are made to the moral, the happiness-generatingprinciple, and it finds its recompense.The love of its parents, its brothers and sisters,its nurse and attendants, grows out of its physicalsensibilities, and these sensibilities areawakened to felicity by the action of that love.Nor is there much value in the objection, thatthis process is too complicated and intricate,too long and difficult for childish intellects. Thegradual production of the results is the realcause of the difficulty of following them bywords; and the absence of appropriate words toexpress the different phenomena, leaves theerroneous impression that the phenomena arethemselves entangled and confused. To denythe connection is to deny the association ofideas in the minds of children ; though thisassociation is exhibited in the very earliestdevelopment of intellect, and it is no more tobe wondered at than that a child should putout its hands rather than its feet to grasp anGENERAL STATEMENT. 39object, and direct organically, as it were, itslittle means to an end.And as the child grows to manhood, andmanhood with its stronger powers and passionsimpels to more ambitious efforts, the thirst forpraise becomes more ardent. It is for this thatmen sacrifice their repose, and rush on to thegoal even of public misery through the ranks ofembattled competitors and in the defiles of toiland danger. It is for this, in happier times, thatthrough the phalanxes and amidst the darts ofignorance and envy, men urge their course tothe goal of public felicity, content though itshould be their fate to sacrifice their tranquillityin the contest.There is in the world so universal and constanta competition for the respect, esteem and loveof others, — the dependence of every man uponother men is so obvious and so intimate, that acertain quantity of benevolence is almost anecessary condition of social existence. Trueit is that those whose station enables themmost easily to command the services of others,value those services least, as those who wantthem most feel the greatest difficulty in obtainingthem ; but there is no man so poor who byhis own good conduct may not increase thedisposition to serve him, and no man somighty as to be able to despise the services of40 Doxology,others without diminishing their amount andlessening their value and efficacy. Absoluteindependence is the prerogative of none ; andwere it possible to conceive of a human beingwholly sufficient to his own enjoyments, — ahuman being deriving neither pleasure norpain from the persons or the events whichsurround him — he would be no object of envy ;compared with him * the hyssop on the wall 'would be privileged, since some consideration,some regard might now and then be flung uponit ; while the man removed from the regions ofsympathy would at the same time be removedfrom those of beneficence.The great security for the active energy ofthe benevolent feeling is found in the mutualdependence of every human being upon otheror others of the human race, and in this dependencemust we look for the check upon themaleficent affections ; since, if neither hatrednor love produced a reaction, if men could visitothers with their ill-will without getting anyill-will in return ; or, on the other hand, if they'poured out their kindly sympathies in merewaste, awakening no responsive kindly sentiment,the link between prudence and beneficencewould be wanting. If one man give painto another either by words or deeds, that otherwill in all ordinary cases seek to inflict pain uponGENERAL STATEMENT. 4 Ilii in return. Hate engenders hate as a sort ofself-defence. It is employed for prompt and oftenfor vindictive punishment, whose awards are toa certain extent in the power of its employer.Cases there are, no doubt, where the dispositionto return evil for evil is controlled by high and ennoblingmoral principle, by the true arithmetic ofvirtue. But those cases are exceptional, and todream of escaping the ill-will of those whom wemake the victims of our ill-will, is to calculateon miracles for the guidance of conduct. And betheexceptions what they may to the rule thatmalevolence in your bosom will, when broughtinto action, be the prolific parent of malevolencetowards yourself in the bosom of others, an exceptioncan scarcely be found to the counterpartof the rule, that love is the source of love.The practical deduction is obvious. Never letpain or uneasiness be inflicted on any one in anyshape, but for the purpose of producing a preponderategood, — good clearly to be made out, andtraceable in its consequences. The good, if goodit be, will be good to some person or other ; to personsone or more; to yourself by whom the painis caused ; to him in whom the pain is caused ;or to third persons ; to third persons, assignable,or to third persons in general. The demand of prudenceand benevolence is peremptory that thereshall be a balance, a predominance, of good.42 Doxology.In order to apply this general rule to everyparticular case, it becomes the Deontologist toconsider, first, the various shapes in which painmay be produced, since pain is multiform ; 2nd,the occasions on which pain may be produced,occasions presenting themselves whenever intercourseexists between ourselves and others ;3rd, the persons on whom it may be produced ;and 4th, the acts by which it may be produced.All these are important elements in the score ofsuffering. When the other side of the accountcomes to be examined, when the good is to beestimated whose existence can alone counterbalanceor justify the evil, the quantity of thatgood must be brought into view ; the situationand susceptibility of the persons who are tobenefit by the resulting good ; and when it is nottraceable to individuals, its existence in thebosoms of unassignable persons must be evidenced.Occasions for the illustration of this importantprinciple will present themselves as weproceed. Here it was intended only to give thegeneral caution, and to establish the universalrule. Deductions will flow into the minds of thethoughtful. They will see that the mere circumstanceof misbehaviour on the part ofanother will not of itself justify the infliction ofpain. If that infliction will prevent the repeti-GENERAL STATEMENT. 43tion of the misbehaviour, then, indeed, the painmay be wisely and morally excited : the useof the pain is obvious ; but pain must not becreated, pleasure must not be interfered with,where no end is answered of which utility canapprove. Hence the reproach, the scorn, thatare flung upon others in consequence of anyirremediable defect, are useless, cruel, immoralinflictions of misery. Imperfections, whethercorporeal or mental, which cannot be controlledor extirpated, must not be visited by punishment.The stupidity, or wrong-headedness,or ill-temper, which are beyond the reach ofdiscipline, which are not curable by attention,are not fit objects for the castigation of pain ;how far less is that castigation warrantablewhen it only exasperates the sufferer, andaggravates the defect?In bringing all conduct into the regions ofpleasures and pains, inquiry will be muchfacilitated by tracing actions up to their sources,and distinguishing the relations which existbetween the impulses which gave those actionsbirth. Emotions, affections, humors and passions,singly and mingled, are each of them the originof action, and each presents its elements ofenjoyment and suffering. An act is said to betheeffect of an emotion when the motive bywhich it is produced is a pleasure or pain of a44 Doxology.transient character. Where a permanent orhabitual state of mind, — as for example, wheresympathy or antipathy towards an individualhas created a continuous disposition to gratifyor annoy, the motive will be the result of anaffection; where the emotion becomes vehement,whether allied with an habitual affection or not,its consequences are called the effect of passion.Humor is somewhat more of a capricious character,and implies a subjection of the emotionsor passion to a predetermination of the understanding.' It was my humor,' — ' I controlled myactions by the volition of the moment,' — * I madethe motive at my own good pleasure.'But among the sources of misjudgment, andamong the causes of despotism, the busy searchafter men's motives is among the most fruitful.Claims to purity, accusations against impurityof motive are dragged about in eternal processions,to excuse, to justify, to laud, to reprove, toreprobate, to condemn. The whole field of actionis covered with pretensions on this score, indefatigablyput forward, constantly appealed to, andseldom grounded on any thing better than theusurpation of the motive-denouncer. Why isa habit so baneful to the general well-being soconstantly persisted in ? In the first place, it isso flattering to the self-regarding affections ; itenables the speaker or the writer to set up hisGENERAL STATEMENT. 45own standard of right and wrong; it saves himfrom the laborious necessity of tracing the consequencesof actions ; it enables him to take theopinions of others into a region — the region ofanother man's mind — where those opinions find nolight to guide, and men are but too willing frommere love of ease, to allow the usurper to set uphis throne of judgment. If a man is to determineas to the value of an action by its consequences, hemust study those consequences; he must presentthem to those whose approval or condemnationof the action he desires to obtain ; he exposeshimself to contradiction if he misrepresents, tocorrection if he voluntarily or involuntarily errs.The blanks he leaves may be filled up, theexaggerations he introduces may be cut down ;he is, in a word, forced to come into courtwith his witnesses, and to establish his caseby the evidence he can adduce. But if, on thecontrary, he can, by his own dictum, proclaimthat for the action there was a bad motive orastood motive in the mind of the actor, thejudgment is an easy process ; its decrees arenot complicated by a variety of entanglements.Good and evil present themselves at once, andthus rashness and self-conceit perform functionswhich belong to reason and philosophy.The imputation of motive is one of the mostdangerous weapons with which to attack an46 Doxology.adversary, and one of the most deceitful groundsfor judgment; since motives can be known tohim alone whose conduct is in question, andcan only be guessed at by other persons. Thisdisposition on the part of the impugner or theapprover of an act, to esteem it praiseworthyor blameworthy, not according to its results,but to the unknowable intentions of the actor,may destroy all the reputation and recompenseof virtuous conduct, by the insinuation that themotives were bad, and all the disreputablenessand punishment of vicious conduct, by thesetting forth the goodness of the motives thatled to it. But, on the other hand, it shouldnot be forgotten that every ill-founded imputationis not mala fide invented by him whofirst casts it. A measure is deemed to bewrong, where it is opposed to the interest ofanother ; and if wrong in the eye of that other,it is but natural that he should attribute it toa wrong motive. Hence, to avoid the attributingmotives to others, and to avoid ready orhasty condemnation of those who do attributemotives to others, are alike the dictates ofmorality.Then, again, the perception of the prodigiousstrength of authority comes in aid of the self-regardingaffections. The same inducementswhich influence the motive-denouncer, have.GENERAL STATEMENT. 47to a greater or less extent, influenced everybodyelse. Authority, with prejudices, — itsfavorite and baleful progeny, — ally themselveswith the egotistical principle. In the estimateof conduct, derivative judgment is wont to takepossession of nearly the whole question, leavingscarcely any portion to the decision of self-formedjudgment. Thus, in the determinationof human action, two elements become frequentlythe principal guides : self-presumptionand blind deference, qualities which seem somewhatincompatible, indeed ; but which unitein mischievous influence ; the deference being,in fact, submission to that species of authoritywhich flatters the self regarding principle.True it is that the ordinary phraseology ofthe world is likely to lead the inquirer astray.The qualities upon which the stamp of publicapprobation has been set are frequently thosewhich deserve no such honorable distinction ;while public reprobation interdicts actions onwhich it would be difficult to affix the scandalor the stain of vice. The judgments of thepublic-opinion tribunal are thus sometimes inopposition with the dictates of utility and theconventions of society ; some of them, the merevestiges of barbarism, make laws which resistall argument, and stand unshaken on the prejudicesleft by feudal times.48 Doxology.The historian of morality will one day appear,to write the tales of the several dynasties thathave ruled over human actions, and most instructivewill the pages be.First epoch, that of Force. No other code,no other standard, no other source of morality.Violence the law, and violent the law-giver.Virtus, or virtue, is there found in its originalsense, a mere conjugate civis. This vis, whenin action, took the name of courage, or virtus ;the quality which is most the object of admirationamong savages ; a quality far more animalthan moral, and deserving of no praise, anyfarther than as the ally of prudence or beneficence.Then conies the second reign, the reign ofFraud. Force belongs to a time of ignorance :fraud to semi-civilization. Its influence, likethat of force, is usurpation ; but it comes withfallacies, instead of open violence, to help it.It fosters credulity, it leagues itself with superstition.It takes hold of the terrors of themind, and makes them subservient to its real,but often concealed despotism. The usurpingpriest, the aristocratical lawyer, flourish underits dynasty.Last of all comes the reign of Justice, thereign of utility. Under its auspices the workof the legislator will be lightened, and theGENERAL STATEMENT. 49moralist will assume many of the legislator'sfunctions. The great court of public opinionwill take charge of the decision of many questionswhich are now in the keeping of penaljudicature. The lines which separate rightand wrong will be more clearly and morebroadly defined as the predominance of thegreat social interest breaks down those barrierswhich have been raised for sinister purposes,or left by the ignorant traditions of ancientdays. Delightful it is to contemplate the progressof virtue and of happiness ; to see themsubduing, by mighty efforts or by quiet influences,more and more of the domain wherefalse maxims of private and public moralityhad so long held undisputed sway. Yet moredelightful is it to anticipate a period when themoral code, grounded on the greatest-happinessprinciple, will be the code of nations, teachingthem, in their vast political concerns, to createno useless misery, and to make their patriotismsubservient to the demands of benevolence. Asknowledge has, in its progress, gathered familiesand tribes, once hostile, into the regionsof common interest and mutual affection, so itwill, in its further triumphs, fling the girdleof beneficence around now-separated nations.As the crimes of violence have diminished underthe rebuke of more enlightened opinion — as thatVOL. II. E50 DEONTOLOC4Y.opinion, acquiring strength, will not fail toact upon the other departments of improbity,who can doubt that war — the maximizer ofevery crime, the harvester of every violence,the picture of every horror, the representativeof every folly, will at last be overwhelmed andannihilated by the mighty and resistless influenceof truth, virtue, and felicity?It is only to a certain extent the lot of manto mark out for himself his mortal destiny.He does not choose his position in the world.The accident of birth decides for him a thousandcontingencies. It puts into his hand certainsources of pleasure, and excludes him fromothers. But so regulated are the instrumentsof enjoyment and suffering, so beautifullybalanced, so equitably compensated, that theultimate portion of well-being dealt out to meninthe different orders of society is, perhaps,not very unequal in amount. For whateverestimate may be given to the pleasures of fruition,in any of their attributes, the pains ofprivation must be increased in proportion.Wants, which soon become pains, grow upmore easily in the bosoms pampered withsuperfluity than among those whose enjoymentdemands little for its satisfaction : and often,close upon the pleasures of rank and wealth,tread lassitude and weariness. The pleasuresGENERAL STATEMENT. 51of sense may grow dull from over-use, or feeblefrom over-straining. The social or domesticsanction loses its power alien pride supposesit can command all services without it. Publicopinion is checked in its influence by the indispositionof the powerful to recognize its authority,or to submit to its awards. These andsimilar dangers wait on opulence, and thuslower its virtue-creating tendencies. Yet power,in all and every shape, is the sole instrumentof morality, and the struggle for it, within thelimits of prudence and benevolence, so far frombeing worthy of reprehension, is perhaps thevery strongest of all excitements to virtue.In those regions of action which birth, education,and social position have prescribed tothe individual, he has the power of directinghis pursuits and occupations with a view to thegeneral happiness of life. No man is withoutsome moments of leisure which may be employedin the search of pleasure, or, in otherwords, in the practice of that virtue which isthe parent of pleasure ; and no occupation isthere which does not create or allow occasionsfor those thoughts — thoughts from recollection,or of anticipation, which are, in themselves,happiness. No man who has the gift of languagecan, in the presence of others, pass asingle hour without the opportunity being52 Doxology.afforded him of communicating enjoyment.One principal reason why our existence hasso much less of happiness crowded into it thanis accessible to us is, that we neglect to gatherup those minute particles of pleasure whichevery moment offers to our acceptance. Instriving after a sum total, we forget the cyphersof which it is composed. Struggling againstinevitable results which he cannot control, toooften man is heedless of those accessible pleasures,whose amount is by no means inconsiderablewhen collected together. Stretching;:his hand out to catch the stars, he forgets theflowers at his feet, — so beautiful, so fragrant, sovarious, so multitudinous.By the condensation of the virtues into two,that is, into prudence and effective benevolence,let it not be supposed that any real, substantial,or useful virtue is removed from the moralfield. Wretched would be the task of thatmoralist who should seek to destroy a virtue,and deplorable would be his success. If, however,after the most scrutinizing and severeexamination, it is discovered that whateverexists of virtue is really a part of one of thesetwo great branches, the discovery is equivalentto those great advances that have been madein chemical science, by the reduction of theinfinite variety of compounds to a few simple.GENERAL STATEMENT. 53elementary substances. And the time, perhaps,will hardly be deemed uselessly employed,that is engaged in reviewing thosemoral qualities which, from time immemorial,at all events from the time of Aristotle, haveput in their claims to be placed on the list ofvirtues. It is, in some respects, to repeatwhat has been urged before, yet, until thefalse, imperfect, and ambiguous virtues aremoved aside, room will not be so easily foundfor the true and legitimate virtues. And therepetition may be excused on the score of itsnecessity for clearing aM^ay incumbrances, andpreparing the field for the introduction of agenuine and practical morality.. Piety is the virtue by which is understoodreverence for the Divine Being, exhibiting itselfin obedience to his will. Reverence can only haveits source in a high estimate of his attributes,especially of the attributes of wisdom, power,and goodness. Now to what purpose canthese attributes be directed, so that they mayharmonize, but to the production of happiness ?What other object can infinite goodness proposeto itself? What can infinite wisdom be so efficientlyengaged in, as the discovery of the fittestmeans? And how should infinite power, beingallied to wisdom and to goodness, give evidenceof its existence but in the accomplishment of54 Doxology.this great end ? In what situation then doesman stand to the Divinity ? In what way canhe best serve, — in what way can he best giveevidence of that piety, which consists in obedience? Surely by furthering the great objectsproposed by the Divine Being; surely by laboringin the same field — the field of benevolence.And on whom can his benevolence be exerted ?Only on himself and others. To himself andothers then all his powers of usefulness are confined; beyond these he has no sphere of action.What is piety, therefore, disassociated fromprudence and benevolence ? — a mere emptysound.2. Fortitude is a quality which is understoodto embrace patience and equanimity. It is toa great extent the result of particular physicalorganization ; and in so far as this is the case, itis no more a virtue than strength, or symmetry,or any other gift of nature, 'unobtainable byhuman effort. That portion of it which is underthe dominion of the will, may, if made subordinateto prudence and benevolence, be intitledto the denomination of virtue ; but it is not necessarilyvirtuous, for there may be an imprudentfortitude and a maleficent fortitude, thoughthere can be no imprudent, no maleficentvirtue : in other words, no virtuous imprudenceor improbity. Fortitude generally implies Ion-generalSTATEMENT. o5gaiiimity under suffering, or resistance to pain ;and as one of the great objects of virtue is todiminish suffering, fortitude may frequently beauseful auxiliary. There are cases in whichits exercise may only lead to a prolongation ofsuffering, — as where, exhibited under torture,the opposition made by it to the ordinaryexpressions of suffering, brings down torturesmore terrible. Whether in such a case thepleasures of the dissocial affections, of scornand contempt, counterbalance the added agoniesof the tortured, as some have supposed, maywell be questioned. Few men would, of theirown choice, allow the additional tortures to beinflicted for any gratification they could derivefrom hurling any quantity of scorn at theinflictor. The true reason may be, that thoughthe torture is near, the scorn is nearer ; andwhen sufferings are intense, there may be a sortof doubt in the mind of the sufferer as to thepossibility of adding to their intensity.Fortitude is nearly allied to courage ; andcourage, like fortitude, depends wholly for itstitle to approval upon the use made of it. Initself it is no virtue ; and the exercise of it,independently of its application to prudent orbeneficent purposes, is the exercise of a qualityrather the distinction of wild beasts than men.56 Doxology.and distinguishing them in the very degree oftheir fierceness and ferocity.3. Temperance may include sobriety and chastity.For the submission to their dictates thereis the strongest prima facie case. Neither prudencenor benevolence appears compromised bythe observance of these virtues. Both may be somost seriously by their infraction. But evenhere, on a closer examination, it will appear thatnothing but the subordination of temperance tothe two great primary virtues will make it really"virtuous. What virtue is there in the temperancewhich produces disease or death ? Whatvirtue was there in the hastings of ascetic moralists,making experiments on the powers of abstinence,and frequently perishing in the struggle? In the instance of temperance, as in thoseof most of the virtues inculcated by ancientwriters, the imperfection of their theory ofmorals is made manifest, and the necessity ofintroducing some other test besides the so-calledvirtue, in order to determine whether it reallybe a virtue, is the best evidence of the incompletenessof their moral code. This test theycalled moderation, for their notion was, that inthe excess of virtue there was no virtue at all.In too much temperance there was no virtue ; intoo little there was none. Their 'golden mean'General STATEMENT. 57was, in fact, a vague recognition of some higherquality to which their virtues, in order to provethem virtues, must be made subordinate. Theywere not happy in the choice of a word, thoughthey could find no better a word than moderation.They would have been ill-content withits application to the business of life : theywould not have been satisfied certainly withmoderate honesty on the part of their dependants,or moderate chastity on the part of theirwives, or moderate temperance on the part oftheir children. But, feeling the insufficiencyand inapj)licability of their phraseology, theywanted some other guide. Their virtues werethe virtues of occasion, whose value dependednot on their intrinsic and substantial excellence,but on the circumstances which called theminto operation. M'hat was virtue this moment,might not be virtue the next. Thus their definitionsof virtue were sometimes so narrow asto exclude the highest virtue, and sometimes sowide and vague as to embrace equally bothvirtue and vice.4. Justice is one of those qualities of whicha great parade is made by the moralists of theAristotelian school. Its interests are, to a greatextent, taken under the care of the legislator,and its infractions are made responsible to thecriminal code in their most extensively penisDoxology.pious consequences. Justice is generally understoodto be the coincidence of conduct withthe dictates of law, or of morality. With themoral, and not with the legal department is ourpresent concern; and the claims of justice,stripped of their vague phraseology, will befound to be simply the claims of benevolence ;the claims of benevolence being here the applicationof the non-disappointment principle. Injustice,in as far as it has any definite or definablemeaning, is the denial of a pleasure which aman has a right to enjoy, or the infliction of apain which he should not be exposed to suffer.In both cases the dictates of benevolence areviolated towards him. But the claims of justice,disassociated from the tests which Doxologyapplies to them, are vague and unsatisfactory.The declaration that such and suchan action, or such and such a course of action,is just or unjust, is mere declamatory pretence,unless, at the same time, the dependent pleasuresand pains are brought into the calculation.If it could be proved that evil, in the shape of abalance of suffering upon the whole, grew out ofa given line of conduct, and it were agreed thatsuch line of conduct ought to be cited Just, theconsequence would simply be, that Justice andvirtue might be opposed to one another, and thatto be just would be to be immoral. MadeGENERAL STATEMENT. 59secondary to the general happiness, or in otherwords, to the combined influences of prudenceand benevolence, justice is intitled to the designationof virtue.5. Libera I it 1/ is beneficence on a large scale,but, unless under the guidance of prudence,may be a vice instead of a virtue ; and, unlessunder the guidance of benevolence, may be stillmore extensively pernicious. The word liberalis one of vague and various interpretations. Itis applied, with different meanings, to thoughts,words, and actions. A liberal mind is usuallyunderstood to imply a disposition to give afriendly interpretation to the conduct of others ;to avoid harsh and sudden judgments; to becandid and charitable : reduced to conduct,liberality may mean mercy, justice, generosity;in a word, beneficence, either by abstention or byaction. In order to associate the term with prudenceand benevolence, it is very usual to attachto it some phrase or word which takes it out ofthe region of possible misinterpretation : for example,prudent liberality, well-judged liberality,well-timed liberality. Liberality, undisciplinedby the two real and cardinal virtues, is merefolly. It would be very liberal for any man togive to others all that he has, either in possessionor in prospect, but it would be neither wisenor virtuous : it might be very liberal to patronsDoxology.rise and to reward error and misconduct, but itwould be neither useful nor philanthropic. Infact, no liberality would be so liberal as thatwhich should run into all sorts of extravagances.In the political field, liberal and liberalismare used as self-laudatory terms by a party inthe state, and are generally associated, in themeaning of those who employ them, with theoriginal idea of liberty, — liberals, the advocatesof liberty ; liberalism, the principles of libertyapplied to public life. There are few wordswhich, with its derivations, have been more mischievousthan this word liberty. When itmeans any thing beyond mere caprice and dogmatism,it means good government ; and if goodgovernment had had the good fortune to occupythe same place in the public mind which hasbeen occupied by the vague entity called liberty,the crimes and follies which have disgraced andretarded the progress of political improvementwould hardly have been committed. The usualdefinition of liberty— that it is the right to doevery thing that the laws do not forbid — showswith what carelessness words are used in ordinarydiscourse or composition : for if the lawsare had, what becomes of liberty ; and if thelaws are good, where is its value ? Good lawshave a defined, intelligible meaning; they pursuean obviously useful end by obviously appro-generalStatement. 61pirate means. When Madame de Roland undertookto distinguish liberty from licence, sheflattered the ear by alliteration, but brought nosatisfaction to the understanding.6. Alagnijiccncc, which, however, is representedas under the check of frugality, inorder to be deemed a virtue, simply means thedoing great things. And were it a virtue, themasses of mankind would be wholly excludedfrom its exercise. A quality, whose power ofaction is confined to the extremely small minorityof mankind, has happily no real claimsto the recompense or to the praise of virtue.Magnificence is a sort of grandiloquent word foraristocratical beneficence. Ostentation has adyslogistic character, and mingles some alloy ofpride, or vanity, or scorn in its displays. Magnificence,even with frugality for its check andcontrol, is not of necessity either worthy ofpraise or blame ; it may not have any tinctureof vice or virtue ; it may imply no sacrifice toothers; it may bring no pleasure to oneself; itmay be a mere waste of a means of pleasure.As a question of expenditure, it may be prudential,and it may be benevolent ; but if it absorbor subtract from means which might beemployed more prudentially and more benevolently,it is, supposing the expenditure would,but for the magjiificaicc, have been employedG2 Doxology.for the production of the greater instead of thelesser good, — it is a source of mischief equal tothe amount of difference between that lesser andthat greater good. The decking magnificencewith the pomp of virtue is, in the moral world,a fallacy of a somewhat similar character tothat which has often intruded into the world ofpolitical economy, namely, that it is more meritoriousto spend than to save. They both growout of an inordinate estimate of the value ofthe social principle, separately and narrowlyviewed, — that social principle which there is agreat disposition to aggrandize at the expenseof the self-regarding. Now the value and trueinfluence of the social depends on its subjectionand subordination to the self-regarding, as theprimary source of action, in the same way asall the minor virtues resolve themselves into thetwo major virtues which hold sole dominionover the regions of morality.7. Magnanimity is a word which, for popularuse, might be conveniently translated into great-mindedness.It conveys an undefined idea ofintellectual superiority prompting beneficentconduct of forbearance or of action, such ason ordinary occasions could not be expected ofordinary men. But magnanimous acts and virtuousacts are by no means synonymous, neitherare pusillanimous and vicious acts. Suppose aGENERAL STATEMENT. 63man, by sacrifice, to have done that which addsto his ultimate stock of happiness, while it interferesnot with, or increases the happiness ofother men, — will the vituperating his conductwith the charge of pusillanimity make it otherthan wise and virtuous ? Let a man have performeda deed by which he has inflicted miseryon himself or others, or both, — will any jwrnp-vous ejaculations to the honor and glory of hismagnanimity make the deed any other than oneof wickedness or folly ? Such two-edged instrumentsas, at one moment, do good serviceto the cause of morals, and the next inflict onthat cause the deadliest wounds, should behung up in the armoury of Deontology, to bevery rarely, always cautiously employed, andnever without the recollection, that they cutboth "ways.To estimate the quantity of virtue in an actionclaiming to be magnanimous, the peculiar physicalorganization of the actor must be takeninto the account, in order to estimate the amountof sacrifice, and of consequent eflbrt made.Then comes the question, has the action beenmore injurious to himself than useful to others ?Has it been more injurious to others than usefulto himself? In the first place, the magnanimousaction was imprudent ; in the second, itwas maleficent, — in neither was it virtuous.64 Doxology.The result of the magnanimous action, has itbeen the diminution of human happiness? Ifso, there is nothing to save it from being draggedforth by the Deontologist from the territoryof virtue into which it has intruded, exposed asan impostor, and flung into the realms of immorality.8. Modesty is a branch of extra-regardingprudence. It is a virtue of abstention. In itsapplication to the two sexes, the sense of theword undergoes a somewhat remarkable modification.A modest man is understood generallyto mean a bashful, unobtrusive, unpretendingperson ; a modest woman immediately associatesthe character with the idea of sexual purity orchastity. The different interpretation of thesame word, when thus differently employed, isone of the consequences of that public opinionwhich imposes upon woman a far stricter morallaw than that to which a man is required tosubmit. Yet the distinction does not exist as tothe corresponding vice. Immodest, as appliedto man or woman, has nearly the same meaning,and implies lasciviousness in words or action.modesty, in its ordinary sense, wins men's affectionsby conciliating their opinion. It checks thedisposition to annoy by contradiction. It is anunobtrusive tribute to the self-esteem of another.It is unwilling to sit in j judgment on the conductGENERAL STATEMENT. G5of others, and if it do sit in judgment, thatjudgment is given in the least offensive shape.Modesty in language is the result of prudentialrestraint upon expression ; modesty in conductof prudential constraint upon action.9. JMansuctudc, when a virtue, is dependenton extra-regarding prudence. Like modesty, itis flattering to the self-esteem of the persontowards whom it is exercised. It is modestywith a deeper tinge of humility ; or, which producesthe same effect upon the object, it ismodesty influenced by timidity : it goes fartherin deference and submission than modesty does,and when suffering is brought into action mansuetudebecomes patience or longanimity. Itis a quality ordinarily virtuous, vibrating as itwere between other ordinarily virtuous qualities,but whose amount of virtue can only be estimatedby the application of the Deontologicaltests. The meekness of a man whose meeknessdiminishes his own enjoyments, and addsless to the happiness of others than the amounthe sacrifices of his own, — that meekness, beingimprudent and improvident, is the contrary ofvirtuous. The meekness of a man whose meeknessis pernicious to others, and useless to himself,is benevolent, and the contrary of virtuous.Meekness is to a considerable extenta natural personal gift, and it is only to suchVOL. 11. F66 Doxology.portion of it as is acquired by thought that thequestion of morality can apply. From thisportion, so diminished, subtract every thingthat is not prudence or benevolence, and theresiduum will be the virtue ; that is to say theprudence and the effective benevolence will bethevirtue, and nothing else.10. Veracity. There are two classes which comprizethe pernicious breaches of veracity. Theyare the anti-prudential and the anti-social. Theviolation of truth, when by its violation mischiefis done to the individual or the community, isvicious ; and the idea of the sacredness of truthis a very important element in the field of morals.But the value of truth is not always and onall occasions the same. Like every otherquality professing to be virtuous, veracity mustbe made subservient to prudence and benevolence.Its excellence can only be estimated bythe result of good that it produces ; and thoughit may appear safe and simple legislation todeclare that prudence and benevolence shall bemade subservient to truth, a little examinationwill show that truth, in order to be most beneficial,must be subordinate to the great and leadingvirtues. For truth must be either useful,useless, or pernicious. Upon useful truths norestraint should be placed ; the more influence,the more diffusion they have the better. Pru-GENERAL STATEMENT. 67hence and benevolence unite not only in encouragingtheir utterance but in giving wings totheir circulation. As to truths whose influenceis neutral, neither injurious nor beneficial, theymay be left to men's caprices, for they standupon their innoxious qualities ; but of thosetruths that are mischievous, truths which arecreators of pain and destroyers of pleasure, letthem be suppressed ; they are ministers of evil,not instruments of good. Happily, however, thenumber of such pernicious truths can be butsmall, and the demands for their utterance rare.The man who treats the dictates of veracitylightly, who seeks occasions either for the concealmentof truth, for prevarication, or for utteringfalsehood, loses that reputation for veracitythe preservation of which is one of the highestobjects of prudence. And strong must be the caseof utility which will warrant a man's sacrificingany portion of his character for veracity, sincefalsehood is the high road to self-contradiction.11. Amity or Friendship is neither a vice nor avirtue until it is brought into the domains ofprudence or benevolence. It is merely a certainstate of the affections implying an attachmentto particular objects. Now that attachment maybepernicious or beneficial. Indifferent it canscarcely be, for that would suppose motives andconsequences of pain and pleasure without any68 Doxology.balance for a result ; a case so rare in the fieldof human action as scarcely to be worthy ofconsideration. Amity may be pernicious toboth parties, in which case it violates both prudenceand benevolence ; it may be pernicious tothe man who bestows his amity, and in that stateof things the laws of prudence forbid its exercise: without being pernicious to the man whoconfers, it may be so to the man who is the objectof the amicable word or deed, or to others, — inwhich case it is maleficent. Again, where thepleasures on either side are more than counterbalancedby the pains on the other, there is a clearloss to happiness, and consequently to virtue.Where amity is the source of mutual benefit, prudenceand benevolence are served to the extent ofthat mutual benefit, always supposing that theconsequences of the words or actions which arethe source of that benefit do not extend beyondthe parties. For no result of happiness to thoseparties will make their friendship virtuous, if thatfriendship destroy more happiness elsewherethan they have created for themselves.12. The word Urbanity is a very ambiguousdescription of a virtue. That portion of it whichis denominated good temper or good nature is anidiosyncratic element ; a part of a person's constitutionalor physical identity, for which no titleof vice or virtue can be properly claimed. WhereGENERAL STATEMENT. 69urbanity is the result of an effort made to givepleasure to another, where it infuses benignityinto a word or action, makes the gracious thingmore gracious, and takes from that which isunacceptable to another all unnecessary inflictionof pain, — where in a word it bears thecharacter of benevolence ; there, and there onlyis virtue. But beyond that benevolence thereis no virtue at all, and there is no virtue exceptin the benevolence. Urbanity, then, is intitledto the honors of virtue in all those cases whereefficient benevolence is its guide and sovereign ;with the understanding that prudence makes nosacrifice of pleasure greater in value than thepleasure won by that benevolence.So vague are the conceptions, so unsatisfactorythe definitions of morality proceeding evenfrom the most distinguished writers, that therewould be little difficulty in drawing the pictureof imprudence and improbity, and showingthat it was quite consistent with the qualitiesto which, and to which alone they give thename of virtue. Examine, for example, the differentcharacteristics which Mr Hume has putforward in his Essays as tests and evidenceof r/V^//o//^ disposition, 'which is,' he says, 'inother words, that which leads to action andemployment, renders us sensible to the socialpassions, steels the heart against the assaults of70 Doxology.fortune, reduces the affections to a just moderation,makes our own thoughts an entertainmentto us, and inclines us rather to the pleasures ofsociety and conversation than to those of thesenses.'It would be easy to show, that of thesequalities there is scarcely one that is necessarilyvirtuous ; scarcely one that may not be appliedto the production of misery. * Action andemployment ' may be as well directed to perniciousas to useful objects; *the social passions'may be the fruitful sources of imprudence andimprobity ; ' the moderation of the affections 'may or may not be worthy of praise ; for whyshould not the virtuous affections be maximizedinstead of moderated ? The ' making our ownthoughts an entertainment to us' may be feedingthose thoughts with poison : no thoughts areperhaps more entertaining than thoughts ofprofligacy, while * the pleasures of society andconversation,' in preference * to those of thesenses,' may, without prudence and benevolencefor their guide, be exhibitions equally perilousto the understanding, and depraving to thebenevolent sympathies.But how should Hume be safe from error,who makes ' a sense of virtue ' — a ' feeling 'referable to no results, the groundwork of goodconduct ? ' An action,' he says, ' is virtuous orGENERAL STATEMENT. 71vicious, because its view causes a pleasure oruneasiness of a particular kind.' iii. 28. Butwhat action is there which in different men willnot produce different feelings ? * To have thesense of virtue,' he proceeds, * is nothing butto feel a satisfaction of a particular kind fromthe contemplation of a character. The veryfeeling constitutes our praise or admiration.We do not infer a character to be virtuousbecause it pleases ; but m feeling that it pleasesafter such a particular manner, we in effect*feel that it is virtuous. The same is implied inour judgments concerning all kinds of beauty,and tastes, and sensations ; our approbation isimplied in the immediate pleasure they convey'to us.'Truly it is inexplicable how all mankindshould have possessed this new sense — thismoral sense, without ever dreaming of it till thelast century. And since the exercise of thissense is a pleasure, well is its inventor intitledto Xerxes' and Tiberius's reward ! But iforiginal, if organic, it would be as strong insavage as in civilised life : is that contendedfor?Hume was a man to get glimpses of truth.He brought in the light of utility to show whatwas the motive and the x^entoi justice. Buthe stopped there, as if unconscious of the value72 Doxology.of his discovery. Yet in Hume there is noobstinacy, no uncandid artifice. Not weddedto a system by professional attachment, a mildphilosophy breathes in his every line.But this moral sense, instead of being or givinga reason, is, after all, only an artifice to avoidgiving a reason. It affords in reality no criterionto distinguish right from wrong ; what oughtto be done from what ought not to be done.It does not answer the question, Ought I to dothis or not ? It may say peremptorily. Yes !or No! Suppose the partisan of the moral sensesays No ! and he were asked why ? he couldonly say. My moral sense condemns it. But,if farther pushed by an inquiry as to what hemeant by his moral sense, he could but declarethat it was painful to do it ; and then, if askedfor evidence of that pain, he might rejoin thatall the wise and the good felt it ; but if moremoderate and accurate he might content himselfby averring that he felt it. In the first case, hethrows the whole question back upon authority,which cuts, but does not untie the gordianknot, and makes all morality arbitrary ; in thesecond, he gives me, as a reason for not doinga thing that it would give him pain were he todoit. If he were to show that it would giveme pain, he would do something ; but the caseis by the supposition just the contrary ; for ifGENERAL STATEMENT. 73it did give me pain, I should never think ofdoing it, nor of asking him the question.Besides, the existence of the moral sense, ifnot organic or intuitive, will just be wantingwhere it is most wanted, — that is, in the caseof those who have it not. It will explain whatis understood already, and leave all the rest asdark an enigma as before. It is a medicinewhich will take effect only on those who are ingood health, and we know who has said, andhow wisely he has said it, ' They that are wholeneed not a physician.'Vain is the attempt to teach morals by declamation,or to build theories out of facts opposedto every thing we know. Is virtue less virtuousbecause it is proved not to be disinterested ? Inno sense whatever. Shall the structure ofmorality be raised on the foundation of truth,or falsehood ? Answer, ye lovers of right !Be men what they may, it becomes us toknow them as they are ; no flattering and faithlessportrait will mend the original. Were theystill worse, it could not but be useful to studythem honestly; for every rule and argumentfounded on an erroneous estimate, must be idleor pernicious in proportion to the errors of thatestimate. The knowledge of man must bebeneficial to man. The times of the grossestdepravity have always been those of the darkest74 Doxology.ignorance, and never were examples of enormousand devastating vice more abundant,than in the days when outrageous and uselesssacrifices of happiness were most sedulouslypreached, and most scrupulously practised.They who discourse, and they who legislateon the supposition, that man will act in oppositionto acknowledged interests, make moralitya fable, and law a romance. Their commandsare nugatory — their expedients vain.Of the systems of morality presented to theacceptance of mankind, which is there so honorableto its advocates as the Deontological ?Sensible of no weakness, it asks for no mercy ;it has no hidden defects to be glossed over bysophistry ; no inexplicable mysteries to becovered by the shield of authority. In itself itcontains the elements of its own purification,and offers no barriers to the progress of thoseinvestigations which are disposed to followtruth and virtue through every ethical labyrinthin which prejudice, or interest stronger thanprejudice, may have involved them. No manneed be ashamed on any occasion to own thathe is desirous of being governed by the doctrinesof utility in all his conduct ; and in making sucha declaration, he is certain to find a largeamount of sympathy ; for it cannot be deniedthat the moral sanction is really grounded onGENERAL STATEMENT. 75the recognition of those doctrines. The Genealogicalcode is the harmonizer of that popularopinion which, in fact, is awakening to its repeatedappeals. It is the law of society broughtinto order and reduced to system, with a fewalterations necessary for the consistency andunity of the whole.But when a system of morals proposes to aman a higher degree of perfection than it canfind motives to stimulate him to, that system isfalse and hollow.If the conduct it proposes to men in generalissuch as, from the very nature of things, fewmen can be expected to pursue, that system isfalse and hollow.If it proposes to a man a line of conduct asnecessary to be maintained which is not maintainable,for which it can find no sanctions ofpleasure to attract, no menaces of pain to forcehim to avoid ; if, in a word, it affects to accomplishwhat is not accomplishable, — that systemis false and hollow.But, in order for utility to be the ground ofapprobation for a species of action, it is notnecessary that every one who approves it shouldhave discovered or be able to explain its utility,or every one who disapproves an act have perceivedits mischievousness or be competent topoint it out to others. One man perceives76 Doxology.its mischievousness — he disapproves of it — heexpresses his disapprobation — he is looked toas an authority — he says it is bad — it is wrongit is mischievous — nobody has any motiveto approve it, that is, in others. Men take himat his word. A general opinion prevails thatthe action is bad ; fit to be disapproved. It isgenerally disapproved. The disapprobationagainst the act thus established, a person hasoccasion to consider whether he shall do it ornot. He concludes not. Why ? It occurs tohim that it is disapproved ; to do an action that isdisapproved draws on him the ill will of thepersons who disapprove of it; 'tis therefore thathe abstains from doing it. Is it because heperceives it is mischievous ? — No. He neverthinks whether it is mischievous or not ; he hasno occasion to look so far ; he does not look sofar: if he did look so far as to see whether therewere mischief or not in it, perhaps he might notfind it of himself. It was general disapprobationof the act and not a sense of its mischievousnessthat was the ground of his disapprobation.But what was the ground of that general disapprobationof it ? Particular experience of itsmischievousness.The mischievousness of the act, even if recognised,would not be the immediate cause of hisconduct ; the immediate cause, that is, hisGENERAL STATEMENT. 77motive, would be the idea of pleasure and painus about to arise from it : that is, the pain hemight incur, in consequence of the ill will ofmen which would arise upon his committing anact marked with their disapprobation.Every thing concurs to make this train ofreasoning habitual, so habitual and so rapid asto assume the guise of instinct ; it is a lesson wearelearning almost every moment of our lives.Need we wonder at our being familiar with it,when we see what practice will do in theoperation of the most difficult arts ?The ends of morality will, however, be on alloccasions best served by the habit of comparingthe consequences of action ; of weighing theirresults of pain and pleasure, and estimating theprofit and loss to human happiness on thewhole. The ablest moralist will be he whocalculates best, and the most virtuous man willbe he who most successfully applies rightcalculation to conduct. Nor will the resultbe always attainable without circuitousness,without reference to motives and consequencesnot immediately adjacent. To aim at virtuousconduct is the first element of success.Aiming supposes judgment; judgment is acomparison of two ideas at a time, the pronouncingthat one of them is or is not conformableto the other.78 Doxology.When he who delivers the ball at crickettakes aim, you see him balancing the hand thatholds it backwards and forwards several timesbefore he parts with it. What is it that passesin his mind all the while ? He is placing themoving forces of his hand in an infinity ofdifferent situations; he is adjusting the severalmuscular fibres of his hand and arm to theirseveral degrees of tension; all these differentadjustments pass over in review to no otherpurpose than out of them all to find some onewhich he recollected under parallel circumstancesof distance to have been attended withthe desired effect, namely, of hitting the wicketwhich is the aim of his action.Here then are an infinity of judgments passedin the compass of a few minutes ; for of all theadjustments that he has tried before his comingto that which determines the casting of the ball,there is not one of which he has not pronouncedthat it was different from any of those he hadin his memory as models.The really practical part of morality consists inthe management of the springs of action ; in thedirecting the affections to the increase of humanhappiness. These affections, as has been oftenrepeated, are self-regarding, social, or dissocial ;each having a relation to pleasure and pain ;each operating upon interests, and motives.GENERAL STATEMENT. 79and desires, and purposes. The question ofvirtue and of vice is on almost all occasionsrepresented by a present evil or a presentgood, to be weighed against future good andevil. Morality is the true, immorality thefalse calculation of the final balance. Thechoice between that which is and that whichwill be, is, in fact, the whole subject ofinquiry, and the laws of morality come intoaction from the moment in which the willexercises its influence upon the choice of conduct.The mastery of the mind over its ownoperations, is the only ground work on whichany theory of morals can be raised. As wellwere it to preach to wood or to stone as to appealto motives which cannot be brought into action.To drag forth pleasures and pains from theirplaces of concealment, to show their connectionwith, and dependence on conduct, to enablethe greater interest to prevail against the lesserinterest, is the task of the genuine teacher.While he attaches to actions their consequencesof good and evil, while he removes vague andobscure generalities into the domains of felicityand misery, while he brings the calculations ofultimate happiness to decide upon all thequestions which vanity, or authority appealingto vanity, would place beyond the reach of aprobing examination, he, the genuine teacher80 Doxology.is advancing the cause of truth and virtue.That cause is, after all, one of the most intelligiblesimplicity. Prudence and imprudence,beneficence and maleficence — in therefor wordsare the exhausted list of those virtues whichalone it recognises, and the vices which aloneit deprecates. Beyond these simple and intelligiblequalities, all is mystery and uncertainty.SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 81CHAPTER II.SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE.Having thus traversed, with somewhat wanderingfootsteps, the domains of practical morality,so as to present a general view of the systemwhich the greatest-happiness principle inculcates— having shown, or attempted to show,that, after all, there are only two classes of virtues— the prudential and the beneficent — it onlyremains to developed that mental discipline bywhich prudence and beneficence may be mademost efficient for the creation of felicity. Prudence,it has been shown, naturally divides itselfinto two departments : the first, that prudencewith which others have nothing to do ; thatwhich refers to actions whose influences do notreach beyond the actor; in a word, that whichbelongs to the individual in his relations withhimself, and not in his relations with society :and the second, that prudence which is demandedfrom him in consequence of his intercoursewith others ; a prudence which is closelyconnected with benevolence, and especially withabstential benevolence. The claims of purelyVOL. II. g82 Doxology.self-regarding prudence first demand attention :the subject is less embarrassed by complication ;the power of the individual over himself ismore complete ; the estimate of pain and pleasureis more immediately accessible to theparty concerned ; and any light thrown uponthis portion of the subject will, perhaps, relievethe rest of some of its seeming embarrassments.Self-regarding prudence comprises in itsdomain actions and thoughts, or rather externaland internal actions; for thoughts are onlyinternal or mental actions. Its dictates sodirect the choice between actions, or the choicebetween thoughts, as to promote the greatesthappiness to the individual concerned.As regards external actions, what prudencecan do, and all that prudence can do, is tochoose between the present and the future ;and in so far as the aggregate of happiness isincreased, thereby to give preference to thegreater future over the lesser present pleasure.But of two portions of happiness of equalmagnitude, one present and the other not present,the one present will always be greaterin value than that which is future ; the valueof the future pleasure beg measured by, andin proportion to its adjacent, and, in case ofuncertainty, by the measure of its uncertainty.SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 83If time be out of the question, if two portionsof happiness present themselves, equal in valueand equal in remoteness, or equal in value,notwithstanding remoteness, virtue is not concernedin the choice between them ; it is amatter, not of virtue, but of taste.Under the head of self-regarding prudence,as there has been occasion to remark, comeseveral of those virtues which Aristotle and,guided by him, other moralists to this dayhave put on the same level with prudence ; eachbeing, in fact, prudence presenting itself in someshape or other, and each requiring for its exercisethe sacrifice of the present to the future.These virtues are temperance, continence, fortitude,magnanimity, and veracity. Subtractprudence from each of these, and the residuumwill be almost nothing. If there be, underany circumstances, any virtue left after thesubtraction of prudence, the small residuum ofvirtue must be benevolence ; whatever elseremains, however it may pretend to the nameof virtue, will be nothing but imposture.If the interest of others be concernedin the exercise of the prudential virtues byourselves, the prudence is not purely self-regarding,but extra-regarding. But if neitherour own greater future happiness, nor thehappiness of others, to an extent greater than84 DEONTOLor.y.the sacrifice demanded by a particular actionis promoted by it, that sacrifice is mere asceticism; it is the very opposite to prudence ; it isthe offspring of delusion ; it is miscalculating oruncalculating blindness ; since to sacrifice any,the least particle of pleasure, for any otherpurpose than that of obtaining for a man's self,or some other person, a greater quantity ofpleasure, or of avoiding a more than equivalentquantity of pain, is not virtue, but folly; andto cause, or endeavor to cause any other personto give up any particle of pleasure, for anyother purpose than in exchange for a greaterquantity of pleasure, or to save him from amore than equivalent quantity of pain, is notvirtue — it is vice ; it is not benevolence — it ismalevolence ; it is not beneficence— it is maleficence.Sterne voluptas,' says Horace ; ' decetempty colore voluptas.' * Spurn pleasures ;purchased pleasure teacheth pain.' Silly isthe precept ; sadly silly, if taken to the letter ;but no such silly notion had the poet in hishead. No such silly notion did he mean toinculcate. He was thinking of the verse, notof the morality; and when the option is betweentruth and rhythm, between serving andpleasing, extraordinary indeed must be the poetwho makes any other choice than was madeSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE.by Horace. What he really meant to inculcatewas that which we have been inculcating.Utilitas/ he says elsewhere, * utility justprope mater et aequi.' Here, happily, soundand sense harmonize. Here is the principle ofutility set up in express terms, as the standardof right and wrong; in terms, the import ofwhich is plain enough, though even here theexpression wants completeness. What/6' utility?What but the property of producing pleasureand preventing pain ?In the field of purely self-regarding prudence,the sensual pleasures being the most intense, andthe most peremptory in their demands for gratification,are especially those which require themost cautious and careful estimate of their associatedpains. The experience of the medical adviser,the lessons of the economist, may indeedtake place of the counsels of morality ; the optionis often between the enjoyment of a momentand the pain of years ; between the excitedsatisfaction of a very short period and thesacrifice of a whole existence : between thestimulation of life for an hour, and the consequentadjacent of disease or death.Of the crime and misery which exist in theworld, the irregularities of the sexual passionsare among the most pregnant. Guerre, in hisStatistique Morale de la France,' states that86 Doxology.one thirty-third portion of the attacks on thelives of men take place in houses of ill-fame :one-fourteenth of the cases of incendiarism,a great part of the duels, a large proportionof cases of insanity, all the cases of infanticide,and almost all the instances of suicide amongyoung women, grow out of sexual immorality.The weakened force of public opinion on thispart of the field of conduct demands promptconsideration ; and M. Guerre most properlydraws the conclusion, that whatever opinionswe may form of the innocence or guilt of theaberrations from chastity, men have but toomuch neglected to trace their physical consequences,— 'for,' he continues, ' when deeplyexamined, views of true utility and moralduty will ever be found inseparable and identical.'But these pleasures of sex stand on the sameground as every other pleasure, and can beplaced on their true basis by the Deontologicalprinciple alone.Certain it is that asceticism, calling itselfreligion, has set its face against them ; and bydeductions from that most false and most perniciousdogma, that the favor of heaven is tobe purchased only by the sacrifice of pleasure,has dragged forth the most intense of pleasuresas the meekest for sacrifice. And truly.SELF-REGARDING Prudence. Sagreat inroad was made upon the domains ofvirtue, when it was laid down as a religiousaxiom, that these pleasures are simply andper se immoral, and offensive to the Deity, andthat abstention from them is in itself meritorious.It was only by gathering round theword chastity a mist of confusion that a casecould be seemingly made out for the virtueof abstention from enjoyment, under all circumstances,and without any reference to ultimategood or evil.Is not chastity, then, a virtue? Most undoubtedly,and a virtue of high deserving.And why ? Not because it diminishes, butbecause it heightens enjoyment.Is not temperance a virtue ? Aye, assuredlyis it. But wherefore ? Because by restrainingenjoyment for a time, it afterwards elevates itto that very pitch which leaves, on the whole,the largest addition to the stock of happiness.Modesty, itself a ramification and evidenceof chastity, what is it but an invention bywhich pleasure is augmented ? Modesty dictatesconcealment ; concealment stimulates curiosity; curiosity augments desire, and withprevious desire subsequent gratification increases.Modesty, in fact, is to one appetite what88 Doxology.bitters or acids are to another ; they contributeto its healthfulness and pleasurableness, notby their similarity, but by their contrast. Ifthey create a temporary disagreeableness, theyproduce, on the whole, a greater amount ofagreeable sensations than would have beenexperienced without them. If they repel apleasure of the palate, and substitute an annoyance,it is only to create a greater and moreenduring pleasure.In fact, temperance, modesty, chastity, areamong the most efficient sources of delight.They form part of the very pleasures whichthey magnify and purify, and which, withoutthem, lose the best part of their value, andshrink into almost nothing.Strange that a result so obvious should haveescaped the penetration of the whole herd ofmoralists! Strange that the simple uses ofsuch valuable instruments should have beenso mistaken and so distorted ! The force thatwas intended to be applied to the spring ofaction, solely to increase and strengthen itsactivity, has been thus represented as meant tobreak that spring; and hence the means whichProvidence has put into men's power, for thecreation of happiness, have been perverted toits destruction. Such moralists, indeed, wouldSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 89be aptly commented on by the surgeon who,in order to cure a pimple, should amputate alimb.As it has been said, in the shape of a paradoxicaltruth, that religion is the height ofself-love, so, with equal propriety, may it beasserted that modesty is the height of voluptuousness.So futile is the distinction, soabsurd the variance, so mischievous the rupturewhich have been made between interest andduty, between what is virtuous and what ispleasurable!The acts which come under that branch ofprudence which we are now considering, areeither such as are in their character unsociable,and accordingly performed without witness, orsuch as are performed in the presence of others.They may therefore be divided into recognizableand cognizable acts.Those which are performed out of view areactions purely internal, namely, thoughts, inso far as thoughts are voluntary, or externalactions which may be performance in the presenceof others. Actions there are, which,though performed in the presence of others,are to them subjects of complete indifference,and therefore come not under the control eitherof extra-regarding prudence or benevolence.Where an act is wholly inoffensive to others.90 Doxology.it comes under the dominion of the physicalor pathological sanction ; where it is or maybeoffensive, the retributive, the popular ormoral, and the political, including the legal,may have application to it.But the acts that are not knowable, orat least not known in themselves, may beknowable, or known by their consequences,and those consequences may be immaterial ormaterial.If an act is unknown, and unattended withmaterial consequences, it belongs to the provinceof taste, and not to that of morality.A mean is perfectly free to perform it or not ;and whatever part he takes, he cannot do amiss.An apple being before him, and he, subjectto no danger from indigestion, may eat it ornot eat it, — eat it with his right hand or hisleft hand ; an apple or a pear being before him,he may eat the pear first or the apple first.Deontology has nothing to do with his conducton the occasion.But when material consequences grow outof an action, the authority of morality begins.Here may be two conflicting interests ; theinterest of the moment, and the interest of therest of life. Here may have place the temptationand the demand for sacrifice, — thesacrifice of the present to the contingentSELF-regarding PRUDENCE. 91future, or of the contingent future to thepresent.And then comes the question, of the twosacrifices, which is of the greatest value! Theapple, we will suppose, would have producedindigestion. At the cost of the future sufferingsthat indigestion will bring, is it wise tobuy the present immediate gratification of eatingthe apple ? And if there be no dangerof indigestion, there is no call for sacrifice :the eating of the apple is a pleasure from whichno pain is to be deducted ; it is a clear resultof good ; but if there be danger of indigestion,then must the comparative values of the painsand pleasures be estimated, and according tothe reported balance will be the demand forself-sacrifice.Again — shall I have beef or mutton to-dayfor dinner ? The price is the same, the costof cooking the same ; it is only a question oftaste. But suppose the price of the muttonbe dearer than that of the beef, and that mypecuniary circumstances do not make the costindifferent to me, here is obviously room forthe exercise of prudence ; but suppose, farther,my wife has a fit of longing for the mutton,in exclusion of the beef, and that she is incircumstances requiring peculiar regard to herdesires, then prudence combines with Doxology.violence, even at the expense of part of thenext day's meal, in deciding in favor of themutton.The rules for making our thoughts subservientto our happiness are two : —1. To exclude such thoughts as are painful,and2. To introduce such as are pleasurable.The thoughts whose consequence is to influenceaction will engage our attention elsewhere.They belong to the head of means-selectingprudence. Such are the thoughts which reviewpast life with a reference to future conduct.The first lesson, then, of self-regarding prudencein the management of the thoughts isnegative, — it teaches the avoidance of thoughtswhich bring self-annoyance with them. Thenext law is positive, and encourages thosethoughts to which self-gratification attaches.In both cases prudence requires that the rejectionof painful and the creation of pleasurablethoughts should not be accompanied by the visitationof a greater pain than that avoided, orthe sacrifice of a greater pleasure than that obtained.Do not, for the sake of laying themaside, or in the expectation that you may easilydo so, look out for painful thoughts : that wouldbe the way not to keep them out of your mind,but to keep them in. Look out exclusively forSELF-regarding PRUDENCE — THOUGHTS. 93the pleasurable ones ; by so doing, in so far asyou succeed, you will, at the same time, get inthe pleasurable ones ; and by introducing thepleasurable you will keep out the painful ones;by so doing, for in mind as in body, no twoobjects can at the same time occupy thesame space. Matchless, it is true, is the rapiditywith which any two, or any greater numberof such objects, may succeed one another ; butstill succession is not co-existence : successiveis not simultaneous existence.Without being looked after, thoughts will introducethemselves, and in many a mind hatefulthoughts more readily than pleasurable ones.It is idle to seek for unnecessary misery. Thepainful thoughts that will come must come; butadd not uselessly to their number; encourage nottheir visitations, and drive them away as fastand as far as you can.Disassociated from the present and the future,the past is valueless, — for as past, present, andfuture are only interesting or instructive, in sofaras they afford materials out of which goodmay be extracted, — the past being irrevocable,cannot, of course, be influenced by succeedingevents or opinions. But, except in the past,there is no experience, and from it alone can begathered those results which may serve for theguidance of the future. Beyond the lessons it94 Doxology.gives, the remembrances of the past are, for themost part, painful. Its history is, to a greatextent, the history of privations. If the mindcan be so happily tuned as to make thoseprivations sources of pleasurable retrospect,something will be gained to happiness by dwellingupon them. In a great many instancesthe memory of departed time is sad anddistressful. The calculation of what we hadand have not, is not fairly balanced against theestimate of what we have. The lost, the irrevocable,is frequently exaggerated in importance,because it is irrevocably lost, while thereis a prevalent disposition to underrate the valueof a present possession. On the whole, thesafest general rule is, to apply the attention aslittle as possible to by-gone scenes and events.Every man may for himself mark out certainexceptions. There are thoughts of past enjoymentsthat still leave pleasant impressions,notwithstanding the knowledge of their beingnever to return ; so there are recollections ofpainful events from which the remembrance ofour escape will be constantly accompanied withpleasurable impressions. One class of reminiscencesare wholly pernicious — that of vain regrets,— dreaming of what might have been hadnot that been which was. No regret can changethe past, and unless it can be turned to someSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE THOUGHTS. 95useful account for the future, prudence requiresits suppression. There is profound philosophicaltruth in Shakespeare's dictum, — thatAll regrets arc vain, and those most vainWhich, by pain purchased, do inherit pain.'Past occurrences in general, and in particularsuch as at the time were of a painful nature,will be continually forcing, or endeavoring toforce themselves from their repository in thememory into present remembrance : and this inaproportion rising with that of their magnitude,and in particular to that of their intensity : thatis, with the intensity which belongs to them atthe time. To keep them out of present remembrance,in one word, out of view, will be but inan imperfect degree in any man's power. Attention,however strong, — desire, however earnest,will fail to exclude the recurrence of sadand disagreeable recollections ; the will has not,in general, so perfect a command over thethoughts as to chase such recollections away.By exercise, however, this faculty, like anyother, may be strengthened and improved.In fact, the thoughts have been often trainednot only to whelm past sorrows in oblivion, buteven to deaden the intensity of present suffering.Cases are recorded of men who, at thevery time they were undergoing the severest96 Doxology.torture, have had the faculty of drawing awaytheir attention even from the present sensationwith such force, as in a very considerable degreeto diminish the baleful influence of it. Incomparison of the force of attention requisitefor the production of such an effect, the forcenecessary to the keeping out of view the ordinarystock of such unpleasant incidents as thosewhich exist in the memory, will be found to bevery inconsiderable.The power of managing the thoughts mayseem to presuppose the absence of other strongexcitement ; yet, if that power can be exercisednotwithstanding excruciating tortures, — if calmnessand even rejoicing under suffering have beensometimes exhibited, what an influence muststrong determination produce upon the thoughts?When an idea or ideas have possession of themind, the will may be often successfully employedin keeping them there ; but the willcannot exclude ideas from the mind : the mindcannot empty itself at will ; it may keep itselffull, — it cannot keep itself empty ; it can onlyget rid of one idea by turning aside from it andcalling in another idea. When the ideas so dealtwith are arguments on the opposite side of acontroverted question, the process so carried onis the self-deceptive process — the process bywhich the reasonings on one side of a questionSELF-regarding PRUDENCE TMOUGTITS. 97are admitted, and the reasonings on the otherside are excluded. In this way, there is scarcelya proposition so absurd but that a man may keephimself tolerably persuaded of the truth of it ;nor a proposition, however reasonable, but mayberejected. The instruments of this sad delusionare hope and fear ; but especially by fear —the stronger passion of the two, is this despotismexerted over the mind.In the question as to the power exercisedover a man's own mind, is involved the questionof liberty and necessity ; and a close attentionto the subject will perhaps show that thetwo principles are co-existent. Liberty, orits equivalent, the sense of liberty, does undoubtedlyand without dispute exist ; yetnecessity is not excluded by it. It is solelyin virtue of the power, the command, themastery which I have over my own thoughts, —of which I feel myself every moment in possession,— that I am writing or dictating theseobservations. But what was it that set meon this occupation ? It was something otherthan these same thoughts, — some thought whichwas already in my mind, without any exertionof my will to bring or keep it there.Among thoughts of pain which struggle toforce themselves into the mind, endeavor especiallyto exclude the recollection or the anticipated.ir. H98 Doxology.tion of irremediable evil. Evil to which youare quite sure that it is impossible for you toapply, or to assist others in applying any theleast remedy, think of as little as possible ;for the more you think of it, the more you increaseit. To this case belong all the evils thatare passed. Passed are they, and nothingcan make them not to have passed ; — noanxiety about an event which has happenedwill make it not to have happened. If it be anevil that you might have prevented by actingdifferently, then prudence requires that yourthoughts should dwell upon it long enough toprevent a recurrence of the conduct that inducedit. If you have suffered a loss of money, orpoAver, or any object of desire or of gratification,and your own imprudence or improvidence wasthe cause, recall it to your mind sufficiently toprevent a repetition of your miscalculation.But if no error of yours led to the evil, revertnot to it ; forget it as soon as you can ; you onlywaste your painful emotions, and in wasting,magnify them. Always remember that painsand pleasures are, after all, the stock of humangood and evil— the seed of future well-being.They should, wherever their creation dependsupon volition, be thrown on no ground uncongenialto the production of good. A painpregnant with future pleasure may be an in-SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE — THOUGHTS. 99instrument as valuable as a pleasure-producingpleasure. If a primary pain be the parent of agreater balance of pleasure than a primarypleasure would give birth to, that primary painis of more value, in the account of happiness,than that primary pleasure. The true discipline,the genuine arithmetic of morality is here.To resume. — If, the recollection of pastscenes of pleasure give more gratification, fromthe memory of the pleasure, than pain from theknowledge that the pleasure is passed away, it iswise and prudent to recall them to the thoughts.If on scenes that were originally painful, thedelight of escape, the contrast which presentrelief affords to past suffering, leave a balanceof satisfaction greater than would be left byabsolute forgetfulness, the lesson of utility is tosummon them forth from the recesses of remembrance.No rule can be given which shall applyto a particular case, as the constitution ofdifferent minds is so variable. To some, forexample, the memory of the dead, whom theyhave loved and honored, comes always in theshape of pain ; nay, often of agony. They canthink of nothing but of the privation of happiness,caused by the removal of those they loved. Toothers there is no source of pleasurable emotionmore sweet, more pure, more permanent, thanthat which flows from the recollection of beings100 Doxology.who no longer take a personal part in the businessof life. These dwell less upon the thoughtof what they lost by their absence than upon thememory of what they enjoyed in their presence.Happily, the tendency of reflection, and theprogress of time, are generally in alliance withthe teachings of prudence. The grief thatmourns the dead, is subdued by a sense of itsfruitlessness ; the mind is dragged forth graduallyfrom the vanities of useless sorrow ; andregret, after exhausting itself in idle lamentation,yields to those more rational influences whichutility recommended long before.Self-reproach may to a certain extent beprudential — prudential as a check upon futureconduct ; but self-reproach which has no referenceto the time to come is the mere depositionof a certain quantity of misery in the mind,which in every respect it would have beenbetter to have kept out of it. Reproach ofothers, where no purpose of good is to beanswered by it — the reproach which is concentratedin your own thoughts, is unqualifiedimprudence ; it is pain to yourself; it cannot beof any benefit to them. It is the first step tomalevolent words, and to malevolent deeds.Cases there are, no doubt, where languageand actions which give evidence of displeasure— where reproaches and their accompanyingSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE THOUGHTS. 101appropriate punishment, are demanded alikeby prudence and virtue ; but where this isnot the case, where the reproach is not intendedto be exhibited in the shape of action,then it is only a pain planted in the mind of thereproacher : he will do well and wisely to shutthe door against its access.To future evils, presentable by thought,let not thought be applied ; and if preventable,and the means of prevention are settled, thinkof them no longer. Some men waste their timeand destroy their peace by imagining possibleevils — evils which may never visit them, and ifthey do, will not visit them the less severely forall the anxiety which anticipated their arrival.They will only have swelled the pains ofendurance by the pains of expectation. Of evilcontingent on prudential or prudential conduct,it is, of course, not intended to speak.To think of these is the self-regarding prudencewe are teaching ; but to harass the mind byimagining disease — fancying the tortures of thestone, the visitations of blindness, or the loss ofany of the senses, is a most unfruitful, not to saybaleful occupation. Dr Johnson vas an exampleof a man whose existence was frequentlymade wretched by the fears of insanity — fearsso vivid as nearly to create the very calamitythey deprecated — fears which frequently Doxology.feared with his usefulness, always (when present)with his felicity.In the pursuit of pleasurable thoughts, whatinfinite regions are open to the explorer ! Theworld is all before him, and not this worldonly, but all the worlds which roll in theunmeasured tracks of space, or the measurelessheights and depths of imagination. The past,the present, the future — all that has been, allthat is, of great and good, of beautiful and harmonious— and all that may be. Why shouldnot the high intellects of the days that are gonebe summoned into the presence of the inquirer ;and dialogues between or with the illustriousdead be fancied, on all the points on which theywould have enjoyed to discourse, had theirmortal existence stretched into the days thatare ? Take any part of the field of knowledge,in its present state of cultivation, and summoninto it the sages of former time ; place Milton,with his high-toned and sublime philanthropy,amidst the events which are bringing about theemancipation of nations ; imagine Galileo holdingintercourse with Laplace ; bring Bacon —either the Friar or the Chancellor, or both —into the laboratory of any eminent modern chemist,listening to the wonderful development,the pregnant results of the great philosophicalmandate — ' Experimentalize.' Every man, PRUDENCE THOUGHTS. 103suing his own favorite tendencies, has thus aplastic gift of happiness, which will becomestronger by use, and which exercise will makeless and less exhaustible. All the combinationsof sense with matter, the far-stretching theoriesof genius, the flight of thought through eternitywhat should prevent such exercises of themind's creative will ? How interesting are thosespeculations which convey men beyond theregions of earth into more intellectual andexalted spheres — where creatures endowedwith capacities far more expansive, withsenses far more exquisite than observationhad ever offered to human knowledge, arebrought into the regions of thought ! Howattractive and instructive are even some of theUtopian fancies of imaginative and benevolentphilosophy ! Regulated and controlled by theutilitarian principle, imagination becomes asource of boundless blessings.Though the imaginative or mental powersdepend on and are reducible into bodily pleasure,the field they expatiate in is far moreextensive than any other ; and the expanseopened to the contemplation, more varied andsublime. As objects appear larger by night,as obscurity magnifies everything, so imaginationof the vague outstrips the calculation of the104 DEONTOLOGV.real. When Milton describes the descent ofSatan, whoTo this hourHad still been falling ' —the idea of the fall is far more great than ifthere had been a positive estimate of tens ofthousands of miles, from the moment of his overthrowto the present hour. A definite expressionby numbers would have made a far lessforcible impression on the imagination. Out ofthis disposition to magnify what is unknown,grows a great part of the charm of voyages ofdiscovery. In an anticipated certainty, therecan be none of the pleasure of surprise ; andhence the value of the mental pleasures is notof a nature opposite to and separate from thebodily ones, but is grounded on their giving anindistinct and, therefore, magnified view of theexpected enjoyment of the latter. But utilitymust be applied to both for their fit estimate.It is the absence or presence of utility thatmakes the sole difference between the arrangementof the pin on a pincushion by a child, orthe locating the stars on a celestial globe by aphilosopher.In all these cases — in all cases where thepower of the will can be exercised over thethoughts — let those thoughts be directed towardsSELF-regarding PUUDENCE — THOUGHTS. 105happiness. Look out for the bright, for thebrightest side of things, and keep your faceconstantly turned to it. If exceptions thereare, those exceptions are but few, and sanctionedonly by the consideration that a lessfavorable view may, in its results, produce alarger sum of enjoyment on the whole ; as whereforexample, an increased estimate of difficultyor danger, might be needful to call up a greaterexertion for the getting rid of a present annoyance.When the mind, however, reposes onits own complacencies, and looks around itselfin search of food for thought — when it seeksrest from laborious occupation, oris forced uponinaction by the pressure of adjacent circumstances,let all its ideas be made to springup in the realms of pleasure, as far as the willcan act upon their production.A large part of existence is necessarily passedin inaction. By day (to take an instance fromthe thousand in constant recurrence), when inattendance on others, and time is lost by beingkept waiting ; by night, when sleep is unwillingto close the eyelids — the economy ofhappiness recommends the occupation of pleasurablethought. In walking abroad, or inresting at home, the mind cannot be vacant;its thoughts may be useful, useless, or perniciousto happiness. Direct them aright ; the106 Doxology.habit of happy thought will spring up like any-otherhabit.Let the mind seek to occupy itself by thesolution of questions upon which a large sum ofhappiness or misery depends. The machine, forexample, that abridges labor will, by the veryimprovement and economy it introduces, producea quantity of suffering. How shall that sufferingbe minimized ? Here is a topic for benevolentthought to engage in. Under the pressureof the immediate demands of the poor.Sully is said to have engaged them in raising-hugeand useless mounds in his garden. Othershave been found to propose the digging holesand filling them again, as meet employment forindustry when ordinary labor fails. But whata fertile field for generous consideration is that,which seeks to provide the clear accession tothe national stock of riches and happinesswhich all real improvements bring with them,at the least possible cost of pain ; to secure thepermanent good at the smallest and least enduringinconvenience; to make the blessingsthat are to be diffused among the many fall aslightly as possible in the shape of evil on thefew! Perhaps when the inevitable misery isreally reduced to the smallest amount, bythe attention of the intelligent and benevolent,the transition will become in most instancesSELF-llEGARDlXG PHLlDENCE THOUGHTS. 107neither perilous, as it has often been madeby riotous violence towards those who introduceit, nor alarming to those whose labormay be temporarily shifted by its introduction.To point out the projects of benevolence withwhich the mind might occupy itself would be toengage in a limitless task. But let a man passin review the different sorts of human miseryfor the purpose of endeavoring to relieve orto remove it : what employments could befound for the blind, the deaf, the dumb ; forthose who had lost one or both hands, andwhat pleasures could be invented for them ?How, by the least quantity of pain inflictedon a criminal, could the greatest effect possiblebe produced on the people? and so forth.The thoughts which have future consequencesfor their object are called expectations ; andupon these expectations no small part of aman's happiness depends.If a pleasure is anticipated, and fails of beingproduced, a positive pain takes place of theanticipation. For the designation of this painthe French language furnishes nothing but acompound appellation, namely, peine d'attentetrompi^e — the pain of frustrated expectation.One word communicates the idea in English,namely, the pain of disappointment.108 Doxology.And of such importance is this pain in thefield of human existence, such its influence onthe aggregate of happiness, that it constitutes avery great part of the foundation on whichthe whole branch of the civil law is erected :it is to the exclusion of disappointment that thelabors of legislation are in that departmentmainly directed. Why do you give to theproprietor that which is his own, rather thanto any other person ? Because, by giving itto any other person than the proprietor, youwould produce the pain of disappointment.Dean Swift has concentrated his notion ofthe necessity of excluding pain from this sourcein the vivacity of an apophthegm ; or rather hehas added it to the beatitudes. ' Blessed ishe which expected nothing, for he shall notbe disappointed.'Hence the high importance of forming correctestimates of what may be expected from mankindat large, in all those cases where theirconduct may influence your own well-being,If we would love mankind,' says Helvetia,as before quoted, ' we ought to expect littlefrom them ;' and he might have added, if welove ourselves. The less sanguine are our expectationsthat others will sacrifice their pleasuresto our pleasures, the less shall we be exposedto disappointment, and the less will be the.SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE THOUGHTS. 109sum of disappointment. And if such sacrificesare really made to us by others, the more keenand exquisite will be our satisfaction : whateverpleasure the sacrifice made or the servicedone might render us, that pleasure will beheightened by the pleasure of surprise, andthe pain of disappointment be supplanted bya pleasure beyond expectation.Now, though in every part of the field ofmorals the keeping in view the primary fact,that the social feelings must inevitably besubordinate to the self-regarding is of the highestimportance, in this particular part of thefield the necessity is more prominently obvious.Against the pain of disappointment he will bebest able to preserve himself who takes a correctand complete view of the necessity ofthat preponderance which, by the unalterablecondition of human nature, the force of self-regardingaffection is destined to maintain oversocial or sympathetic affection. The rights ofproperty, be they what they may, grow out ofthis source ; and indeed the whole machineryof society is the recognition of the truth of theprinciple.We are thus naturally led to inquiry as to thethe best means of giving to the mind mastery overits own thoughts. If it possess the power ofbanishing thoughts of pain, and introducing110 DEONTOLOGV.thoughts of pleasure, how can that power beexercised with most effect ? The obvious meansare to divert the mind from the thoughts that arepainful, and from the objects associated withthose thoughts; and on the other hand to occupyit with thoughts that are pleasurable and with objectslikely to awaken pleasurable thoughts. Theexpulsion of the one and the introduction of theother, are in truth closely allied ; for unless somethought of pleasure is at hand to take placeof the thought of pain which exertion has ejected,little may be won for happiness. Enoughwill not be done by the mere attempt at forcingan annoying thought to vacate the mind ; itwill infallibly be supplanted by another thought,and the balance of happiness will be betweenthe efforts of the thought which enters and thatwhich makes its exit.In many cases, as in cases of annoyancefrom objects of the corporeal class, a man mayemploy direct means ; he may remove the objectitself, or remove himself from its presence.When the fatal apple was presented to Eve,Eve might have turned her back upon it, orhave made a present of it to the first frugivorousquadruped that crossed her path.But it is not thus with impressions underivedfrom physical objects ; with ideas presented bymemory or imagination. A man can employSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE — THOUGHTS. Illno direct means for getting rid of these. Hehas but one way of ridding himself, and that anindirect one. He must detach his thoughtsfrom the idea he desires to expel, by attachingthem to some idea of a different nature. Untilhe can do this his object must be thwarted ;for the continuance of the endeavor to get ridof the unpleasant idea, until he has hold of someobject to replace it, will but keep the unpleasantidea constantly present, and more prominentlyin view.Thus, to drive or keep an unpleasant idea outof the mind, the attention must not be thrownon the idea itself; since that would only fix itthe faster, and counteract the object. Endeavorto lay hold of some idea that interests you,and use it as the instrument for the expulsionof the other. If it fail to fix itself in your mind,and no other agreeable idea presents itself, useany that, even though affecting, is less afflictingthan the one you desire to be freed from. Inthis case, the remedy employed is analagous tothat employed in the case of a blister : by apain less intense and less lasting, a pain moreintense and more lasting is subdued.For example. You are visited by the wrathof a near and dear relative. You plunge intobusiness in order to mitigate your grief. If yourgrief be exceedingly afflictive, it might happenthat the business you carry on, even though112 Doxology.accompanied by loss and vexation, would bringalleviation with it. It might even involve youin quarrels with other parties, and still, byoccupying your attention, distract you from thegreater grief from which you sought to escape.But, in a case lilac this, the pursuit to whichyou fly in the search of a remedy must demandyour continuous attention, an attention continuedlong enough to allow the sharpness of yoursorrow to be mitigated ; for if the business besoon despatched, and you are left at liberty,and exposed to the influence of your formerfeelings, your purpose will scarcely be answered.Thus, if by way of remedy against thedistress produced by the loss of a friend, youbetake yourself to mere reading, especiallylight reading, the demand upon your attentionwill be so weak, that your attention will refuseobedience, and instead of the ideas Which thebook presents, the distressing thought willintrude itself at every turn, and take and keepits place. Nor is it irrelevant to refer here tothe great advantages attendant on a busy, incontradistinction to an idle life ; to the privilegeof being fitted for and practised in a variety ofoccupations in comparison of being dependenton a few ; to the distinction of having a mindhighly cultivated by study in contrast with amind left by want of culture in emptiness andbarrenness. It is generally to persons ofSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE THOUGHTS. 113small fortunes and little or no education, thatsuch domestic losses are most afflictive andirremediable.Time for free thought, unoccupied or preoccupiedtime, almost every human being has inabundance. Apart from those engagements onwhich existence and its enjoyments depend, —apart from those amusements which are necessaryto health, — apart from hours of repose, orhours of repast, — time there is in the possessionof all men which they may employ in theexercise of free thought, giving to that thoughta moral, or in other words, a useful and a felicitousdirection. Every night, and every day,morning and evening, have those intersticeswhich may be filled up to excellent purposes.Some time elapses between the moment of lyingdown and that of sleep. Sleep itself is notcontinuous, — its breaks leave time for reflection.How much, again, of a man's life is employedin locomotion, in walking or being conveyedfrom place to place ; how much in attendanceon others ! What thousand interruptions stealmoments away from his occupations of businessor of pleasure ! These moments are all of themprecious. And then, how many of the engagementsof mankind are handicraft and mechanical,leaving to the thoughts an almost unbridledliberty to wander whither they will ! Time forVOL. II. I114 Doxology.thought is wanting to no man who has learnedhow to husband time. In the multitudinousmoments of existence, as in the multitudinoustopics which have a claim upon the attention ofour race, neither time nor subjects for prudentialand benevolent reflection can be long soughtfor in vain.A few such subjects it may not be amiss totouch upon ; but the field is boundless, and willoffer to every man some peculiar points ofinterest. All men may occupy themselves inthinking of means for the prevention of evil, —in projects of profit or of amusement : if nosuch projects occur to them, hopes may taketheir place; if no hopes, agreeable imaginations;imaginations turning aside from the improbabilityor impossibility of their being realised;imaginations which may be made more vividand delightful by individual recollections.For himself each individual must mould hishabits of thought to suit his own circumstances.If his thoughts are engaged in the search aftermeans of security against evil, and there be noevils in particular of which he is apprehensive,or none which it is in his power to guardagainst, or none against which he has notalready made sufficient provision, he will dowell to turn his thoughts away from any suchunpleasant topic. And even if such evilsSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE THOUGHTS. 115menace him, his attention to the means of preventionshould not be continuous, — he shouldseek his times of respite, otherwise the effect ofhis endeavors to secure himself against futuresuffering may be to make that suffering perpetuallypresent.In every case, the thoughts should be directedas much as possible to the means of prevention,and as little as possible to the evils themselves,to the evils only so far as is necessary fordevising those means.Thoughts directed to the consideration of themeans of alleviating the sufferings of others, donot belong to this part of the subject ; nor arethey of any importance to others until andunless they lead to action.Projects have an advantage over imaginations.Projects, in addition to the present good, afforda chance of future. The interest and excitementthey create are more lasting than hopesand fancies, and more likely to extend ; to beprolific, productive of ulterior projects ; andthose of ulterior, and so on, in long succession.But, in the absence of purposes and projects,hopes and imaginings come with their pleasure-givinginfluence. Though imagination mustwork upon the elements furnished by recollection,yet imagination and recollection are not116 Doxology.the same thing. There may be recollectionwithout any work done by imagination ; theremay be imagination without any distinct recollectionof the individual objects by which thematter for the operations of the imagination hasbeen furnished.No situation is there out of which imaginationmay not extract pleasure. Nothing so painfulas not to offer to the fancy materials pregnantwith enjoyment. When a man is laboring underany disorder, pleasure may be derived from theimagination of the mere absence of that disorder; from the mere imagination unaccompaniedby the expectation, and thus unaccompaniedeven by hope. But, in such a case, it must bethesufferer's endeavor to abstract his thoughtsas effectually as possible from the considerationthat the relief is not obtainable ; he must attachthem as strongly as they can be attached to therecollection of his former state, and the severalenjoyments furnished by it antecedently to thecommencement of the disorder, shutting outthe idea of the hopelessness of their return.To such a state of mind it is not uncommonfor reflection to discipline us. Of the pleasuresof the past, of boyhood and youth, of * theglory in the grass and the sunshine on theflower,' thousands think and talk with a satisfactionwhich the thought that those pleasuresSELF-regarding PRUDENCE — THOUGHTS. 117are irrevocably departed has not been able toimbitter.In proportion to the quantity of pain which agiven thought brings with it, will, in general,be the difficulty of removing it from the mind.At all events, the motive for its removal will beproportioned to its intensity and duration. Andof such painful thoughts those caused by theloss of friends are often the most painful. Inthe earlier stages of grief the power of introducingthoughts of a character unallicd to griefcan scarcely be exercised, and it then becomesthe object of wisdom to modify the painfulthought by associations naturally and easilylinked to it, of which the presence of deathitself furnishes an abundance, and almost everyindividual case of death some peculiar and personalelements. For there is no sorrow whichhas not in some way or other been linked withpleasure, and the very existence of sorrow impliesa contrast with the absence of sorrow.Grief and grievance derive many of their painsfrom the privation of some good once possessedor hoped for, and cannot enter the mind but inadjacent to pleasures enjoyed or anticipated;the remembrance of which enjoyment or anticipationis not necessarily, and on all occasions,overwhelmed with the idea of its loss. Thus thememory of the dead may be brightened with so118 Doxology.many beautiful and pleasure-giving reflectionsas to make even their death a source of happiness; and there is a true philosophy as wellas an affectionate tenderness in the reflection,that a greater bliss may be associated withthe recollection of the dead we have lovedthan with the enjoyments gathered among theliving.As to the direction to be given to discoursewhen the well-being of others is notconcerned, little is required to be said. Suchill-timed or ill-judged conversation as is likelyto bring with it the resentment of others, belongsto another branch of our inquiry. To suchdiscourse as produces no influence on the conductof others towards us, but merely leavesbehind it a balance of pain, from the reflectionof its having been calculated to lower us in theirfriendly opinion, — to such discourse as, from thator any other cause, we think of with after-regret,so that when the balance is drawn between thepleasures of giving it utterance, and the pains offuture reflection, something is found to be lostto our personal happiness, — to such discoursethe character of imprudence must attach, andtherefore such discourse should be avoided. So,again, the discourse which, being pleasurableto the speaker, gives no annoyance to thehearer, leaves so much of gain as the pleasureSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE — DISCOURSE. 119it excites. But this is perilous ground, inasmuchas annoyance may often be felt by thelistener, to which he will give no utterance, fromhis own prudential calculations ; from the desireof avoiding the appearance of contradiction,and the expression of displeasure. The onlyrule that can be given by way of estimating theeffect of conduct, is, to change places with theother party; to apply the law of doing to anotheras we should desire another to do unto us ; a lawof great value and importance when made subservientto the greatest-happiness principle; butinapplicable on many occasions, and especiallyon those where the infliction of pain is necessaryto accomplish the purposes of the moralist orthe legislator; since if the offender, who is theobject of punishment, could claim the benefitof the rule just referred to, it is clear he wouldescape punishment altogether, as no manwillingly entails suffering upon himself.There is a source of enjoyment in words notlistened to by others : in recitations andsoliloquies; in viva voce composition; in readingalone when no one is present but the reader.For if the art of chasing grief be often unsuccessfullypractised in supplanting thoughts ofgrief by thoughts less painful, the instrument oflanguage will sometimes prove a valuableauxiliary; and it frequently happens, when oui120 DEONTOLOGV.own mind is unable to furnish ideas of pleasurewith which to drive out the impressions of pain,these ideas may be found in the writings ofothers, and those writings will probably havea more potent influence when utterance is givento them. To a mind rich in the stores ofliterature and philosophy, some thought appropriateto the calming of sorrow, or the brighteningof joy, will scarcely fail to present itself,clothed in the attractive lansfuaofe of somefavorite writer, and when emphatic expressionis given to it, its power may be considerablyincreased. Poetry often lends itself to thisbenignant purpose, and where sound and sense,truth and harmony, benevolence and eloquenceare allied, happy indeed are their influences.In the management of conduct at large,the two great departments of abstention and ofaction, naturally present themselves, and theyagain may conveniently be divided into corporeal,intellectual, and mixed. Though somegeneral principles may be laid down, bothnegative and positive, yet in all questions ofsuffering and enjoyment, much depends on thepeculiar constitution of the individual. For bethesense of pleasure what it may, a man hasno right to assume that because he has norelish for it, therefore his neighbor has none ;and still less reason has he to interdict to anotherSELt-llEGARDlXG PRUDENCE — CONDUCT. 121an enjoyment, on the ground that it is no enjoymentto himself. Every man is able to form thebest estimate of his own pleasures and his ownpains. No description of them, no sympathyfor them, can be equivalent to their reality. Nostory of a blow ever produced a bruise, nor wasthe agony of tooth-drawing ever felt by mereinterest excited in the sufferings of a friend underthe hands of a dentist. Even were it otherwise,the power of sympathy is nothing till itacts upon self: a truism which is almost reducibleto the self-identical proposition, that a mancan feel nothing but his own feelings. To escapefrom one's self, to forget one's own interests,to make unrequited sacrifices, and all for duty,are high-sounding phrases, and, to say the truth,as nonsensical as high sounding. Self-preferenceis universal and necessary : if destiny be anywheredespotic, it is here. When self is sacrificed,it is self in one shape to self in anothershape, and a man can no more cast off regard tohis own happiness, meaning the happiness of themoment, than he can cast ofi' his own skin, orjump out of it. And if he could, why shouldhe ? What provision could have been madefor the happiness of the whole so successful, socomplete as that which engages every individualof that whole to obtain for himself the greatestpossible portion of happiness 1 and what amount122 Doxology.of happiness to mankind at large could be sogreat on the aggregate as that which is made upof the greatest possible portion obtained byevery individual man ? Of the largest numberof units, and those units of the largest amount,the largest sum total must be the necessaryresult.One considerable branch of essential self-regardingprudence may be called the medical ;it is that in which bodily future suffering is thepenalty of imprudent present enjoyment. Thediscipline of after-punishment generally followsthe excess of sensual pleasure ; if the excess beextreme it invariably follows. The pleasure offruition will be in most cases corporeal, but theadjacent, or consequent pain, will be bothcorporeal and mental ; for imprudence callsdown the chastisement of the mind in alliancewith that of the body; and regret adds stings tosuffering, when man's frame is least able toendure them.Take any case of imprudence ; intoxication,for instance, from the excessive use of spirituousliquors. Setting aside the effect upon others, —the evils of example, the loss of reputation, theexposure to commit all those indiscretions andoffences which the temporary absence of reasonbrings with it, — what is the amount of pleasureand pain which regards the individual PRUDENCE CONDUCT. 123ordered as isolated from the rest of his race ?At the cost of a certain loss of time and money, hepurchased a certain quantity of pleasurable excitement.To the loss of time occupied by theenjoyment, add the loss of time and money sacrificedby or in consequence of the inebriety ; addto that the sufferings of sickness and the sufferingsof debility; the loss of self-control bystrengthening a vicious propensity ; the shame,the sorrow, attendant on the imprudence (and ifno shame and sorrow be there, far more thantheir amount of suffering will have to be addedto the extra-regarding portion of the account.)All these are considerations affecting the individual,without reference to those pains which itis in the power of others to inflict upon him.To calculate the consequences of immorality isthe first step towards escaping from it.To the acts of imprudence which may beconsidered of a mental, or mixed character, thesame tests must be applied ; — irascibility, forexample, which to a certain extent is attributableto natural temperament, but upon whichthe greatest-happiness principle would put astrong and an effective bridle. The pleasure ofits exercise, the pleasure of being in a passion,is a very transitory one. Excessive anger soonexhausts its stores. Now, the irascible affectionsas respects others, are of all the most infectious.124 DEONTOLOGV.and ordinarily produce a vehement reaction.Let them be directed against whom they may,they diminish the pleasure felt in serving theirascible person, and with the diminution ofthe pleasure comes the diminution of thedisposition or the motive to serve him. Butwhat is the effect on the irascible person, asdisassociated from others ? What price has hepaid for the short-lived pleasure of being outof humor? He has fluttered his temper; hehas weakened his powers of judgment; hismastery over his own mind is diminished ; hehas lost time; he has lost influence : in a word,he is left with a serious balance of loss.Upon gaming self-regarding prudence laysits interdict. Benevolence is not the lessperemptory in insisting on the immorality ofthis so dearly-purchased pleasure. The public-opiniontribunal has stigmatized the practicewith sufficient disgrace to hold a considerablecheck upon the gaming propensity, and legislationhas, at different times and in differentways, interfered to bring the offence into thefield of penal judicature. Its consequences,too, have been frequently followed into alltheir ramifications of misery, personal, domestic,and social, by the pens and pencils ofauthors and artists. But there is a consideration,and one of mere prudential calculation.SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE CONDUCT. 125which seems to have escaped observation, or,at all events, has not had any popular currency.Has it ever been hitherto considered thatevery gamester who plays upon equal terms,plays to a disadvantage ? Though the stake,skill and chance be entirely equal, a manloses more than he could have gained. Supposethe stake 20/. on each side. If he loses,he loses 20/. If he wins, he wins 20/. andno more. Now 20/. lost is more on the sideof pain than 20/. won on the side of pleasure.A man can better bear to be without 20/. addedto what he has already, than to be without20/. out of that which he has ; so that, in fact,either person is sure to lose more than the othergains.In order for the one to gain as much as theother loses, or rather say, for the one to loseno more than the other gains, the sum at stakeshould be a sum that had belonged to neitherof them before.In extravagant expenditure, imprudence isoften exhibited; and the error is sometimesbrought about by the benevolent affections; bythe exercise of those very qualities which occupyso large a part of the domain of virtue,but which, when escaped from the control ofthe self-regarding interest, become pernicious126 Doxology.vices. The imprudence will be greatest whereits errors are least reparable ; and though theestimate of the quantity of imprudence mustbe weighed in every particular case, yet thefit distribution of expenditure may be subjectedto some general considerations, which it willbe well to keep in view, — as, for example,where income depends wholly upon labor ;in such case, the necessity is obvious of astrict economy, and of the laying by someportion of the fruits of labor, as a securityagainst those interruptions to which ill-health,or accidents, or the inevitable inroads of time,subject the whole human race. When thework of the laborer, who is wholly dependenton daily exertions for his daily bread, is suspended,and he has no store gathered out ofthe economy of the past, the imprudence whichneglected the habit of a strict economy willbe most painfully and most prominently felt.In the expenditure of income underived fromlabor, considerations of another character presentthemselves. Its judicious distribution willbe facilitated by the removal of all those uncertaintiesand contingencies to which theincome of the laborer is subjected. The meansof judging what prudence deprecates or demandsare more accessible, and at the sametime the habit of labor, as a resource againstSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE — CONDUCT. 127want, being wanting, it will not, in ordinarycases, be looked to as a resource. Perhapsthe happiest of human conditions is that inwhich income is derived partly from and partlywithout labor, in which labor is looked to, notfor the supply of absolute necessities, but forthose extra enjoyments which add so much tothe sum of human pleasures. That the fruitionof them should be pushed to the greatest extent,it is needful that their present intensityshould not interfere with their future duration,so far as would, on a fair calculation of probabilities,diminish the final amount of them.If, for the purchase of one pleasure to-day,two, each of equal amount, are to be sacrificedtomorrow, it is clear the bargain is one of loss,of folly, of imprudence.The means of positive pleasure, which self-regardingprudence presents to the mind, aremultifarious. They depend for their extentupon the habits and pursuits of the individual,and must be followed out with a particular referenceto those sources of enjoyment whichexperience has taught to be most valuable tohim. Groups of pleasures will be found inthose different regions of amusement to whichdifferent men address themselves, — amusementsintellectual and corporeal, stationary andlocomotive, scientific and artistical; amusements128 Doxology.of research into the past, or of discovery for thefuture. Sex, age, station may influence someof these. In every individual's case he mustselect for his owen pursuit those which to himafford the greatest amount of satisfaction.Happily for mankind, men's minds are so variouslyendowed, so variously trained and tutored,that tastes will always be distributed among aconsiderable number of dissimilar objects. Tosome the solitary, to others the social investigationwill be most delightful. The leaves ofthe library will instruct one, the flowers of thefield another. Some enjoy the examination ofthe minutest details, others are most gratifiedwhen they can grasp great and general principles.And thus it is that in turn the wholedomain of thought and inquiry is occupied,and the crowding upon some departments, andthe abandonment of others provided against.Where no distinct tendency towards a particularstudy has been perceived, a little attention tothe pursuits and amusements of men distinguishedfor their possession of happiness maybevery useful. Of amusements purely mentalthe list would be multitudinous, embracing allthe topics to which mind can devote itself. Passin review the various games by which skill maybeexercised without such a mixture of chanceas to produce more annoyance from unexpectedSELF-regarding PRUDENCE — CONDUCT. 129disappointment than satisfaction from unexpectedsuccess. How much enjoyment may-growfrom the collection of antiquities, with aview to illustrate the past, to assist the investigationof historical facts, and especially tothrow light upon any topics which might bemade instructive to the future ; — from the collectionof objects of natural history, in the animal,mineral, and vegetable field, but particularly inthe two latter, since their collection inflicts nopain, and implies no destruction of life, or ofhappiness or enjoyment ; and most of all in thelast, the vegetable or botanical, which frequentlygives the opportunity of diffusing pleasureto others by the multiplication of specimens; — and, as connected with such studies,the breeding of domestic animals, with a viewto the observance of their peculiar instincts,habits, and propensities; the power of educationupon them ; their aptitude for services to whichthey have not been before applied ; — the cultureof beautiful flowers, such as tulips, auriculas,or anemones, or of choice and useful plants forpurposes culinary or medicinal. Of locomotiveamusements many will present themselves,both healthful and varied. Nutting, or mushroomhunting, or the thousand other attractionsof forest and field — amusements not only pleasurablein themselves, but useful in their con-vol.II. K130 Doxology.sequences, and sometimes even lucrative ; andno man need blush if, without loss to others, hisamusements can be made pecuniarily profitableto himself. The mechanical arts again ; thosearts which invent and modify the instrumentsdirectly subservient to animal enjoyment, orindirectly subservient by their subserviency tosciences which promote that enjoyment. Butprudence, setting out in the chace for happiness,will seldom fail of success ; the world isall before it, — a world which presents at everyturning some new instrument, some new elementof pleasure.All the virtues, whether prudential or benevolent,do, in effect, essentially, though indirectly,belong to the regions of self-regardingprudence. For, be their action upon the mindsof others what it may, their action upon themind of him who exercises them must be beneficent.When the temper is in the most complacentand pleasurable state, the dispositionto display acts of kindness is most fervent. Itmay happen, indeed, that the effort of beneficencemay not benefit those for whom it wasintended, but when wisely directed, it mustbenefit the person from whom it emanates.Good and friendly conduct may meet with anunworthy, with an ungrateful return, but theabsence of gratitude on the part of the receiverSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE CONDUCT. 131cannot destroy the self-approbation which recompensesthe giver. And we may scatter theseeds of courtesy and kindness around us at solittle an expense! Some of them will inevitablyfall upon good ground, and grow up intobenevolence in the minds of others, and all ofthem will bear fruit of happiness in the bosomwhence they spring. Once blest are all thevirtues always ; twice blest sometimes.The counterpart of these observations appliesto the baneful and immoral qualities. Theirinfluence upon others may be undefinable, notso their influence on the person who exhibitsthem: he must be deteriorated. Cases mayoccur in which incivility, asperity, anger, ill-will,may, as far as they regard others, produceconsequences opposed to their natural tendencies,but they can only have a pernicious effectupon him who makes the foolish experiment oftrifling with the happiness of others.132 Doxology.CHAPTER III.EXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE.This branch of the great moral topic may beperhaps most conveniently and satisfactorilytreated by considering, first, the general lawswhich extra-regarding prudence dictates in ourordinary intercourse with mankind ; and then bypursuing the inquiry into relations which demandmodification of those general laws, in orderto produce on the whole the greatest accessiblesum of felicity.The dependence of man upon his fellow menis the sole source of the extra-regarding, as it isof the benevolent principle. For if a man werewholly sufficient to himself, to himself he wouldbe sufficient ; and as the opinions and conduct ofothers towards him, would by the suppositionbe indifferent to him, no sacrifice would hemake to obtain their friendly affections. In fact,such sacrifice would be but a waste, and suchwaste would be a folly.Happily for each, happily for all of us, thehuman being is differently constituted. Of man'spleasures, a great proportion is dependent onEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 133the will of others, and can only be possessed byhim with their concurrence and co-operation.There is no possibility of disregarding the happinessof others without, at the same time, riskinghappiness of our own. There is no possibilityof avoiding those inflictions of pain withwhich it is in the power of others to visit us,except by conciliating their good will. Eachindividual is linked to his race by a tie, of alltics the strongest, the tie of self-regard.Dream not that men will move their littlefinger to serve you, unless their advantage in sodoing be obvious to them. Men never did so,and never will, while human nature is made ofits present materials. But they will desire toserve you, when by so doing they can servethemselves ; and the occasions on which theycan serve themselves by serving you are multitudinous.The intelligent will catch at opportunitieswhich escape the eyes of the vulgar ;and in these mutual services there is virtue,and there is little virtue beyond them ; and happilyof such virtue, there is more than thosewho do not possess it are willing to acknowledgeor able to believe.The social and popular sanctions are calledinto action in the field of extra-regarding prudence.In the domestic and private relationsof man, as well as in his public position, he has134 Doxology.not only to create but to apply those pains andpleasures which the tribunals of social andpopular opinion distribute ; to create, by fixingas far as he is able, an accurate standard of viceand virtue; to apply, by judging every actionaccording to the greatest happiness principle,and awarding to it the recompense or penaltywhich that principle demands. Of the head ofa family, in his family circle, the power is great,because he is the principal source of opinion ;and the character of the moral atmosphere inwhich his household dwells will essentiallydepend upon himself. He may establish aroundhim a state of things, in which happiness beingwisely, will on most occasions be successfullysought; but the sound judgments established athome, will spread abroad and afar off — in everydirection in which the members of such a familymay be placed. Were a correct estimate ofright and wrong, were sound notions on moraltopics born in the centre of families, they wouldsoon make their way into the civic and thenceto the national world. For the felicity-promotingcode is universally applicable, — applicableto all men, on all occasions, in all places.Where the dictates of prudence, and those ofbenevolence obviously harmonize, the line ofduty is clear ; where they clash, as for example,where prudence requires abstention from benefitPUUDENCE. 135cent action, or even the infliction of pain by activeinterference, no other rule can be laid downthan that the evil should be made not greaterthan is necessary to accomplish the good, andthat the good obtained should be as great as isobtainable. The question must always be oneof arithmetic ; for morality can be nothing butthe sacrifice of a lesser for the acquisition of agreater good.The virtue of extra-regarding prudence is onlylimited by the limits of our intercourse with ourfellow men ; it may even extend far beyond thebounds of our personal communion with others,by secondary, or reflected influences. In thepublic field, and as forming a part of a wholepeople, both national and international law maybesaid to constitute a proper ground for the introductionof that prudence which concernsothers. And, were this the fit occasion, thesubject might be followed into the ramificationswhich the legislative and the executive departmentsof government present, and these againsubdivided into their administrative and judicialfunctions. But these topics belong more properlyto the question for philosophical legislation; and it is therefore to the private jiart ofthe subject, as divided into the domestic andnon-domestic branches, that our attention willbe given; that part which embraces mansDoxology.social relations which have not a public character;relations either permanent or accidental,constituted by genealogical ties which are dissolvedonly by death, or growing out of thoseshifting or temporary associations which form apart of every man's history.Various are the situations in which an individualmay be placed, as connected with publicopinion ; at its tribunal, a man may be eitherjudge, pleader, or party. He may have to awardand dispense pains and pleasures to others; toadvocate at the hands of others the dispensationof reward or punishment, or to receive fromthe decrees of others the penalty or recompenseof acts submitted to the scrutiny of the social orthe popular sanction. In all these cases, lethim be on his guard against a common failing,the ascription to others of certain motives,inducements, or intentions, or the setting up aclaim of motive, inducement, or intention forhimself. In the character of a judge, nothingcan more assist an honest and a useful decision,than the laying bare all actions as they reallyare ; the tracing consequences as they presentthemselves in overt conduct; avoiding carefully,on the one hand, all attempts to dive into theunfathomable regions of motives which cannotbe known ; and, on the other, steering clear ofthat petty, pharisaical vanity which is so fondEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 137of exhibiting itself to the great detriment of theexhibitor. As an advocate, happily removedfrom that most perilous position in which usagehas placed a numerous profession, who aredoomed, at the bidding of a sufficient fee, indiscriminatelyto defend right or wrong, by truth orfalsehood ; as an advocate, who is bound, if hecan, to obtain a correct verdict at the hands ofthe popular sanction, no attempt to misdirect,or lead astray from the consequences of theaction in question, can be sanctioned by themoral principle. And, as a party to be judgedby the tribunal of public opinion, nothing canbe more safely recommended than to bear constantlyin mind the conditions on which theaffection of others is held, namely, the interchangeof mutual services ; the sacrifice, on fitoccasions, of the present to the future. As ageneral rule, let useless reproaches in thoughtbe avoided : they may lead to useless reproachesin words, or useless reprobation in action. Inall these — in thoughts, words and actions,extra-regarding prudence has to exhibit itself.Thoughts, not leading to words or actions, areharmless to others, however painful or pleasurableto ourselves. But, inasmuch as thoughtsoften do lead to words and actions— are theirsource and origin — in fact, are in every case thefirst imjndse which prom sits to conduct, they mustbe followed into their recesses by the inquiring138 Doxology.moralist, and divested, as far as may be, ofthose qualities which are likely to break out inpernicious influence upon individuals, bodies ofmen, or mankind at large.Thoughts there are prejudicial to a fair estimateof human character, and which by theirdisparagement of our nature lead to erroneousjudgment, and what is worse to practical injusticeand malevolence. Of these it will be sufficientto point out some of the most obvious.The list might easily be extended, but theinquirer will not be ill-employed in drawing onhis experience, his recollection, or his observation,in order to increase the number of instructiveexamples.One, is to conclude, because professions oncemade have afterwards been departed from, thattherefore they were insincere at the time theywere made.Another, is to suppose that men profess suchand such sentiments solely because they are ofsuch and such a party : whereas, the case maybethat they are of such a party, because suchand such are their sentiments.A third is, where a man may be a gainer byprofessing such and such sentiments, to conclude,in every case, that such interest is the solecause of his professing such sentiments.The greater part of those who in point ofopinions are swayed by interest, are probablyEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 139sincere. This is the case when the interestwhich sways them is not perceived by orsensible to themselves.There are few, perhaps, wiio have the boldnessto own their dishonesty to themselves : fewwho say to themselves aloud : * This is not my'opinion, but yet I will say it is, because I canget so much by saying so.' Interest in general,acts in a more insensible and covert manner.It does not attack men's integrity in front, butundermines it. It occasions them to view thearguments against the proscribed opinion withmore complacency ; those in favor of it withless. When any of the former make their appearancein the mind, they are thought much of; theyare regarded with attention, and have their fullweight given them ; when any of the letterpressthemselves they are received askance, and hustledas it were out of the mind without a hearing.In the political world, errors of opinion,which may well be called ' vulgar ' from theiruniversality, are the sources of much uncharitablenessand suffering. Such are those whichmake consummate characters either in depravityor in virtue ; those which refer everymotion of public men to political motives; whichattribute every action to ends and purposeswhich belong to them as politicians, and noneto those which belong to them as men ; whichlay every instance of supposed misconduct in140 Doxology.public men to the account of the depravity ofthe heart, and none to the imbecility of thehead ; which suppose every thing immoralwhich appears inexpedient.True it is, that every observer of public menmay have noticed instances of misconductwhich would seem to justify the severest judgment;but the severest judgment is seldom thewisest ; and the passions, which in politicalmatters so often mingle with the estimate weform of others, sadly bewilder the intellect, and.play havoc with the generous affections. Thelaw of benevolence requires that our thoughtsof others should be candid and merciful, andthis the claim of prudence yet more emphaticallyurges ; for harsh judgments of others willbring back harsh judgments on ourselves; andthe pleasure of malevolence must be purchasedby the reaction of its penalties.The prudential management of discourse is adifficult, but most important branch of morals.The aberrations of the tongue have been fromtime immemorial the topic upon which proseand poetry have poured forth their judgments,though neither prose nor poetry has hithertogiven us any complete set of rules by whichthe faculty of speech may be made most subservientto the creation of happiness and thediminution of misery. With that great objectin view, the functions of the tongue, like all theEXTRA-regarding Prudence. 141other functions of the body, may be made theinstruments of good.In a great part of the regions of conversation,boundless as they are, the dictates of benevolenceare in complete accordance with thoseof prudence ; and the topics arc multitudinouswhich, while they are pernicious to no one, arepleasurable to the hearer, pleasurable to thespeaker, and pleasurable or useful to mankindat large. And such topics should undoubtedlybe those of primary choice, where the directionof conversation is in our hands, and where, atthe same time, the more urgent claims of a particularpresent interest do not interfere. Butthe mistake must be specially guarded against,which is too frequently made, of supposing thata topic interesting to the speaker is necessarilyso to the hearer, however really important thattopic may be. The prudential, as well as thebenevolent motives, dictate an abstention fromconversation which is annoying to others, andeven from that which is indifferent to them.Nay, that which is pleasurable to both partiesmay be in discordance with the great rule ofvirtue — the ultimate balance of good.The discourse by which a man may beaffected is susceptible of three divisions. Discourseto him, — of him, — and both ; in otherwords, that discourse addressed to him of which142 Doxology.he is not the topic ; that discourse addressed tohim of which he is the topic ; and that discourseaddressed to others of which he is theobject. But by the discourse of which he isnot the topic he may be very sensibly influenced,though, in ordinary cases, far more sensiblyby that which concerns his own personand character. The discourse addressed toothers will act upon him as a portion of theawards of the public-opinion tribunal ; and, infact, the judgments we give expression to, arein themselves awards, and dispense the painsand pleasures, the recompense and punishment,of which we have the disposal. Those judgmentsmay or may not harmonize with theopinions of the majority ; they may or may notinfluence the opinions of the majority ; theymay or may not affect the happiness of theindividual in question ; but we are bound tosuppose that unfavorable judgment will infalliblyproduce pain, and we have no right to produceit without satisfactory evidence that themischief inflicted by the pain in one direction,will be more than compensated by the productionof pleasure, or the removal of pain inanother direction. And so with undeserved, orill-deserved eulogium. To lower the standardof morals, by dealing out the language ofapproval to character or conduct in itself PRUDENCE. 143worthy, — that is to say, to conduct or characterunfriendly to the happiness of mankind, is toplay a pernicious part on the stage of morality,■ — is to pervert that judgment in its sources,whose correctness and appropriateness are thegreat securities for its beneficial influences, — inaword, is to lend a helping hand to the demoralizationof the race.As a general rule, if the affections of himwith whom you are about to commence a conversationare matters of indifference to you, alltopics are open to you : if it be an object withyou to gain or keep his affections, choose thattopic, whatever it be, that is most agreeableto him. At any rate, you may avoid everytopic which you know or suspect to be disagreeableto him.So, as to hearing and making others hear,it will be a question of prudence as to theproportion of time you shall yourself occupy inthe discussion, or allow to your companions fortheir portion of the conversation. Not to furnishyour contingent when that contingentmight instruct or amuse — instruct withoutannoyance, or amuse without mischief, is to bewanting in one of the great arts of pleasing ;while, on the other hand, to assume an unfairportion of the time employed in conversationalintercourse, to intrude your discourse upon144 Doxology.others, to their annoyance, is to assume a rightto interfere with the pleasures or the prejudicesof others, which sound morality will by nomeans justify, still less recommend.Let the tone of your conversation be invariablybenevolent. Differ without asperity :agree without dogmatism. Kind words cost nomore than unkind ones. Kind words producekind actions : not only on the part of him towhom they are addressed, but on the part ofhim by whom they are employed ; and this notincidentally only, but habitually, in virtue ofthe principle of association.There is an infirmity to which many menare subject, and which cannot but leave anunfavorable impression on the minds of theirhearers. It is the use of hyperbolical language,of praise or blame, as applied to actions of toolittle importance to merit such extreme judgments: out of such phraseology oratory iswont to choose its instruments of delusion, andto these a great portion of the mischief oferroneous moral estimate is to be attributed.It is an act of sophistry to attach terms ofstigma to the conduct which the sophist wishesto deprecate. The conduct in itself, perhaps,if plainly and simply stated, would excite littleemotion ; but if some opprobrious name can beattached to it, it is already half-condemned inEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 145the mind of the inconsiderate. Among themost important triumphs of mental discipline,is that which at once separates good and evilactions from the laudatory or condemnatorylanguage in which they are so frequently wraptup, and which serves to bewilder or to blindthe observer. To the substantive act someadjectival qualification is frequently appended,by which the act is removed from its appropriateregion into that-where the applause or vituperationof tie speaker chooses to place it.Phrases eulogistic or dyslogistic act upon themind as stained glasses act upon the visualsense, and the object contemplated assumes acoloring which is not its own. In the politicalworld especially, men are prone to indulge inthat decorative and dishonest language, whichmay sometimes serve the purposes of spite orof flattery, but must, in the long run, be perniciousto the moral and intellectual reputationof him who employs it.Avoid all arguments that you know to be sophistical.Think not, by shutting your own eyesagainst the weakness of your statements, thatyou have thereby shut the eyes of your hearer.Your sophistry will but irritate, for sophistry isnot only uncandid, but dishonest. It is an attemptto cheat, not the purse of another, but hissenses and his judgment. His aversion to youVOL. II. ■ L14G Doxology.will be awakened by your effort to shine at hisexpense ; and his contempt will be roused forthe folly that supposed it was able so to shine.In all argument be candid, for the sake of yourcomrade and for your own sake. The triumphof an argument which is known and felt to beunfair and unfounded, is a wretched exhibitionof perversity. If successful, it can serve nointerests but those of fraud : if unsuccessful,it brings with it the consequences of blunderingand detected dishonesty. Constituted associety is, with its errors and prejudices, itsnarrow interests and interested passions, thepursuit of truth makes demands enough uponcourageous virtue ; for he who goes one stepbeyond the line which the world's poor conventionshave drawn around moral and politicalquestions, must expect to meet with the thunderinganathemas and obloquies of all whowish to stand well with the arbiters of opinion.Let no searcher after truth be led into thelabyrinths of sophistry. He will have enoughto do in order to make good his ground onestep beyond that trodden by those who dogmatizeabout decorum, and propriety, and rightand wronof.While differing in opinion from others, andgiving expression to that difference, let care betakento avoid the appearance of personalEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 147attack. And this may be accomplished by theuse of those forms of expression which secureyou against seeming personally to assume ahostile position. You have, for example, occasionto convey your disapproval of certainopinions, held by another. There is no needof bringing upon yourself the sort of undividedhostility which may probably resultfrom your direct and violent onset against thoseopinions which, for aught you know, may beas deeply rooted in your opponent's mind asthe contrary are in your own mind. Instead,therefore, of taking the front ground, as itwere, of personal offence, you may representyourself to be one of a number who have notbeen able to see the weight of the argumentsalleged in favor of your opponent's doctrine ;that the doctrine has been met by such andsuch difficulties, and so on. Or, you may putyour own opinions into the mouth of another, byusing a class of men indefinitely, or any determinatebody of men, for the avoidance of thatsort of personal jousting which is so frequentlya source of annoyance to both combatants.Such a form of expression as * Some say,' orThe opponents of this opinion say,' will bluntthe sharp edge of the controversy ; and, if thesubject be one in which particular classes areconcerned, the terms of dissent will be sufficesDoxology.gently conveyed by a phrase like this — * Yetthere are lawyers who contend,' &c. ; or, * Butsome divines argue,' and so on, with referenceto the special case before you.And this contrivance has many uses. Itleaves your argument free from obnoxious personality,and it leaves your person free fromthe obnoxious associations which your opinionsmight have attached to yourself.True, a state of things may exist — and tosuch a state of things we are happily tending —in which opinions will not require to shroudthemselves in any trappings but those of honesty.Yet, independently of difference ofopinions, respect must be had even to the prejudicesof others, so as to check the dispositionto intrude opposed opinion in what appears tothem an incongruous or offensive shape. Mindsthere are, to whom the treating even ludicroustopics with any thing like levity would bevexatious and disagreeable ; and others, towhich serious and mathematical reasoning isrepugnant. To each the general rule applies,though for each a distinct course may have tobe adopted. In the shape we give to the communicationof our opinions, as well as in theopinions themselves, let every thing be avoidedwhich creates a useless pain.There is an instrument of tyranny, and PRUDENCE. 141)sequent source of annoyance, against whoseintrusions it is most desirable to find protection.It is that of imprudent interrogation. It assumesvarious shapes, and sometimes producesevil of no inconsiderable amount. Its powersof annoyance vary with the situation of theperson who asks the question, as compared orcontrasted with that of him who is expectedto answer it ; they vary with the topic whichis put forward, and with the times or occasionson which it is introduced. Where an individualin a superior situation asks a question of aninferior, which that inferior is known to be unwillingto answer, what is the question butthe interference of despotism on the part of thequestioner ; and what to the party questionedbut a cause of suffering, and of mendacity, — ■self-preservative mendacity? When a monarchinquired of a novelist, in the presence of others,whether he was the author of certain works,whose authorship the monarch knew wasintended to be kept a profound secret, theinterrogation was an exhibition of tyranny, alie-compelling tyranny.But to avoid collision, prudence requires,not that the intrusion of offensive questioningsshould be met with offensive answers, butrather that they should be turned aside by150 Doxology.good-humored management. * What a question!'* You are not serious, surely!' 'Therebyhangs a tale ;' and so forth. A facetious quotation,the singing a line of a ballad, an appropriatelook or gesture, may relieve the mind ofits embarrassment, and prevent the mischiefsof imprudence. It is scarcely possible to provideformulas for every condition in life, butthe broad Deontological line is sufficiently obvious.The restraints demanded upon discourse byprudence must be sought in every directionwhere discourse has the power of inflictingpain ; and, indeed, the rules which apply towords differ only from the rules that apply toactions, in that the immediate influence of discourseupon human felicity is not so easily norso accurately definable. The pain which isthe consequence of a corporeal injury can beestimated without much difficulty. The valueof a pleasure derived from a particular gratificationmight be, probably, averaged withoutany considerable error. But the influence ofwords upon the mind of the speaker, or uponthe mind of the hearer, cannot be very correctlytraced. The same quantity of tooth-ache wouldaffect, pretty equally, ten different individuals ;but the same words, which addressed to oneEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 151man would fill his mind with acute distress,would be heard by another with completeindifference.In the giving advice to others, and in theabstaining from giving it, there is great reasonfor the exercise of prudential calculation.Cases are rare, in which the giving advice isnot the infliction of pain on him who receivesit; for, unless his conduct were in some respectsdefective, there would be no motive forgivinghim the advice ; and to have defectspointed at, or weaknesses divulged, cannot butbe disagreeable to him whom, by the advice,it is sought to improve. Is there a certaintythat the advice will be wasted ? Let the adviserspare himself the pains of disappointment, andspare the advised the annoyance of a uselessinfliction. But, escorted between self-regardingprudence and beneficence, if the adviserhas good reason to believe that his lessons willnot be lost, he is well occupied in giving them.Let liii avoid reference to by-gone misconduct,except as necessary to give more efficiency tohis counsels. Let those counsels be tinged aslittle as possible with reproach for the past,but brightened as much as may be with encouragementfor the future. In a word, let himlook forward instead of backward, and urgehis hearer to do the same. By sparing him152 Doxology.the recollections of pain, by opening to him theprospects of pleasure, he will best discharge hismoral mission.To restrain those sallies of wit which giveannoyance to others, is one of the duties, anda difficult one, whose exercise is demanded byextra-regarding prudence. The complacencywith which men in general display their intellectualsuperiority, and especially in the regionsof ridicule, often betrays them into disregardfor the feelings they wound, and the reactionof those wounded feelings upon themselves.Happy he, who, tempted to say a clever butmalicious thing, has his own self-love so controlledby the benevolent principle, as to beable, on any occasion, to check the utteranceof that which would distress another ; and happierstill the man in whom the powers of witand ridicule have been so constantly subjected tothe influence of beneficence, as to feel no dispositionto utter that which could give to anotheruseless pain ! Men there are, whose minds havebeen so successfully disciplined, as to be placed,by a temperament which has become habitual,beyond the influence, and even beyond thesuggestions of that infirmity, which exasperatesits victims far more than it injures them, andis often repaid by a malevolence more intense,because its fears do not allow it to break forthEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 153ill ordinary expression. Pleasantry, the gayand joyous pleasantry which proceeds fromhappy spirits, and avoids all topics of painfulresults, is alike an attraction and a merit.Beware in your discourse of raising expectations,without a certainty of their realization ;and if you have the certainty, take care that theexpectation be rather of something less than ofsomething more than you anticipate. The value ofthe pleasure, when it arrives, will be heightenedby its being greater in amount, intensity, or indurationthan was looked for. If you preparedisappointment, you suffer in the good opinion ofthe party whose hopes your representations haveraised too high, and you suffer in your owngood opinion. You Avill have lost something inusefulness by losing something in reputation.In exciting a less amount of expectation than thecase would warrant, you can do neither yourself,nor the expecting person any evil ; for if theevent happen, it will bring with it greaterpleasure from its out weighing anticipation, andif the event do not happen, the pain will belessened in proportion to the small ness of thedisappointment. And that we should preventall needless disappointment, is but the corollaryto the principle that we should not awakenimbue expectation. Next to the creation offelicity, as the great and fundamental basis154 Doxology.of all sound morals and legislation, comes thenon-disappointment principle as second in importance.And its application to discourse isobvious : the language which creates an expectationnot to be fulfilled, or in other words,which lays the ground-work of a disappointmentwhich is inevitable, is as pernicious as anyother conduct which does not produce a greateramount of suffering. Promises lightly made,and carelessly broken, are frequent sources ofmisery.The pretension which indicates the motives ofothers is almost always futile and offensive.For if their motive be what we suppose it, andthe motive be a praiseworthy one, it will bevisible by and in the act ; and if the motive beblameworthy, to denounce it will but be acause of annoyance to him to whom the motiveis attributed. And after all, we have nothingto do with motives. If bad motives producegood actions, so much the better for society ;and if good motives produce bad actions, somuch the worse. It is the act, and not themotive, with which we have to do ; and when theact is before us, and the motive concealed fromus, it is the idlest of idling to be inquiring intothat which has no influence, and forgetting thatwhich has all the real influence upon our condition.What acts, however outrageously and PRUDENCE. 155pensively mischievous, but may be excused andjustified, if the motives of the actor, instead of theconsequences of the act, become the test of rightand wrong? Perhaps there never was a group ofmore conscientious and well-intending men thanthe early inquisitors ; they verily believed theywere doing God service ; they were under theinfluence of motives most religious and pious,while they were pouring out blood in rivers,and sacrificing, amidst horrid tortures, the wisestand best of their race. Motive, indeed ! as if allmotives were not the same, — to obtain for theactor some recompense for his act, in the shapeof pain averted, or pleasure secured. Themotive, as far as that goes, of the vilest is thesame as the motive of the noblest, — to increasehis stock of happiness. The man M-ho murders,the man who robs another, believes that themurder and the robbery will be advantageous tohim, — will leave to him more happiness than ifhe had not committed the crime. In the fieldof motive, however, he may make out a case asrecommendatory of his conduct, as if he werethe most accomplished of moralists. To saythat his motives were ill-directed to his object,is to reason wisely with him ; to say that hismotives had not the object of obtaining forhimself some advantage, is to deny the operationof cause on effect. There is, —and the existence156 Doxology.of the disposition is a striking evidence of thetendency of men towards despotic assertion, —there is by far too great a willingness to turnaway from the consequences of conduct in orderto inquire into its sources. The inquiry is afruitless one, and were it not fruitless it wouldbe useless. For were motives other than theyare, — were they fit and proper evidence of thevice or virtue of any given action,— it would notbe the less true, that opinion could ultimatelyhave no other test for judgment than theconsequences of that action. A man's motivesaffect nobody until they give birth to action ;and it is with the action and not with themotive, that individuals or societies have anyconcern. Hence, in discourse, let all indicationsof motives be avoided. This will removeone spring of error and false judgment fromthe mind of the speaker, and from the minds ofthe hearers one source of misunderstanding.In the conveying approbation to another formeritorious conduct, let the expressions be warmand cordial. Let the recompense be as muchas the circumstances of the case justify. Sincerityand candor, indeed, are modifications ofveracity ; or rather veracity is a modification ofsincerity ; but veracity has its shapes more orless attractive ; and when it has the matter ofpleasure at its disposal, let its distribution beEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 157made as welcome as possible to the receiver.That a favor denied may be made, by the graceof its denial, almost as pleasurable as a benefitconferred has almost passed into a proverb ;and that the language of approval may lose all,or almost all its acceptableness by its forms ofexpression or manner of utterance, is within theobservation of every man's experience. Letyour praise then, when given, be given with allthe accompaniments which make praise mostdelightful. The exercise which conveys approbationis in itself most salutary. Let it be theexpression of truth combined with warm-heartiness: one sentence so characterized will beworth many in which such qualities are wanting.And, where extra-regarding prudence requiresthat disapprobation should be conveyed to another,let only so much of pain be created as isnecessary for the accomplishing the object youhave in view. If you create too little pain, indeed,that which you do create is wasted, because thepurpose for which it was created fails. But thecommon error is on the other side. Vindictivenessfrequently mingles with the awards ofjustice. The disposition of poM'er to displayitself, usually leads to the infliction of moresuffering than prudence or benevolence warrant.And in ordinary cases disapprobation is conveyedin that moment when passion has158 Doxology.enfeebled the power of judging how much of pahis demanded. As a general rule, avoid the expressionof disapprobation when you are angry.The violent expressions to which irritation givesbirth, are those which will be least adaptedto the end ; for the blindness of anger preventsit from seeing and seizing the fit object forthe accomplishment of its ends. If a man hasinjured you, avoid, if possible, being yourself theawarded of the punishment the injury merits :wait for denunciation of the injury by someother person ; it will produce more effect thanfrom you, and the odium to yourself will besaved.Some men have a failing, which is a source ofgreat annoyance to others, and for which theypay the penalty, by making their conversationless agreeable, and even at times making theirconversation intolerable : it is the habit ofstickling for the final word. Right or wrong inthe controversy, subdued or victorious, thereare persons who insist on exercising the pettyand vexatious despotism of uttering the last sentencethat is uttered. This disposition is theoutbreak of pride in a very offensive shape ; itis the usurpation of dominion over the self-loveof other men, on a ground where men are ordinarilymost sensitive. It is, in fact, a determinationto humiliate him with whom you haveEXTRA-regaining Prudence. 159been holding intercourse, — to humiliate him,not by the success of an irresistible argument,but by the intrusion of a tyrannic power.Avoid then the act, lest the act should createthe habit ; and if the habit exist, extra-regardingprudence requires that it should be got ridof. Watch yourself ; and inquire of any friendon whose sincerity you can rely, — inquire, ifyou are quite sure that you will not be hurtby his reply, whether the infirmity is exhibitedby, or has been observed in you. A^^l if it be,correct the infirmity.The proper subjugation of the virtue of veracityto those of prudence and benevolence hasbeen already insisted on. Of the vice mendacity,which is the contrasted vice to the virtueof veracity, there are several ramifications, ofa character more or less pernicious, but againstwhose exercise prudence demands us to be onour guard. Mendacity is one of many modesby which deceit is practised. Disingenuousnessis another. Its tendency always, and itsintention generally, is to produce misconception.Insincerity is another form of mendacity,to be estimated, as to the extent of its perniciousness,by the extent of evil which itgenerates. Exceptions excepted — and thoseare the rare cases in which the higher demandsof prudence and benevolence require the sacri-vigoDoxology.face of veracity — ingenuousness and sincerity-areamong the virtues which extra-regardingprudence takes under its care. They are singularlyfascinating and self-recommendatory.The interest that every individual feels, onordinary occasions, in the communication oftruth, gives to truth a peculiar recommendationwhen it comes in a shape so attractive. Itscharm is then upon the surface ; visible to theeye ; obvious to the understanding.As to the general influence of our actionsupon others, as reflected back upon ourselves,and with a sole regard to our own happiness, —that is, supposing their happiness to form nopart of our estimate, it is certain that an enlightenedselfishness would prescribe friendlydeeds towards them. For, take any object ofdesire, — power, for example, — power, as asource of pleasure, which it undoubtedly is,and inquire how it is best obtainable, in so faras other men are concerned. There are twocourses of action, — namely, doing good to them,or doing evil to them ; for non-action will, ofcourse, produce rio results. By doing evil tothem, you make enemies ; by doing good tothem, you make friends : now which, in referenceto your own good, is preferable ?Solitary and isolated man disposes but ofsmall portions of pleasure. Alone, all his PRUDENCE. Insertionswould scarcely be enough to provide forhimself food and clothing, and protection againstthe elements. Even in the earlier periods ofcivilization, where the means of association arefew, his sufferings are considerable, from thefrequent absence of the necessaries of life ; andit is often his fate to perish from the want ofco-operation. All that social knowledge does,is to make men more useful to one another, —is to give to each an interest in the resourcesof the whole, — is to deal out to every man, forhimself, a greater portion of the enjoymentswhich are in the gift of others, than he wouldotherwise have obtained.Though, to the definitions of the Aristoteliana thousand irresistible objections may be urged,though their classification of morality, underthe bifurcate divisions of virtues and half-virtues,is wholly untenable, yet the virtues maybevery conveniently and fitly divided into twosections, the major and the minor morals, — themajor, as they regard the interests which aregreater, but are more rarely at stake ; theminor, those which regard interests that ai:*comparatively less, but are continually broughtinto question.To both branches the same rules apply; but,inasmuch as the quantity of good and evilwhich depends on any one action belonging tovol II. M162 Doxology.the minor branch will be comparatively small,it is sometimes more difficult to mark out thecourse which prudence and benevolence prescribe.But the popular sanction has taken agreat part of the minor morals under its wing,and, to a very considerable extent, the laws ofgood breeding are in conformity with the Genealogicalprinciple. To those laws there isseldom any hostility on the part of the aristocraticalsection of society. Like the rest ofmankind, the ruling few are dependent on theirobservance for no small portion of their ownhappiness, and therefore they combine to givethem action and effect. Reckless as are toooften the opulent and privileged classes of theclaims of morality in its more exalted andimportant bearings, they are cautious in violatingits dictates in that narrower field, wherearistocratical opinion has itself marked out acertain course. Their extra-regarding prudencehas put a decided check upon the dissocialaffections. In numberless cases, the impulsewhich would inflict pain on another is disarmedby the well-established code of courtesy. Goodmanners already tolerate difference of opinionin religion, politics, and taste. The outbreakswhich, only a few years ago, would havebeen allowed to intolerance, have been alreadychecked by the peremptory mandates of politeness.A better system of morals than thatEXTRA-regarding PRUDENCE. 1G3which has so long overruled society is graduallyintroducing itself, and regulating theworld's judgment by a more faithful standardof right. In this there is consolation, — in thismay be seen a tendency towards a state ofthings where social and popular rewards andpunishments will be sufficient to restrain andencourage a vast number of acts which are nowleft to the intervention either of the legislative,administrative, or judicial authorities; to thedictum of the priesthood, or the terrors of thelaw-giver. With the Deontological test in hand,let Chesterfield's Letters be read, or any otherwork whose object it is to teach the minormorals, and it will be found very easy toseparate the chaff from the wheat, to rescueand reduce to practice whatever is wise andvirtuous, and to pick out and fling aside, asunfit for use, all those instructions which violatethe great primary principles. Such an employmentwould be a delightful exercise, both forthe intellect and the affections : — for the intellect,as engaged especially in calculating theclaims of the self-regarding interest; and forthe affections, in giving weight to all the suggestionsof effective benevolence.If the accomplishment of any one purposewhich a man proposes to himself be submittedto any other rule of action than that we have164 Doxology.laid down, will that other rule give him somany chances of success, or make his successso complete or so economical as the rule ofDeontology, which is resemble in two simpleprecepts, ' Maximize good, minimize evil?'Take any case that can be suggested. Youhave, for example, long been in habits of intercoursewith another. His society has ceased tobe acceptable to you. It is desirable the connectionshould be dissolved. Now, for the puttinga termination, whether temporarily or otherwise,to his visits, could any better advice beoffered to you than that, while removing fromyourself the annoyance caused by his company,you should take care that as little vexation aspossible should be given to him ? No goodend can be answered by exciting in his mind,or in your own, a useless pain. Prudencewould guard you against distressing yourselfunnecessarily. Benevolence would prevent yourbringing down upon him unneeded suffering.Such being the general law, you would soapply it, in every case, as to give it the greatestefficiency. If there were any peculiar susceptibilityin the mind of your acquaintance, thatsusceptibility you would take care not towound. Unless the case demanded an immediaterupture, you would break off your intercoursegradually ; if instant cessation of com-EXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 165medication were absolutely needful, you wouldput forward the least offensive reason you couldfind for your justification.Let a man's object be to ingratiate himselfwith another, — a fit and proper object, if pursuedin accordance with prudence and benevolence, — ■how can he best accomplish it ? How shall heapply the Deontological rule ?To ingratiate yourself with another is toobtain his good opinion, — his good opinion onany particular occasion, or his good opinion ingeneral. Out of his good opinion will growthe desire to render you acceptable services ;services in a shape which you or he may speciallyhave in view, or services of a more extensivecharacter. It is your desire that he shouldnot regard you as he regards men in general,or men unknown to him, but that his mindshould be impressed with favorable and friendlyaffections towards you.You have these two distinguishable coursesto pursue. If you have the power of givingevidence of your disposition to render acceptableservices to the party whose good opinionyou are seeking, and still more, if you havethe power of rendering him such services ; ifyou can induce him to look upon you as likelyto be able, or as able in reality to add anythingto his enjoyment ; if, in a word, you are166 Doxology.in a situation to exercise towards him thevirtues of benevolence and beneficence, — do so :it is the first and most obvious means of ingratiating,and may be intitled courtship.But if this be wanting, you have anothermeans of ingratiating Set yourself, as regardsmen in general, in a favorable light. Endeavorto appear in his eyes as a fit object of socialaffection, as worthy of love or esteem, or both.This may be called self-recommendation, orself-elevation.With some persons this self-elevation is themost recommendatory course ; with others, thesystem of courtship, in other vv^ords, the exhibitionof the qualities which make your title out tofriendly regard, may be put forward with moresuccess and with less reserve to certain personsthan to others.Where the desire of ingratiating is exhibitedwith prudence and wisdom, it seldom fails ofsuccess, since there is no man who is not dependent,to some extent, on the good-will ofothers, and very few who, in the obvious calculationsof self-interest, are not willing to makesome return for tendered useful services. Butself-recommendation cannot be employed withoutmore or less hazard ; it is an attempt tooccupy a higher position than that we fill inthe mind of the person appealed to. If it fail.EXTRA-UECAUDIKT. PRUDENCE. 167we are lowered in his opinion, and humiliatedin our own. Yet it is the most agreeableinstrument, and the most flattering to self: itis that which is most frequently employed forthe purpose of winning the friendly sympathiesof others ; and the anxiety to employ it is thefrequent cause of the counteraction of its ownpurpose. To the young it is peculiarly fascinatingand peculiarly delusive. They are wontto assign to themselves a place more exaltedthan the world in general is disposed to recognize; a place above the ordinary level inthe scale of popular estimation. They do noteasily lend themselves to the practice of courtship,lest it should be deemed disreputableflattery, and are therefore more prone to taketheir stand upon their own merit.But, in as far as the good opinion of otherscan be purchased by services done, and if thoseservices can be done without any other sacrificeof self than will be recompensed by a greaterresult of good, no opportunity should be lostwhich enables us to win the friendly affectionsof mankind in general, or of any individual inparticular whose approval will augment ourown and the general happiness.Various rules have at various times beengiven for the suppression of anger, most ofwhich consist of devices for giving the irritation168 DEONTOLOGV.time to allay itself, before it breaks out intooffensive words or actions. All these rules arein fact appeals to sober judgment against excitedpassions. The deliberate repetition of thealphabet, — a walk into the open air, if the sceneof excitement be within doors, — any device,indeed, for diverting the mind from its irascibletendency, may be used with effect. Butinstead of depending on the chance of findingthe power of alienating the mind from its angrydispositions, when on any particular occasionthey chance to be awakened, it would be farbetter to obtain the power of subjugating thosedispositions by the habitual exercise of the correctiveinfluences. Hence, in the cool andquiet hour, when nothing disturbs the tranquillityof your feelings, satisfy yourself completelyof the usefulness and applicability of those rulesfor which you may have occasion in the momentof exasperation. Lodge them — fix them firmlyin your memory — think frequently of theirvalue ; and thus, when any incidental provocationhappens to excite anger, the recollection ofthese rules may serve to repress it. It is inthis way you will purchase redemption from theslavery to which passion would subject you, onthe cheapest and the safest terms.The hoarding money is among the mistakesof imprudence and miscalculation. With PRUDENCE. 169dice to ourselves to treasure it up unproductivelyis an obviously false estimate of interest.As a means of enjoyment, the transfer of theaffections from the reality, to that which is onlythe instrument by which the reality is obtainable,will, in its consequences, reduce manypleasures to one, and that one disassociatedfrom, or even opposed to, the pleasures ofothers. The sensibility to pleasure being deadenedby non-exertion, the vague and undefinedanticipation of good to be obtained by money,as a source of pleasure, is magnified. Oneafter another, the individual pleasures vanish,and as they vanish the pleasure of possessingthe source of so many pleasures takes strongerand stronger root in the affections ; it becomesin itself an object of desire, independent ofand above all others, and at last excludesthem all.Here then is a man who has disconnected theself-regarding principle from the social, andendeavored to obtain for himself an additionalportion of good by alienating others from cooperationin his own happiness. And the consequencesare as Deontology and philanthropywould desire they should be. He has made afoolish bargain in the interest of self. He haslost much good to obtain little, and that littlegood is made almost an evil by its being associ-170 Doxology.acted with the anxieties which attend the one,single, solitary source of pleasure. Indifferentto the opinion of others, that opinion retaliatesa sentiment that is not indifferent. For howevermen may desire to escape the judgment ofmankind, escape is impossible : the tribunalof opinion drags all men inexorably before itsbar.The rules of extra-regarding prudence, thoughsimple in their claims, dictate different formsof operation with reference to the differentsituations in which a man may be placed withrespect to others. The law is in all cases thesame, and the inquiry resolves itself into themeans of giving that law the greatest efficiency.In the various grades of social position variousrules apply. The general reasoning is groundedon the average of those grades. But it may bewell to point out some of those diversities ofposition which demand the attention of theDeontological student.The cases presenting themselves where noconflict of interest has place, will be of theeasiest decision. On those occasions wheretodo that which is most agreeable to othersis to do that which is most agreeable to yourself,and where to do that which is mostagreeable to yourself is, at the same time, toingratiate yourself with others, the task of exertPRUDENCE. 171tion is easy. In so far as without sacrifice ofprudence on the one hand, or of benevolenceon the other, you can make your own wishes toaccord with the wishes of others — your owninterests with their interests, you will advancethe cause of virtue and consequent felicity.But the points of difficulty will be, when conflicting,or, still worse, irreconcilable interestsmeet, — where the conduct which would besatisfactory to yourself is repelled by others, asthe cause of vexation and pain to them. Itmight be a great enjoyment to a man to smoke,notwithstanding the annoyance caused to othersby involving them in the fumes of his tobacco.Setting aside the question as to what benevolencemight prompt, would not extra-regardingprudence demand from him the sacrifice of hisenjoyment, for the sole purpose of protectinghimself from the reaction, upon his own comforts,of the ill-will of those he had annoyed ?He might consider that the quantity of pleasurewhich the smoking communicated would be lessin amount than the pleasures he would lose bylosing other men's good opinion, or in comparisonof the pains which other men would have itin their power, and perhaps in their disposition,to inflict.Again, the laws of extra-regarding prudencewill be applied with greater facility on those172 Doxology.occasions where no difference has place as tothe inferiority or superiority of a man's condition,as regards the party with whom he hasto do. Actions, which, generally speaking,appear controlled by the Deontological principle,might be found more or less accordant withit, when the relative situation of the parties isduly weighed. The very conduct which mightbe prudent and benevolent when practised, forexample, by an opulent man towards his poorerneighbour, ^ — by a wise man towards his lessinstructed acquaintance, — by a father towardsa child, — by an old man to a youth, mightchange its character on being adopted by theopposite side, by those whose condition iscontrasted in the circumstance of wealth, orknowledge, or of paternity, or age. In a situationof equality, the mind is released fromweighing in the balance many topics of differencewhich, if they exist, are intitled to beduly estimated. As the pains and pleasuresenjoyed or suffered by persons in the samecondition, resemble each other more closelythan where the gradations of rank have separatedmen, the similarity of position will increasethe power of accurately estimating thevalue of the pleasure and the pain. For pleasuresand pains are not worth seeking or avoiding,except in so far as they act upon theEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 173individual, and can be applied to his particularcase.The domestic and social relations present,under their various characters, various demandsfor the exercise of extra-regarding prudence.The intimacy and adjacent of a connection,and our dependence upon it for our own happiness,strengthen the influence of the prudentialprinciple, by bringing us more immediatelyinto the presence of those who hold in theirhands the power of distributing to us frequentlyrecurring pains or pleasures. The ties of consanguinityare ordinarily the strongest ; nextfollow those of affinity ; next those of domesticcontract, such as exist between master andservant ; next those of accidental social intercourse;and last, those of neighborhood. Tosome family circle almost every individualbelongs ; upon the services rendered by theother members of that family circle every individualis greatly dependent for his ordinaryportion of happiness. Immediately beyond orbeneath the habitual relations of family, comethose accidental relations which grow out ofthe communications by which others are sometimesbrought into our domestic circle, or bywhich we are taken into theirs ; while thefriendly, but less intimate, intercourse of neighborhoodmay be deemed the last grade to174 Doxology.which the social sanctions apply. Beyond it,the popular sanction begins its action.A family is a small community, in which thesituation of the heads is analogous to that ofrulers in a state : it is a government in miniature; a government armed with all the powersnecessary for regulating its own concerns, andespecially all those which belong to the Genealogicalfield. Appropriate rewards, for therecompense of actions which add to the happinessof the domestic circle, and appropriatepunishments for actions which diminish it, arein the hands of those who exercise the functionsof authority. And to them the rules ofextra-regarding prudence apply ; for their authoritymust become more or less influential,as exercised with a greater or less regard tothe well-being of their dependents.Every human being is dependent, in somedegree, upon others. In the very highestelevations of the social ranks, the influencesexercised descend upon the ranks beneath,while the very lowest are not without influenceon those above them, being called upon forservices necessary to the enjoyments of themore privileged classes. To every individualwhether as patron or as subject, the claims ofDeontology apply. If his views look not beyondhis own personal interest, if he be PRUDENCE. 175less of every thing but the means of exactingfrom others useful and agreeable services, thedictates of wisdom will lead him to seek theaccomplishment of every end he proposes tohimself by the instrumentality of happiness.Let the conditions of man's varied existence beexamined, one after another. Let the masterinquire how the ready attentions of his servantcan be best obtained. How but, by associatingthe interests of that servant with his duties,by making the duties pleasurable ? How canthe servant most easily win that good opinionof his master which will lighten his labors ormake them sources of enjoyment ? Certainlyonly by giving evidence to the master, that hisservices are not without their beneficent influenceupon that master's felicity.In following the claims dependent on man'svaried condition, those of superiority, inferiority,and equality have been referred to, as presentingtopics for distinct consideration.Superiority may represent greater excellencein general, or greater excellence in some particularand special branch. Superiority inpower, whenever derived, is the ordinaryground for the claim to superior services ; andthe claim is obvious, for whatsoever inducementsyou have to the exercise of beneficencetowards inferiors and equals, on the score of176 Doxology.prudence and benevolence, you have these, andothers too, when the virtues are to be exercisedtowards a superior. The claims of self-regardingprudence come in to add their weight tothe claims of beneficence. The superiority ofhim you serve places in his hands an additionalmeans of recompense, and your own self-regardwould compel you to endeavor to obtain it.Superiority in power, derived from wealth,shuts out, to a certain extent, the influenceof the inferior in that particular. The smallersum sacrificed by the opulent may be agreater loss than the larger sum obtained bythe opulent. The value of money, in differenthands, is a most important consideration, whenit is to be employed as a means of influence.In early life, strange mistakes are wont tobe made by inexperience. Indifference, oreven haughtiness to superiors, is assumed as acharacteristic of independence, and an evidenceof high-mindedness. And yet such exhibitionsdo not alter the real situations of men. Thegradations of rank exist, in spite of all thatbenevolence can anticipate, or philosophy suggest.Let any man ascertain what he getsby scorn or disdain directed towards thoseabove him ! The ill-will of those who aremightier than he is cannot serve his purpose.Even if beneficence did not prompt him toExtra-REGARDING Prudence. 177avoid the giving useless pain, a prudent regardto his own well-being should teach him forbearance.By superiors in general are to be understoodsuperiors in power ; and, consequently, on thepart of the persons who are considered as theirinferiors, there exists, as towards them, a correspondentdegree of dependence. In regardto the deportment proper to be maintained bytheir inferiors, as towards such superiors, theerror of which we have spoken is apt to haveplace; and it is of a sort prejudicial, at once,to beneficence as well as prudence, and whichis apt not to stop at the breach of these negativevirtues, but to go on to a violation of the correspondingpositive ones, A sort of merit isattached by some to the refusal to manifesttowards the feelings of superiors that degreeof regard which, by the same persons, wouldnot be refused to equals or to inferiors. Tothis supposed merit is annexed more or less ofself-praise, on the score of spirit, as it is called;on the score of a spirit of independence. Butif there is no merit in the violation of thedictates of a single virtue, — viz. beneficence,negative or positive, still less can there be inthe violation of the dictates of that same virtue,added to the dictates of self regarding prudence.VOL. II. N178 Doxology.In this particular a difference may have place,according as, on the occasion in question, thirdpersons are, or are not present.The case where third persons are present, isthe case in which a display of this sort of spiritis most apt to be made.It will depend, however, upon the cast ofmind that has place on the part of the personsthus present. It may possibly happen that, in theopinion of them, or some of them, the characterof the person in question may be raised by thisdisplay of independence : so far as this is thecase, what a man loses in the affection andregard of the superior in question, this, ormore, he may gain by increase of regard onthe part of these same third persons. Inthis case, a sort of conflict has place betweenthe two virtues. The dictates of beneficenceare neglected ; those of prudence — self-regardingprudence — are consulted and conformedto ; and happiness gains by the sacrifice madeby the one virtue to the other.In the other case — in the case where noother persons are present — if imprudence, inthis shape, is committed, ill humor — anger —is apt to be the cause. By the anti-socialpassion, the joint force of the self regarding andthe social affections is overborne: folly presentsitself to the actor under the garb of merit : heEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 179fancies himself to be displaying strength when,in fact, he is betraying weakness.A case, not absolutely impossible or unexampled,is, that by this display of hostility, inacase where obsequiousness is not only moreadvisable but more common, the inferior entertainsa hope of raising himself in the estimationof the superior ; and where that hope may evenhave its accomplishment. But the experimentis a hazardous one, and requires no smalldegree of skill and attention to be madesuccessful.The nature and existence of equality is aseasily conceived as those of superiority and inferiority; it being a negation of both.But between no two persons is the existenceof it capable of being demonstrated, or withany thing like precision capable of being ascertained.Suppose, for argument sake, the existenceof it ascertained, as between yourself, whoeveryou are, and another person, whoever he is.From self-partiality you, in your own scale,may be placed above him ; he, in his scale,above you.This difference, therefore, it belongs to youto bear constantly in mind, as well with respectto beneficence as with respect to self-regardingprudence.180 Doxology.The difference, however, is not so great inthe case of those classes which have least, asin the case of those which have most powerfulincentives to emulation. Examples: — -day-laborers on the one hand, professional men onthe other.Superiority and inferiority suppose each other:neither would have place without the other.But superiority and inferiority, in order topresent a positive idea to the mind, must beassociated with some object, in itself a good,or, at all events, supposed to be a good, so asto awaken desire. The different quantity ofthat good possessed relatively, may be consideredas the different degrees of a scale ofsuperiority or inferiority, with a reference to theparticular good in question.One of the shapes in which superiority presentsitself most obviously to the mind has beenalready referred to. It is that of power. It isa superiority easily conceived, early established,and widely spread.Take, for example, the dependence of theinfant child upon its mother, and the power sheexercises over it. It begins with the child'sexistence, it is absolute, it is boundless, iteven precedes existence ; on the mother thechild depends for its very being.The power she exercises cannot but be hers.EXTUA-REGAKDING PUUDENCE. 181No child can be born without a mother ; theexistence of a mother implies the existence ofa determinate child. The mother, standing inthe relation of extreme superiority and absolutepower over the child ; the child in those ofextreme inferiority and absolute dependenceupon the mother.Of primeval, and necessary, and absolutesuperiority, the relation of the mother to thechild is far more complete, though less seldomquoted as an example, than that of father andson. No man can with positive, indisputablecertainty, be known to be the father of a determinatechild. His connection with his supposedor real offspring is, in the very nature ofthings, less intimate than that of the mother.By Filmer, whose name is kept alive by hishaving had Locke for his antagonist in the fieldof the political branch of moral art and science,by Sir Robert Filmer, the supposed necessaryas well as absolute power of the father overhis children was taken as the foundation andorigin, and thence justifying cause of the powerof the monarch in every political state. Withmore propriety he might have stated the absolutedominion of a female as the only legitimateform of government.In the Negro kingdom of Ashantee, the kinghas for his successor the eldest male child of182 Doxology.his eldest sister. In so far as certainty, combinedwith proximity of natural relationship tothe preceding monarch, is a proper, efficientcause of title to the vacant throne, the advisersof the black monarch of Africa have been, andare wiser than the advisers of the white monarchsof Europe.The scales of comparison by which superiority,equality, and inferiority may be measured,embrace, necessarily, a great variety oftopics, and may be classified under the headof qualities which distinguish one man's situationfrom another, or under those situationsthemselves. Qualities useful to self, qualitiesuseful to others ; qualities natural, qualitiesacquired ; and these, again, divided into thequalities which are acquirable by a man's ownexertions alone, and not acquirable, except withthe concurrence of others ; qualities also of thebody, and qualities of the mind, — in the possessionof each, or all of these, almost everyman is in some way distinguished from everyother man. The amount of these qualities maybethe same in the cases of different individuals,but their distribution is never so ; and a greatportion of the charm of social intercourse growsout of the infinite distinctions by which thesevaried elements exist in different persons. Aman may be distinguished from another by hisEXTKA-llEGAllDIKG PRUDENCE. 183wisdom on general topics, by an all-pervadingaccuracy of judgment, or by a wisdom peculiarlyassociated with certain determinate objects. Aman may be characterised, though very rarely,by universal knowledge ; but in nine hundredcases, or more, out of a thousand, it will be hisdevotion to, and acquirements in some particularbranch of study, that denote his superiorityover any man, or over men in general. Sointhat more vague dependence, which maybecalled the dependence of expectation, aninferior may anticipate good from a superior,growing out of any one of the qualities spokenof, or of any one of the various branches ofthose qualities.Among the more determinable sources of inferiorityand superiority in ]position, — age, wealth,rank, and political power, are particularly prominent.The difference in age is easily definable, andin some cases towers over every other distinction.The power of the nurse, for example,over the infant, however wealthy or high-bornthe infant may be, is almost limitless. Ingeneral estimate it may be remarked, that thesuperiority conferred by age is frequently exaggerated,or rather, the points of character inwhich youth may be fairly considered as postsDoxology.lessing greater excellence, are not sufficientlytaken into the account. The mental powersare generally improved by the teachings oftime ; at all events, up to a certain period ofman's existence ; but this can hardly be said ofthe benevolent tendencies.If age bring experience with it, a cooler anda riper judgment, if by it the intellectualfaculties are strengthened, youth presents, onthe other hand, valuable and virtuous qualities,which are not, alas ! fortified by long life ; foryouth is the season of generous affections, ofwarm and glowing sympathies, of zeal and ofactivity. And occasions there are in whichdifficulties are vanquished by it, because theirmagnitude has not been perceived ; difficultiesagainst which, perhaps, reflection would havecounselled a more advanced intelligence not tocontend. Youth, too, has a longer period ofrecompense or punishment before it; its calculationsof the fruitfulness of pains and pleasuresare spread over a wider future field ; itssusceptibilities are more intense ; its hopes arebrighter ; it has more to gain and more to lose ;its destinies are not fixed, but remain to becalled up, to a great extent, by the tendenciesitself must give.From the novi Homines the great advancesEXTUA-UEGAIIDING PRUDENCE. 185must be expected ; un palled by satiety ofhonors, to them the slightest regale is a banquetthe most exquisite.The distinctions of wealth, in the scale ofsuperiority and inferiority, may be easily measured.The pound in the hands of the foolishman cannot, indeed, be considered an instrumentof the same value as a pound in thehands of the wise ; but, as far as the standardof wealth is applied, the fool and the wise arein the same condition. Wealth, however, regardedthrough the optics of utility, is only oneof the many means of power ; the means ofpossessing that which is an object of desire;and upon its application, less than its distribution,depends the quantity of pleasure purchased,and pain avoided by it.The number of fallacies current on the subjectof wealth is extremely great, and manyof them leave erroneous impressions on themind, both as to the value and the use ofwealth. Its value, its sole value, is as aninstrument of power, and the possession ofpower, until called into exercise, counts forlittle in the balance of pam or pleasure.On its exercise its value depends. There is nomore truth in saying that * Money is the rootof all evil,' than in saying that ' Money is thesource of all good.' The phrase endeavors to18G Doxology.give to a small portion of a truth, mingled witha large portion of that which is not truth, all theinfluence of a truism. No doubt, some desireor other is the cause of all misconduct, andmoney is the means for gratifying a large portionof our desires. But as there are manypains which neither the presence nor theabsence of money can create, remove, or eveninfluence, so there are pleasures beyond thereach of wealth, however boundless.Rank, as a representative of prosperity, is,like wealth, to be estimated by its own scale ofinfluence, as different titles constitute differentgrades of social position. But their bearingupon the general question of a man's superior influence,depends also upon moral and intellectualqualities. As a rule of conduct, extra-regardingprudence demands, in almost every case, therecognition of those habits of deference which areordinarily paid to rank. Exceptional cases thereare in which self regarding prudence will leaguewith benevolence to prevent that prostrationwhich is painful to the prostrate, and perniciousto him who exacts or allows the humiliation.Political power implies the means of actionin a wider sphere of influence. It enables aman to dispose of a larger portion of good andevil than power in any other shape will conferon him. And prudence requires that conductEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 187should be directed with a view to that greaterquantity of happiness and misery of whichpolitical power disposes.In intercourse with superiors, prudence particularlyrequires attention to all those lessermarks of respect which superior station is wontto exact. Great faults are sometimes pardoned,little ones seldom. Many great menthere are very willing to forgive an error, butfew who would forgive an inattention. In theworld, men's thoughts are far less occupiedwith important than with trivial things. Theusages of polite society, the minor morals arewithin every body's observation and estimatewho dwells in the more privileged social regions.Hence, there is little chance of any violation ofthem passing undetected and unpunished.Among the lessons of extra-regarding prudence,that which teaches us to brook the insolenceof office, is not the least valuable. Howshall that insolence be divested of its sting ofannoyance ?Consider yourself as having to do with a stockor a stone. In that case there is no use in givingexpression to resentment : as little in the othercase. In that case no mischief results to yourselffrom the expression of irritation : in theother case mischief indefinite.If your social position enables you successesDoxology.fully to resist the disposition of men in powerto worry others by the display of their authority,good service may be done by your appealingagainst, by your resisting their pretensions ; butif you can neither serve others nor serve yourself,by rebellion against those pretensions,subdue your disposition to break out into fruitlesscontention. Save yourself from vexation,by preventing your own irascible passions fromurging your susceptibilities into openly expresseddiscontent. Think that the possession ofpower in the hands of others is in itself a meansof annoying you, and take care that the occasionis not given to them.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 189CHAPTER IV.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE.The compound term * effective' or * efficient benevolence,'has been adopted, in consequence ofthe want of a single word which should imply theunion of benevolence and beneficence. Theseoperate by checking by exciting action. Theyare either restrictive or instinctive. The effectivebenevolence which requires abstention fromaction is the first branch that deserves attention.Actions there are, and those very numerous,which at the same time that they areinhibited by efficient benevolence, are manifestlyso by the considerations of prudence.And where the alliance between prudence andbenevolence is obvious, there can be no doubtas to the line of duty. But the miscalculationsof self-regard so often encroach on the claims ofbenevolence, the sacrifice of the happiness ofothers is so often made on the false estimate,that by such sacrifice our own happiness is bestpromoted, that the first and most important taskof the moralist, is to harmonize the selfish andbeneficent principle, and to demonstrate that a190 Doxology.due regard to the felicity of others, is the bestand wisest provision for our own.Negative effective benevolence consists innothing more than in the avoiding to do evil toothers.But of evil done to others, some portions aretaken cognizance of by law, others are left tothe operation of opinion, with its different sanctionsor instruments of pain and pleasure.Evil done to others by man's instrumentalitymay be deemed annoyance ; and annoyance iseither punishable or not punishable by judicialproceedings.This division, it is obvious, must be notnatural but factitious. Its lines of demarcationshift with time and place. In different countriesdifferent laws visit the same acts with differentconsequences ; what is sanctioned by the legislationof one nation, is unnoticed or prohibitedby that of another. In the same country thesame act has been at different epochs rewarded,allowed, or punished. The annoyance that ispunishable by law is termed injury, personalinjury.But the evil we are engaged in preventinghere is that, and that alone, which it is in aman's power to produce, without exposing himselfto legal punishment.It would be a service of no small momentNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 191done to mankind, if a work were specially devotedto the collection and exhibition of thoseevils and annoyances to which men are exposed,and which are not visited by the interference ofthe law. A manual of this sort would conveya mass of practical moral instruction, whichmight be turned to beneficial account, on occasionsof constant occurrence.If the different cases of men's vexations andsufferings produced by the acts of others, andremediable by forbearance, were gathered outof the different volumes which tell the tales,whether in ridicule of, or sympathy for, humanmisery, — such a collection might be made themanual of essential virtue.Of these evils, one division might be composedof those, by the infliction of which noadvantage in any positive shape is produced, orexpected to be produced to himself, by theagent. In the case of these, the efficient inducementmay be referred to one or other oftwo causes: — 1. Antipathy, or say malignity;2. Sport.Another division may be composed of thecases in which, from the production of the evil,positive advantage, in some shape or other, isreaped or looked for by the agent.Of this class, one sub-class may be composedof those in which superiority, on some account192 Doxology.or Other, is by the agent exercised, or supposedby him to be exercised over, or at the expenseof the patient.Such an investigation, conducted in a benevolentand inquiring spirit, would assuredly layopen vast fields of pain, in which the tares ofmisery might be torn up by the roots, and,perhaps, no small portion of the ground becovered with the seeds of happiness.How many little pleasures are interfered withby the meddling of unwelcome intruders, — howmany checked by the asceticism, or the ill-nature,or the ridicule, or the scorn of a bystander? How many trifling vexations areaggravated by the dissocial qualities, or heedlessdeportment of a looker-on ? At the end ofa day how much total loss is there not of happinessby inattention to those small elements ofwhich it is composed ? AVhat an aggregateamount is made up of those particles of painproduced by carelessness alone !The time will perhaps arrive, when all thesesources of evil will be investigated, groupedtogether in their distinguishing characteristics,illustrated by examples, and their inconsistencywith virtue be made so apparent, that opinionwill take charge of their extirpation, — opinion,which to enlighten and to make influential, isthe highest purpose of the moralist.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 193The general rules of negative benevolenceand beneficence may be thus enumerated : —1. Never do evil, in any shape or quantity, toany individual, but for the purpose of somedeterminate and specific greater good : good toyourself, to the other party in question, or tothird persons : to third persons, assignable orunassignable.In one verse, —Never do evil but for greater good.2. Never do evil, solely on the ground that itis deserved.In one verse, —Never do evil for mere ill-desert.These two branches of morality correspondwith the branches of negative and positiveoffences which are taken cognizance of by law.A negative offence is the omitting to preventthat which, if done, would constitute a positiveoffence. It is a guilt of abstention. It is theforbearance of a man to prevent a mischief preventableby his interference.A positive offence is the direct infliction of amischief.In both cases, the offence consists in thatcourse of conduct which leaves a balance on theside of evil.Negative beneficence is exercised by me, inso far as evil, which, by an act of mine, mightVOL. II. o194 Doxology.have been done to another, is purposely forborneto be done.It has benevolence for its cause, or, at anyrate, for its accompaniment, in so far as thecontemplation of the evil in question, and theefficient desire and endeavor to avoid contributingto the production of the evil, has place inmy breast.It will be highly conducive to the cultivationof negative beneficence and benevolence, to havepresent to the mind the several sources fromwhich evil-doing to others is liable to flow ; andthese sources or motives may be classified underthe following heads : —1. Self regarding interest at large, and inparticular the interests of the senses, and theinterest of the sceptre ; the interests of activecorporeal enjoyments, and those of power.2. Interest of the pillow, interest correspondingto the love of ease ; to the aversion to laborof body or mind. In this case, the cause of theevil may generally be expressed by some suchsingle word as heedlessness, carelessness, inadvertence,indifference, and so forth.3. Interest of the trumpet. Interest correspondingto the pleasures and pains of thepopular or moral sanction. In this is includedthe interest affected by wounds given to prideand vanity.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 1954. Interest of malevolence. Interest correspondingto the motive termed ill-will orantipathy.Ill-will or antipathy, considered in respect ofits source or cause, may be thus distinguished : —1. Ill-will or antipathy on account of rivalry;opposition of interests, in respect of self-regardinginterest at large.2. Ill-will on account of trouble, that is, laborof mind, regarded by me as produced in mymind by the individual who is the object of theill-will thus produced ; say anti-social affection.3. Ill-will on account of wounded pride orvanity ; pains of the popular or moral sanctionexperienced by me, and regarded as havingtheir source in some act, habit, or dispositionof his.4. Ill-will or antipathy, having its source, itsimmediate source, in sympathy : in sympathyfor the feelings of some person to whom evil, inany of its shapes, is regarded by me as beingdone, or more or less likely to be done, by theinstrumentality of the individual in question, inwhom this anti-social affection of mine beholdsits object.5. Ill-will on the score of difference in opinion.In this case, the interest affected is composed ofthe interests respectively corresponding to loveof power, and to the love of the pleasure, and196 Doxology.aversion to the pains of the popular or moralsanction. In a man whose opinions are, inrespect of some point or system, or topic ofimportance, in a state of determinate oppositionto mine, I behold a man in whose mind therecannot be that esteem, or that affection, whichthere might be in the opposite case ; I beholda man in whose instance my love of powercannot receive that exercise and that gratificationwhich it would receive, if I could causehim to give up that adverse opinion of his, andadopt mine ; I behold a man at whose handsI receive the evil, consisting in the suspicion ofan exemplification of mental weakness on myown part : for the greater the number of thepersons by whom the opinion opposite to mineis entertained, the greater the probability isthat mine may be erroneous.Of the sufferings experienced by others, inconsequenceof our behavior to them, a verylarge portion brings with it no benefit, in anyshape, to ourselves. Nothing is gained to theself-regarding interests, in order to form a counterpoiseto the pain to which we have givenbirth. The sole justification for annoyancescaused to others is, the obtaining for ourselvessome advantage : the justification can only becomplete when the advantage gained is clearlygreater than the annoyance caused.INEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 197Hence the rule of general application — thatnothing be ever done of which you have reasonto suppose it will, in any shape, be productiveof uneasiness to any individual, unless someobvious, special, and preponderant advantageto yourself, to some other individual or individuals,or to mankind at large, is to be thecertain result.Such a subject, wherever the pains and pleasuresof others are involved, demands the strictestinvestigation : for to every individual thestock of pains and pleasures possessed, recollected,or anticipated, forms all the elements outof which existence itself is made worthy of hisregard.Even in joke, say nothing and do nothingwhich you have reason to apprehend will causeuneasiness to another : that uneasiness is a sad,an unworthy source of merriment.And if for no purpose of merriment the inflictionof uneasiness is to be allowed, how muchless can it be tolerated for any purpose ofmalignity ?Though the sensibilities of men are more orless acute, and the same actions, which as respectssome Avould cause little suffering, and asrespects others, more, or even much suffering,no better rule can be given for enabling youproperly to estimate the amount of suffering.198 Doxology.than that of changing places with the sufferer.Put yourself in his position — imagine the painsare inflicted on yourself, and then make theestimate of their burthensomeness. The moreyou have accustomed your thoughts to weighthe different classes of pains and pleasures, themore accurate your opinions as to their value,the sounder will be your judgment in all thosematters where they come in question within thedomains of morality.But under both classes of negative and positivebenevolence, provision must be made forthose e.vceptmis, where a preponderant good orevil takes the case out of the ordinary instances.Hence, in order to avoid producing preponderantevil for want of being aware of it, cautionis necessary.The caution may be exercised by guidancefrom a pernicious course.Direct guidance is employed by indication orcreation of pain.Indirect guidance by the indication or creationof pleasure.Indirect where practical is preferable ; for itgives pleasure to both parties, and it is morelikely to be efficacious.The modes of gratification and annoyance aretwo : —Physical — acting on the bodily organs.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 199Mental — acting by impressions on the mind.The occasions of benevolent action and abstentionare —Incidental, orPermanent.The permanent occasions are —Domestic, orExtra-domestic.And the domestic are again divided into thoseof kindred, which have their origin at the beginningof the social relation, and are dissolvedonly when that relation is terminated by death ;or such as exist between masters and servants .>between hosts and visitors, which are enteredupon, and closed at the will of either or boththe parties.The instruments by which effective benevolencegives evidence of its existence are wordsand deeds. Words, as exhibited either in oralor written discourse ; deeds, which have an influenceupon the pains or pleasures of others.Much of the ground which has been goneover in the inquiry as to the demands of extra-regardingprudence, again presents itself forexamination under the head of effective benevolence.Their claims are in many instancesthe same — their interests happily identical.One of the topics treated of, however, leaveslittle to be said. In the regions of thought —200 Doxology.thought as unconnected with, or unproductiveof actions, prudence has many laws to establish; for thoughts have no small influence uponenjoyment.But unless and until thoughts become wordsor deeds, they do not concern others ; theyform no part of the field of effective benevolence.Intrusion into their sanctuary is usurpation.If any thoughts do you, or do others, nomischief, on what plea do you interfere withthem ? If they do, they must be exhibited insome mischievous shapes. They must havefound expression, — they must have become an act.To words and deeds, therefore, the inquiryinto the exigencies of effective benevolence mustbe confined; and, first, it will be convenientto examine into the requirements of negativeeffective benevolence as to discourse.The general rule for the abstention from theinfliction of all unnecessary pain, — all painunnecessary to the avoidance of greater pain,or the production of a balance of pleasure,must be accommodated to the different cases,as they present themselves. The great moral lawis peremptory : — Exceptions excepted, inflictno pain. The province of the legislator and themoralist is to inquire into, to produce, to justifythe exceptions.To prevent the uneasiness produced by disNegative EFl'ICIKNT BENEVOLENCE. 201course, where that uneasiness, in its generalresults, would be useless or pernicious, is theobject of the instructions about to be offered.And, as a primary precept —Consider whether the words you are aboutto employ are likely to produce uneasiness inthe breast of those to whom they arc addressed,or whom they may reach.Discourse is either conveyed by evanescentor by permanent signs : when evanescent, commonlyby word of mouth ; when permanent,usually by writing or printing.Word-of- mouth discourse being the most simple,and the only original mode, with this letus commence. And, in the first place, letit be to one person alone that the ideas thusexpressed are communicated. That person maybeeither present at the utterance of the discourse,or absent.If, among its probable effects, be that ofproducing uneasiness, consider, in the nextplace, whether, in the account of good andevil, in compensation for the uneasiness so produced,good may not be produced in someshape or shapes, in which it will be preponderantin value, with reference to such uneasiness.More briefly thus. If uneasiness beamong the probable effects of it, consider, then.202 Doxology.whether the uneasiness may not be compensatedfor by some greater good ; by a more than equivalentgood. In this case comes the considerationof the justifying causes for producinguneasiness by discourse.Again. In the case where uneasiness to theother party is regarded as a probable consequence,consider whether, among the effects oraccompaniments of such uneasiness, anger, ofwhich you are the object, may not be theresult.For want of a sufficient attention to theparticular causes by which uneasiness may beproduced by discourse, an indefinite quantityof suffering is often caused, even where thesatisfaction felt by the utterer is extremelysmall. The sufferings of others, originating inthe words of heedlessness, are often greaterthan malevolence itself would be disposed toinflict. Inattention may create an intense painthan hatred ; and levity be more mischievousthan immorality.In every case, however, small though it be,there must be some motive of pleasure to himself,which induces any man to give pain toanother.As to evil without good, that is impossible ;for no evil ever is, or can be done, but withNEGATIVE Deficient BENEVOLENCE. 203a view to good. The least possible good is, inthis case, — where it is through ill-will to theman that you do the evil, without doing good,in any shape, other than that of a gratificationto your own ill-will : which gratification, in thesupposition of your conceiving yourself to havereceived evil at his hands ; and to be acting inconsiderationof such evil, is called vengeance,or revenge.But let the evil thus done by you be ever soenormous, and the gratification to be derivedfrom it ever so slight, still the object, in contemplationof which the act found its motive,is in itself not evil, but good.To do good to a man, the evil you speakmust be to him, not of him, unless it be in theview that what is said of him may, in somewayor other, for his good, have the effect ofdrawing on him punishment, at the hands of thepolitical or of the popular sanctions.Supposing always that the good in questioncannot be produced at any cheaper rate, thefollowing are the justifying causes by which theproduction of evil, in any shape, and thereforein this shape, may be justified : — •1. Production of preponderant good to theevil-speaker himself.2. Production of preponderant good to the204 Doxology.person who is spoken to or spoken of, and towhom evil is thus done.3. Preponderant good to any other person orpersons at large.4. Preponderant good to the public at large.To the head of preponderant good done, — doneto the public at large, belongs the case where, inthe production of the uneasiness, the author ofit acts in the character of a member of thetribunal of public opinion, applying the forceof the popular or moral sanction.But a distinction must be drawn betweenthe case, where there is nobody present but theperson in whom the uneasiness is caused, andthe case where there are another or others present.Abstraction made of any particularrelation borne by them to either of the parties,the uneasiness produced will be the greater,the greater the number of the persons sopresent.Always keeping, therefore, in view the mini-imitationof suffering, if the discourse whichbenevolence demands will answer the ends ofbenevolence, by being addressed to the individualin the absence of all other persons, itshould only be addressed to him in theirabsence. If the presence of others be necessaryfor its intended effect, let the number presentNEGATIVE Efficient BENEVOLENCE. 205be as few as are needful for producing thateffect.In the cases of the exercise of the domesticauthority, and of the exercise of the publicauthority in an official situation ; that is, as adepository of the political sanction, true andproper grounds may be found for the inflictionof pain by discourse, which could not be justifiedas disassociated from that authority. And,as a member of the public-opinion tribunal, asadispenser of the popular sanction, language isdemanded frequently by benevolence in reprobationof misdeeds, which the same benevolencewould check, if addressed personally tothe rnisdoers.But, in ordinary cases, the justifications putforth for the infliction of pain by discourse arenot tenable. It is far from sufficient to saythat the assertions made are true ; it is far fromsufficient to pretend that the person on whomthe pain is inflicted deserves the infliction ; itis far from sufficient to urge that he is recklessor worthless, or that you deal charitably withhis misconduct. Unless you can come andshow that preponderant good is to result fromthe sufferings you create, your vituperation ofyour victim, your laudation of yourself, are butvain and wasted words.The modes in which the feelings of others206 Doxology.may be wounded by discourse are many — forexample : —By direct reprehension, whether by the imputationof positive misconduct, on a particularoccasion, on the part of the persons addressed,or by that assumption of authority which intimates,by words, the right of general dictation.The right to reprehend is in itself a virtualclaim of superiority, and a claim which is likelyto hurt the pride and vanity of him upon whomit is exercised. Reprehension is awarded punishment; and in proportion to the doubtfulnessof the title to arbitrate and to condemn, of himwho thus takes on himself the functions ofcondemner, will be the perils incurred by hisown self-interest, from the enmity of the partypunished. The extent of his malevolence willbe measured by the same standard, and theamount of his usurpation will be measured bythe needless severity of his reprehension.Imperiousness is the attempt to strengthenargument by despotic authority. Not satisfiedeven with being right, some men's pleasureseems to consist in putting others in the wrong.They must have a triumph for their dogmatismas well as their reason. They must humiliatewhile they subdue. They will beat down acompanion, even though his downfall shouldnot be needful to their success. Not only shallNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 207their opponent be in the wrong, but they willextort from him a confession that he is in thewrong. They condemn him — others condemn ;but their tyranny will be satisfied with nothingbut a declaration of self-condemnation from thecondemned himself.Stickling for the last word is another formof this conversational imperiousness, — a poorand petty triumph, which only serves to lengthenthe endurance of pain, and to exasperate byhumbling an opponent.A form of imperiousness is that of positiveand unqualified assertion, which is made moreoffensive when it contradicts an opposite opinionexpressed by another : and the arrogance becomesheightened if the assertion be of acharacter not to be substantiated by proof. Ofa fact, for instance, a man may have evidencethat amounts to demonstration ; but imperiousnessis not satisfied with unqualified assertionsas to facts, it often makes them, as to matterswholly incapable of proof. A man may safelysay, that he witnessed such and such an action ;but that such an action was a crime or a virtue,might be a matter of opinion ; and if the casewere one of doubt, his peremptory declarationas to the character of the action could not fail towound the man who had been giving a contraryopinion.So, positive assertions as to matters of fact,208 Doxology.not witnessed by the assertor, the proof ofwhich depends upon evidence; assertions makingno reference to that evidence, but demandingbelief on no other ground than the assertionitself. But of this anon.Peremptoriness of decision, before an opportunityhas been given to others to express their convictions,is a usurpation, shutting the door upondiscussion. Peremptoriness of decision after anopinion has been given by others is annoyingand offensive.Useless contradiction is another violation ofbenevolence; it is also an exhibition of folly;for while it manifests impotence, it woundspower.There is a form of imperiousness, somewhatless annoying, but still worthy of discouragementand reprobation, which may be calledassume guess. It generally displays itself inthe naked and crude assertion of an allegedmatter of fact, without reference to any percipientinterest. Its pretension is to demandimplicit credence.Now, if with the expression of the opinion ofthe speaker, intimation were given of the evidenceon which that opinion was founded, nothingwould be lost to the reputation of thespeaker, and the hearers would be spared theannoyance inflicted by a rude and unauthorizeddemand upon their credulity.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 209Another of the exhibitions of an assumingtemper, is the peremptory assertion of futureevents ; such and such a circumstance willtake place. In so far as the speaker has anyknowledge which enables him to predict thecoming events of futurity, he may, withoutgiving any pain to the self-love of others, employsome such formula as, * I should,' or * Ishould not expect to find,' * It would not surpriseme if — 'Whether the domineering spirit exhibits itselfby undervaluing your companion, or overvaluingyourself; in whatever shape of arrogance oroverbearingness it displays its propensities,tyranny and aristocracy are there.Its consequences will be resentment, eitheropen or secret : if open, quarrels ensue; if secret,secret plans of injury.Benevolence insists on its suppression : to all,its efforts are maleficent ; if exercised towardsa dependent, it is ungenerous ; if exercised towardsa patron, it is imprudent.If you have benefited another, do not fancythat your beneficence gives you a right totyrannize over him. Destroy not the good ofone action by the evil of another.Discourse may wound by advice-giving, involvingin it the appearance of reprehension, orexhibiting itself in a shape implying the pos-vol.ir. p210 Doxology.session of an authority not recognized by thehearer. Even the giving good advice is theassumption of authority on the score of wisdom.A man may be in the wrong, but howeveregregiously wrong you may deem him, do notthink it is incumbent on you to set him right.If the case require the interference of goodadvice, give it so that it may be least offensiveto his self-esteem and self-complacency.Speak to him rather alone than in company ;rather in the company of few than of many.If a man be engaged in a pursuit in whichsuccess is hopeless and the expense seriouslyprejudicial to him, advise him to abandon it.But if not, avoid saying anything that cantend to discourage him.On the contrary, say what appears to you, so itbe consistent with truth, likely to encourage him.Hold up to his view the considerations whichtend to probability success ; not bringing outspontaneously any, the tendency of which is, toimprobability it.More particularly if success would, in yourview, be upon the whole beneficial to himselfand mankind at large.If in this case you represent success as improbable,you will hurt his feelings without anypossible good. If he, on his part, contend infavor of probability of success, you will appearNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 211to him in the character of a person making pretensionto superior wisdom, and holding him incontempt in the character of a self-deceiver.Whereas want of judgment may be evidenced,as well by regarding success as improbablewhere it is probable, as by regarding it as probablewhere it is improbable.Discourse may wound by information-giving;first, where it involves the supposition of generalignorance or general inferiority in the scale ofknowledge on the part of the person to whomit is given ; or relative ignorance in relation tosome special subject of knowledge which, forsome special reason, he ought to be possessedof; and secondly, where it involves a suppositionof a supposed consciousness of superiority,general or special, on the part of the speakerwith relation to the person spoken to.In all these cases a circumstance supposedis, that, with reference to the speaker, theperson spoken to is, in point of general estimation,superior, decidedly superior, or at leastequal ; or, if inferior, not so decidedly inferioras to warrant any such assumption of superiorityas above.Beyond these cases, the communicating informationcannot come within the limits of offence ;for no person is so knowing as not sometimes tostand in need of instruction, even from theignorant. ^212 Doxology.If you have to communicate information ofany sort, avoid all arrogance.In preference to general, employ the mostparticular assertion, and state, if possible, theauthority or authorities, the person or persons,who, with reference to yourself, are the narratingwitness or witnesses.General assertions are but conclusions — conclusionsdrawn by the judgment from particularsupposed facts. Assent to a general assertionsupposes two things : unlimited confidence inthe appropriate aptitude of all supposed witnessesthrough whose minds and tongues, orpens, the supposed fact has passed, or is supposedto have passed ; and the like confidencein the rectitude of their conclusions. Hence inthe general rectitude of the intellectual facultiesof the party by whom the communicationhas been made.If it be to a familiar friend that the communicationis made by you, the non-mention ofthe individual person, or other source of evidence,from whence your belief has been derived,is a token of want of confidence in him :if by any tie of propriety you stand precludedfrom making the disclosure, acknowledging thatthis is the case is less offensive than the arrogancewhich calls for implicit credence : itindicates some confidence, not the absence ofconfidence.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 213If a friend be permanently distant, do notcommunicate to him any vexations of yourswhich he is unable to relieve. . You will sparehim all the suffering that his sympathy wouldhave excited.Discourse may wound, by contempt expressedfor the religious opinions of another.The contempt which is poured forth on thosewho differ from us in religious matters, isordinarily close upon the regions of hate.The dogmatism of establishments, the damnatorycreeds of church usurpation, sharpenthe edge of scorn with the instruments ofmaleficence. * Why should I spare my anathemastowards those who are under thecurse of God?' Why? Because I cannot hatewithout pain to myself— pain increasing withthe increase of hatred, so that my self regardinginterest should check the growth of hatred.Why ? Because I cannot hate without desiringto punish those I hate, — to punish them in theratio of my hatred ; and as the outbreak ofhatred must thus necessarily be maleficent, myregard for others should prohibit that outbreak.And what is true of hatred is true in a lessdegree of scorn. Scorn has its pains, too ; andeven though they may sometimes be outweighedby the pleasures of the scorner, they cannotcounterbalance the sufferings produced in thebreast of the scorned.214 Doxology.Essential benevolence requires that no questionshould be put, the answer to which would,or might expose the answerer to considerable,or lasting inconvenience.Such might be the consequence of inquiriesas to the religious sentiments of an individual.He might gain little if his opinions were foundin accordance with those of the inquirer, and ofother persons present. He might lose much ifthey were found discordant. Even withoutculpable intention, much damage might be done,and the damage might be irreparable.The very question has more of intolerance init than even of curiosity.Let, then, intolerance be checked in everyshape, — the expression of impatience, contempt,or ill-will, when you are unable to convinceanother, however cogent and irresistibleyour arguments may appear to yourself. Noman can believe just what he likes to believe,at all events, at a moment's notice. He can doagreat deal towards believing in future, bylending a favorable and attentive ear to theevidence on one side, and resolutely turningaway from the evidence on the other. This isall that can be exacted from him by way ofoperating on his convictions, to produce the resultyou desire. But such a convert would dolittle honor to your apostleship ; and, at allevents, take care that no dishonest declarationNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 215is obtained by the menace, or the infliction ofevil, or by the withdrawal of good.Discourse may wound by contempt expressedfor the tastes of another. For tastethere can be no standard. To you such anobject of sight is beautiful, to another it isostensive. How can you estimate the causes,which, in his mind, have associated with painthat which you deem pleasurable ? To yousuch and such an assemblage of sounds is harmoniousand attractive, to another they seemdiscordant, or they afford no gratification. Whatmischief results to you, or to mankind, fromthat difference of opinion ? In what possibleway is any one injured from the circumstance,that certain colors, or forms, or melodies do notmake exactly similar impressions on the sensesof different individuals? If jon fed contemptfor the judgment of another on such topics, itis your misfortune ; if you express it, it is youroffence. Essential benevolence need not preventyour adopting the opinions which seem toyou best founded, but essential benevolencerequires you should not so express them, as togive needless pain to others.Discourse may wound by contempt, or ill-will,expressed towards the class of men, orcountry, to which the hearer belongs. Thisis a malevolence exercised on a wide scale.216 Doxology.and unfortunately finding sympathy in thebosoms of many who are in the same conditionas the malevolent person. It sometimestakes the name of esprit de corps, ofnationality ; sometimes the higher title ofpatriotism ; and, in so far as these imply thedesire and the action of good upon the individualsor parties with which we are speciallyconnected, nothing can be said against them : itis a diffusion of the benevolent and beneficentprinciple. But, from the moment in whichtheir exercise is exclusively directed to thebody, the class, or nation to which we belong,and is denied to others, — from the moment inwhich they break out into words and deedsof antipathy, — from the moment in which thefact, that a fellow man speaks a different language,or lives under a different government,constitutes him an object for contempt, abhorrence,or misdoings, — from that moment theyare maleficent. A toast, for example, in America,has been given, * Our country, right orwrong,' which is, in itself, a proclamation ofmaleficence, and if brought into operation,might lead to crimes and follies on the widestconceivable field, — to plunder, murder, and allthe consequences of unjust war. Nor lessblameworthy was the declaration of a primeminister of this country, ' that England — nothingNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 217but England — formed any portion of bis careor concern.' An enlarged philanthropy might,indeed, have given to both expressions a Genealogicalmeaning, since the true interests ofnations, as the true interests of individuals, areequally those of prudence and benevolence ;but the phrases were employed solely to justifywrong, if that wrong were perpetrated by theland or government which we call our own.Among the various exhibitions by whichsuperiority is assumed, and annoyance causedto others by conversation, imperative command,whether of injunction or prohibition, is amongthe most vexatious.Remember, on all occasions, that kind costsa man no more than unkind language.To use kind language costs nothing at all ;unkind costs always more or less ; oftentimesmore to him who employs it than even to thoseto whom it is addressed. But every man isbound to anticipate that unkind language willproduce the fruits of unkindness; that is, suffering,in the bosoms of others.The mandate which exacts obedience maylose the despotic character with which harshnesswould invest it, and become even pleasurable,if communicated in forms and terms ofkindness. Men there are, whom, to serve, is218 Doxology.in itself pleasurable, from the consideration forthe feelings of others which accompanies theirdemands for service.Interrogation is often offensive, other than inthe way of request : there is a manner of interrogationwhich assumes all the dogmatism ofcommand. A question is put in the shape of arequisition. Information is called for with theforgiveness of authority. It is one of the exhibitionsof imperiousness. It is generally exercisedby superiors towards inferiors ; and itsvexatiousness increases in proportion as theinterrogator is less and less removed above therank of the interrogated. The purpose of aquestion being to obtain an answer, moralityrequires that the answer should be associatedwith no unnecessary pain.Discourse may wound by censure, whetherit takes the form of direct disapprobation, orof laudation bestowed on conduct similar toyour own, and opposed to that of the partycensured. When censure is vituperative, itassumes the functions of judge and executioner.Defamation, when no person is presentbut the party defamed, is but vituperationparticularized.If you have occasion to speak of a man'sfault, if for the prevention of its repetition, orNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 219for some other undoubted purpose of good, it isdesirable that reference should be made to it inyour conversation with him, provide him withan exculpation ; suppose, if that be possible,a casual and blameless ignorance on his partonyours a casual knowledge.Equally avoid accompanying your censurewith any expression of scorn, with any phraseologywhich shall convey a wish of yours todegrade or lower him in the social scale.Abstain from all vituperative words, whenneutral will express the meaning. Instead ofsaying that a man intended to defraud you ofyour rent, say he appeared desirous of avoidingthe payment.If you think a man has used you ill, do notoverwhelm him with reproaches, do not evenlet him know that such are your thoughts, unlesstheir communication to him be necessary to preventa repetition of the misdeed. In almost everycase, the reproach will come with more graceand more effect from any other party ; for thejudgment of a third party will be less liable to bewarped by interest, or exasperated by passion.If called upon to give an unfavorable opinionas to a saying of any kind, or a work of anykind of which you disapprove, do not be forwardto communicate your disapprobation merely becauseyour self-love is flattered by the appeal220 Doxology.made to your judgment. If the influence ofthat of which you disapprove be pernicious tomankind, in conveying your opinion to others,for a purpose of preponderate good, employno phraseology stronger than is absolutelynecessary to communicate the amount of yourdisapproval ; taking care that no portion ofmalevolence mingles with your award.Be cautious not to drag forward ill-conductwhich, but for your reference to it, might be forgotten.Except for some obvious purpose offuture good, to treasure up in your mind therecords of old misdeeds of others, is to sinagainst prudence and benevolence ; it is to makeyour breast a store-house of pain, to be inflictedon yourself and on others. The expression ofdissatisfaction at past ill-conduct, when ithas no reference to present ill-conduct, and atthe same time is not likely to prevent future ill-conduct,is the creation of misery to no endwhatever, or to a bad end.If you imagine you have cause for complaintagainst any man, on the ground of his misconducttowards you, and if it appear to you ofuse that he should be informed of this, takecare that the communication be made so as togive him the least possible annoyance ; do notconvey your expression in a way to make himsuppose you think ill of him ; so speak that heNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 221may regard you as attributing his conduct to acause in which he is little, or not at all blameworthy.You have asked him, for example, tovisit you ; he has neither done this, nor sent ananswer ; he ought to have come, or at least tohave given a reason why he did not, or wouldnot come. Impute his neglect to the possiblemiscarriage of your letter; or if the messagewas a verbal one, to probable misconception onthe part of the bearer, to misconception, ormis expression, or forgetfulness ; for, as the effectmight have been produced by any of thesecauses, there is no insincerity in a man's supposingas much.Choose a fit time for that reproof whicheffective benevolence demands. If a failurehave taken place on the part of any individualtoward you, avoid mentioning it at the moment,for nothing you can say will cause that not tohave happened which has happened. Thetendency of your observation will naturally andnecessarily be to produce suffering on his part,and that ill-humour toward you which is theresult of his suffering.If a similar occasion is likely to occur, thenand then only, just before the occasion, if yousee a prospect that your interposition will be ofuse, is the time for recalling to his mind theformer failure. The effect will thus be influxDoxology.enthral at the moment when it is wanted, andall the intermediate suffering will be spared.But remember, that of useless reproof pureevil is the consequence, — evil certain and considerable,in the humiliation of the person reproved,— evil contingent, in the loss of hisamity and the exposure to his enmity.These lessons may be resumed in a singlesentence: — Blame nobody but for preventingfurther cause of blame.Direct and avowed interruption of the speakeris one of the evidences of contemptuous disesteemto be particularly guarded against. Itsoffensiveness is often so intolerable as to makeconversation painful rather than pleasurable,and to produce so much of annoyance as toexcite even the reaction of ill-will.Indirect and unavowed interruption of thespeaker, by your own loud discourse, while theother party has not completed his, — this isonly another mode of annoyance ; the attemptis injurious, and, in case of success, oppressive.When, by such interruption, the thread of aman's discourse is broken, it is frequently irrecoverable.By a man with a stronger voicea man with a voice less strong may thus berendered at any time virtually dumb; theweak-voiced man kept in a sort of depressedand slavish state, and the strong-voiced manNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 223deprived of whatsoever benefit he might havederived from the conversation of the other.Departure from the presence of the speakerbefore he has ended his discourse, is one of theoffences against good-breeding, which essentialbenevolence takes under its care. Great must bethedemand for the presence of the listenerelsewhere, to justify his abruptly quitting thatof the speaker. And in a less degree is theexhibition of impatience, by language or gesture,during conversation prohibited by theminor morals, always barring those exceptionswhere an obvious and preponderate good is tobe set against the annoyance caused.Affectation of disregard, while another personis speaking, is another exhibition of contempt.To hear what a man is saying to you, and takeno notice of it, is a breach of good-breedingwhich would find little justification in publicopinion ; and the inattention is more offensive,if a request is conveyed that you will not do soand so, and paying no attention to his desires,you continue to do it. This, indeed, is positive,not negative maleficence ; but negative benevolenceshould induce you to refrain.A mode of annoyance which does not necessarilyassume superiority, is direct or virtualinquisitiveness into the private affairs of theperson addressed. By such interrogations pain224 Doxology.will almost certainly be excited. In ordinarycases the communication will be spontaneous,if it be, on the whole, desirable that the knowledgeshould be conveyed. At all events, theright of judging whether the communicationshould be made, is with the party inquired of,and not with the inquirer. The inquiry createspain to the inquirer, if the information be refused; pain to the other party, if it be unwillinglygiven : and, in many cases, pain to both.And where pain to either is a probable consequence,the motive to abstention from theinquisitiveness should check its expression.Avoid causing annoyance by the communicationof unpleasant, afflictive, or useless information.The general exception is where the evil ofthe annoyance promises to be outweighed bythe good produced by the information. Thepersons susceptible of the good are — 1. Theperson to whom the information is conveyed ;2. The person by whom the information is conveyed; and 3. Other persons at large.If it be supposed that no good, in any shape,can accrue from the information to any personof any one of these classes, it is clearly thecase to which the application of the rule isabsolute : to convey the information is inconsistentwith benevolence and beneficence. ButNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 225if there arc cases where, to set against the evilfrom the information, good, in some shape andquantity, is created on the other side ; whereforexample, the communication of disagreeablenews is necessary to the adoption of certainmeasures of prudence, whose adoption is ofpreponderating importance ; where, but for thecommunication, more pain would be sufferedthan if the communication had not been made ;where some important object is to be accomplishedby him who makes the communication,or some important benefits to be obtained byindividuals or society at large : on such occasionsthe pain must be inflicted, for its inflictionwill prevent greater pain, or secure pleasuremore than sufficient to counterbalance the pain.Never bring to view irremediable disasters ;especially to or in the hearing of any who, inthe eyes of others or their own, may havecontributed to those same disasters, or the like.No reference to them will make them not tohave happened ; and, in addition to the sufferingsthey caused, add not the sufferings whichthe reminiscence of thin brings with it.Avoid condolence with those who are mourning the loss of friends. Condolences, as wellas mourning, are bad things. Men, and moreespecially women, give actual increase to theirgrief while, under the notion of duty, andVOL. II. Q22G Doxology.even of merit, they make display of it. Ifmourning were altogether out of use, a vastmass of suffering would be prevented fromcoming into existence. Some savage or barbarousnations make merry at funerals : theyare wiser, in this respect, than polished ones.Instead of offering condolence to your friend,if you cannot persuade him to take any amusement,contrive that business shall, in someshape or other, make an irresistible demandupon him for his attention.Abstain from holding up to a man's viewimperfections which it is clearly beyond hispower to remedy or remove. The value ofyour abstention will be in the ratio of yourelevation above his position. If his position besuperior to yours, prudence should teach youforbearance ; if you be so little dependent onhim, that his ill-will can do you no sort of mischief,effective benevolence requires that youshould cause him no useless suffering.Such forbearance is demanded, whether theinfirmity is intellectual, moral, or corporeal ; itis demanded even in the absence of others; itis more strongly demanded in their presence.One never-failing result of unkindness in thisshape is, a pain of humiliation.This pain will be greater or less, accordingto the relations existing between the personNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 227thus annoyed and other persons present : and,be those relations what they may, it will begreater and greater, in proportion to the increasednumber of persons present.And if the consequences of such unkindnessbe traced, they will be found to produce evilto all parties: — 1. Evil to the person thusannoyed, by the infliction of this pain of humiliation: 2. Evil to the third persons present, bythe infliction of the pain of sympathy, producedin their minds, by the idea of his pain : 3. Evilby pain of antipathy, of which you will be the object— of antipathy produced by their sympathy :4. Evil to yourself, by danger of retribution atthe hands of the person thus annoyed ; and,eventually, at the hands of those in whosebreasts any such antipathy may have beenexcited. For this mass of evil, whatever itmay amount to, compensation cannot, in anyshape or quantity, have place. Yes, perhaps,if the imperfection thus brought to view wereremediable ; but, by the supposition, this is notthe case.If any reference to irremediable infirmitiesbe thus prohibited, by the laws of benevolence,far more decidedly and severely is it where itcomes in the shape of ridicule. Derision oforganic defects is one of the most cruel formsof pain-giving. Imperfections there are, which228 Doxology.may or may not be shaken off; but where, inthe very constitution of the human being, someinfirmities are intervened, the demands of ab-essentialbeneficence are peremptory.To this class of evils belong many of thosetricks and inflictions known as school-boy jokes.Some malformation — some human wretchedness,is often marked and selected as the buttfor petty inflictions of pain. Let the maleficenttendency be checked in its very earliest exhibitions.Let children, especially, be instructedthat the pleasure which finds its aliment in thepain of another — in the useless, uncompensatedpain of another, has in it the germ of all that isimmoral.In the case of remediable imperfections, thoughthe rule which suppresses allusion to them doesnot absolutely apply; yet before you refer tothem by oral discourse, and especially oral discoursein the presence of third parties, be surethat the object, which allusion to them purposesto accomplish, cannot be accomplished withoutthose pains of humiliation which your referenceto them brings with it. Be sure that the goodis not attainable by some lesser evil. Be surethat you are the person most likely to attainthe good at the least expense of evil.In your intercourse with a child, servant orother dependent, in regard to every fault or im-negativeEFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 229perfection not incorrigible by his exertions, remindhim of it every time you observe it, solong as prospect of amendment have place. Ifall prospect is at an end, cease reminding him ;and never afterwards let him see that youobserve it.In the choice of subjects for conversation,essential benevolence will often find occasionfor its exercise. Every man's mind is soorganized, or at all events so trained by habitand usage, that certain topics are less pleasurablethan others. Let those be avoided whichare the least agreeable, and in proportion totheir disagreeableness, be your anxiety to shunthem. The presence of important interestsmay require the introduction of subjects onwhich there is a known discordance of opinion.Necessity, or preponderant benefit, can alonejustify their being brought forward.*♦ I remember an interesting case in point. For two orthree years after my acquaintance with Mr Bentham, wehad frequent discussions on some points of religious controversy.Certainly on his part there was no diminution ofaffection towards me ; on mine, no diminution of reverencetowards him, notwithstanding the unchanged state of ourminds on the subject in question, after so many and suchlong debates. One day, he said to me — *1 shall not changeyour mind, I see; you will not change mine, you know. Ifwc goon, I shall give you pain, or you will give me pain, and230 Doxology.Avoid on all occasions wounding the self-loveof another. If a man misunderstand, or donot understand your conversation, attribute thefailure not to misconception on his part, but tomis expression on yours. For misexpressionmay be the cause of misconception, and thereis no reason for seeking an explanation whichwill give pain, when one is at hand which cangive no pain.Give no expression, and as far as you canavoid it, give no place in your mind to uselessresentment ; not even where you feel that youare calumniated. If you are accused of badconduct, past or intended, and it is in yourpower to disprove the accusation, do not fly intoa passion, but give disproof : to fly into a passionis naturally a guilty man's sole and thereforenatural resource ; disproof are the onlymeans of distinguishing your case from that ofa guilty man. Where you think you observemarks of stupidity, beware of asperity in yourobservations. Only in so far as negligence isthe cause, can they be of any use. Supposenegligence out of the question, the effect of anyin either case pain to both will be the consequence. We willnever talk on this matter again.' Nor did we. And yet, ifever there were a man who unveiled his bosom to another,Bentham unveiled his to me. J. Bo.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 231asperity is to give purely useless pain, and toexcite resentment towards yourself on the scoreof your injustice and cruelty.Patience under invective is a lesson hard tolearn and difficult to practice, but well worthyof being learned and practised.If, in your presence, an attack is made uponyou, be it ever so outrageous, especially if therebe others in company, treat it, if you can, citherwith manifest indifference, plain good humor,or with pleasantry, as occasion serves. Themore outrageous the attack — and to the assailantwho makes it the more disgraceful — themore effectually will he be then put down :he will be disappointed, humbled, and yet notirritated, nor made your enemy in a greater degreethan he was before ; he may possibly beeven reconciled. As to his disappointment, itfollows of course : at any rate, if no otherpersons are present. For in such a case whatcould have been the object of the attack?No other assuredly than the making yousuffer : and the more completely undisturbedyour complacency, the more complete his.failure.This is no doubt of the number of thoselessons which it is so much easier to give thanto obey : few lessons, be it repeated, either232 Doxology.of self-regarding prudence or of effective benevolence,can be more difficult than this.This, however, or any other conquest overtemptation may, on adequate inducement, beeffected by previous preparation. Exercisesfor the strengthening the body, have been invented,and with illustrious success brought intopractice : this is of the number of those exercisesby which, on a similar principle, strength,the passive strength of patience, may be givento the mind.In the denial of favors, let the denial give aslittle pain as possible to the person who applies.Even though the request should appear ill-timedand unreasonable, there is no motive forshowing that there is any disinclination on yourpart to oblige or serve him. Should it seemnecessary to convince him that the request isunreasonable, do so suavity in moclo : by theforester in moclo, you may humble or irritate him,or both ; you may make him unhappy withoutneed or use ; you may even make him yourenemy ; and what advantage can you obtainfrom his suffering — what good from his enmity ?In the case of otherwise unmanageable importunity,that is, if gentleness and kind expressionhave failed to rid you of the suppliant'spresence, have recourse to the monitory method.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT JiENEVOLENCE. 233Abstain from all expressions whose object isthe manifestation of opposition to the will orjudgment of another; no matter how trivial theoccasion.Contest not a point of no practical importance,merely because you are in the right and anotherin the wrong. Out of such contests springdissension and enmity.If, on account of something which he hasdone, a demand presents itself for speaking ofa man in the correspondent unfavorable light,mention the particular fact, but not in generalterms the opinion formed by you on account ofthe fact. The f\ict may prove the correctnessof your judgment of condemnation. The termsof condemnation will prove nothing, perhaps,in the eyes of the person you are conversingwith, but the state of your affection with referenceto the person in question.Excite in the minds of others no unreasonablehopes, by holding out prospects of whoserealization there is any reasonable doubt. Letthe language in which you speak of anticipatedpleasures be such as to leave the smallestamount of disappointment, should the pleasuresnever arrive. Little will be lost by loweringthe tone of expectation ; much will be sufferedif it be raised too high.The passion of anger has been already Doxology.bounced as useful on no occasion ; perniciousand pain-giving on almost every occasion. Allhabits, therefore, that administer to it are to beavoided. Of these habits, that of cursing andswearing is among the most foolish and themost mischievous. The popular sanction ishappily directing its opprobrium against suchexhibitions. Fashion had once taken themunder its protection; fashion is now repudiatingthem. In addition to the pain produced by theanger which excites them, other pain will beproduced by the expression of anger in a formso offensive. In the minds of some, it willshock the religious affections ; in the minds ofall, it will produce sensations which benevolenceshould avoid conveying.Thoughtlessness, or heedlessness of the consequencesof language, is the source of thegreater portion of the evils inflicted by language.Men are apt to speak, without consideration ofthe effect their words may produce upon thosewith whom they are conversing, or who arewithin hearing.Truth, it is said, ought not to be spoken atall times. But there is a dangerous ambiguityin the aphorism, and hence it is often employedto a pernicious purpose. It has two senses;one a bad, the other a good one. ' Falsehoodought sometimes to be spoken,' — this is the badNegative EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 235and perilous sense. Cases there are, in whichtruth ought not to be spoken. * What, then,ought to be spoken? Falsehood?' No! nothingat all. This is the good sense. And this isthe sense in which only it should be employedas an aphorism by the moralist.The maxims which have been thus put forward,as the rules for conduct in matters ofdiscourse, will be found of similar applicationwhere actions are in question. In fact, in theprogress of our investigations, it will have beenseen, that it has been convenient sometimes toassociate actions as the consequences of words,their connection with one another being so intimate,that it has been difficult to separate theconsideration of them.Of actions, however, a greater proportionthan of words comes into the domains of judicialauthority. The actions which are controlled bythe laws may be considered obligatory ; thoseof which the laws take no cognizance maybedeemed free ; and they are such as are notconsidered to belong to the domain of penaljustice.Actions annoying to others may either be soby offending the physical senses, or the intellectualfeelings.Of the five senses, the feeling and the tastedo not, on this occasion, come in question :236 Doxology.annoyance to either of these senses presentsitself in the form of a legally-punishable offence:annoyance to the touch or feeling becomeswhat, in law language, is called assault : annoyanceto the taste presents the idea of poison;and, unless deceit or intimidation be employedas the instrument of it, cannot but involve init an offence of the nature of assault.In a word, the only senses exposed to thoseannoyances which come under Deontologicalcognizance, are the three senses which arecapable of being operated upon without immediatecontact. These are the smell, the hearing,and the sight.1. The smell. The ways in which annoyancemay be inflicted on this sense are, for themost part, sufficiently obvious. Under thishead some cautions may not be altogether withouttheir use.Trilling as they may seem at first sight, inregard to all these modes of annoyance whichoperate through the senses, such may be theeffect as to banish one friend from the societyof another, and even render a man an objectof recorded aversion to a whole company, inany degree numerous. Trifling as it may seem,what renders the mischief in this case the moreserious is, that by a sort of mixture of shame,fear, and sympathy, the person by whom theNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 237annoyance is felt is apt to be restrained frommaking communication of his feelings to theperson who is the author of it. Here, then,is the case of an act which, having the effectof maleficence, stands clearly prohibited by thedictates of negative beneficence, and thence ofself-regard ing prudence. Trifling in the extremeas it may seem, greater annoyance is producedby it than would be produced by manya punishable offence ; at the same time that,by the circumstance just mentioned, the injury,such as it is, stands precluded from the benefitof pardon.The cautions in question consist in presentingto view, to the reader, this or that circumstancewhich, though really productive ofmischief in the shape in question, has beenfound, by experience, to be liable to escapenotice.First, then, as to annoyance in that shape inwhich the seat of it is in the sense of smell.The most obvious is that which is producedby the emission of gas from the alimentarycanal.Of gas of that species which is emitted fromthe lower part of that canal, the emission is,almost always, optional : in such sort that, in general,annoyance in this shape cannot be inflictedwithout being intended : forbearance is in the238 Doxology.power of the individual by whom it is inflicted.In the production of annoyance which hasplace in this shape, though the sense is theimmediate seat of it, imagination acts the principalpart : the self-same scent which, if emittedfrom a man's own body, would not have beenproductive of any annoyance to him, is renderedproductive of annoyance to him, in ahighly offensive degree, by the mere circumstanceof its being by another person that ithas been emitted, and the annoyance is capableof being mitigated or enhanced by a varietyof circumstances connected with the personof the individual whose body has been thesource of it.As the share which the imagination has inthe production of annoyance in this shape isso great, annoyance may, in this case, haveplace without any actual impression on theorgan which is the natural seat of it. Such isthe disgust apt to be produced by the impression,that, by means of the principle of association,a disgust correspondent in its nature,though inferior in degree, is commonly producedby the idea, when excited by operationswhich apply not to any other sense than thatof hearing.Education has done much for the suppressionof annoyances from this source. The good-negativeEFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 239breeding which has penetrated even to themasses of society, has succeeded in makingacts unfrequent, which are considered suchevidence of rudeness and ill-manners as tomake their exercise perilous to the reputationof the offender.The power of preventing disagreeable emissionsfrom the mouth is not possessed to thesame extent ; but absolute power is possessed,to regulate them so as to prevent their offensivenessto others. Eructation, which cannotalways be controlled, may be made less annoyingto those present, by watching the directionin which the blast will not reach any person ;then let the air escape in that direction, fromthe smallest possible aperture at the corner ofyour mouth, so the act may be unperceived.If there be persons on every side withinreach of the blast, either cover your mouthwith your handkerchief or your hand ; the carbonicacid gas will descend by its own gravity.If you are at table, with any person oppositeto you, the covering your mouth is better thanyour visibly puffing out the effluvia ; for if thedistance be so great that the annoyance will notaffect your companion's sense of smell, youmay save him from fancying that he does perceiveit, — a fancy likely to be created by his240 Doxology.perceiving that the act of eructation has hadplace.2. Hearing — sense of hearing. To this senseannoyance may be applied in a direct way, orina collateral way, by the instrumentality ofthe association of ideas.In a direct way, either by the quality of thesound, or by its quantity.Annoyance by means of sounds offensive bytheir quality, independent of their quantity, isnot very apt to be inflicted without intention :without intention, having, for its end in view,the production of such an effect. If inflictedin pursuance of any such intention, it might,perhaps, be considered as forming the matter ofa legally-punishable injury ; at any rate, anywarning to abstain from the practice can be nobetter than superfluous and useless.By the principle of association, any sound,the effect of which is to call up and place in themind the idea of an application offensive to anyother sense, such as, for example the sense ofsmell, becomes thereby, itself, noisome.Annoyance may be created through the earto the inside of the nose and mouth by thepower of sympathy.By an assortment of glands opening into thenose, the interior of the mouth, and the passageNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 241called the larynx into the lungs, a viscousliquid, — subservient to various uses, — a liquid,but in some cases, partly by its original texture,partly by evaporation, approaching to solidity,is discharged. This liquid, when accumulatedin the passages to a certain quantity, becomes,in various ways, productive of disagreeable sensations,which cannot be removed but by theexpulsion of it. That portion of it which linesthe lungs, the larynx, and the interior of themouth, is capable of being discharged througheither of two channels : through the mouth, inwhich case it is expelled out of the body altogether,and in its own form; or through the gulletinto the stomach, in which latter case it mixesitself with the food, and, after having undergonelike changes, is finally expelled through thesame passages. That which lines the nose, theupper part of it at least, is capable of being dischargedthrough anyone of three orifices : namely,at the nostrils ; at the mouth, as above ; or intothe stomach. When at the nose, it is driven outfrom above by an extraordinary quantity of airinhaled for that purpose ; in this case, the nose issaid to be blowed ; that which is expelled throughthe mouth, is discharged partly by means of acurrent of air inhaled for the purpose, partly bymeans of the muscular force of the tongue andthe lips. In the instance of some persons, if,VOL. II. R242 Doxology.instead of being expelled from the mouth ornose, this mucus is swallowed, sickness is aptto be produced : sickness, partly by the diffi-curtly-digestible quality of the matter whentaken into the stomach, party by its tenacity,by which it is kept in a state of continuousstrings, extending themselves down the gullet,and stimulating it in such manner as to producea sort of convulsion called retching.A man who is liable to be thus affected,when, by the sense of hearing, he perceivesthat another person experiences annoyance fromthe accumulation of mucus in an extra quantityis, in order to relieve himself, swallowing, orpreparing to swallow it into his stomach, insteadof expelling it through the mouth or the nose,such a man is apt to receive from such perceptionno inconsiderable annoyance. This annoyancehas for its cause the affection of sympathy.By his own experience, in his owncase, the idea of sickness is associated with theidea of that state of things.Very considerable, indeed, is the sufferingproduced by a cause apparently so inconsiderable,and the nature of which seems not to becommonly understood.A distinction must here be observed betweenthe cases in which the bodily organ, the organof sense, is itself the seat of annoyance suffEFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 243feared, and the cases in which it is but an inletto the impression made on some other part ofthe body or on the mind.Thus, for example, the organs of sight andhearing are each of them exposed to particularmodes of annoyance, of which they are respectivelythe seats. But, taken together, they arethe inlets to an infinity of annoyances as wellas of enjoyments, the seat of which is not inthe respective organs, but in the mind ; in aword, of the annoyances and enjoyments capableof being afforded by the means of discourse.The only cases in which it is worth while, forthe present purpose, and on the present occasion,to bring a mode of annoyance to view, arethose in which it is in a man's power to avoidgiving the annoyance, without taking himselfout of the presence of those who are exposedto it. There are some persons to whom thesight of a person whose eyes are the seat of acertain morbid affection, is sufficient to producea similar affection ; no forbearance, except theforbearance to introduce himself into the presenceof the person laboring under this morbidsusceptibility, being sufficient to prevent theannoyance, the case belongs not to this head.On terms of less inconvenience than that oftheir avoiding each other's presence, the annoyancemay be avoided by an easy forbearance on244 Doxology.the part of the person laboring under the morbidsusceptibility : namely, by his avoiding toturn his eyes towards those eyes, by the morbidstate of which the morbid sensibility is affected,and the annoyance produced.These cases, purposely gone into with somedetail, will be sufficient to awaken attention toother points, where the corporeal senses arelikely to be affected by want of attention to thecauses which bring annoyance to them ; and willenable every man for himself to watch the instancesin which benevolence demands abstentionfrom practices thus offensive to others.The subject is in itself so unattractive, thateven what has been said would seem to demandan apology, were it not that to such sources alarge amount of disagreeable sensations is tobe traced, and that the full importance of protectingmen, as far as possible, from the visitationsof such annoyance is not sufficiently', orgenerally felt.As an example of the way in which the topicmay be followed into other departments of theminor morals, the following extract is given fromthe * Examiner ' newspaper : —Mode of Feeding annoying to persons of anydelicacy : making a clattering with theirknives and forks ; smacking their lips ; drawingin their liquids with a bubbling sound ;NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 245chewing with a noise ; and eating with rapidity.These things may seem of little importanceto some, but they are very far from beingso ; for they not only indicate coarse feelingson the part of the offenders, but tend greatlyto make their company very distasteful to personsof refinement, and must therefore operategreatly to their injury in their commerce withsociety.'Unkind expressions, with regard to the infirmitiesof others, have been referred to as violationsof the Greatest-Happiness Principle.Unkind actions are yet more palpable and decidedviolations of it. If you meet with anyperson laboring under corporeal or mental defects,let your attention be especially awakened,and be most anxious to say, and still more todo,nothing which can wound the person sufferingfrom the defect. If the infirmity be one oftemper, do not suppose that you are authorisedto let your disapproval exhibit itself in wordsor deeds of unkindness. Many defects of temperare constitutional, and cannot be overcome :the cases are very rare indeed, where any, theslightest good, can be done by your giving evidenceof hostility, or even censure. Appearnot to notice the weakness, and if you notice it,let it, at all events, be in a manner which shallgive the least possible pain.246 Doxology.In cases of corporeal defects, do not refer tothem. It is dangerous to do so, even by anexpression, or an act of sympathy ; for the defectis brought by that sympathy into the immediateview of the sufferer; and the pleasureof your sympathy, even where it communicatesa pleasure, which it will not always do, may beoverbalanced by the pain which excited attentionwill awaken.The case is different where the suffering isremediable — remediable by your kindness, oralleviate by your sympathy. Such a caseestablishes a claim to both.If the words or deeds of another give youpain, and you, in consequence, desire theyshould cease from annoying you, so manage thatthe discontinuance of the annoyance be obtainedwith as little pain as possible to the other party.Do not, therefore, desire abruptly that the vexationmay cease ; do not give evidence of thepain it causes you, but propose some new topic ;give a direction to the conversation, or conduct,which shall lead it away from the course thatannoys you.In the interference of others on your behalf,it may well happen that there has been imprudence; that the interference has not been suchas you would approve, and that your dissatisfactionis well-grounded. Before you complain.NEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 247be quite sure that, with a reference to thefuture, it is necessary to apprize the party ofyour displeasure ; nothing but some referenceto the future will authorise, in any case, an expressionof dissatisfaction ; for no such expressionwill change the past, or make an evil thathas been, not to have been. Should a recurrenceof ill-judged interference be contemplated,then, at the moment when it is about totake place, gently apprize the party that, on aformer occasion, some unintended mischief wasdone ; otherwise, do not let him perceive thatyou noticed the consequences of his injudiciousinterference, nor apprize him of it.The rule has been mentioned by which youare enabled to judge of pains and pleasuresexperienced by another : namely, by changingpositions with him. Thus, to avoid giving uselessoffence, or uneasy pain, on the occasion ofany thing you are about to do or to say in relationto any individual, think, in the first place,in what manner, if said or done in relation toyourself, it would affect yourself. If to yourselfit would be a matter of indifference, thinkthen whether between your situation and histhere may not be some difference, the effect ofwhich may be to render painful to him whatwould not be so to you.The best ordinary rule is, to assume equality;248 Doxology.to make equality the law of general applicationexceptional variations, growing out of differenceof position, must be applied to the particularcases as they occur. There may be caseswhere the peculiar character of the individuallikely to be offended, makes him less susceptibleof pain than in ordinary persons ; but safetyis on the side of forbearance.What thou doest, do quickly,' and especiallyif the deed be one that is likely to gratifyothers. Hence, negative benevolence exacts,that there should be no needless waste of timein the discharge of those functions, on whoseexercise others depend for any portion of theirenjoyments.Unnecessary delay in answering letters, forexample, is inconsistent with prudence andbeneficence. It brings with it loss of reputation,in so far as you are concerned, and is likelyto cause annoyance to others. Promptitudeadds to the value of every service. Procrastinationis punishment imposed by the despotismof indolence.The same service rendered promptly is oftenof far greater value than a more important servicewhen delayed. Bis dat qui cit dat, — Hegives twice who gives quickly, is an aphorismwhich, when the gift is a benevolent one, theDeontologist may adopt into his code. For toNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 249promptitude of beneficent action not only isgreater efficiency of service ordinarily attached,but greater vivacity in the generous affections.Applications for services are too frequentlytreated with inattention. At a little cost, thepains of delay may be saved to the applier. Itwas said to be the Duke of Wellington's practiceinvariably and promptly to reply to allsuch communications. Next to conferring thefavor, attention to the application is the surestway of gratifying the applicant. It is asaving of all those sufferings which grow outof * hope deferred.'Occasion has been found to point out some ofthe instances of discordance between the lawsof politeness and the Deontological laws, or inother words, the want of coincidence betweenthe popular sanction and the Deontologicalprinciple.Persons, for example, have been deemedperfect gentlemen' whose morality was as badas it could well be, and whose manners reallyno better than their morality. Perhaps, if suchpersons had not occupied stations pre-eminentlyexalted, they would not have been quoted asmodels. At all events, a politeness of a highercharacter, and a gentlemanly spirit more regardfulof the pains and pleasures of others,might more properly be jMoposcd for imitation.250 Doxology.Far from being inconsistent with true morality,the laws of genuine politeness harmonizewith those of benevolent beneficence. It willas cautiously avoid giving pain, or excitingpainful associations, as if its name were virtue.But fashionable habits, to be made trulypolite, must undergo many changes. Thesehabits are now a very chaos of inconsistencies, —inconsistencies sanctioned by aristocratic usage,and escaping from the influence of any generallaw. A gentleman whose conversationaldemeanor is courtesy itself, who will not uttera word that shall cause needless pain, will nothesitate to break an engagement for the dispatchof business, to keep a visitor in weary attendance,to leave unanswered letters of intenseinterest to the writer, to mislay or lose valuablemanuscripts, — in a word, to give extreme andgratuitous pain, without any sort of benefit tohimself.As in your words, so by your conduct exciteno expectation that is likely to be disappointed ;and, in as far as the intensity of expectationdepends on you, take care that it is less thanthe probable amount of gratification ; for thoughthe pleasures of anticipation occupy no smallportion of the field of happiness, they will beoverbalanced by the pains of disappointment,in so far as disappointment follows them. AndNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 251that portion of the pleasure really obtained,which had not been looked for, will comewith the additional relish and welcome ofsurprise.Your exaggeration of your own ability to servewill not only increase the demands of othersupon you, but lead to diminished affectiontowards you when that exaggeration is mademanifest by the failure of your attempts toserve. Your self-love will leave more vexationfrom its detected helplessness than gratificationfrom its anticipated influence ; and others willexperience the annoyance of unrequited expectation,without any of those abatements, whichthe pleasure of making fair promises to othershad excited in your mind.Intrusion into the company of another, whenunexpected or uninvited, is one of the modes ofannoyance which effective benevolence wouldavoid. It is the substitution of your will for thewill of another, and in so far is the assumptionof despotism. A purpose, an importantpurpose, may have to be answered; the intrusionmay be justified by preponderant good; butsuch a case is exceptional. You are to take forgranted, — unless on some general understandingthat your presence is welcome at all times, or atspecified times, — you are bound to suppose that,if your company were wished for, you would have252 Doxology.been advised of the wish. At all events, yourintrusion does not give the person intruded on anychoice: it may compel him to submit to an annoyancehe would not have chosen, or to inflict onyou the annoyance of expulsion. If you have awish to see a person, and the business is not ofa peremptory character, communicate the wishin a way which may leave him the privilege ofa refusal, without giving him pain or youoffence.Do not let the timidity of another induce youto act intolerant towards him. If, in ordinarycases, a benevolent man would avoid giving pain,still more would he be anxious to avoid it wereany additional susceptibility excited in themind of the sufferer.So in case of dullness. Let a man be naturallyever so stupid, do not give him reason to believethat you are annoyed by his stupidity ; do not lethim perceive that you have discovered it. Nothingthat you can say or do can make him lessstupid than nature has made him, and your tellinghim of his stupidity will only bring bad consequencesto both ; to him, by the uneasinessyou cannot fail to give him ; to you by thatill-will which no stupidity will prevent beingexcited, to a greater or less extent, in his bosom.A remote, but not unimportant consequenceof a habit of effective benevolence is, that in caseNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 253of rupture between yourself and any associateof yours, the presumption antecedently to aparticular investigation will be in your favor inthe minds of your common associates. Thehabit, which, being a habit, will have exhibiteditself in the presence of others, has laid up foryou a fund of reputation in the minds of othermen, which will influence their judgment withoutyour knowing it.If you have deserved, as you will have deserved,the credit of abstaining from all thosecauses of offence which ordinarily are supposedto justify reprisals, the advantage of so honorablea distinction will be your acquittal, indoubtful cases, of blame, and an unwillingness,on all occasions, to receive evidence tending toshake your acquired fame. Your characterwill be your justification.As the field of pernicious action widens, thedemand for beneficent abstention increases. Ifthe claims of benevolence be strong where thehappiness and misery of few are concerned, stillstronger are they in view of the happinessand misery of the multitude. And, it unfortunatelyhappens, that the popular sanction asregards one of the great topics of human wretchednessis miserably immoral. Nothing can beworse than the general feeling on the subject ofWa)\ The church, the state, the ruling few,254 Doxology.the subject many, all seem to have combined,in order to patronise vice and crime, in theirvery widest sphere of evil. Dress a man inparticular garments, call him by a particularname, and he shall have authority on diversoccasions to commit every species of offence ; topillage ; to murder ; to destroy human felicity ;to maximize human suffering ; and for so doinghe shall be rewarded !Of all that is pernicious in admiration, theadmiration of heroes is the most pernicious ;and how delusions should have made us admirewhat virtue should teach us to hate and loathe,is among the saddest evidences of human weaknessand folly. The crimes of heroes seemlost in the vastness of the field they occupy. Alively idea of the mischief they do, of themisery they create, seldom penetrates the mindthrough the delusions with which thoughtlessnessand falsehood have surrounded their namesand deeds. Is it that the magnitude of the evilis too gigantic for entrance ? We read of twentythousand men killed in a battle, with no otherfeeling than that ' it was a glorious victory.'Twenty thousand, or ten thousand — what reckwe of their miserable sufferings ? The hostswho perished are the evidence of the completenessof the triumph; and the completenessof the triumph is the measure of meritNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 255and the glory of the conqueror. Our schoolmasters,and the immoral books they so oftenput into our hands, have inspired us with anaffection for heroes ; and the hero is moreheroic, in proportion to the numbers of theslain. Add a cypher, not one iota is addedto our disapprobation. Four, or two figures,give us no more sentiment of pain than onefigure, while they add marvellously to thegrandeur and splendor of the victor. Letus draw forth one individual from those thousandsor tens of thousands : his leg has beenshivered by one ball, his jaw broken by another; he is bathed in his own blood, andthat of his fellows ; yet he lives, torturedby thirst, fainting, famishing : he is but oneof the twenty thousand, — one of the actors andsufferers in the scene of the hero's glory, — andof the twenty thousand, there is scarcely onewhose suffering or death will not be the centreof a circle of misery. Look again, admirer ofthat hero ! Is not this wretchedness ? Becauseit is repeated ten — ten hundred — ten thousandtimes, is not this wretchedness?The period will assuredly arrive, when betterinstructed generations will require all theevidence of history to credit that, in timesdeeming themselves enlightened, human beingsshould have been honored with public approval,256 Doxology.in the very proportion of the misery they caused,and the mischiefs they perpetrated. They willcall upon all the testimony which incredulitycan require, to persuade them that, in pastages, men there were, — men, too, deemedworthy of popular recompense, — who, for somesmall pecuniary retribution, hired themselvesout to do any deeds of pillage, devastation,and murder, which might be demanded ofthem. And still more will it shock their sensibilities,to learn that such men, such men-destroyers,were marked out as the eminentand the illustrious ; as the worthy of laurelsand monuments, of eloquence and poetry. Inthat better and happier epoch, the wise andthe good will be busied in hurling into oblivion,or dragging forth, for exposure to universalignominy and obloquy, many of the deeds wedeem heroic; while the true fame and theperdurable glories will be gathered round thecreators and the diffuses of happiness.Intolerance in language, for difference in religiousopinions, bad as it is, is more worthy of tolerationthan intolerant deeds. Persecution in actionis the exhibition of this lamentable species ofmaleficence. And next to the mischiefs of warcome the mischiefs of religious hatred. To saynothing more than has been said of the immoralityof punishing men for holding opinionsNEGATIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 257different to our own, let the absurdity of thepretence be investigated. Why are they to bepunished? Because they will not bow toyour authority, will not blindly submit to thefaith you would impose upon them.Now a blind faith can operate only by suppressingevidence. It cannot change sensation ;it cannot change the sentiment of truth andfalsehood.Offering rewards for faith, and punishmentsfor the want of it, is therefore like offeringrewards for, and punishing the absence of, prejudiceand partiality in a judge.To say, * Believe this proposition rather thanits contrary,' is to say, do all that is in yourpower to believe it. Now, what is in a man'spower to do in order to believe a proposition,and all that is so, is to keep back and stiflethe evidences that are opposed to it. For,when all the evidences are equally present tohis observation, and equally attended to, beliefor disbelief is no longer in his power. It is thenecessary result of the preponderance of theevidence on one side over that of the other.The sources to which is to be attributed thepain-giving which it is the object of negative effectivebenevolence to avoid or counteract, are to befound in arrogance, imperiousness, scornfulness,overbearingness, coldness, closeness, pride, andVOL. II. s258 DEONTOLOGV.affectation. Any one of these vices may producea similar result. To the sufferer, it matterslittle whether his suffering emanates fromone bad quality or another. The law of abstentionapplies to all. In some minds, someof them predominate ; in other minds, others.They must be measured in the scale of moraldefects, by the quantity of pain they cause.One man's scorn may be less offensive thananother man's coldness, and therefore less mischievous.The arrogance of a man in an elevatedstation may be more tolerable than thecloseness of a man in a station of inferiority, oreven of equality. Of each of these vices someexamples have been given ; but each of themissusceptible of so many modifications, each ofbeing exhibited in such varieties of words anddeeds, that it must be left to every man to filllip, from the pages of his own experience, theblanks that are left. To root out these vicesfrom the mind, is to extirpate their fruits. Theypartake, more or less, of the two fundamentalvices, — of imprudence and maleficence, — andtherefore cannot be retained without injury andsuffering.POSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 259CHAPTER V.POSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE.Beneficence consists in contributing: to thecomforts of our fellow-creatures : benevolence isthe desire so to contribute. Beneficence is notavirtue, except in so far as accompanied withbenevolence. The food we eat contributes tothe comfort of those by whom it is eaten. Butthe comfort of the eater does not render thefood or the act of eating virtuous.Benevolence may be a virtue, without beingaccompanied by beneficence ; for the desiremay exist, without any power of carrying itinto effect. But benevolence is not a virtue,any farther than, as occasion serves, it is accompaniedwith beneficence ; if, when occasionserves, correspondent beneficence is not exercised,it is a proof that the desire was not,in reality, present ; or that, if present, it wasinoperative ; it was so faint as to be of no use.Over and above any present pleasure withwhich an act of beneficence may be accompaniedto the actor, the inducement which a man hasfor its exercise is of the same sort as that which2G0 Doxology.the husbandman has for the sowing of his seed ;as that which the frugal man has for the layingup money. Seed sown is no otherwise of anyvalue than for the crops of which it is productive.Money is of no value, but for the servicesof all sorts which it procures at the handsof other men : at the hands of the laborer, theservice rendered by the performance of hislabor ; at the hands of the baker, the serviceperformed by the delivery of his bread to thecustomer, who gives the money for it.By every act of virtuous beneficence whicha man exercises, he contributes to a sort offund, a savings-bank, a depository of generalgood-will, out of which services of all sortsmay be looked for, as about to flow from otherhands into his ; if not positive services, at anyrate negative services ; services consisting in theforbearance to vex him by annoyances withwhich he might otherwise have been vexed.Negative beneficence, as we have seen — andwe again go over the ground, for the sake ofshowing what is left to positive beneficence —negative beneficence is exercised in so far asmischief is not done to others. Negative beneficenceamounts to nothing, unless in so faras accompanied either with correspondent benevolenceor with self-regarding prudence. Themost mischievous of all beings exercises nega-POSITIVE Efficient Benevolence. 201time beneficence in respect of all imaginablemischief, except that which he does.Negative beneficence is a virtue, in so faras any mischief which without considerationmight have been produced, is by considerationforborne to be produced. In so far as it is bythe consideration of the effect which the mischievousaction might have upon a man's owncomfort, the virtue is prudence — self-regardingprudence: in so far as it is by the considerationof the effect which the mischievous action mighthave upon the comfort of any other person, thevirtue is benevolence.A main distinction here is, between beneficencewhich cannot be exercised without self-sacrifice,and beneficence which can be exercisedwithout self-sacrifice. To that whichcannot be exercised without self-sacrifice, thereare, necessarily, limits, and these, comparatively,very narrow ones. In truth, beneficencewhich is accompanied with self-sacrifice isnot exercised but at the expense of a certainamount of self-regarding prudence ; although itmay be no otherwise at the expense of self-regardingprudence, than as the seed sown bythe husbandman is sown at the expense ofself regarding prudence. In no case in whichmoney is disbursed without adequate return262 Doxology.can beneficence be exercised without correspondentself-sacrifice.To the exercise of beneficence, where it isexercised without self-sacrifice, there can beno limits ; and by every exercise thus madeof it, a contribution is made to the good-willfund, and made without expense. In a certainsense, indeed, beneficence that has any virtuein it cannot be exercised without self-sacrifice ;for it cannot be exercised without forbearance ;and forbearance, in so far as there is any thesmallest desire to perform the act forbornefrom, requires consideration, requires effort ;and to undergo any uneasiness with which thiseffort may be accompanied, is, by the amountof that uneasiness, self-sacrifice. There arecases in which this self-sacrifice is accompaniedwith uneasiness to a great amount ; an amountbeyond the endurance of the generality of meninthe present state of society at least. Suchas that which causes a forbearance to gratifythe appetite of revenge, when excited by severeinjury.But to self-sacrifice in this shape, whateverlimits may be set by the dictates of beneficenceand self-regarding prudence, there areothers set by the nature of the case ; others,such as those which are set in the case wherePOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 263the act of beneficence consists in the gift ofmoney, and the rendering of service by laborperformed.Negative beneficence, then, is exercised in sofaras annoyance is forborne to be inflicted onothers. Negative beneficence is forbearance ofannoyance. By acts of this description nodirect contribution, it is true, can be said to bemade to the good will fund abovementioned.But, on the other hand, correspondent to thatsame good-will fund there is ^x\ ill-will fund ;and by every exercise of negative beneficencethe ill-will fund is kept from receiving contribution,contribution to the amount of value itwould otherwise have received. In an indirectway, the withdrawing contribution from the ill-willfund may be productive of an effect equivalentto that produced by a contribution to thegood will fund. For if, while malevolencekeeps filling his ill-will fund, benevolence keepshis ill-will-fund empty, it is manifest what theadvantage will be which, in a case when theyare rival candidates for a certain service, whichmay be rendered to either, and must be renderedto one of them, benevolence will have on hisside.Described in general terms, the inducementto positive beneficence, in all its shapes, is thecontribution it makes to the man's general264 Doxology.good-will fund ; to the general good-willfund from which draughts in his favor maycome to be paid : the inducement to negativebeneficence is the contribution it keeps backfrom his general ill-will fund — the generalill-will fund hanging over his head; and besidesits own particular use, any exertion made tokeep the ill-will fund empty, may be productiveof advantage in the same shape as that producedby contribution made to a man's generalgood-will fund.He who is in possession of a fund of this sort,and understands the value of it, will understandhimself to be the richer by every act of benevolentbeneficence he is known to have exercised.He is the richer, and feels that he is so,by every act of kindness he has ever done. Willit be believed — believed or not, it is strictlytrue — I knew a man once, of whose mind thevery contrary impression had taken hold ? Hehad a phrase of his own by which he gave expressionto it. Even without self-sacrifice, inany shape, to be the source of advantage orgratification to any one else, without receivingan advantage equal, at least, in value, he called,• being made a property of.' Often have I heardhim declare, he * did not like to be made a propertyof,' or, he * would not be made a propertyof : ' he would have regarded himself as being soPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 265much the poorer for it ; lie would have beenashamed of it as of a weakness.If a disposition of this stamp was in this sameinstance productive of its natural effects, it hadfor its accompaniment an ardent ambition, andto that appetite it contributed to secure containsrebuff's and disappointments.The retributive sanction has been pointed outas a motive to efficient benevolence, — its powerof reward depending on the relation existingbetween the parties. Widely separated as theymay be, there is no case where the influencepossessed by any individual, however mean,over any other individual, however mighty, isreally null, and unworthy of all regard. Themouse in the fable releasing the lion from bondage,is an exemplification of the possible dependenceof the strong upon the weak.Popular opinion, in so far as it is enlightenedand has cognizance of beneficent actions, takesthem under its care. Its awards depend on theestimate it forms of the merit of an action, andthe number and influence of those who sit injudgment, and decree the recompense of thataction.Independently of the rewards of opinion, andthe pleasures of sympathy, the acts of positivebenevolence tend to the creation of the habitsof benevolence. Every act adds something to266 Doxology.the habit ; the greater the number of acts, thestronger will be the habit ; and the stronger thehabit, the larger the recompense ; and the largerthe recompense, the more fruitful in producingsimilar acts ; and the more frequent such acts,the more will there be of virtue and felicity inthe world.Employ, then, every opportunity of beneficentaction, and look out for other opportunities.Do all the good you can, and seek themeans of doing good.Efficient benevolence, when in action, may beconsidered the gymnastics of the mind, or the fieldin which it is displayed the mental gymnasium.Like the gymnastics of the body, they will notonly give enjoyment but strength ; enjoymentin their exercise, and strength from their callinginto greater activity the moral and intellectualfaculties, training them to the vigor of habitualexertion. The indirect and general object is, tofortify the mind, in order that it may betterguide the affections to virtue ; the direct andparticular purpose is, on any given occasion, soto influence conduct, as that a result of happinessmay be the consequence of the individualaction in question.In the application of evil for the productionof good, never let it be applied for the gratificationof mere antipathy ; never but as subserveEFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 267vient to, and necessary for the only proper endsof punishment, the determent of others by example,the determent of the offender by suffering.In the interest of the offender, reformationis the great object to be aimed at ; if this cannotbe accomplished, seek to disable him frominflicting the like evil on himself or others.But always bear in mind the maxim, whichcannot be repeated too often : — Inflict as muchand no more pain than is necessary to accomplishthe purpose of benevolence. Create notevil greater than the evil you exclude.When it is settled in a man's mind that suchor such another is a bad man, an effect apt tobe produced by such judgment is a settled affectionof antipathy ; of antipathy more or lessstrong, according to the temper of the individual.Thereupon, without troubling himselfto measure out the proper quantity of punishmentwhich it would be proper for him to administer,— upon every opportunity that presentsthe means of expressing towards the offendingparty the affection of hatred and contempt, heaccordingly employs it ; and in so doing he piqueshimself upon the evidence he affords to othersof his hatred of vice and love of virtue; while,in truth, he is only affording a gratification tohis 'own dissocial and self regarding affections,to his own antipathy and his own pride.268 Doxology.The happiness of the worst man of the speciesis as much an integrant part of the whole massof human happiness as is that of the best man.On every occasion in which evil done to adelinquent does not afford an adequate promiseof greater good — to the delinquent himself, orothers — so far from doing evil to him, the law ofbenevolence enjoins us to do as much good tohim as is consistent in other respects with beneficenceand extra-regarding prudence.The points of essential benevolence whichhave been brought forward, will serve as analogiesin exhibiting parallel cases of active efficientbenevolence. To avoid giving pain being the negativerule, to seek to give pleasure is the positive.And though it cannot be invariably said,that the virtuous abstention has necessarily acounterpart of virtuous action, yet in a greatnumber of cases, to act precisely contrary towhat imprudence and maleficence would dictate,is to pursue the course which moralitydemands.It is not always possible to draw the exactline between the claims of efficient benevolence,whether positive or negative, and those of prudence,self-regarding or extra-regarding ; nor isit always necessary nor desirable, for where theinterests of the two virtues are the same, *thepath of duty is quite clear. But points ofPOSITIVE Eri'ICIKXT BENEVOLENCE. 2G9agreement and of difference may be easilypointed out, and a general definition may showwhat, in ordinary cases, is the distinction betweenthe two qualities. As for example : youare called upon to do service to another. If heis in a condition to render you services inreturn, prudence as well as benevolence combineto interest you in his favor. If he iswholly removed from the occasions of servingyou, your motives can be those of benevolencealone.But though in a given case it may be difficultto show, that the interests of prudencedemand a particular act of beneficence, it is notthe less true that the self-regarding considerationdoes, in fact, occupy the whole ground ofconduct. Whatever peculiar reasons benevolencemay furnish for a given course of beneficentaction, the universal principle remains,that it is every man's interest to stand well inthe affections of other men, and in the affectionsof mankind in general. A really beneficentact, which may seem to be removed from theprudential considerations — always taking forgranted that the act is itself no violation of prudence,and that it is one which has the sanctionof the Deontological principle, by producing abalance of good, — such an act will, in its remoterconsequences, serve the self-regarding interests,270 Doxology.by helping to create, to establish, or to extendthat general reputation for judicious benevolence,which it is every man's obvious interest to possessin the opinions of his fellow men.Suetonius records that a Roman tyrant offereda premium to the inventor of a new pleasure.Since that time, many a moralist has numberedthe tyrant's desire to create a new enjoymentamong that tyrant's most obnoxious crimes.Yet to the discovery of unexperienced gratifications,a great portion of man's anxiety isdirected. From the moment human beingsassociate, that object becomes their prominentconcern. In proportion to their aggregate numberare their efforts to provide some untastedenjoyment. Every newspaper bears evidenceof the attempt. The list of theatrical exhibitionsis a list by which an appeal is made to attentionby rarities and novelties, by something in theshape of pleasure enjoyed before.But, it will be said, the tyrant was a sensualist; his desire was for some other sensual gratification; it wanted to make his senses subservientto the production of some new delight. Whatthen ? Had he succeeded it would have beenthe better for him and the better for us. Andas to pleasure of which the senses are not to betheinstruments, let colors be presented to theblind, sic to the deaf, or motion to the lifeless.POSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 271As a matter of fact, however, civilization,knowledge, commerce, have invented new pleasures.And no generation passes away withoutadding something to the stock of the generationthat preceded it. The discovery of Americaopened a host of unexperienced gratifications toour hemisphere.And what various and valuable pleasures hasnot the progress of philosophy brought with it !The experiments of chemistry, the discoveriesof astronomy, the telescope, the microscope,the mechanical powers, natural history, — in aword, the world of modern science ; a worldmore extensive than that which Columbus madeknown.These, and whatever besides can add an iotato happiness, have been added to the domains ofeffective benevolence. These are to be appealedto, these are to be drawn upon, in order to promotethe felicity of man. Exhibit any sourcefrom whence enjoyment can be made to flow,and you may add that source to the sum totalof prolific good.And if the premium once offered by despotismcould now be offered by intelligent benevolence,it would be given to him who should succeedin exhibiting the greatest variety of shapesin which pleasure can be produced, and how its272 Doxology.magnitude, intensity, duration, and extent canbest be secured.To give exercise, influence, and extension toefficient benevolence, is one of the great concernsof virtue. Nor let it be thought that suchbenevolence is to be bounded in its consequencesby the race of man. There are other,though inferior, sensitive objects intitled to itsconsideration and its care. There is happinessbeyond the sphere of human beings — happinesswith which human beings have much to do —happiness of which human beings are theguardians, though the participators of that happinessare not of the human species. Let menremember, that happiness wherever it is, and bywhomever experienced, is the great gift confidedto their charge — that any thing else is unworthytheir regard, and that this —this alone — is thepearl of great price.It has been said, that * Honesty is the bestpolicy.' This is not exactly true. There is apolicy that is better, — the policy of activebenevolence. Honesty is but negative : itavoids doing wrong; it will not allow intrusioninto the enjoyments of others. It is, however,only an essential, and not an active quality.The best policy is that which creates good ; thesecond best is that which avoids evil.POSITIVE EFFICIENT Benevolence. 273The modes by which efficient benevolencecan gratify others by action, may be arrangedunder the same heads as those by which annoyanceis avoided, and belong to two classes : —1. Discourse. 2. Deportment. And as negativemorality takes under its cognizance thoseacts of mischief which the laws allow to passunpunished — the political sanction being toogreat and solemn for the occasion, — so positivemorality takes under its charge that conductwhich state recompense leaves unrewarded.But the interposition of the law beingmore monitory and prohibitory than remuneratoryand exciting, inasmuch as it is more speciallycharged with the functions of protecting individualsagainst wrong, than with those of encouragementfor right, — a small portion alone ofthe field of active beneficence is taken possessionof by the legal or political authority.Numerous acts of maleficence fall under thecognizance of the law's penalties, for whosecounter or corresponding acts of beneficencethose laws provide no reward. Over multitudinousdeeds, whose results would be a balanceof pain, the Deontological authority obtains theallied influence of the retributive legal power,each assisting the other with its restrictive force ;but in the regions of positive benevolence, theDeontological principle is, for the most part, leftVOL. II. T274 Doxology.to its own solitary influences for the productionof good. Ill-appropriated as are, in many cases,the legal sanctions of punishment to offences, theapplication of reward by those same sanctions,is even more irregular and imperfect. With thegrowth of intelligence, with the spread of morality,the state of public opinion will becomemore and more accordant with the Deontologicalcode, and the popular affections will be morebusied in distinguishing real from spurious virtue,and in giving to the virtue that is real itsfit recompense. Meanwhile, to that end wemust labor, each for himself, and as far as he isable, marking out for his highest approbation inthe conduct of others those actions which haveproduced, or are likely to produce, the greatestsum of happiness, and visiting with his loudestreprobation that conduct which leads to, orcreates, the greatest amount of misery. Bythese means, every man will do something tomake the popular sanctions more useful, healthful,active, and virtuous. The alliance of truemorality with the great interests of mankind,mankind will soon discover, and the discoveryonce generalized, it will not be in the power offallacy, of dogmatism, or despotism, to preventits influence, its universal action.As regards discourse, the inquiry of positiveeffective benevolence is — what are the meansPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 275by which language can be best made to advancethe happiness of others? And the occasionswhich offer themselves for consideration are, asbefore, those in which the subject-person ispresent: those in which the subject-personis absent : and those where the subject-personsand others are present.In all these cases, the pleasure producedmust primarily depend on the power of thespeaker ; power intellectual, moral and active :the power growing out of wisdom, knowledge,the social affections, and the will to give thema beneficent direction : the power of superiorityin any of its shapes, whether political orsocial ; whether of age, station, wealth, or anyother influence. To employ their action for theremoval of pain, or the sources of pain, for thepromotion of pleasure, or the introduction of thesources of pleasure, whether the discourse beoral or written, is the business of activebeneficence.In the presence of the person of whom youare speaking, and in so far as the topics of conversationare in your power, choose always thosewhich are likely to be the most pleasurable tohim, taking care, however, that nothing is saidby you, the result of which would lower yourown credit for veracity, or imply approbationof pernicious words or actions. In the first case.276 Doxology.damage might be done to your own reputation;in the second, damage to the character of thehearer. But, if you have occasion to refer tomeritorious conduct, on the part of him to whomyou are speaking, deal out such liberal encouragementas the case will justify.For the prevention of a balance of mischief,take into consideration the disposition of theindividual, and be sure that your putting forthprominently his merits will not give such inordinateincrease to his pride or vanity, as by itsresults will produce evil to himself or others.If the quality which appears to its possessora merit or an accomplishment, is really of a characterto injure others by its exercise ; that is tosay, if it cause preponderant evil, either to itspossessor or others, the flatterer who encouragesits development, becomes accessary to all theevil done in consequence by the person flattered.Again, if your flattery exceed the bounds of truth,and the flattered person detects your insincerity,and perceives that you are yourself aware ofit, you may become to him an object of contemptand dislike ; your influence for the futuremay be destroyed, and even the honest praisewith which you may have gratified him on formeroccasions will thus lose its value.The annoyance caused by the intrusion ofgood advice, has been referred to, while inquiryPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 277was engaged in the claims of essential benevolence.In the too frequent way of communicatingeven useful counsels, there is almost invariablysomething to vex, often to insult, and almostalways the arrogance which assumes authority,and exercises a species of despotism. Now, ifmen were as willing, and as ready to give reasonsas they are to give rules, much mischiefmight be prevented, and some good might bedone. Pride is undoubtedly gratified by beingenabled to deal out its animadversions, and self-regardis flattered, but at a terrible expense — agreat sacrifice of benevolence. Yet, it is nosmall part of good-breeding and good morals togive appropriate advice appropriately.There is a class of people in the world, offensiveintruders, forward hypocrites, and boldusurpers, who, under the mask of friendly advisers,are great creators of misery.Vice is never so much at ease, never moretyrannical, never more ambitious, than when itimagines it has found a mask, under the coverand protection of which it may pass off for virtue.And masks there are which, to a certainextent, deceive even the wearers ; a deceit towhich they lend themselves with alacrity, andfind in their own delusion, encouragement tomake daring experiments on the credulity,timidity, or dependence of others.278 Doxology.By no other means can a man give himselfso good a chance of conquering the weaknesswhich he finds in his way, of subduing the willsof others by the instrumentality of their understandings,as by taking upon himself the characterof a giver of good advice.In this character some men so dextrouslycomport themselves, as to make abuse of othersthe very instrument of self-elevation.Not that, on every occasion, the counsels ofthe adviser, even though injudicious, can be takenas evidence of an unfriendly purpose. For foolishthough it be, hastily concocted and inconsideratelycommunicated, it may have had itssource in sympathy, and be really a mark ofgood-will.But such cases are exceptions. Selfishnessuntouched by sympathy, is ordinarily the inspirerof the intrusive counsellor. Pure selfishnessis abundantly sufficient for the productionof the character. And without good groundsfor believing that credit is to be given tobenevolence, it may, with great probability,be presumed that some quality, far removedfrom benevolence, gave birth to the intervention.It is clearly then demanded by morality, thatadvice-giving, as a habit, should be abstainedfrom ; and if the demand for it be obvious andundoubted, if the case be clear and urgent, thatPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 279it should be accompanied with such statementsand reasons as will, in so far as may be, pleadits excuse and justification to the person advised,and cause to him as little suffering asmay be necessary, to give the advice its intendedeffect. Without strong evidence both ofthe necessity for its application, and the probabilityof its success, virtue requires the suppressionof the advice, and the abstention of theadviser.Revenge itself sometimes takes the shape ofadvice-giving. For a gratification of ill-will aman censures another in the shape of counsel.He visits another with the burthen of evil, forthe obtaining a small pleasure in the infliction ofthat evil. In so far as the inflicter is concerned,no doubt the infliction of evil is good, for noaction can have its source in any other motive.However enormous the evil may be, and howevertrifling the pleasure of inflicting it, stillthat pleasure is good, and must be taken intoaccount. But the law of effective benevolencerequires that the advice you give to a man, orthe evil speaking of him, necessary to do himgood, should lead to no waste of evil. Only inthe absolute necessity of drawing on himpunishment from the popular source, or sanction,are you authorised to speak evil of him toothers ; and then be sure there is reason to280 Doxology.believe that the awarded punishment will bringa result of good.Ingenuousness is sometimes a virtue, sometimesnot. Where it leads a man to declare hissentiments without being called upon, therewould be no disingenuousness in his refrainingfrom doing so ; and, exceptions excepted, thedeclaration of unasked opinions is to be avoided.Where, being asked to declare his opinions, heforbears to express them, his conduct would bedisingenuous, but not necessarily blameworthy.Where no evil, in any shape, would result fromgiving utterance to opinions, and the expression ofthose opinions is solicited, ingenuousness wouldbe worthy of praise.To abstain from bringing into view the infirmitiesof others, was exhibited as one of themarks of negative efficient benevolence. Tohold up to view the accomplishments or meritsof another, occupies the corresponding place inthe regions of positive benevolence. But, aswill have been naturally deduced from precedingobservations, while in the negative part ofthe field of action, there are no restrictions orlimitations, since the avoidance of action is theavoidance of evil ; in the positive part, caremust be taken that the good which is done, thepleasure which is purchased, do not cost morethan its worth, by leading to the destruction ofPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 281a greater amount of good, or the creation of agreater portion of evil.Within these limits, it is an act of effectivebenevolence to give to deserving conduct its fullmeed of approbation. The effect of praise isto dispose to imitation, and you as effectuallyelevate the standard of morals by encouragingvirtue, as by exposing or reprobating vice. Theimmediate recognition of the merits of an act ofefficient benevolence, will have the advantageof helping to place it at once in the regions ofpublic approval. The value of the praise will beheightened by its promptitude — a promptitudewhich will take the character of generosity. Incases where an action, obviously beneficial tomankind, is left, by the want of courage on thepart of others, floating in the regions of undecidedjudgment, do what it depends upon youwithin the pale of prudence, to give it the benefitand sanction of your favorable opinion.In intercourse with others, it may sometimesbe demanded by benevolence that their opinionsshould be corrected on points affecting theirown happiness. In general, however, it becomesus rather to seek points of agreementthan points of difference ; but where points ofdifference are to be discussed, give the discussionthe character of a joint search aftertruth — an inquiry by which both are to be282 Doxology.benefited, rather than of a contention for victory,or an exhibition of dogmatism. Knowledgecommunicated by benevolence has the unitedcharm of intellect and virtue, — intellect engagedin clearing the ground of evil, and virtue engagedin covering it with good.If you have two topics to talk to a man about,one of which interests him the most, whilethe other interests you the most, begin withthat which interests him the most. It will puthim in good humor ; it will confer pleasure.If you are not assured that a particular topicon which you have to speak interests him, allowhim every facility for commencing the conversationwith the subject that is most agreeableto him.The power exercised over the press, is one ofthose instruments of good or evil whose influencesupon human felicity are, though not definable,of most extended range. And, in asmuch as the reaction of opinion upon a publicwriter, especially if anonymous, is for the mostpart less operative than if individual responsibilitywere present to answer for the consequencesof thoughts or actions, it is rather to theclaims of benevolence than to those of prudence,that mankind must look for the proper directionof the writer's productions. They act in awide field, a field proportioned to the numberPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 283of readers, and to the influence of those readersupon society. When an author gives vent, fromsome inaccessible retirement, to opinions whichdistress the feelings of others, his dissocialaffections have not the restraint put upon themwhich exists when a man gives utterance to hisideas vinci voce. If, however, the desire to maximizegood were present to the minds of publicwriters — if it were ever less their purpose to givepain to some object of individual hostility thanto further the great ends of the popular felicity,the atmosphere of opinion would soon becomebright and clear.Public meetings, or deliberative assemblies,often afford occasion for the exercise of activebeneficence on a large scale. But, under theexcitement which the presence of numberscreates, too often the passions obtain the mastery,and the passions of the orator acting uponthose of the auditors, lead to consequenceswhich benevolence must deplore. That alwaysmischievous, and often dishonest practice ofattaching to conduct adjectival terms of praiseor blame, the habit of speaking of actions, notin their simple shape, but with the associationof some term of reproach or eulogy, is too aptto obtain, on occasions, where to move men'sfeelings is as much an object of desire, as to convincetheir judgments ; where, in fact, the great284 Doxology.ambition of the speaker is, to find such instrumentsas will enable him to carry his auditorswith him to the conclusions at which hedesires they should arrive. But let the Genealogicallaw be present to his mind, and thetriumph he will desire will be only the triumphof the greatest-happiness principle. Contendingfor that, and for that alone, the victory ofany sentiments more friendly to the principlethan his own sentiments will be, in fact, hisvictory.Whatever object of good is to be accomplishedby our interference, will be best accomplishedby the instruments of veracity and bythe avoidance of exaggeration. If we have tospeak of actions, let them, therefore, be representedas they are, without the addition of thoseterms of vituperation, or of applause, by whichmen are led astray from the action itself to ourestimate of the action. The best testimony isthe simple statement of facts ; the worst, is thatwhich distorts and tortures facts into a predeterminedshape, and communicates them witha judgment tacked to them. Now, the manwho, in seeking my opinion of the conduct ofanother, gives his own opinion in putting thequestion to me, does all he can to deprive meof the power of judging truly, and of expressingmyself honestly.POSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 285To point out public abuses is a high functionof positive efficient beneficence, and to pointthem out so that their removal may be accomplishedwith the least possible sacrifice on thepart of those interested in their continuance, isthe task of intellectual virtue. For it oftenhappens that, in the anxiety to get rid of an evil,a greater evil is entailed on an individualor a class, than the evil got rid of by the community; that the sufferings experienced by thefew are not counterbalanced by the benefitsresulting to the many. In the demand for politicalreforms, the situation of those who benefitby the unreformed state of things, is seldomheld up to view, as benevolence, as moralityitself would dictate. * Sweep abuses away' isundoubtedly the maxim of political wisdom ;but so sweep them away that as little disappointment,vexation, or pain, be created as possible.A man occupies a situation for which heis overpaid, but occupies it on an understandingwith the public authorities that he shall notbe displaced. Is it wise, is it just to displacehim ? I care little how that question is answered,but of this I am sure, that the greatest-happinessprinciple, while it would provide thatno other person should be appointed to succeedhim on the same conditions, would also providethat he individually should suffer no loss ; that286 Doxology.the future good to the public should not beaccompanied by present injury to him.Some rules of positive benevolence and beneficencemay be made the immediate source ofhappiness amidst the daily events of life.Whenever you have nothing else to do, — inother words, Whenever you have no particularobject in view, of pleasure or profit, of immediateor remote good, — set yourself to do goodin some shape or other ; to men, to sensitivebeings, rational or irrational ; to one or tomany; to some individual, or to the whole race.In so doing, and in proportion as you doso, you will be producing a stock of sympathyand good reputation, laid up in the breasts ofothers, ready, upon occasion, to be broughtinto action for your advantage. In the meantime,whatsoever be the result to you or to them,you will have been giving exercise to yourown powers ; giving exercise to your faculties,mental and bodily, and, by means of suchexercise, strength. Your reward will be, atall events, to experience and enjoy the pleasureof power ; that sort of pleasure which is capableof being reaped from the mere exercise ofpower, independently of all advantage in theshape of the fruit of labor, or of any otherfruit or result of such exercise.That pleasure may be reaped from the merePOSITIVE EFFICIENT Benevolence. 287exercise of power, independently of all fruitexpected from it, is true beyond dispute : itis proved so by universal experience. Witnessthe pleasure derived from games of skill fromwhich all pecuniary profit-seeking is excluded :for example, among mental exercises, chessand draughts ; amongst athletic bodily exercises,walking and riding with extraordinaryspeed or perseverance.Again, when your endeavors are directedtowards doing good to an individual, in otherwords, to do him service, if there be any optionas to the mode or way, consider and observewhat mode of so being served is most to histaste.If you serve him, as you think or say, inaway which is yours, and not his, the valueof any service may, by an indefinite amount,be thus reduced. If the action of serving aman, not in the way in which he wishes to beserved, but in the way in M'hich he ought tobe served, or the way in which it is best forhim to be served, be carried to a certain length,it becomes tyranny, not beneficence ; an exerciseof power for the satisfaction of the self-regardingaffection, not an act of beneficence,for the gratification of the sympathetic or socialaffection.True it is, that so you do but produce to the288 Doxology.individual in question a balance on the sideof good, the choice as to the quantity you willproduce is yours, and be it greater or less,your act is an act of beneficence ; but if, bya little self-restraint, at the end of a littlereflection, you could do good to him in hisown way, or serve him in his own way ; it is badeconomy and weakness, on your part, to chooseto serve him, or do a less good to him, onlybecause it is your own way, rather than domore good to him, render him greater service,as you might do, by serving him in his ownway instead of yours.A belief, an honest belief, that they are underthe real influences of benevolence, sometimesleads men to conduct the most intrusive andtyrannical. Power is usurped for the purpose,it is supposed, of doing good. The doing goodis beneficent, therefore it ought to be done.Beneficence is virtue, and virtue must, at allevents, be practised.Under the shadow of this fallacy, vastmasses of misery have been poured out uponthe world, and that with the most benevolentintention.The ground-work of the mischief is this. Aman fancies he knows what is best for othermen ; that he is better acquainted with theirsources of happiness than they can be ; thatPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 289he has more appropriate knowledge, and havingmore power, that he can turn his knowledgeto good account on their behalf. He has formedhis own estimate of good ; he is thoroughlypersuaded that such and such a thing is good,and being good, he will compel others toreceive and to adopt it, because it is good,and because he knows, from experience, thatit is so.Yet despotism never takes a worse shapethan when it comes in the guise of benevolence;and is never more dangerous than when it actsunder the impression that it represents beneficence.Pleasures and pains, the sweets and thebitters of existence, cannot be tried by thetaste of another. What is good for anothercannot be estimated by the person intendingto do the good, but by the person only to whomit is intended to be done. The purpose ofanother may be to increase my happiness, butof that happiness I alone am the keeper andthe judge. His feelings are not my feelings,nor can they be ; nor can his feelings be madeto comprehend my feelings, except in so far as,by observation or by frank communication onmy part, he has mastered my springs of action,my pleasures and my pains. But no observationof his, and no communication of mine,VOL. II. u290 Doxology.can have made him as much the subject asI am of my own enjoyments and sufferings ;and any pretence on his part to understandthem better is a freak of usurpation.^l Refrain, then, from doing good to any managainst his will, or even without his consent.Obtain his consent beforehand, or be sure ofhis subsequent consent. If the good you proposeto do be really such as, in his estimateof it, will add to his happiness, no resistanceon his part will there be to your doing it. Noman opposes an increase to his pleasures, whenhe sees reason to believe that the increase willhave place. And for his sake do not exhibit,and for your own sake suppress, any annoyancethat you may feel from his rejection of a goodproffered by you. Your forbearance will bemore truly beneficent than your persistance in apurpose of greater beneficence.To this source, to this pretension of doinggood to others in spite of themselves, may betraced the worst of religious persecutions. Theyhad their origin in a desire to benefit the persecuted: to give them some chance of thateternal happiness, of which their persistancein error was supposed wholly to deprive them.And let it not be supposed, that those misdeedswhich have flooded the world with misery areto be attributed to malignant intentions. ToPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 291do evil for its own sake is not in the natureof man. The most horrible of offences, themost devastating and murderous of crimes, iffollowed up to their origin, will be found onlya distortion of the happiness-seeking principle ;the creation of a misery, intending to preventa greater misery, but mistaking its purposeand miscalculating its means. And of suchmistakes and such miscalculations none hasbeen more prolific than the despotism of benevolentinte)2tio7i ; a despotism taking no accountof the parties it subjects to its influence ; adespotism setting up its own standard for othermen's happiness. A man who, on principle,pretends to be, or is in reality, a benefactor,in spite of, or in opposition to him he intendsto benefit, is among the most maleficent oftyrants : beneficent or not in purpose, he isnecessarily maleficent in effect.The motives to seek the good opinion ofothers will be strong, in the proportion of thepower of others to do us service. Inferiorityof social position diminishes the means of benevolentaction, and scarcely allows those ofpositive beneficence to be brought at all intooperation. There are two methods of winningthe friendly sympathies of superiors : by accommodatingourselves to their wishes and pleasures,or by the display of talents in whose292 Doxology.exercise they may see an after-interest, andfeel the desire of appropriating them to theirservice. But this latter case requires preeminenceof talents, and therefore is at thedisposal of few : the other means are at thedisposal of all.Rising in the scale of superiority, man risesin that of usefulness. Superiority is, in fact, therepresentative of power ; power in its variousshapes ; the power of good and the power ofevil. To associate all the power we have withthe exercise, and hence with the habit of effectivebenevolence, is to give to virtue its widestscope. By what is the exercise of that benevolenceto be limited ? By nothing, as respectsobjects susceptible of pain or pleasure ; by nolimits of family, or clanship, or province, ornation : no, not even by the boundaries ofthe human species ; but by the considerationsof prudence alone. Prudence must not allowthe individual to sacrifice more happiness thanhe gains. Benevolence demands that, to thecommon stock of happiness, every man shouldbring the largest possible contribution.To this diffusive spirit of benevolence it hasbeen commonly objected, that it weakens theties of friendly and family relations, and givesless of enjoyment to the many than it takesfrom the few. But why should it? Is it foundPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 293by experience that the really philanthropic manis the man most wanting in domestic affections?Are the tone and temper which constitute benevolencelikely to find no fit exercise amongthose who are habitually in contact with them ?Or must not the social principle be essentiallystrong and influential, when it enables itspossessor to act upon the wide field of publichappiness? In general, so far from neglectingthe enjoyments of those immediately dependenton him, the true lover of his race brings intothe circle of their enjoyments the reaction ofthe beneficent influences, which he exerciseson the vaster scale ; his contributions to thehappiness of mankind are so much in additionto the happiness he creates in his own socialsphere. Let no man apprehend for himself orothers, that he can produce too much good, orremove too much evil. It is not on the sideof expansive benevolence that his mistakes arelikely to be made. Let him do all the goodhe can, and wherever he can, he will never dotoo much for his own happiness, or the happinessof others. *The immorality of acts of maleficence maybegreatly heightened by the want of temptation; that is, in cases where the pleasurepurchased is small to the evil-doer, from theabsence of want, or other cause, contrasted294 DEONTOLOGV.with the injury done to the sufferer. Thus, therich man who is a despoiler, commits an offencefar more culpable than one of the same charactercommitted by a poor man. And, in theregions of active or positive beneficence, wherethe good done has required some special effort,in consequence of the situation of the good-doer,the merit (always supposing the laws ofprudence not to be violated) will be great, inproportion to the sacrifice. As a mischievousact will naturally be considered evidence of aman's malignity, should its natural consequencebe the production of other mischievous acts,so those acts of beneficence will be worthyof the highest praise, whose result and effectare the creation of other acts of beneficence ;in other words, should the one deed of virtue beprolific of other deeds of virtue.The exercise of positive efficient benevolencetowards inferiors brings with it increase of thepower which constitutes superiority. Of twomen occupying a position of equality as regardsothers, the man who contributes most to thehappiness of those others will infallibly becomethe most influential : will dispose of a greaterquantity of service. He will strengthen hisposition by augmenting the number of his gooddeeds. Every benefit conferred on others willbe prolific to himself. And the benefits con-positiveEFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 295sei red on others increase the power of others ;and the increase of power in the hands of thosewilling to do him service, is the increase of hisown power. The compound interest broughtto effective benevolence by deeds of benevolence,is happily limitless. Of the seeds scatteredby the husbandry of virtue, few will turnoutbarren.And the gratitude exhibited towards a manwho has benefited us, is, on our parts, an act ofpositive beneficence.It may be laid down as a general principle,that a man becomes rich in his own stockof pleasures, in proportion to the amount hedistributes to others. Isis opulence will be theoffspring of his generosity. Every time hecreates to himself a pleasure, by the communicationof a pleasure, or the suppression of apain, he increases the sum of his own happiness,directly, speedily, surely. Every timehe renders a service to another, he augmentsthe amount of his own happiness, indirectly,remotely, slowly ; but in both cases his well->being will be added to by his benevolence.What then ? Where no means are at handfor increasing your happiness directly, employyourself in increasing it indirectly. In thefield of active benevolence there is always workto be done.296 Doxology.You have the night for repose. How bettercan you employ the day than in the pursuitof happiness ? You cannot always add to yourstock by direct means ; it is surely better todoso by indirect means than not to add toitat all. Those indirect means are labors ofbeneficence.You have solitary pleasures, perhaps. Yousmoke your pipe, you drink your coffee alone.You do well, if your enjoyment causes nobodyannoyance. But how are your thoughts employed?They cannot be better employed thanin turning over in your mind all those opportunitiesof usefulness which, though they seemprimarily to concern others, yet have the facultyof bringing happiness home to yourself.Promptitude has been mentioned as one ofthe evidences of effective benevolence. Ingeneral much pain is saved, and sometimesmuch pleasure communicated by early attention.While delay lasts, false hopes are excited,and the mind is kept on the rack by painfulexpectation. In public functionaries, wherethe points of consideration are often of thegreatest importance, and the anxieties of theapplicant, therefore, the greater, the virtuewhich avoids procrastination is peculiarly meritorious.It is pleasant to speak of a departmentwhere promptitude appears the order ofPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 297the day. The Secretary of the Post-office issaid to give immediate attention to every application.It is an honorable distinction, andworthy of all praise. On every occasion inwhich the virtue is exercised, if something isnot added to happiness, something is takenaway from anxiety.If, from day to day, our recollection recordedthe little circumstances which had given uspleasure in the conduct of others, in order todispose us to imitation for the benefit of others;and, on the other hand, if the causes of annoyancecreated by others were reverted to in ourintercourse with our own minds, solely for thepurpose of guarding against them in our relationswith our fellow men, no day would passwithout treasuring up some addition to thestore of virtue.You leave your house in the morning. Manycircumstances may occur in which the knowledgeof the hour of your return would beuseful, useful to your inmates, useful to strangers.Mention, therefore, the time when youwill probably be at home, and be sure that theinformation be as correct as your thoughtfulanticipation will allow it to be. Wilful misstatementwill be more mischievous than silence:it will lower your reputation for veracity. Heedlessmis-statement, though not equally per-298 Doxology.vicious with intended mis-statement, will bealmost equally liable to cause annoyance.A stranger calls. You are at home. Keephim not waiting. His time is not yours, norare you to judge of its value. If he call on youby appointment, his claim on your prompt attentionis undoubted. Out of his wearinessfrom being kept in attendance, will grow loss ofreputation to yourself, and when admitted, hisframe of mind will be less pleasurable, less fittedfor the discussion and dispatch of the businessthat has brought him to you. The habitualpractice of requiring inferiors to lose their timein waiting-rooms, is one of the ordinary misdeedsof aristocratical and official pride. If theamount of annoyance suffered in the anti-chamberof many a great man could be added up,and presented to him in its results, he might bemade to blush at the quantity of useless miseryhe had created. A great portion of the alimentof pride is suffering ; suffering gratuitouslycreated by itself, for its own good pleasure,without bringing any addition to those elementsof power, the possession of which is pride'smain ambition. On the contrary, pride sapsits own foundation by the intrusive display ofits influence. To be proud of the power ofdoing evil is something ; to be proud of possessingthe power without exercising it is somethingPOSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 299better ; but to bo proud because our pride liasmade others unhappy, is an exhibition of viceequally maleficent and mean.The laws of good-breeding might be properlyclassed under the pleasures of amity, towhich they belong. They demand, as dependentupon positive efficient benevolence in theordinary intercourse of life, the doing all thoseservices, the creating all those pleasures againstwhich neither prudence nor beneficence in theirregions of wider influence have aught to object.Good-breeding, when it degenerates into formalityor ceremoniousness, loses the charm ofbeneficence. Separately taken, acts of good-breedingare of small importance. Added together,the amount of pain and pleasure dependenton them will be found to be very considerable.Good-breeding is a quality perpetuallyin demand, while conducting our relations withothers ; for there is scarcely any one actionwhich may not be made instrumental to moreor less of pain or pleasure, that pain or pleasuredependent often on the good or ill grace withwhich the action is done.No man can have opened his eyes upon theevents of every day, without perceiving how constantlythe occasions occur in which the benevolentperson is placed in advantageous contrast tothe benevolent. No man but may have remarksDEONTOLOOr.ed at how small a sacrifice of self, some personswin the good affections of others, and find occasionsfor the exercise of friendly sympathies,which either wholly escape the attention or theregard of minds less happily constituted orless virtuously trained.You are travelling, for example, in a publiccarriage, shut up with others, and mutually dependentfor the pleasures or annoyances of yourposition. Now watch how many subjects ofcontention may arise. Shall the windows, oneor both, be shut or open ? One man will shutor open them in spite of the remonstrances ofall the rest. On that occasion, as far as thatact is concerned, his maleficence would be maximized; another man would do so against the remonstrancesof one passenger, the others continuingsilent ; a third would do so without havingheard or consulted the opinions of the others.The line of true morality, as of genuine courtesy,would be to consult the majority, and if in anindividual case there were any special cause ofannoyance, or gratification from the opening orshutting the window, to state that case for theconsideration of the rest. But suppose the restwere unreasonable ? It is a rare case, but itwould still be more for the interest of the reasonableperson to give way.Which side of the coach shall I occupy ?POSITIVE EFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 301Suppose a case, a frequent one, that a fellowpassenger suffers from riding in a particularposition, say with his back to the horses, orfrom being forced to lean on the right sideor the left, beneficence would demand from methat I who suffer little, or less, or not at allfrom that particular position, should surrendermy place to him who suffers more. But bysurrendering it, I abandon a right ; a right whoserecognition is important for the general good ;a right whose recognition prevents mistakes,quarrels and their consequences. No doubt itis so ; no doubt I make some sacrifice ; but I doso in the interests of benevolence. I abandona small temporary pleasure in order to communicateto another a greater temporary pleasure.I have added to the amount of happiness ;I have excited gratitude ; I have done good tomyself and to another.The coach stops, a passenger expresses adesire for food ; says he is hungry or thirsty ;he had not time to eat before the coach started ;and asks his fellow passengers to consent to ashort delay. They have the power, the rightto refuse him the gratification. Should they ?Certainly not, unless the delay were unreasonable; for the pains of hunger may be greater inhis case than any pains growing out of thatshort delaysThe dinner-time arrives. The same passingDoxology.ger having satisfied his own wants, becomesimpatient, and attempts to shorten the averageduration and enjoyment of the meal. Here isagain a conflict of wills and interests. Doesbenevolence demand that the individual willshould be submitted to by the rest? On thecontrary, it is a fit occasion for resistance, andfor the display of the popular sanction ; for a lessongently and not intrusively given, that thosewho had exhibited patience and kindness towardsthe passenger just before, are in titled tohis consideration then ; but it is no occasion forvituperation or anger. Even self-regarding prudencewould check these, and demand thatonly as much pain should be given to the partyoffending as was necessary to prevent a repetitionof the offence : for what is to be gained byhis ill-will ? He is your companion, and beingso, many opportunities of manifesting his ill-will,will be in his power during the remainderof the journey, and by these you may suffer.Why then should he be rebuked at all ? Becausethe interests of the community requirethat such a want of beneficence should not beunnoticed ; because, if the instruction be judiciouslyconveyed, it is not unlikely that to theperson himself the vexations may be savedwhich a repetition of his offence would bringwith it.A subject of conversation is started. It is ob-positiveEFFICIENT BENEVOLENCE. 303piously painful to one of the parties. Opinions,political or religious, are expressed which woundthe sensibilities of a fellow-traveller. Is it anoccasion to rebuke the speaker ? In ordinarycases not, unless the case be one of more thancommon impropriety ; but often there is a veryobvious claim on benevolence for endeavoringto give another turn to the conversation. Andthe course taken should be such as least toannoy the annoyed and the annoyed. It is notnecessary to show that you have been hurt bywhat may have been a want of temper, or awant of liberality, on the part of him who hasbeen irritated by the expression of opinions hostileto his own ; it is not necessary that youshould give pain to the speaker who, in the introductionof a disagreeable topic, had, perhaps,no intention to hurt the feelings of his neighbor.Check not the conversation, then, by imperiousreproof, nor even by any species of animadversion; the animadversion will not be justifiabletill other means have been tried. If you canseduce the conversation away to pleasurabletopics, by any other than painful agencies, thatis your duty.And, as a necessary consequence of this, theacts of benevolence cannot be better exercised,on occasions where we are forced, as it were,into the company of others, than by the choice304 Doxology.of pleasurable topics of conversation. A littleattention will discover those topics. To detectwhat are the peculiar riches of another man'smind, or experience, or knowledge, is amongthe happiest of resources. Its exercise is alikecomplimentary to the other party and instructiveto ourselves.CONCLUSION. 305CHAPTER VI.CONCLUSION.In pursuing these important inquiries, it ishoped and believed that the sole dispositionoperating on the mind of the writer has beenthe promotion of that great interest, the interestof human happiness, to which reason and morality,if they are of any worth, must be madesubservient. Since to trace errors to theirsource is to refute them, there has been nohesitation in threading the mazes of sophistry,or following up the aberrations of honest purpose,or exposing the sinister interests of dogmatismand self-conceit. When progress shallhave been made in the true philosophy ofmorals, investigation may possibly take a bolderrange, and proceed with less anxiety and lessdistrust. As matters are, the counsel given inRoman Catholic countries is the most judiciouscounsel which can be offered to the student :let him, in order to keep clear of mistakes,believe not the testimony of his own eyes.Let him be warned, at every turning, to takeVOL. II. X306 Doxology.care how he trusts to the dictates of his ownsenses. But while the Roman Catholic teacherinsists on the prostration of his moral andintellectual perceptions, before the said teacherand the church which he represents, the Deon-eulogist asks for the submission of the inquirer'sfaculties to his own felicity. He assumesnothing but that happiness is the end and aimof his being, and reasons only on that contingency.While thus prosecuting the interests of truth,the Deontologist will employ none of the artsof falsehood. Why need he? What possibleend could he accomplish by it ? Applying tohimself the theory he proposes to others, hislabors are, to him, felicity ; and if he earnestlyintreat the attention of others to the thoughtshe scatters abroad, he asks no welcome forthem, but in so much and in so far as theyare susceptible of becoming to others instrumentsof felicity. He cares not whether thehonors of invention belong to him or not ; forhe is consoled with the reflection, that there aremen who, as wise to their own true interestsas they are zealous in the cause of truth, areindifferent as to the manner in which theymake the commonwealth their debtor; whetherthe discovery of truth is due to their sagacity.CONCLUSION. 307the recognition of it to their candor, or thediffusion of it to their zeal.Among the highest and brightest hopes ofthe Deontologist, upon this he dwells, that heis laboring, not unsuccessfully, to hasten theday when opinion Mill give expression andeffect to the greatest-happiness principle. Fortill that time arrives, vast mischiefs and miseries,which would not exist but for the prejudicesthat sanction them, will continue to walkabroad and devastate the earth. War, forexample, — inadequately grounded, or utterlygroundless war, must infallibly be suppressedby the progress of a sound morality. Nothingbut the lamentable success of those who, forpersonal and sinister interests, have sought tonarrow the field of good-will and sympathy,could have made those destructive contests,in which nations have been so constantly engaged,appear innocent or laudable. And hadthey not found fit instruments in phrases ofdelusion, — had they not filled men's ears withthe clamors of * honor,' ' glory,' ' dignity,' andso forth, — till the sounds of human felicity andhuman wretchedness could obtain no entrancethere ; had they not, in a word, turned upsidedown all that wisdom or benevolence evertaught, the greatest of scourges and the greatest308 Doxology.of crimes could not so long have afflicted humanity.There is much, there is very muchto be done. Who, of all those who are theactors in the murderous deeds of wear, who butlooks with abhorrence on a solitary murderer ?Napoleon himself made a boast that he hadnever committed a crime !In the same way, though to an extent lesslamentable, exists the notion that power, rank,opulence, may convert malevolence into innocence,wrong into right. The obtaining moneyunder false pretences, an offence punished,when found among the poor, according tostatute, by imprisonment, whipping, or transportation; when carried on by great men, on agreat scale, appears scarcely illaudable. Is themeasure of wretchedness produced by thecrime considered as the measure of wickedness?Far from it; too often is it the wretchednessof the criminal. Let him be dirty and untidyin his apparel ; let him use a phraseologydifferent from that of the opulent ; let him, inaword, be vulgar, and see how differently, inordinary cases, will he be judged and punished,even by popular opinion. Vulgar is the wordto which the association of dislike attaches ; andhence the willingness to bring down the fruitsof dislike upon the vulgar. Yet what is theCONCLUSION. 309meaning of the epithet ? Vulgar is that whichis in use among the common people. Andwhat are the common people ? What but thegreat majority of the people ? And because athing is in use among the great majority of thepeople, is that a reason, a sufficient reason thatit should be held in contempt ? Is the existenceof a usage among the relatively few,and among those alone, a reason, an adequatereason, for its being held in honor? Poets andphilosophers have not been blind, indeed, tothe enormous injustice of opinion on thesematters ; they have not failed to observe theimpunity with which the errors of the rich areclothed, and the harshness which scourges theoffences of the poor. Aphorisms, metaphorsin abundance, dance up and down the pagesof moralists, from the biblical books to thenewspaper of this morning, but still nearlythe same measure of injustice is dealt out, andwill be dealt out, until men shall see thatvirtue is made up of pleasures, vice of pains,and that morality is but the maximization ofhappiness.The state of opinion as to duels is alikeunfortunate and immoral. Take an ordinarycase, in which the popular sanction may be saidto be leagued with evil. A man imputes to310 Doxology.another a wilful falsehood ; and here, in ordinaryjudgment, a man is authorised to destroyanother's life, and to risk his own. Could themagnitude of the suffering be less appropriatelyweighed against the demand for it? A falsehoodhas been uttered, and the life of thebitterer is to be staked in consequence; andbecause the falsehood has been uttered, aninnocent person, already, perhaps, suffering fromits utterance, is placed on a level with theguilty, and compelled to risk his own life.Could a more monstrous distribution of penaltiesbe fancied by barbarism? But it was afalsehood, a wilful falsehood ! And where isthe man who, while he calls upon another toexpiate the falsehood with his life, can boldlysay that he has never uttered a falsehood ; thathe has not done so more than once ; that he hasnot done so frequently ? The * jealousy ofhonor,' as it is called, if pursued into itsrecesses, will be found, far more frequently, theself-convicted, self-condemning sense of frailty,the exhibition of inwardly-avowed assailable-ness,than the evidence of conscious strengthand purity. But in this particular the tribunalof the vulgar is far more enlightened than thatof the privileged. Duelling has not descendedto the many; and if, on any occasion, it hasCONCLUSION. 311attempted to intrude itself among them, ridiculehas been sufficient to stop its progress. Thepopular sanction has protected the ' commonpeople' from a folly monopolized by * theirbetters ;' and the benefit of the example of thatmany' may one day act with salutary influenceupon ' the few.*It is thus, by gathering up, wherever theyare found, the elements of good, by givingpatronage to whatever exists of truth, virtue,and happiness, and more especially where theyare found spreading over a wide field of thoughtand action, — it is thus, by putting into everyman's hand an instrument of power and aninstrument of felicity, that the work, the greatwork of morality advances. If each man, forhimself, will seek emancipation from thosefraudful delusions by which his own well-beingis sacrificed ; if each man, while thinking of thewell-being of others, will ask the true meaningof the words and the things by which socialand national affairs are conducted ; if he willbring down the pompous phraseology of theeloquent into the regions of his own and othermen's happiness ; if he will strip influentialopinions of the artful decorations of interestand passion ; if he have the courage to ask, — •Shew me, then, the good, and shew me the312 Doxology.evil : exhibit to me what there is of enjoyment,and what there is of suffering — the seedplanted by true morality will be indeed ripeningto an abundant harvest, and the reapers willbe the whole family of man.But, alas ! not such has been the course ofthose who have had the monopoly of moralsin their hands : those who, seated in pompand pretence, loaded with dignities, riches, andhonors, have taught that it was sacrilege todoubt their authority, impious to resist theirdecrees.And what have been their tactics, and whattheir conquests ?Theirs the art to cover their advances fromthe eyes of the people, and their usurpationsfrom the scrutiny of the conscience of thepeople.They have taught mankind to be silent, secret,submissive, accommodating : to hate innovations,to join those with alacrity who wouldstop up the inlets at which light may enter, inorder to save them the fatigue of examiningprojects which distress their indolence, andthe vexation of being obliged to adopt measureswhich oppose a bar to their cupidity. Whyshould these worldly ones insult weakness,and ignorance, and mediocrity, with the demon-conclusion.313stations of wisdom ? They know that, to avoidbeing tempted, the safest plan is to close upthe entrance of wisdom into the minds of thepeople.How many are there who, for six days, havethe Mammon of unrighteousness, of intrigue,of avidity, of fraud, of insincerity, of timeserving,of debasement, in their hearts, andwho dream of settling matters easily if, on theseventh, the gospel of righteousness, or whatthey call the gospel of righteousness, is in theirears?How many are there, who live in the habitualpractice of what themselves call perjury, andin the still more flagitious tyranny of forcingthat perjury upon others, — who rise to vow-breakingas to their breakfast, and sleep on itas their pillow ?Are they not the nurses of that corruptionwhich is the child of weakness : arc they notthe teachers of that profligacy which is theparent of crime ?In the course of these volumes, it will havebeen seen, that mathematical terms have beensometimes employed ; and their employmentrequires explanation, in order that two dangersmay be guarded against.One is, that some people will think mathewir. Y314 Doxology.magical certainty attained : others, who seevery well that it is not attained, will think itaffected. It is not attained, neither is it affected.It is not mathematical modes of expression thatcan give mathematical certainty to the factswhich are necessarily put forward, as the foundationof the notions advanced, but they mayserve, in a certain degree, to give mathematicalprecision to those notions.But the inadequacy and insufficiency of languageis a source of equal embarrassment tothe writer and the reader. Moral philosophywill, in the course of time, probably createbetter modes of expression, in proportion asmoral truths force their way into men's minds,and the poverty of existing terms is consequentlyfelt. Meanwhile, such words must beemployed as are found ready-made to the handsof the teacher : all that he can permit himselfto do is now and then to venture upon a newlocution. And though, in the progress of thiswork, the necessity of making such experimentshas been strongly felt, yet have they beensparingly and unfrequently ventured on.Will these volumes find mercy at the handsof dogmatism? Probably not! Yet, it is hoped,humbly and earnestly hoped, — that the impugnerof the greatest-happiness principle, beCONCLUSION. 315he whom he may, will bring forward casesto which it does not apply. This it is incumbenton him to do, if he mean to conduct acontroversy in the love of truth and the spiritof honesty. A standard of morals is here proposed.Its dictates are clear and intelligible.He who runs may read ; and it is believed thatit has the merit of universal, invariable applicability.If men retreat from it into the regionsof mysticism, all that its advocate will haveto say is, that he stands in the light, while itsadversaries shroud themselves in darkness. Ifauthority comes with arbitrary and despoticmandates, the Deontologist has only to tellmankind that he reasons, but does not menace.If crabbed asceticism pronounce evil to be thereal good, the advocate of happiness can butretort, that to him evil is evil. And the world\\'\\\ decide between them ; the world, whichwill create its own futurity, which has its ownfelicity in its own keeping, and which willhereafter give to the disputants of the presentday the influence which unto it shall seemgood.For the earnestness with which the cause ofhappiness has been advocated, can an apologybe needed ? It is a cause, in the presence ofwhich every thing else really sinks into insignificance.It is a cause, beyond which man316 Doxology.has nothing to desire, nothing to accomplish.It is the sole link which binds him to thepresent, the past, or the future. It is thetreasury in which all he has, all he hopesfor, is up-gathered. Happy he who pointsout the edifice, happier still who unlocks theportal.THE END.LONDONC. And W. Reveal, PRINTERS,LITTLE PULTENEY STREET, Haymakers